LETTERS ON Various interesting and important Subjects; MANY OF WHICH HAVE
APPEARED in the AURORA. CORRECTED AND MUCH ENLARGED.

By ROBERT SLENDER, O. S. M.

Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow;
The rest is all but leather or prunella.
Pope's Essay. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR. FROM THE PRESS OF D. HOGAN
-- And sold at his Store, No. 222, South Third-street and at the Office of the
Aurora. December 30, 1799.

Entered according to Act of Congress.

FELLOW CITIZENS,
AFTER having debated the matter with myself at least twenty times, at last I
determined to publish all my letters, agreeably to the request of my friends,
with several others which I have prepared, and some trifles, that may at least
amuse the ignorant, whose brains, like my own, are not able to bear deep
reasoning, because they have never learned Latin.

Having come to this conclusion, in I stepped to my neighbor the Latinist, and
told him the scheme, with as few round-about digressions as I could: he heard
me to the end of my tale with great patience, and then, emphatically shaking
his head, exclaimed, Ah! Robert, I much fear you will find the truth of the old
Latin proverb, Suitor ne ultra crepidam, -- let the cobbler stick to his last.
It Is a mad thing of you to commence author; for, first, you know you are not
rich: you don't boast of great connexions, but stand, as you yourself have
said, a timorous little fellow, undistinguished among the swinish herd.
Secondly, you cannot come before the public with a flourish, thus -- By ROBERT
SLENDER, A. M. or D. M. or LL. D. or F. R. S. And in the last place, you have
no great man to whom you can dedicate your performance: and let me tell you,
that a number of the poets and historians, of both modern and ancient times,
would never have obtained the celebrity they enjoy, if they had not been
patronized by some great men -- Odds my heart, cried I, for I could hold no
longer, I thought you would have applauded my resolution, and offered me your
assistance; but instead of that, you come forward with your doubts and
difficulties. To be sure I am not rich, but what says that to my letters; the
public say they like them, and why should I deny them that gratification? --
Indeed, I grant that I cannot write myself, with truth, A. M. or D. M. or LL.
D. or F. R. S.; but I can write myself, O. S. M. and that will do quite as
well. In the name of common sense, said my friend, what do you mean by O. S. M.
I Am sure I never heard of it before? Why, answered I, I believe it has very
seldom been chosen by any of your great men and great scholars; but it suits me
exactly -- its meaning is, ONE OF THE SWINISH MULTITUDE: and for dedicating,
continued I, I Will dedicate to the President of the United States. Nay, replied
my friend, that could not otherwise be construed than daring presumption --
Well then, to Timothy Pickering -- That would be deemed an insult -- I Will
dedicate, answered I, much agitated, to our own governor Thomas M'Kean, for
whom I have more real respect than I have for them both -- Why Robert, that
would argue too great familiarity -- It don't signify, said I, leaping to my
feet, I Will dedicate to all their masters -- To the Freemen of the United
States; and I Will bet you a pair of boots, that my plain stories, shall be by
them as well received, with my plain name, and O. S. M. as some of the
productions of these flashy fellows, with a string of titles, which are of no
other use to American freemen, than to lull them to sleep. Robert, replied my
friend, I Will not bet with you; I have gotten more boots, shoes and hats, by the
election, than I Will wear these three years; but I doubt you will make a poor
job of it -- dedications are of all others, the most difficult -- Have you
studied the art of flattery? Can you new vamp a character as easily as you
would a pair of old boots; and make it appear fair and unsullied, though many
years have passed since a single virtuous trait was found in it? Can you
collect as many mouthfulls of moonshine as the pallet of vanity can easily
admit? Or with a good grace and pious countenance, offer incense to a mortal,
who is only clothed with a little brief authority? -- If you can do these
things, go, dedicate to any great man you please, he will be your patron; and
though your pages be as dull and as stupid as ever disgraced the republic of
letters, yet the great man's nod of approbation will place sterling value on
the performance; but if you dedicate to the freemen of the United States, you
-- I Will have none of your buts, said I, out of all patience -- I Will never
flatter vice as long as I live; nay, first, as your book says, I Will "sow nether
socks, foot them and mend them too;" and placing my hands in my sides, and
looking as big as if I was worth a 1000 a year, Do you think sir, said I, I Would
gather moonshine for any man? No sir, if the sides of vanity never stand
prominent till they are puffed out by the breath of Robert Slender's flattery,
they will be as lean as a lath to the day of judgment -- I say, I will dedicate
my works to the Freemen, the Lovers of Liberty, the Asserters, Maintainers and
Supporters of Independence throughout the United States -- And not my works
only, added I, but my life also, and all I have, and God knows that is not much,
shall be ever at their service, to defend and preserve that invaluable
CONSTITUTION and glorious Independence, which is their indescribable honor,
and the richest patrimony that true republicans can hand down untarnished to
posterity -- And if my plain told stories, continued I, can have the effect of
calling up the republican spirits to a more ardent love of their country's
rights -- to more watchfulness, and stricter enquiry, I shall abundantly
receive that which I expect -- For the good of his country, must undoubtedly be
the good of Robert Slender --

And, said my friend, seeing I had talked myself out of breath, What will you
do now? -- Why, answered I, go home and write my dedication, -- Why, answered
he, you have done it already. Out of a frolic, when I saw you so earnest, I
took down your last reply -- here it is -- I pronounce it a complete
dedication, and any thing you could say after this, would be as fulsome as the
flatteries of Dryden -- Odds my heart, said I, I did not intend to have been
cheated into a dedication neither, I would have -- Hold, hold, says he, placing
his hand before my mouth, not another word, or all is ruined. Well, well, said
I, so be it; if it must be so -- only with your consent, I would add, that with
the sincerest wishes for your real happiness,

I am, Fellow Citizens, Your very humble servant, ROBERT SLENDER.

SLENDER's LETTERS.
LETTER I.
SIR,
YOUR correspondents, in their examinations of several measures which have of
late very much engaged the attention of the public, have, in my opinion,
reasoned from a very erroneous principle, namely, that princes or presidents
ought always to act fairly, openly and ingenuously: that they ought not only to
see that the laws should be obeyed by others, but should, in all their actions,
strictly act in conformity to both the letter and spirit of the law themselves.
If this indeed were so, that princes were bound by laws, and could never cause
right to bend to convenience, I, for my part, would as soon be a dray-man as a
secretary of state; as soon tug at the oar, as fill the presidential chair --
But I am bold to affirm, that I can prove the contrary; first, by the authority
of the most learned and wise ancient sages; and, secondly, by the practices of
princes in all ages.

No man, says Pliny, ever presumes to prescribe to princes, or include them
within the verge of any laws but their own inclination. In the highest post,
justice is always on the strongest side. That which is most profitable, can
never be unlawful. Holiness and piety, faith, truth, and common honesty, are
the virtues of private men -- princes are above these vulgar dispensations.

It is allowed by all, that it is lawful for governors to use dissimulation.
Says one of high authority, "The same dissimulation, which in persons of
private condition would be vicious and abominable, is in princes highly
commendable: there is no discharging their weighty affairs without it; yea, the
very thing which ruins private conversation, is the best support of government.
A prince or governor must appear open, honest, sincere; but in his mind deceit,
deep design, and cunning must hold their seat. If he wishes to govern wisely,
he must know, like Cromwell, the art of employing SPIES, and the almighty power
of BRIBERY -- of compassing his designs by deep devised and unseen methods, by
equivocating and ambiguous terms; by refined subtilties and deep intrigue; by
good words, fair promises, compliments and congratulations, formalities of
EMBASSIES and letters; and by these outwardly fair pretenses and amusing
stratagems, bring the matters about on which his whole foul is steadily fixed."
And to accomplish this, says Plato, "governors ought to make no scruple of
having frequent recourse to lies and tricks;" and Pliny asserts, that it is a
part of prudence to deceive, as occasion and the present posture of affairs
shall require. Suppose, for instance, that in any state or country whatever,
there should be a citizen or subject turbulent, overruling and rebellious, head
of a strong and determined party, would it not be just to employ the assassin
secretly to stab him, or bribe one of his intimates to hand him the poisoned
draught? Or suppose some great man, who was every day increasing in popularity,
and strengthening his interest; who undoubtedly had it in his power to do
mischief, if he were so inclined; I say, would it not be prudent for the
governor to clip his wings -- check his popularity by well devised and
plausible stories, forged letters, and secret correspondence, that so he might
not be able to annoy, if he would? To me it appears evident, that in both these
cases the ruler would be perfectly justifiable. One thing is certain, princes
ever have acted thus, and in so acting have ever found advocates. "In order to
preserve justice in greater and more important matters, there is sometimes a
necessity, says Plutarch, of deviating from it in those of less moment; and in
order to do right to the generality, it is allowable to put some hardships and
to do some wrong to particular persons." Commonly speaking, says Tacitus, the
noblest exploits carry somewhat of injustice in them. A prudent prince, says
Plutarch, must not only know how to govern according to law, but know how to
govern the laws themselves: that is, if the laws are not willing that he should
do what is necessary at that time, he must make them willing. And, not to tire
you with quotations from the ancients, Aristotle's rule is, if a prince cannot
be good in all, it is sufficient that he be so in the greater part of his
administration.

I now think I have fully established my position by authorities, that princes
are not bound to be, like other men, virtuous. Were I to enter on the proof of
it from the practice of princes, it would be giving a history of their lives,
which abounded, according to their abilities, in every species of
dissimulation, deceit, and cunning; and if the most diligent historian can
select one eminent for virtue, he will stand rara avis in terra, nigroque
similima cygno A rare bird on the earth, very like a black swan,
. From this disquisition, of governors or princes being, in certain cases
supreme above all law, I would deduce the following particulars:

1st. An irrefragable argument for the justice of the Alien Bill. Those people
who are most affected by it, and against whom it was made, are inimical to all
good government. Witness the troubles they raised in Ireland, where at present,
and for many hundred years past, the government has been temperate, humane,
and just.

2d. It was necessary, by the Sedition Law, to clip the wings of some men, and
to show the heinous nature of speaking against persons high in trust. What
would have been the consequence if a stop had not been put to such abuse? --
Colonel Lyon's imprisonment and fine did more good to America, by inculcating a
proper submission to our rulers, than any thing that could be devised, short of
cutting off his head: which indeed might have been wrong in itself, but would
have been right nevertheless, for great advantages would have sprung from it.

I was in great spirits a few days ago, expecting that the tale of a tub with a
double bottom, would have proved our governors well skilled in developing the
secrets of foreign courts; but I am now quite chapfaln, for the tub appears to
have lost both its bottoms. But I hope they will be more fortunate in their
next attempt. I trust also that the people will soon open their eyes, to see
that the paltry sums of money which are granted by their representatives in
Congress, for the use of government, will never serve to answer any valuable
purpose: if ever they wish to see their government respectable, they must give
freely, and not stand trifling for a few thousands, like women on a market day
higgling for halfpence; for when all is done, no sword can cut so deep as that
with a silver edge; it serves with zeal, obeys without grudging, and draws the
world after it. Let us never judge governors by those rules by which we
ourselves are to abide and be governed; but rest satisfied under whatever laws,
decrees, or ordinances the rulers frame, still remembering this grand advice,
(which is my last authority) whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves DAMNATION.

A MONARCHIST.

LETTER II.
MR. EDITOR,
UNTIL of late your paper never came into the neighborhood where I live: we
all with one consent pronounced it a French paper; and yet, when I begin to
think why we did so, I cannot, for my life, find a reason; for none of us ever
read a word of it. However, it came into my hands in the following manner: A
few weeks ago a man came to be my next door neighbor, who we soon found took
the AURORA; and, indeed when we found that, we determined to keep ourselves to
ourselves, and not to be defiled by democrats; but this resolution we some how
or other have entirely broken through; for he is a sober, quiet, religious sort
of a man, and the whole family are the most obliging you ever knew. As we grew
intimate I thought it could do me no hurt to read a paragraph of his paper,
just for sake of curiosity, as I had no paper of my own, for I gave up the
English paper six months ago; not that I disliked his politics, but because he
taught the children to curse, and speak bawdy. Well, to be sure since that time
I have every now and then, when tired of working, read a little; and it has
produced on me strange effects: my neighbors say I am bewitched, and point
their fingers at me, and call me a turn-coat; and then I wish your paper had
never been seen, -- but the next day the paper comes, and I cannot for the soul
of me keep from reading it. It makes every thing appear so fair, open, and so
like a history, that I believe my neighbors may hoot on, for I am determined
to read a little longer.

Indeed, Mr. Editor you publish some strange things; I am often very much
surprised: the other day, for instance, I was almost thunderstruck with the
account of the liberties allowed to kings and princes, in that piece signed a
MONARCHIST -- Lord bless me, said I to my neighbor, can this be true? True,
says he, aye, and this is only a very small and imperfect sketch of their
character. Saying this, he took down a large Chronology book (I think he called
it) and read to me above fifty instances of kings and princes swearing to do
one thing, and doing immediately the contrary: of their treachery, malice,
unforgiving temper, cruelty; of their secret murdering, covetousness, and
usury; until my hair nearly stood an end. But God be thanked, says I, these
were all heathens, I am sure Christians could not be guilty of such crimes. My
neighbor smiled, and said, I am sorry my friend to inform you, that the infamy
of kings professing Christianity, has been more notorious than that of the
Heathen of Pagan monarchs: well says I, if this be so, how can they ever say
the Lord's prayer? Can they ever think of being Christians, without following
Christ's rule, of doing as they would be done by? Do they ever think on death?
Do you suppose that they can be Christians, and yet strive to cheat and
defraud? Kiss like Judas, and stab like Joab; make fair promises and base
performances; wink at wickedness, and suffer every species of fraud to pass
unpunished; reward people for acting as spics; honor the adulterer, and laugh
at the crime! -- Lord keep me from unbelief, said I; these men are great men,
high in learning and in fame -- Do they think religion a cheat, or a bugbear
only to frighten children? I believe, says my neighbor, they think nothing at
all about it! The scripture says, the god of this world has blinded their eyes
-- and I verily believe it; but, surely said I, if the rulers of this world
would act so, the clergy would excommunicate them, and would not suffer them
thus to wear the Christian name, without its power. I cannot, said I, believe
it; it cannot be. Do you know, said my neighbor any wicked men who are very
rich? Yes, says I, there is X. Y. and Z. they are very rich, and every body
knows they are great rascals. Well, says my neighbor, are they excommunicated?
No -- I protest said I, now when I think of it, the rev. Mr. W. dined with X.
on --, and with Y. on --, and six or seven clergymen dined with Z. a few days
ago. God preserve us, said I, where shall we look for help; in the great
depravity is permitted, some kinds of wickedness counted laudable, and every
species winked at. It is our great comfort, said my friend, that although here
some things are wrong, I must confess, among the rich and great, yet the great,
the honorable and very worthy, our AMERICAN FARMERS, are VIRTUOUS, not in name
but in REALITY. Vice has not been able to entice them from the standard of
VIRTUE, INDEPENDENCE, and FREEDOM. To them we look -- they are our bulwark, the
guardians of our rights, the supporters of our dignity, and the pillars of our
CONSTITUTION. The mist of darkness, ignorance and error, begins to dissipate;
party-spirit will soon, like a fretful child, cry itself to rest; the seeds of
reform that are sown in our constitution, will bring forth fruit; the storm
indeed may awfully growl and grumble at a distance: but said my friend (leaping
to his feet, whilst I shrunk into a corner) the sun will arise with ten-fold
glory; the demons of war, discord, and desolation shall be disappointed -- true
religion shall banish pretense and hypocrisy, and AMERICA SHALL STILL BE FREE.

LETTER III.
MR. EDITOR,
I THINK I have lived in the world about forty years, but I am not certain, for
my parents thought dates of little consequence -- "Our son, said they, will
never be a great man, and what use will it be to him to be able at every
opportunity to hand down the record of his birth." The prophesy has been
literally accomplished -- I stand unnoticed among the swinish herd, as the poor
are generally called by the great and well-born. However, be that as it may,
these two or three last years past have brought about more wonderful things,
than all the rest of my life; and children, and weak minded ignorant people,
you know, are so delighted with wonders, that oftentimes they think things are
great wonders, that are no wonders at all -- but I really am of opinion that
these things are very wonderful which I am going to relate. The first thing
that set me a wondering was, when the states rebelled against Great Britain:
Lord bless me! said I, are the people mad? Is it possible they can think to be
able to oppose king George? Why their destruction is as sure as if it were
written in the Bible. I trembled for fear, and skulked into a corner, where I
lay snug out of sight during the awful contest; and when Washington had gained
the day, and made England, very much against her inclination, acknowledge our
independence; I, wondering more than ever, slipped out of my hiding place, and
talked, as well as I could, about Liberty, Independence, Freedom, and such like
things, just as the rest of my neighbors did, who had hid as well as I. Since
that to within these two or three years, as I said before, my wonders have not
been very great, though pretty numerous. I wondered a good deal about the poor
soldiers who were so nicely tricked out of their hard earned wages, by
receiving two shillings and sixpence for twenty; and when I heard so much about
funding systems, and banking systems, and public debt being a public blessing;
O, said I to myself, my poor head cannot understand this -- I wonder what it
means?

I wondered a good deal to see the old tories slipping in by little and little
into places of power and trust -- I then wondered at their impudence, and next
at the readiness with which they were admitted; and lastly wondered what it
would all come to. But these were only the beginning of wonders. I declare, Mr.
Editor, one wonder of late has so closely followed another, I am yet astonished
to look back on them. The revolution of France, the defeating of the combined
powers, the creating of so many new Republics, the pulling down of Antichrist,
for which the Protestants and Presbyterians have so long prayed to God, and now
when God has pulled him down, they say they don't thank him, which to me
appears a very great religious wonder, and I believe, a very irreligious
contradiction. I wondered at the valor and confidence of the king of Naples,
the sagacity of the king of Sardinia, the consistency of the Duke of Tuscany,
and above all, the modesty and foresight of General Mack. At home I have
wondered at the Sedition Law -- the Alien bill -- the tale of a tub -- the
existence of a stupendous army of United Irishmen in America -- the barbarous
and bloody hot water insurrection -- the great army sent to subdue the vendue
crier -- and, not to tire your patience with my wonders, I was struck dumb with
astonishment when I saw such a deep laid, well concerted and organized plan, to
influence the people into federal ideas at the next election: not altogether
understanding some part of it, I took up the paper and went in to my neighbor,
who understands Latin, and is therefore you know a man of more than ordinary
knowledge -- Did you see this, says I, about the election for governor -- See
it says he, yes, yes! -- Surely, says I, it must all be a humbug -- It has only
been printed for a piece of fun; ah, says my neighbor, there is no joke like a
true joke -- It is as true as the gospel. Well for my part, says I, I cannot
for the life of me, see much meaning in it -- surely, added I, there are very
few people in this state who do not know Judge M'Keau? Very true, said my
neighbor, and thousands know nothing at all about James Ross. Why I was in
company not may evenings ago, when it was strongly debated, and some bets made
about where he lived, and a world and all never heard of him before, and this
they said was the reason why such pains are now taken. They are fully assured
that without these exertions there would be no chance at all for their
candidate's getting many votes -- they will stretch every nerve to the utmost,
and you know if they stand in need of a few votes, there may be found a
successor for Josey Thomas, of electioneering memory, who can forge a few:
besides, it makes it altogether evident what an opinion is entertained, by
these gentlemen, of the independent electors of Pennsylvania; it is in fact
speaking to them in this language, backcountry farmers and others, long
experience has undoubtedly taught you, that such poor, illiterate, uncultivated
creatures as you are, can by no means pretend to judge for yourselves, we
therefore, who now address you, being infallibly certain that we are gifted
with all possible knowledge and extensive discernment, and likewise being the
friends of order, and good government, the admirers of the British government,
firm supporters of the British Treaty, the Excise Law and Stamp Act, the Alien
and Sedition bills, etc. etc. -- do in great love to you, and from the purest
and most disinterested motives, entreat and beseech you not to pretend to judge
for yourselves; on the day of election, trust not to your senses, because you
are poor ignorant swine, unfit for such an important task, but one and all of
you be governed by our infallible committees, they will write your tickets for
you; and you thus acting shall be entirely freed from the trouble of thinking,
which alas has brought so many evils on the United States -- on France, and
indeed on all Europe. Here I could hold no longer! Surely my friend, said I,
you cannot be serious; did not our Congress-men say that we were the most
enlightened people in the world -- it would in my opinion, said I, be a flat
contradiction for these men to think thus if they believed as you say.

By no means said my friend, do you think when they asserted that we were the
most enlightened nation, that the poor farmers were included in the account; if
you do, you are very much mistaken, the truly enlightened are your lovers of
order, your federalists, at whose head stands his excellency of Ninety-Six, his
highness the courageous and continent Thatcher, the sweet scented Rutledge, and
the thrice noble and diffident Bayard -- after these follow the four
New England States, who for true learning, zeal, piety, liberality of
sentiment, and philanthropy, are not, were not, nor ever will be equalled,
until the commencement of the glorious millennium: the residue of the union who
do not think just as these truly illuminated men do, are esteemed by them just
as high as the Jews, during the Mosaic dispensation, esteemed the heathens
around them -- as dross and dung, or in plain modern terms, as swine. Lord
bless me, said I, you astonish me -- If these men think so, no doubt but they
will soon strive to deprive the poor of the right of being electors. Soon
strive, said my neighbor, why they strive every election, and a number are
really deprived of their rights to all intents. Why they plainly tell all their
laborers and tradesmen, if they do not vote as they order them, they shall not
be employed by them another day! -- I never was more pleased than with an
answer made by a barber, with whom I am acquainted, at an election not long
ago, to one of those very wise and important gentlemen -- "For whom does thee
vote," said a very plain but very spruce looking man; for Swanwick, said the
barber. If I had known that thee held such principles, replied the other, thee
would not have gotten so much money from me for shaving, but thee shall never
shave me again; as to that said the barber, much nettled -- I don't care a
straw, but if thee does not go very quickly about thy business, I Will
effectually lather thee, and then I don't care who the devil shaves thee. Just
as my neighbor said this, I perceived his wise yawning, and casting my eyes up
to the clock, saw it was past eleven, so I got up hastily, for fear I should be
troublesome, and bade my neighbor a very good night.

LETTER IV.
MR. EDITOR,
THE other evening I happened to step out to see an acquaintance, and on my way
stopped at a neighbor's store; whilst I stood there, talking of, I do not
remember what trifle, in came a man, seemingly in high spirits, and went on
without any apology thus -- "Well neighbor," addressing himself to the
store-keeper, "I have good news for you; you may lie down now without dread,
and rise up without fear; our government is determined to demonstrate to the
world, that it is not to be played upon by every designing democratic rascal;
God be thanked! we have learned from the practice of the English government,
which is the best government on earth, how traitors ought to be served." --
"Why, what is the matter now," said the store-keeper, "is the army to march
again? Has Harper found another clue? Has Dr. Logan gone again to France -- or
have the conspirators broken jail, or -- speak I pray you." -- "No," answered
he, "but the grant jury have found three of the insurgents guilty of treason,
and they shall be hanged, beheaded and quartered, their hearts torn out and
thrown in their faces, just the way they serve conspirators in England. "O but"
says I, venturing to thrust in a word, "I believe, no body can as yet tell what
will be their sentence; I believe said I, they must be tried by a jury of their
fellow citizens." -- "Fellow fiddlesticks!" replied the other, "if every cursed
democrat of you could, you would free them without judge or jury; -- but I tell
you they shall die, let the jury condemn them or not. If," continued he, "we
had been wise enough in the beginning of the unnatural rebellion, and trussed
up but a dozen of the leading men in each state in time, this country would
have been yet happy under the king of Great Britain; but we were such plagued
fools as to give the designing fellows liberty to prate; they stirred up the
common people, and chiefly the the hotheaded rebellious Irish, by which means
the detestable sin of resisting the Lord's anointed was committed, and under
this sin our whole country lies, and for this, and this only, have we been
punished with first, the Hessian Fly, second the Yellow Fever, and lastly by
rebellion; and yet, with all this before our eyes, some of you wish to have
these men freed, and talk about juries forsooth! but we'll jury them, and judge
them too. -- If Washington had drawn and quartered thirty or forty of the
whisky boys, we would not have had this rompus; but he was always so much
inclined to what he called mercy, and humanity, and forgiveness, and all that
there sort of whining stuff, that all that Hamilton and the rest of them could
do, he would not agree to it; so now we see the consequence. But it will not be
the case now; our present President, God bless him, will give them a passport
to the other world, I Will be bail; and if he should'nt, I know what I know." --
"I hope," said I, "my friend you do'nt intend to take the law into your own
hands." -- "Why sir," answered he, "what the devil would you have us to do? Do
you imagine we are to sit still and look tamely on, till all the advances we
have made to be happily reconciled to our mother country are entirely
destroyed? No sir, we will resist, and that in a way which some folks little
dream of. I thought," continued he, "that the people were heartily tired of
their folly. I was fully convinced in my own mind, that all they had been told
by the President, about republics, and republican governments, by Fenno and
Peter Porcupine, about liberty or such nonsense, had prepared them for at last
putting absolute confidence in the men to whom they had entrusted the
government that they have established; and not to do any thing contrary to the
mind of the leading characters. But behold they set up Thomas M'Kean for
governor, though fully satisfied that he is a democrat; sure that he was, and
still is, an enemy to our mother country, Great Britain, and sure that he, as
president of Congress, signed the instrument of all our woes, the Declaration
of Independence! -- But Peter's right, we, who are the friends of order and
good government, must and will be found at our post -- What!" said he, "I have
-- but mum is the word." -- "Lord bless me," said I to myself, "its a hundred
to one if he is not thinking about making the calico shirts and blue breeches!
-- Indeed," said I, "friend, I know but very little about politics, but you
seem to know a great deal." "And so I may," said he, "I learned politics when
this country was a land that flowed with milk and honey. The year sixty-five --
ah! we'll never see such times again, unless" -- "Unless what," said I --
"Never mind," added he, "I Am old enough to know where to stop" -- and stamping
his foot with much force, stalked out of the shop with great dignity; and
shortly after I took my leave. When I came home I stepped into my neighbor's,
and told him the story: Do you think, said I, that the man can have any
foundation for venturing to talk so -- I declare, added I, I sometimes trembled
for fear, when he talked so big, about hanging and quartering, but most of all
when he said mum! But now I am quite easy, I don't believe a word of it. --
Indeed, added I, as I cannot say that I am over and above courageous, except
when I take a glass extraordinary; and am besides a fellow of a pale face, I
dread very much fellows of Sterretorian courage. "Indeed Robert, said my
neighbor, we ought neither to pay too much regard to what we hear in this way,
nor reject it altogether; there is a middle way between these extremes, which
is generally the sasest -- that is, we ought coolly and dispassionately to
examine both sides, and reject or approve according to the dictates of reason.
-- Porcupine has sounded the alarm, and much in the same strain. He is
undoubtedly the organ of a strong British party -- they well know, that when
Thomas M'Kean is chosen governor, as without a doubt he will, it will be
signing another declaration of independence against being under the influence
of British measures, or British connections -- they will therefore do all in
their power to oppose his election." --

"Lord bless me," said I, "I Will settle my affairs, and retreat to my old
hiding place. I hate fighting, not so much for the name of the thing but the
smart of the blows; -- and besides, in contests of this kind, a man might lose
an eye, or a leg, or an arm, or indeed perchance be killed by accident, and
then you know 'twould be no matter to me, whether Ross or M'Kean was governor
--!"

"Very true," said my friend, laughing, "very true; -- but you need be in to
haste, although I am well assured that they will do all they can to intimidate
weak minded people, keep back returns, forge votes, and bribe voters; yet they
know too well what would be the result of any acts of violence. Numbers have
been induced to join their party, not from an evil design, but merely from
thinking them real friends to the country; but very impolitically they have
thrown off the mask -- he who was an angel of light appears now to be a devil.
Porcupine first exposed him, Fenno tore the mask, and the hot water
insurrection, and Captain Montgomery's new method of preserving the laws
inviolate, have clearly exhibited the cloven foot -- now by their own folly
their whole plan is deranged; Harper begat a clue of conspiracy, the clue of
conspiracy begat a forgery; that forgery begat the tale of a tub; the tale of a
tub begat the hot water war; that begat the devil among the tailors -- in all
five generations, evidently springing from the slippery end of the Harperian
clue; and they all, like their father, will soon sleep in that disgraceful
silence which they so justly merit." -- As my neighbor said this, we were both
alarmed with a great noise in the street -- it proved to be a lover of order
and good government, who was teaching his rib, the true meaning of being
subject to the higher powers -- whether he convinced her or not I cannot say,
but I Am sure his arguments were so pointed that she must have had the worst of
it.

LETTER V.
MR. EDITOR,
WHEN your Saturday's paper came to hand, I took it up with a great deal of
earnestness, and casting my eyes over it to see what I should read first, I
perceived -- "To the President of the United States," in large letters. So, so,
says I, let me see what we have got here. Amazing! three columns and an half
long! Why what in the name of wonder has the man to say to his Excellency, that
can take him such a time in telling his story! However, said I to myself, it is
no matter, my head could never, even in my youngest days, know the meaning of
so long a tale; I Will pass it over, and leave it to those men who are blessed
with a greater stock of patience, and a stronger brain. But just as I was about
to begin the next article, A Maryland Clergyman met my view. What, says I, was
it written by a clergyman? It must be good, it would be sacrilege not to read
it. Perhaps, Mr. Editor, you may think strange that the term Clergyman could
produce on me such an effect; the reason is, my father, who loved religion, not
for the name of it, but for its life and power, paid always the greatest
respect to the clergy. They labor for the good of our souls, he would say, and
are therefore worthy of double honor. If one of them committed a fault,
instead of railing out against the whole fraternity; let us remember, he would
say, a minister is but a man; and "no man lives and sins not." I endeavor
to imitate the old man, and though I fall far short in performance, I still
remember the precept. There must be something good in it, said I; perhaps its a
sermon, though I cannot see the text -- but perhaps I will meet it as I go along
-- so having snuffed the candle, opened the wick, and set myself a little more
on my center, I began.

In your late reply to the Legislature of Maryland, you have appeared in all
the dignified splendor of your public and private character -- the statesman,
the philosopher, the patriot -- I trust, the Christian.

I hope it will not be considered any diminution of this tribute of respect,
that I take the liberty, as an individual, of offering a few animadversions on
that part of your reply to our Representatives in the State Assembly, that
respects religion. This is a subject I hope equally free to all.

In the reply, you express some alarm or apprehension for the cause of
religion; and a dereliction of its most essential principles for the
maintenance of morality, government and society.

Such, sir, being the slate of your mind, it has every reason to excite similar
apprehensions in ours; to invite us to the investigation of what new and
unexpected dangers, foreign or domestic, menace our religious liberties. When
we hear our dignisied political watchman proclaiming, that he trusts "America
will not be converted into a perfect bedlam, whatever other parts of the world
may wish it; we must naturally raise our eyes and look around on others, and on
ourselves; it is full time we should examine the direction of the impending
influenza of irreligious infanity. Maryland Clergyman's Letters; Aurora, No.
2545.


God be thanked, said I, after I had read the first five or six paragraphs,
while wickedness abounds, we have a good, virtuous, and truly wise man for our
President -- who is "a terror to evil doors," and a praise to them that do
well; -- under his virtuous administration, no encouragement will be given to
men who devour widow's houses; and for a pretense make long prayers. But let me
read a little farther -- "Make a perfect bedlam of our country," in the name of
wonder what does this mean? -- "Make a bedlam of all America;" to me it
appears, said I, perfectly nonsense. I thought when the French went to Egypt,
it was a mad scheme; and when before that, they changed the Sabbath into a
decade, a foolish scheme; but to turn America into a mad house, was the maddest
of mad schemes that ever a raving mad people could for a moment conceive. Was
it for this, said I, they assisted us to obtain our independence? Was it for
this that they have been ever since telling us fair tales and smooth stories?
No, no, said I, if that is what they want, they shall want; why I would not give
them the size of my garden for a mad house, let alone all America. I tried to
read, it was all a joke; I could think of nothing but Bedlam -- Bedlam, make a
perfect Bedlam of our country, rung in my ears. I took off my spectacles, put
them in the case, and muttering Bedlam all the way, went in to my neighbor?
Did you ever hear the like, said I? Why what is the matter, said my neighbor?
Why, said I, our President tells us these plagued French folks, want to make a
perfect bedlam of our country. "O," said my neighbor, "you are always in too
great haste. -- Did I not tell you in our last conversation, that you ought to
weigh both sides of every point dispassionately, and then judge? Had you read a
little farther, you would have seen that what is there meant by a Bedlam, is
not a mad term, as you imagined, but a receptacle for people holding opinions
on religious subjects, which we and a majority of the United States think
entirely without foundation, either in reason or scripture." Indeed! said I, is
that the meaning of a "perfect bedlam?' -- "It is not," said he, "the real
meaning of the term; but, however, must be the meaning of it here. -- But read
on," said my friend -- "you are but just began, I see:" I read on accordingly
-- Is it possible, said I; can this clergyman be depended on? I thought, added
I, that no religion of any kind was suffered in France; and yet here are
prelates, bishops, vicars, curates, etc. large salaries and fine seminaries.
Under the new Constitution the French have no less than nine Metropolitan
prelates, eighty-three bishops, each department being a diocese, with vicars,
curates, etc. etc. etc. -- and the government has provided, that the salaries
of the bishops shall be from 500 to 840 pounds per annum, not to exceed the
latter sum -- and from 160 to 50 pounds sterling for the vicars and curates.
Besides a seminary is provided for in each diocese, for the instruction of
candidates for the ministry, under three vicars and a vicar general, in order
that they may be properly prepared for entering into holy orders, agreeably to
the sentiments and wishes of the people. Guth. Geog.
Well, said I, the more I read, I see I know the less -- I wish to God, said I,
some of our great preachers would for the love of the gospel, go to France.
Poor things! they never heard a good gospel sermon, from an honest Calvinistic
Presbyterian minister. You think then, said my friend, that there are no
Presbyterians in France! Think, said I, to be sure I do, they are all papists
or infidels -- Indeed my friend, replied my neighbor, you are much mistaken;
truly there are more Presbyterians in France at this day, than there are
citizens in the United States; and among these are men eminent, yea of the
first rank in all scientific acquirements. A number of their leading men are
deists, it is true, and so are a number of the leading men here, and in all
other countries. The number may be more in France, because of its very great
population, and the long night of darkness and slavery in which they labored
-- But here we are increasing in proportion to our population, in every species
of what is called in England liberality, as fast as ever they did in France or
elsewhere. Well, says I, but was it not from France that we derived all our
wickedness and profanity, and infidelity; sure, says I, our parson says so, and
he is a learned clergyman. Read on, said my neighbor, and then judge. Why I
protest, said I, this gentleman thinks that our intercourse with England has
tended more to our growth in wickedness and infidelity, than our love of French
principles; and for my own part, added I, I must confess I believe him. If the
French, continued I, are infidels that come here, they can do little hurt to
me, for I do not understand a word of their gibberish nor they of mine -- and I
do not ever remember to have seen a Frenchman drunk, or in a quarrel, from the
day of their revolution to this. I believe said I, they do not pay much regard
to the Sabbath; but alas! they may say as much of us -- And if, said my friend,
that be the mark of infidelity, but a small number of believers will be found
in Philadelphia. And yet, says he, I have been through most of the capital
cities in Europe, and never did my eyes behold such a well regulated, quiet,
inoffensive and peaceable people, as the inhabitants of Philadelphia. I
suppose, however, that what your parson meant was in allusion to the great
circulation that is given to the Age of Reason, by Thomas Pain; he thinks it
was our love of French principles that enticed us to read his work; but in
this, with all due respect, said my friend, I choose to judge for myself.
Paine's works were, and are sought for, because, first, he was a man very
active, and highly esteemed in our revolutionary contest; his Common Sense, is
a jewel which cannot be too much esteemed -- and his Rights of Man are but a
continuation of the same subject; and it is richly deserving of high
approbation. -- Again, his Age of Reason, would never have been much known in
this country if the Clergy had suffered it to rest; but they dragged it into
publicity -- let the text be what it would, animadversions on Pain, made a
part of the sermon. The clergy wrote -- the people read. Pain was brought to
the bar of the public, and in general so ill was the cause of Christianity
handled, by its weak, yet conceited friends, that Pain too frequently came off
with flying colors. I, for my own part, continued my friend, have read over
seriously and carefully that paper of which you have now read a part, and do in
my judgment declare it to be a strong evidence that the writer is possessed of
sound judgment, a clear understanding, and a good heart, and had I influence I
would undoubtedly endeavor to induce every good republican to read it
seriously, and weigh it impartially: it answers completely all the cavils that
are so loudly sounded about our being corrupted by French principles; and his
strictures on the appointment of men to offices of any kind whatever, who are
not in their stations a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do
well, argue that he is not a minister for filthy lucre's sake -- that he holds
the person of no man in estimation -- but is determined to reprove and not to
spare. But after all, said I, I cannot rest easy -- it is no matter to us, added
I, where the people came from, or who they are, if they make a perfect bedlam
of our country -- No doubt says I, but William Cobbett meant the same thing,
when he so pompously proclaimed the Church in danger. The world is indeed in a
strange way -- I don't half like it, I hate to be among mad people, they say a
bite is dangerous; besides, not being a strong man, added I, and not much used
to tussling, I believe I had better in time slip quietly out of the way --
better an hour too soon, than a moment too long, is my motto; and I think a
safe one. I have no pleasure in spasms, pangs, and convulsions.

I never thought, said my neighbor, that you were so fearful; why I tell you
there is no danger -- the jarrings, discontents, and murmurings of party here,
will just keep pace with the soulafflicting state of Europe. That men there
will finally be free, is clear to every unprejudiced enquirer -- and as soon as
Europe shall rejoice in peace, happiness, and liberty, so soon shall this
country, in renovated splendor, lift aloft the ensigns of freedom; then she
will rejoice, and her joy will receive an infinite addition, when she reflects
that the bright ray of liberty, which has dispelled the shades of savage
barbarity despotic cruelty, and monkish ignorance, first illuminated the
American hemisphere. -- Stop my friend said I, I will consider of this a little
more at leisure, my poor head begins to grow giddy, and cannot hold any more at
this time; but, said I, I Will not forget your advice, I Will weigh both sides of
every question for the future, and judge as dispassionately as I can. Having
said this, I bade my friend good morning.

LETTER VI.
MR. EDITOR,
IN the country where I was born, scarce a day passes in which the little
country towns are not visited by deaf and dumb prophets, who for a small sum
make the people as well acquainted with what is to come, as they are with what
is past. When I was a child, one of the most eminent of these divines, plainly
declared that I would stand in great danger of being frightened to death. This
prophecy has at different times made me very uneasy and at every appearance of
danger I make it my chief concern to slip out of harm's road as soon as I can.
However, I am very much alarmed at present, I dread very much that the
fulfillment of the fatal prediction draws near; and I have been so often
plagued and frightened of late, that it will require but a little more to do my
turn. Indeed if it had not been for one little circumstance, it would have been
all over with me long ere this time; but this gave me a little courage and kept
my spirits, which were just ready to make a last retreat, a little longer in a
state of operation. The circumstance was, that all the alarms which were so
industriously spread by men of the first rank, and all friends of order and
good government, turned out to be what my neighbor the Latinist says, an old
fellow whose name I have forgotten, said of the nightingale, Vox ^t nihil
preteria, that is, as my friend explains it, only a voice: for example, when
William Cobbett published what he called a formidable and alarming conspiracy
of the United Irishmen, their constitution, regulations, and an army 50,000
strong. I quaking at every limb, believed every word as firmly as if it had
been revelation, barred my gates, double locked all my doors, and if a mouse
but scratched on the wall I was ready to hide behind the curtains. But in a
short time Cobbett grew quiet, and all our experience from that to this has
proved that it was only a voice. Next our city was to be burned -- I trembled
very much, and I believe so did a great many more. I every night had a sharp
eye about me, praised the carefulness of the friends of good government, and
wetting out all the fires in the house myself, went quaking to bed -- and this
also proved a voice only. I was much perplexed about the affair of X. Y. and
Z.; dreamt every night of a French invasion -- dreaded terribly that the
negroes would rebel -- prayed all my friends to strive with all their might for
to increase our navy -- wished heartily for a league offensive and defensive
with our mother England -- and thought our Envoys, the President, the King of
England, and the Grand Signior, the greatest men upon earth. Think, only think
of my disappointment, when this, by the plain tale of Mr. Gerry, was shown to
be like the rest, for some special purpose, only a voice. When the great Harper
ingeniously catched the clue of a most dangerous conspiracy, he made the
Congress-hall ring with it, and my heart throbbed violently -- Lord bless me,
said I, where will all this end? We have the best government on earth, except
the English; and I dare say our great men would, to oblige us, make our's as
good as their's, if we would but ask them -- and yet we are a divided people.
Thus I mistrusted my near neighbors, and was all of a cold sweat if I saw two
men talking seriously -- Oh, says I, they are making up the plot -- and then I
ran home to put all my affairs to rights, that I might decamp at a moment's
warning. But think how I felt confounded when I got my eyes opened, and saw
that the whole plan of United Irishmen, burning the city, and the clue of
conspiracy, were only to prepare the way for the Alien and Sedition bills. The
tale of the tubs also had its day, and produced on my weak mind very sensible
effects -- and my disturbance of mind was beyond my feeble powers to express,
when as I was going to church on the Sabbath, a most wicked conspiracy was
defeated, by the vigilance of some active magistrates: a conspiracy which had
taken root among the tailors, who my neighbor the Latinist says, being
generally people (excuse me for not saying men) feeble, and like myself owners
of pale faces, were never known to be at the head of a conspiracy before. But,
Mr. Editor, all these frights were only as a molehill by the side of a
mountain, when compared with what I the other night felt, and, alas! do yet
grievously feel.

The other evening, having finished my day's work a little sooner than
ordinary, I stepped out to drink a pint of ale at a tavern I sometimes frequent
to read Brown's, Fenno's, or William Cobbett's paper, and smoke a segar. I
placed myself in the dark side of the box, and after taking my draught, sat
thinking over some of the above alarming occurrences, when in came two men, and
taking their seats without ever paying any attention to me, went on thus: You
think the sea-tyger a strange beast; I wish you could but get a sight of the
Aristocrat. The aristocrat, says the other, you astonish me. Is not your
aristocrat a man? No more a man, replied the other, (with a smile of superior
wisdom) than the sea-tyger. Odds my life, rejoined his companion, what do you
mean? I have heard it said a thousand times that man's an aristocrat. Granted
said the other, and have you not heard men say, that man is a sad dog? Have you
not also heard a man styled a bear, a wolf, a fox, a sheep, etc.? I confess I
have said the other. Well continued he, in the same manner a man is called an
aristocrat. I listened with both my ears -- the subject was something new. Well
said the other, this is plagued strange; was it not that I know you are always
poring over books, I would not believe a word of this. But pray what sort of a
beast is it? I am able only to describe it by hearsay, I am not entitled to a
sight of it -- I am informed, continued he, that an aristocrat is headed like a
lion, its body like a leopard, its feet like a bear, its tongue like that of a
man, and its teeth like that of a panther. God bless me, said his companion, it
must be a wonderful beast indeed; pray where was it produced? That, answered
the other, is much disputed: Clavus Beligero, who has given us an accurate
account of it, says it is coeval with the devil, and accompanied him in his
first attack upon man. But this I can scarcely credit, for Milton, who knew all
that story as well as the devil himself, makes no mention of it -- Petrus
Albinus says, "the aristocrat is the fourth beast spoken of by Daniel;" and
Johanus Scotus, who was well acquainted with it, says that it is the king who
was set over the beasts which ascended out of the bottomless pit, of whom John
writes in the Revelations; and for my own part I think he is right.

This is all new to me, I never heard a word of it, nor did I ever meet with a
beast of that name in all my reading. That Is not improbable, replied the other;
yet not the less true. But are these beasts numerous? The aristocrat is like
the phoenix in that respect, said the other, there is but one in the world; but
that has answered the same end as if they were innumerable, for it has
traveled over the whole world, and wherever it sets its foot, it leaves such
terrible impressions that they can scarcely ever be effaced, unless by the
blood of millions. God forbid, said his companion, that ever the creature
should defile America. Your prayer is useless, answered the other, it has,
alas! been in this country too long for our quiet -- Who imported it, continued
he his not as yet come to my knowledge; but one thing is certain, it was
brought here from England, for it is well known that Lord Dunmore was very
intimate with it, and acted solely under its direction. What new wonder it
this? -- you speak of it as if it were a reasonable being. Reasonble, replied
the describer, yes, it possesses the art of reasoning to a high degree. It was
this circumstance that led Clavus Beligero to think it was the devil's
companion in the defeat of our first parents, because the serpent is said to be
more subtle than any beast of the field; and what is more wonderful still, it
speaks distinctly, and understands accurately all the languages and tongues
that are spoken on the earth -- and its discourse is full of high swelling
words of vanity. It was the aristocrat, continued he, that planned the campaign
which rendered Burgoyne so famous, it presided at the Indian war feast, and
it is said that it dictated the war speech delivered to them by the general. --
It was also held in high esteem by General How, and planned the whole of that
elegant exhibition, in honor of the general, styled the Mezchiensa. At the
close of our contest, the English through spite let it loose, well knowing it
would be a worse enemy to us, than either the Hittite or the Canaanite was to
the Jews. This being found out, Dr. Franklin, Rittenhouse, and a few other
ingenious men, contrived a TRAP to catch it; but it is creditably attested,
that about that time the crafty creature put itself under the protection of the
Society of Cincinnati. Since that time the aristocrat has never appeared to any
but the great and well-born, and to them he is so very agreeable, that although
he is of such an hideous appearance, yet ladies of the most delicate mould play
as familiarly with him as if he were a kitten; it is also said, though I cannot
credit it, that the aristocrat has been the chief counselor, attended to by a
certain person high in authority, that he is admitted into the Senate chamber
when the doors are shut, and is always present in the house of Representatives
when the galleries are cleared. Well, said the other, many a strange story you
have told me before, but this is the most singular I ever listened to; why
continued he, the English have done us more real harm by leaving that devil of
a beast hehind them, than it was in their power to effect with all their
armies. Yes, that is true, said the other -- but the TRAP approved of by
Franklin is not lost, though it is a little out of order; and I still hope the
aristocrat will be caught; and, that America may have the honor of freeing the
world of this inhuman monster.

Having said this, they got up, paid their reckoning and departed -- I followed
their example -- I ran the whole way home; often however, looking on this side,
and that, for fear it would leap upon me from some of its lurking places -- and
I might, Mr. Editor, safely assure you that the aristocrat meets me in my
waking meditation, and is even present in my dreams -- I wish that some of your
ingenious correspondents would be so good as to inform me through the medium of
your paper, whether this beast does really exist or not -- And so ease in some
measure,

Yours, etc.

LETTER VII.
WELL Mr. Editor, for my own part I cannot conceive of what stuff some people
are made -- You say, that you do not feel that plagued rib-beating and
head-bumping bout -- Perhaps the gentlemen, for gentlemen they undoubtedly are,
were only in sport, and you did not clearly understand them -- if this was the
case, I do not think it was over and above kind of either you or them, to make
such a confounded rompus, and so to frighten poor, quiet inoffensive people,
out of their seven senses -- I am sure that I shall not feel myself the same thing
this month. I feel myself dwindle very much of late -- I grow paler and paler,
and how can it be otherwise? Constantly on the watch -- ever on the wing -- Why
Hercules could not stand it -- and how then can I -- Frightened by plots,
astonished with wonders, made jealous and mistrustful by conspiracies and
combinations, robbed of my natural rest by insurrections, terrified to death by
whipping, pummelling, choking, nosebumping, eye-bruising, and cow-skinning. --
I can with the wise man exclaim, with propriety, all is vanity and vexation of
spirit. I was just reflecting this last evening, when in stepped my neighbor.
He came in without knocking; a ceremony I will never again dispense with -- for
I will be on my guard, and am determined if I cannot get a peep at the knocker
through the window, the person shall give his or her name; and unless I know
them well, but one at a time shall be my guest.

What think you of times now, said my neighbor, as he seated himself in a
chair -- Think of them said I, why I am going to think no more about them --
let them sight who love it: as long, says I, as nothing can be gotten by
fighting but black eyes and bloody noses, I Will declare off -- I Will start
tomorrow morning, added I, and then let the hardest skin hold longest out.
Well but I thought, replied my neighbor, that you had been always a lover of
order and good government and yet you talk of running away: Is this the part of
a good citizen?

I have always, said I, been a friend to good order, and that for two reasons
-- religion bade me love my neighbor as myself, and do unto all men as I would
they should do unto me -- and I do not yet believe that religion is a cipher;
secondly, I always have been an advocate for good government, because being but
a weakly little fellow, and not very foolhardy, as I have often told you, my
whole dependence for profection is on society -- I therefore love the law; not
club law, that is my aversion; and if ever I find myself insulted, I retreat
behind it, and find myself perfectly secure -- But at present, says I, it seems
the law is set at defiance -- I remember that in the Bible I have read these
words, "There was no king in Israel, and every one did that which seems good
in his own eyes." I began to think that is the reason of all our disorders --
We have too much freedom -- our chief magistrate has too little power, and
therefore is not sufficiently respected. When the hon. Robert Goodloe Harper,
and I. Williams, humbled themselves so much as to state, with remarkable
precision and infallible veracity, the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth -- if sufficient power had been lodged in the proper authority, all
who suffered themselves to doubt, but for one instant, the truth of the
relation, ought to have been carbonaded -- And you see, added I, what the
Editor of the Aurora has gotten for speaking out -- I wish, continued I, the
lawmakers would speak plainly, and tell us, if the being a volunteer, and
immediately under the direction of the chief magistrate, gives any exclusive
privileges -- It has some how or other popt into my head that it does. I
remember a foolish fellow in the country, having been honored with the office
of constable, came home in a great flurry, and summoning the neighbors
together, went on thus: My good friends and neighbors, with the greatest good
nature and love, I warn you not to provoke me to anger, or even tread on my
corns, for the future; for, rising from his seat, and placing his arms a-kimbo,
Gentlemen you must know I am now a civil officer; I am, I say, gentlemen, a
constable, and may therefore, kick, cuff, beat, bruise, cowskin, or kill any
man I please; therefore I say gentlemen, for God's sake be careful. Now, says
I, if this is the case in respect of the volunteers, as I for my own part have
no objection but it should be, because they are gentlemen of the nicest honor
and humanest minds, and being enrolled for the express purpose of supporting
order and good government, and protecting us in the enjoyment of our rights,
our lives and honor would undoubtedly be perfectly sase in their hands -- I
would only wish it to be generally known, and then every person would know, how
he ought to respect these gentlemen of honor; I am sure, said I, I would do
any thing, brush their coats, black their boots, or powder their fore tops,
rather than be either run through the body, or shot through the head; but as
long as we are ignorant what should be done for the men whom the President
delights to honor, we are every moment in danger of incurring their
displeasure, and perhaps occasioning our own ruin.

Indeed said my neighbor, I think we have some reason to be alarmed, but not
to such an extent as to cause us to run away from the city -- the moderate men
of both parties, who I hope are equally lovers of their country's good, though
they do not exactly agree in the mode of bringing it about, ought to meet and
fix upon some method to keep under this spirit of anarchy. Delays, in such
cases as this, may be very dangerous -- if blood is once spilt in this mad
business, God only knows, where it will stop -- Both parties have arms in their
hands, and in both parties are many brave men -- The death of one man would
only be a prelude to the death of thousands. That Is what I fear, replied I --
Phillis, Phillis, cried I, as loud as I could bawl, go and tell your mistress
to make all the speed she possibly can, for we'll leave town before daybreak.
Away ran Phillis -- and in came Mrs. Slender, Why my dear all this haste? Why
all this haste, replied I, that is a question indeed; do you think I am going to
stay here to have my throat cut, to be whipped to death, or skivered like a
lark? -- No, no, I Am not such a fool yet, God be thanked! Our President, said
I, said our country was in danger of being turned into a bedlam by French
principles -- But I doubt that we stand in more danger of turning it into a
slaughterhouse by wicked practice -- But, said she, where will you go? -- Go,
said I, where should I go, but to the place I was during the last war, and then
we will be safe -- and if I should live, said I, to see the end of the scuffle,
I Will be then in the high way to preferment -- for to have done nothing, or
worse than nothing for the country, you know has so highly recommended the old
tories, that they are now raised to power, trust and honor -- That may be
true, answered she, for any thing I know; but how shall we go? -- We will go in
the stage -- Why we have no places taken you know, and it is now too late -- In
the water stage then, cried I -- There are no water-stages to sail tomorrow my
dear -- Well in a wagon, a cart, or on our feet, said I, rather than stay here
and be killed -- I believe we cannot go tomorrow, Patty has no shoes, the
mantua-maker has not brought home my gown, and the barber has not your wig
ready yet -- Death and confusion! cried I -- My dear Sir, said my neighbor, do
not torment yourself to death; this foolish bustle will in a day or two blow
over; and take my word for it, that your security will be more confirmed and
not made less sure thereby -- The eyes of every true American are on the
actions of each day -- The genius of America is not dead, but only sleeps --
Let us, said my neighbor, be careful not to overleap the boundaries of
moderation -- let us be calm, cool and collected -- You will shortly see that
those who dig a pit for others shall themselves first fill it -- for the
present make yourself easy; I assure you, you are in no danger -- So saying, he
shook me cordially by the hand, and departed; whilst I was forced, much against
my inclination, to postpone my journey.

LETTER VIII.
MR. EDITOR,
IN my last you know, I was forced much against my mind, to postpone my
journey; and as my friend said, I find all the bustle has ended, and peace and
good order operate as usually -- Ever since I have been endeavoring to bring
my mind to such a state as not always to be so severely acted upon by the
system of alarm which is still kept up by a certain description of people, I
doubt not to answer some very valuable purposes. I can only speak for myself --
of other folks I know but little -- but if many in the union have been so
plagued with their lying alarms as I have been, I think they may exclaim, like
the old fellow with the great belly, in a book my neighbor sometimes reads to
me, called, I think, Shakespeare, "Lord help the while" -- I have been, like
the weathercock, the sport of every blast; like a tennis ball, bandied from
hand to hand; now up and then down, for all the world like the ends of a
balancing beam -- As for example: when first I heard of a French conspiracy for
the subversion of our government, published in the English paper, and found
that a number of our very wise men in Congress believed it, why what should
poor I do, but believe it also -- Ah, says I, it must indeed be true; if there
were not some foundation for it, Harper, and Smith, and Otis, and Fenno, and
WILLIAM COBBETT, men so remarkably gifted with long heads, would never have
credited it; and I Will lay my life, added I, those men will ferret out these
secret-working villains, who wish to rise on our ruin -- Thus my mind was
placed on the very pinnacle of expectation -- I greedily ran over the contents
of each paper, looking for something which would prove me a true prophet: for I
have ever been very much addicted to the act of foreseeing, though I must
confess I am generally disappointed; but in that I have good company, witness
my friend Harper -- that is my comfort. Well, as I was saying, I looked, and
looked, and paused, and looked again, till at long, and at last, out came the
story of the famous packet directed to Benjamin Franklin Bache, sealed after
the form in which the Directory, and all that sort of people, seal their
letters of great consequence -- So so, says I, my prophecy is come true at last
-- I thought they would ferret it out, and I see I was not mistaken -- I could
scarcely sit a moment still, ran round to all my acquaintances, told them of my
having foreseen as much long ago, and freely consigned Bache to punishment and
insamy. But judge Mr. Editor, my confusion, when Bache, with so much manliness,
called upon them for his packet -- and when received, broke it in the presence
even of his enemies, as well as friends; and lo! the important communication
proved to be two pamphlets -- My neighbors laughed at me -- What Is come of
your prophecy now, said one? -- You foresee truly, said another -- What death
must Bachedie, said a third -- Ask Porcupine, he is in the secret, replied a
fourth; whilst I stood in the middle, as still as a mouse, and as sheepish as
Hamilton when he wrote the story about Reynolds' wife.

However, picking up a little confidence, Have patience, friends, says I, you
will all see -- Hush, cries a man at my elbow -- Robert is going to give us
another prophecy -- aye -- aye -- Harper -- says a second -- He foresees -- Out
with it, said a third. I turned, and seeing an opening in the crowd, ran home
as fast as my heels could carry me; from which I did not stir for three days.
The recalling of this transaction has so ruffled my spirits, that although I
intended when I sat down to write, to tell you how all the alarms one by one
operated on my weak head and poor spirits -- yet I find I must desist, and
postpone the account to another opportunity.

LETTER IX.
To Mr. ROBERT SLENDER.
Bucks County, June 14th, 1799. DEAR COUSIN ROBERT,
THIS comes with the kind love, and good wishes of myself and family to you and
yours, hoping this will find you all in good health, as we are, thank God, at
present -- I was much surprised to besure cousin Robert, to hear that you had
of late turned your mind so much to politics, and in particular, that you had
ventured to correspond in the public prints with the editor of the Aurora, who
is for certain, as all our neighbors say, a dangerous sort of a man. It was by
mere chance, as I do not take the Aurora, that I met with your publications,
and now write purely to give you my advice on the occasion -- Ah! cousin
Robert, if you only followed the good advice of your father, my honored uncle
Timothy Slender, you would certainly never have troubled yourself with such
kind of business, which, believe me, does not suit such heads as yours -- Is it
possible you can have forgotten how earnestly he always warned all his friends
and relations, and particularly yourself, how that you should not upon any
account have any thing to do with state affairs, but mind your own proper
business, and get money as fast as possible. He was, as every body knows, a
very wise man, and to me it appears unaccountable that you could so soon forget
his precepts -- But how in the name of wonder, if you must be meddling in
politics, came you to choose the editor of the Aurora, in preference to all
others, to correspond with? Why he is represented all through this neighborhood
as a most strange sort of a man, and moreover suspected somehow of a kind of an
inclination for democracy, and writing and printing about liberty; and how that
all men ought to be equal, and that the present system, which (as Mr. Fenno
says) no body understands, is better than the good old kingly government, which
you know our wise fathers always loved. You may well be afraid, as I see by
your letters you are, of the bad consequences of such conduct. See only what it
has brought your correspondent to. Why we have been informed, that he has been
attacked on account of his publications, and beaten and abused in a most sad
manner. -- Take warning dear cousin, and think how poor a chance you would
stand against such fighting fellows, when the editor of the Aurora was overcome
by only ten, and it is even doubted if Buonaparte himself would not be
overmatched by twenty such desperadoes. Why there is one fellow who is so
powerful, that he can kill at every blow, if he pleases; and then there is
another, God bless us, a most dreadful sort of a man, who is sure to injure
every one that comes within a scaffold pole's length of him -- besides there is
M. R -- a most fierce man, as all this country can witness; but as he was
always on the right side, I only hint this, to warn you against making him your
enemy, or you might happen to be burnt alive.

I had just wrote so far, when Dorothy coming in, and understanding I was
writing to you, insisted upon knowing the whole business -- It is impossible to
give you an idea of the manner she took on, when she heard the dreadful danger
you were in, and ordered me to set off immediately, and persuade you all to
come up -- and in particular to offer cousin Slender the use of Dobbin,
together with her new side saddle and safeguard -- However, recollecting that
you had moved, and not knowing whither, I persuaded her at last it would be
more proper to send our oldest son Titus, with directions, if he cannot find
you, to call at the Aurora office, and leave this letter for his uncle, which I
hope you will receive, and let me hear from you as soon as possible -- So no
more at present from your loving cousin

SIMON SIMPLE.

LETTER X.
To Mr. SIMON SIMPLE.
DEAR COUSIN SIMON,
I RECEIVED your kind letter, and read it over with much satisfaction. My heart
waxed warm on account of your renewing a correspondence which has been so long
dropped -- and for such a trifle too -- I believe we both carried the dispute
too far -- I Am sure for myself I can safely say the bank never benefitted me a
shilling, and I suppose it never took one from you -- and to quarrel about such
a thing -- Ah cousin Sim, I Am afraid we have both poor heads -- I thank you
kindly for your advice, but I Am certain if you could have but known what
mischief it has done, you never would have written it -- I was to be sure
frightened, and that very much, with plots upon plots, embassies, rebellions,
massacres, systems of bribery, hot water insurrections, cavalry trumpeters
handling a cat-o'-nine-tails, and the ever memorable engagement between the
editor of the Aurora and fifteen cavalry officers; in which the officers
gained, by manly actions and deeds of hardyhood, laurels, which shall never
fade, but flourish as long as the Aurora rises. But all these were nothing to
what I now feel -- Lord bless me dear Sim, are you in earnest? -- Have I indeed
been meddling with politics? Alas! I thought I might talk of the moon for a
month without meddling with her! -- See what it is to have a poor head -- I
find I have been just in the station of the fellow in a play that my neighbor
read to me the other night, who had been speaking prose all his life without
knowing it -- Duce take the politics -- A man's indeed reduced to a fine
condition, when he cannot write an account to his friend that he has been
frightened, without meddling with politics -- Dear Simon, you studied the law a
little in your youth -- write to me as soon as possible, read over my letters,
tell me if I have written sedition -- If I have not, they cannot put me in
limbo; and God be praised I am not an alien. But if you doubt in the smallest
degree, put the house in readiness, that was occupied by your brother Hezekiah,
and send black Titus down with Dobbin -- we'll lose no time, but go up to you
bag and baggage; and once we are there, they must have better spies than the
British had, to be able to find us out. In the midst of my concern, I reaped a
little pleasure from your remembering my good old father so affectionately: I
hope cousin, since you have so well, and so successfully, remembered his
advice, of getting money as fast as you can, that you have not forgotten
another of his sayings, which still followed this -- "but make not too much
haste to be rich" -- and then he would add, "and still remember, my dear
children, a well won penny goes far." -- You ask, how I came to correspond with
the seditious editor of the Aurora? -- If you had carefully read my first
letter, you would not have asked. I there informed him, it was because his
accounts were so fair, that his paper just read like a history -- and the more
I read, I declare cousin, I like him the better. I hope, dear Sim, you will not
only take this paper yourself, but cause Simon Sure, Thomas Silly, William
Doolittle, and Jeremiah Thoughtless, who are all our blood relations, to take
it also, and read it seriously, that they may improve themselves and know
something. Inform them, from me, that they will receive more delight in reading
it, than ever they did from Valentine and Orson, the Seven Champions of
Christendom -- yes, almost as much as from Laugh and be Fat, or any other story
book I know. I have read over all my letters with a trembling heart -- I cannot
find that I have written any thing to make Mr. R. my enemy -- the very thought
of it makes me feverish. To be burnt alive!! -- Lord preserve us! It brings to
my mind the poor fellows that were burnt alive in the buckwheat straw at the
Crooked Billet -- And for any of the rest, I am not so much afraid at present;
for Barnabas Bigbones swears, that if they look cross at me, that he will dress
them in the true style of Mendoza, the British bruiser -- But I promise you,
I Will not touch any of them, unless I do it without my knowledge, just as I
touched politics -- Give our best respects to cousin Simple, and tell Titus I
am collecting a few diverting story books for to entertain him during the next
winter.

I am, with all respect, Your affectionate Cousin, etc.
N. B. Having by accident seen your name in the list of subscribers for the
Aurora, after I had written this, I recollected one of your favorite sayings,
viz. a penny saved is a penny won -- and so said I to myself, I Will even hand my
answer to the editor -- 'twill please cousin Simon the better, it will save the
postage.



LETTER XI.
MR. EDITOR.
I HAVE ever been a great advocate for the dignity of human nature, and have
ever condemned that very prudent counsel given by a miser to his son, "deal
with every man as if he were a rogue;" my practice has ever been the contrary,
I deal and esteem every man honest and honorable, unless I know by experience,
or on good authority, that he is not. It Is very true, I have often suffered by
this good opinion of man -- but the pleasure I derive from placing some degree
of confidence in my fellows, and giving no place to distrust in my bosom, amply
compensates me for any little losses I have sustained.

In agreeableness to this mode of reasoning, I consider every one of our
Representatives in Congress as honorable men, because I know nothing to the
contrary. Says I to myself, they all have our good at heart, and are worthy of
double honor. One thing, however, appeared to me very strange, that all having
but one end in view, how had they come so widely to differ? And so I told my
neighbor -- I believe neighbor, said I, man himself is the greatest riddle,
and the most difficult to explain, that ever was proposed since the day that
Sampson proposed his famous one to try the skill of the Philistines -- Gallatin
says one thing, Harper the quite contrary; yet they are both men of knowledge,
and both no doubt love their country -- When I hear Harper reason, said I, then
I Am on his side; Callatin replies; I change sides -- I Am sure he is right.
Otis, or Rutledge, or some other tonguey man gets up, harangues for an hour,
and in the end convinces me that I was in the wrong -- Findley once more
convinces me -- and thus I am plagued, until at length I know no more of what
opinion I am of, than I know of the man in the moon -- Now that which puzzles
me so confoundedly, said I, is, whether, judging still charitably, added I,
these men think that they themselves are right. Undoubtedly answered my
neighbor, they do; why if they did not from their soul, believe that they were
acting for the advancement of their country's good, they would be as arrant
knaves as ever existed -- Well, answered I, it may be so. God forbid, it should
be otherwise; yet I freely acknowledge that my poor brain cannot comprehend it:
God help the ignorant, said I, since the wise can be so much mistaken; for
although I know but very little, this much I may venture -- one of them must be
wrong. Indeed Robert, answered my neighbor, you are right -- but we will still
hope that we have not arrived as yet to such an height in wickedness, as to
pretend to be lovers of our country, and promoters of its good, while secretly
plotting its ruin. Hope! said I, when hope dies heart breaks. I Will hope for the
best as long as I can breathe; but though I hope, I cannot be satisfied that all
are as they should be -- I know, continued I, that many a thing is a riddle to
me that is very plain to other people -- and this always makes me very
diffident: but you, my friend have been blessed with a good education; you can
read Latin and Greek, and speak Italian and jabber French -- tell me, do you
really believe that Harper did not know that the paper he read in Congress was
a forgery? Can you think that he ever possessed a thread of conspiracy, but
what was bred in his own brain? Do you think that Josey Thomas thought he was
right, when he forged the cleven votes on the contested election -- or, can you
imagine that Blount thought he was right in that little delicate business, that
has been so ingeniously hushed into silence, for the good of the public? Do you
imagine, continued I, that the people who so neatly dressed up the story of the
ship Ocean, and served up the whole crew carbonaded alamode-de-Francaise, a
highly relished dish, sit for a Virginian's dinner on the day of election,
thought they were right? Or, to mention no more, can you think Dr. Morse can
pretend that he was right, to preach the same story from the pulpit, heightened
with all the Doctor's rhetorical skill, that so he might rouse his hearers to
revenge; when Christ, whom the Dr. pretends to follow, enjoins it on all his
followers to forgive their enemies -- It may be, said I, that these people
think they are right -- but I assure you my poor head cannot fathom it.

Indeed Robert, answered my neighbor, in this respect religion and politics
are something akin; Christ informs us, that they who should kill his disciples
would think they were doing God service; although the precepts of the gospel
are so plain, that he who runs may read them. In politics it is nearly similar:
You think a republican form of government is best -- I think a republican form
of government is the highest note in the gamut of nonsense. Fenno's Farewell.
United States' Gazette.
You think there is nothing on earth, for goodness, to be compared to the
federal constitution -- I think it is like an old sow going to eat up her
farrow of pigs. lbidem.
Each of us no doubt, think we are right, and all these little false steps,
that appear so criminal in your eyes, may be easily justified. -- You know it
is a well known maxim, that every scheme is lawful in war -- Are not these
parties at open war, as to opinion, and sometimes as to practice too --
therefore all schemes are lawful -- Now continued my neighbor, if I can
outmanoeuvre you by a few well-tim'd lies, a forged letter, or a few nicely
managed votes -- as I know I am right in the end, let that justify the means.

Lord help me, said I, what kind of doctrine is this. Does not the apostle tell
us, "Ye shall not do evil that good may come of it."

Yes, truly, answered my neighbor, but that was long ago, and we are not
altogether of his opinion -- For Dr. Dwight, the great poet, says that the Jews
slew all the male children of the Canaanites, not for any thing the poor little
things had done, but least they should do evil when they could; just as we kill
the young snake -- not because he has bitten any person, but lest he possibly
might do so. I declare, said I, it is the same doctrine to a leek -- What? said
my neighbor -- I Will tell you, said I: the other morning, as I took my walk
along the street, I was much alarmed with the noise of blows, and very high
words -- I hasted up to the house from whence it proceeded, the door stood open
-- I then saw a lusty shoemaker strapping his wife in a most unmerciful manner.
I called out -- the fellow stopped, and, seemingly with much good humor, said,
I hope it will do you no harm my dear -- Are you not ashamed, man, said I, thus
to beat the woman? -- No Sir! -- Pray, what wrong has she done? -- Nothing Sir
-- In the name of common sense, then, why do you beat her? -- Why Sir, for fear
she should do wrong! -- It Is just so, said my neighbor -- with all these
gentlemen you will find it an established axiom -- the end justifies the means
-- For proof of this, attend to the whole system of bribery, spies, somenters
of strife, secret service money, diplomatic skill, systems of alarm -- and
insincere negociations -- I Will think of it, said I, as I shut the door -- but I
am not yet convinced that we should do evil that good may come of it.

LETTER XII.
MR. EDITOR,
THE other evening my friend and I, after having taken a cheering glass, sat
talking over the affairs of our country, as is our custom -- Well, said I, the
birthday of INDEPENDENCE draws near: I hope it may not rain -- I am an enemy to
all holy days, that, and Sunday excepted -- But; on the 4th of July, I Am
determined to put on my Sunday coat, and treat Mrs. Slender and the children in
one of the public gardens, if I should wor^ an hour later for it, for a
fortnight after. I think, said my neighbor, it would be better for you to work
the hour later for to pay your expense, for a fortnight before: for I have
often heard your frolicking fellows say, it was very disagreeable to pay for
past pleasure. I declare, answered I, you are right -- I Will sit up an hour
every night from this to that, and the hope of the pleasure will keep up my
spirits. But now let me ask you -- is it not a shame, that you, who are such a
great scholar, and understand grammar, and history, and all that, never write a
line we hear of? -- Cannot you write us an ode, or a song, or an oration, for
the fourth of July? -- Odds my heart do, says I; I Will carry it to the editor
myself -- Nay, answered he, the editor has one prepared, and a good one too;
but, continued he, here, drawing a paper out of his pocket, is an ode, not for
that glorious day, but for the day after -- you see I am singular -- which you
may take to your friend and welcome. I snatched the paper with the greatest
earnestness, and without saying a single word, whipped up my hat, left my
friend in a fit of laughter, and ran to the office with it; where I had the
misfortune to not find you. I therefore thought proper to write these lines on
the subject, and your attending to my friend's ode, which I have enclosed, in
due time, will oblige your friend, etc.

FOURTH OF JULY -- An ODE,
It Is past -- another Anniversive day,
Has smiled upon our states, with UNION blessed:
Pale envy shrinking, hides her blood-stained crest,
And lurking slavery flies without delay;
And let her fly far from Columbia's coast,
Her power destroyed, her influence lost:
Far from the world, with grief, and woe and pain,
May she be hurled, never to arise again.
Here long with iron hand she held her reign,
And tyrants' satelites her power upheld;
Till freedom's sons, through many a well fought field,
Did INDEPENDENCE, glorious birthright gain;
And may they still preserve the gift divine.
FREEDOM thy wreathe with INDEPENDENCE twine;
Nor end your course, till all the world ye see,
Arouse, inform, inspire, and render FREE
Hark! it is the voice of kings, the curse of men,
That from Siberia calls the savage host --
Suwarrow wild, to finer feelings lost,
Terrific war to wage, and aid the plan:
But thou, fair FREEDOM, shall victorious rise,
The boasts of kings, and savage hosts despise.
MAN shall be free, debased no more a slave,
Though emp'rors gnash their teeth, and kings impotent rave.
Too long, alas! had vile tyrannic power,
Held man in bondage great -- the cup of grief
His daily draught -- and groans and death relief
Alone produced; 'till, glorious hour!
Columbia rose in godlike form;
She ruled their rage, assuag'd the storm
Of bold tyrannic sway, brought to submit,
And own her right divine, and kneel before her feet.
Dear INDEPENDENCE ever be our boast,
Tenacious we will grasp thee to our heart;
Despotic power avaunt -- we never shall part --
Sooner our heart's best blood shall all be lost.
AURORA rise -- proclaim to all we are free;
CREATED EQUAL, equal still we'll be;
And to posterity, without alloy,
Transmit a RIGHT which tyrant's cannot destroy.
LETTER XIII.
MR. EDITOR,
SOME time ago, I thought that I had gained such an entire mastery over my
fears, that the whole troop, so remarkable for printerflogging, here, or
elsewhere, could not make me tremble -- and so I walked about in open day,
ventured even to talk in favor of the Aurora in the little beer-house at the
corner, and indeed was so foolhardy, as to assert that the clergy were now
behaving in the most inconsistent manner, by praying for the success of
Suwarrow, the pope, and the re-establishment of the Romish religion; for the
downfall of which they, and their fathers before them in the church, have
prayed heartily for at least these two hundred years -- But this conduct raised
such a buz about my ears, that I have been forced to run away in good earnest.
What chiefly led to this was the following -- One day having gained a little
time, I took my stick in my hand, adjusted my wig, and walked out to see an
acquaintance. Who happened to be there, as ill luck would have had it, but his
reverence -- So after some chit chat, about dry weather, water works, sickness,
and some thoughts on death; which I thought, made the parson's face longer than
ordinary, though it is not short at any time; ^the thus addressed me -- So
Robert, I am informed that the reason why you no longer attend to hear God's
word preached on the Sabbath, is because you neither like our prayers, nor our
preaching. I confess Mr. Editor, I knew not what to say -- I looked on the one
side, and then on the other, rose from my chair, spit in the sand box, and
threw a segar, I had but just lighted, into the fire. -- I had never
contradicted the clergy, because my good father had often said to me, "Robert
never meddle with the clergy -- they are edgetools;" but father's advice had
slipped out of my memory at that time -- so giving three pretty loud hems, by
way of preface, I answered -- And pray your reverence, said I, can I have a
better reason? If, Robert, answered he, our preaching or praying were not
orthodox, then you would have a right to quit us and go elsewhere; but what
fault have you? -- Why sir, said I, as to what is orthodox, and, what do you
call it, the other dox -- Heterodox, replied he -- Aye, aye, says I, that is it,
I never clearly knew what they meant -- I have but a poor head at best, and
these are hard words -- I would be much obliged to your reverence to tell me
what they mean, and then I will try to answer your question. The parson putting
on one of his airs, went to thus: I am astonished Robert to hear you talk thus
-- You have appeared in public, censured men and measures, in that democratical
sheet called the Aurora, and your name is samiliar in every company. Some say
you're a man of sense; others, that you are a fool; yet both laugh at your
productions; and you ask what is the meaning of two plain English words. --
They may be English or Spanish for me, said I, much ashamed of my own
ignorance; but if you please to tell me, I Will thank you kindly sir, and if I
can I wont forget what you say. -- Why said he, with a smile of superior
wisdom, orthodoxy is the whole body of principles taught in our church -- and
every opinion contrary thereto is heterodox -- So, said I, this is indeed to me
very strange but I Will remember it -- But, added I, can a principle be heterodox
one year, and orthodox another year? -- No sir, answered his reverence, with
much authority; orthodoxy is ever the same; the principles I have the honor to
preach, were taught by Christ, his apostles, and so on, to the present day,
without the smallest alteration. -- It may be so, answered I, I have but a poor
brain -- but I confess I think otherwise. And pray sir, said the parson, what
is this great fault that we have been guilty of, and of which your wise head is
so full? -- Sir, says I, before you come to preach at our church, the reverend
Dr. * * * * never went into the pulpit, but he prayed for the fall of
Antichrist, that man of sin, and this I think was orthodox praying -- He
preached very often against the errors of the church of Rome, and from the
prophecies proved, that the Pope was Antichrist; and this, because you know it
was taught in our church, was orthodox preaching -- Now sir, you pray for the
re-establishment of the Romish religion, and preach that the French have
committed a damning sin, in pulling Antichrist from his chair, converting
images into money, consecrated bells into democratic cannon, shutting up the
nunneries, and sending the poor girls into the world to answer the end of their
creation -- Now sir, is this also orthodoxy? Undoubtedly sir, answered he, for
you know it is taught in our church. But, says I, how sir can this be? You told
me but just now, that orthodoxy did not change, but was always the same -- I
acknowledge, said his reverence, that you have, Robert, stumbled on something
like a contradiction, and it deserves a reply. We prayed for the downfall of
the Pope, because we thought religion would be benefitted by it -- we now see
that religion is much hurt by it, and therefore we wish it restored -- If
indeed God had brought down Antichrist in some other way, and established the
true Calvinistic Presbyterian religion in its room, then we would not have
desired its restoration -- and this is orthodox. It may be orthodox, said I,
for ought I know to the contrary, but one thing I Will venture to say, that it is
neither agreeable to Judaism or Christianity -- I hope, Robert, said his
reverence, you don't pretend to argue religion with me! -- God forbid sir, says
I, excuse me for speaking rashly; but if you please sir, I Will tell you a story
-- Let Us hear it, says he; but I tell you aforehand, there must be nothing
about the French in it, for I hate them heartily -- Indeed said I, there is not
one word about the French in it, for I believe it is somewhere in the Bible or
Testament -- Once upon a time, there was a very great man, but he was not a
Jew, who had the bad fortune to be afflicted with the leprosy -- all the
doctors in his own country were consulted in vain, and he was pronounced
incurable. At length he was informed, that in the land of Jewry, there lived a
very good man, who could cure him in an instant. The great man set forward
immediately on his journey. His equipage was splendid -- his retinue numerous.
He arrived -- the man of God paid no respect to him, although he was very great
-- but sent him word to go and wash himself a number times in the river Jordan.
The great man was enraged. Are not, said he, the rivers of my own country much
better than the rivers of Israel? I thought he would have come out to me -- put
his hand on the place, called on God, and so healed me. However, being a man of
some sense, and having some wise men about him, he was induced to obey the
prophet. He did so, and was cured. You have my story. I can make nothing of it,
said the parson. Well, said I, I Will apply it. God had his way (like the
prophet) of bringing down Antichrist; but you, like the great man, say his way
was not a good way, and if he had taken counsel with the very wise Christians
of the day, they would have taught him, that it would have been much better to
have left him standing, than to have made use of such instruments; and now you
would instruct him to govern his providential dispensations by your advice, and
once more erect spiritual Babylon, bring back the images, catch the poor nuns,
and shut them once more in their cells. As I said this, his reverence leaped to
his feet. I declare Robert, said he, you are unfit to live in society, it is
such men as you who are bringing the curse of God on our city. I pronounce you
an infidel, a despiser of the clergy, constituted authorities, holy customs,
and a dangerous man in society, and I hope we shall shortly have it in our
power to lay such fault-finding ignorant fellows by the heels, that so they may
learn to reverence the most useful and honorable of all men, the clergy.
Having said this, he stalked out of the house with great consequence. Shortly
after I took my leave. The story ran like lightening -- Robert Slender is an
infidel, said one -- Why, he argued with the Reverend --, and the parson told
him he ought to be imprisoned for the good of society. Mrs. Slender went to
visit her neighbor -- I am very sorry, says Goody Rattle that it is so bad.
What Is the matter, said she? Why I need not hide it -- Mr. Slender is an
infidel -- a speaker against the clergy -- a puller down of religion -- and his
reverence says so! -- In short, I had once more to shut myself up in the house;
and I have moved into the country among my friends, till the story blows over.

P. S. Your papers have come safe to hand. Lord bless me! what a story about
horsethieves, and busy-bodies, and proclamationmistakes, and Kingston-cargo!
But I cannot say I understand it all -- but I Will read it over along with my
friend the Latinist, (for he came out along with me) and perhaps I Will steal
time to send you our remarks.

LETTER XIV.
MR. EDITOR,
THE mistakes that are daily made in the world, is a subject, which, if
attended to, would certainly yield us some good amusement, and perhaps
improvement too. I know I have a tolerably good memory, though, like the Irish
gentleman's horse, I cannot boast of a very good judgment -- I shall therefore
try to amuse you a little. Mistakes may be divided into two kinds, first, those
that alter the terms, but do not much injure the sense -- second, mistakes,
that by altering the terms, entirely destroy the sense -- As Mr. Reverend says,
of each of these I shall treat in its order. I remember when I was a
schoolboy, one of my class-mates was reading to old Mr. Slashem, that portion
of the New Testament, where it is thus written, "there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth;" but the poor boy read it thus, "there shall be whipping and
slashing to death." -- You see he miscalled the words, but nearly preserved the
sense -- the matter was not great. One day I heard a young clergyman citing
that text," the devil was a liar from the beginning" -- by mistaking the term
he pronounced it thus, "the devil was a lawyer from the beginning" -- the
sermon was little the worse -- the sense was undoubtedly preserved. When such
mistakes as these happen, I think we ought to receive them with good nature,
laugh at the blunders, and so dismiss them. But mistakes of the second class
ought not to be so easily passed over. As for example: the boy who read in
school, "beggars' skins," instead of "badgers' skins," was, without a doubt,
deservedly whipped -- for should the transcriber of the command have made such
a blunder, and have sent it to the heads of the people; as the command of the
Lord, what a plagued bustle would it have made among the beggars -- and the
butchers would have had a very disagreeable task. The man also was much to be
blamed, who read thus, "Mr. Edward Young was executed at Cambridge" -- when he
ought to have read, "Mr. Edward Young was educated Cambridge." But all these
mistakes are but as molehills to a mountain, when compared with the mistake
made by Dr. Stevens, or Dr. Somebody, or T. Pickering -- to publish to the
United States, that such ports in St. Domingo, on the first day of August,
should be open for to receive vessels from the United States; when it should
have been, that it would be lawful for vessels to leave the United States on
and after the first of August -- is such a blunder as I believe has not its
parallel. The blunders or mistakes I have just mentioned, have a likeness of
sound or a likeness in sense; but this has neither a similarity in sound or
sense -- And so I told my neighbor the Latinist, How do you think, says I,
could it have taken place -- That I cannot positively say, replied he --
perhaps to honor more highly Toussaint, the treaty was written by his
secretary, in the language spoken in Guinea, and the mistake is the fault of
the translator -- But, says I, Dr. Stevens must have heard of it, conversed
about it, and agreed to it -- Perhaps not, said he, he might confide in General
Maitland -- the General might tell the Doctor right enough -- the Doctor might
write his dispatches from memory; his memory might deceive him -- or, he might
write St. Domingo for the United States, and the United States for St. Domingo
-- Chesterfield's absent man, you know, did much more than this, when he
swallowed the dice and threw the glass of water over the table. -- But, says I,
I would suppose, that the whole transactions were regularly laid before our
Executive, and I don't see, how Dr. Stevens can be blamed -- I would think --,
but I confess I know but little about any thing, my own calling excepted, and
not half enough about that; that our Executive knows, and had as good a right
to know all about it as Robert Liston, who I see has the honor of
understanding plain language, and setting them all to rights -- Well, says my
friend; if you will not take my thoughts on this business, you must even take your
own -- but added he, my pride as an American, is, I assure you, very much hurt
by this shameful affair -- where the fault lies is a mystery as yet -- but it
will come out -- It is a disgrace, as the fellow says in the play, put upon a
whole nation -- And Robert Liston has demonstrated to the world, that he is a
man of consummate knowledge and ability-diplomatic; for he can not only argue,
but convince his opponents; for Timothy, who it is well known is no friend to
Robert, confesses the fact. But said I, I suppose it cannot be of much
consequence, otherwise more care would have been taken -- It certainly will
produce some very serious consequences to some merchants, replied he, who put
faith in the proclamation. They immediately fitted out, in order to be there by
the time appointed -- At the day, they are ready to enter but are not permitted
-- thus disappointed, they must either run into the English ports, already
stalled, or run the risque of falling into the hands of Rigaud's pickeroons; in
either way it will enrich the English merchants, and ruin the Americans. God
bless me says I, what a mistake this was -- A school boy ought to be whipped
for it -- the skining of the beggars instead of the badgers was but a trifle to
it -- But I hope, said I, there is so much virtue still left among us as to
investigate this matter in full, and so effectually prevent such doings for the
future -- Having said this, I bade my friend, as I now do you, a very good
night.

LETTER XV.
MR. EDITOR,
LAST evening I had just placed my tools in proper order, laid aside my apron,
and was preparing myself to take a walk, to catch a mouthful of fresh air, when
who should step in but my old friend the Latinist, with one of your papers in
his hand: I have several times wondered, friend Robert, says he, that you never
spoke to me about Mr. Sweezy the horsethief, when you and I have been talking
about your good friend Robert Liston. Odds my life, says I, I would have
mentioned it -- but the thing did not at all surprise me -- Not surprise you,
answered he, why, how could that be, that Sir Robert Liston would have any
connection with a horse-thief, a knight of Great Britain with one of the knights
of the moon, as John Falstaff says, is unparalleled. I declare, said I, friend,
if you talk thus you will convince me that there is less knowledge connected with
a skill in the Latin language than I have formerly thought -- I have not read a
great deal, continued I; my time for reading is very little, and my poor weak
head cannot bear much; but in what little I have read, I never have met with a
king that was not surrounded by a parcel of rogues, rascals, sycophants and
lazy fellows, who had no conscience but interest, and no god but gain! Only
turn to the Bible, said I, see what a righteous set surrounded David, the man
after God's own heart, I Sam. xxii. 26. And every one that was in distress, and
every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered
themselves unto him. But, added I, turn to the history of kings, glance only at
their system of bribery, of spies, secret service money, assassinations, open
violations of every principle of justice, honor, and honesty -- mark the
horrid atrocities, which by the instrumentality of these pensioned vagabonds,
they have been enabled to perpetrate; and then say, if a horse-thief does not
possess more real honor, more humanity, more generosity, and more Christianity
than any king on earth -- Mark him out for me, says I, in a rather higher tone
of voice, and though I can neither speak Latin, nor read Greek, nor jabber
French, nor sing Italian -- yet I Will lay the price of all the lasts in my shop,
that I Will prove, before an impartial audience, that a horsethief is the most
honorable of the two -- for, continued I, what have kings done, since first we
found them in the history of man, but carried on a system of aggrandizing
themselves on the ruins of millions, and endeavoring constantly to establish
their own greatness, though the poignard of the assassin, or the slow working
poison, should drink the blood of thousands? The poor horse-thief -- the
Sweezies of the present day, or of antiquity, are so much more honorable, and
so far the less criminal, as the value of a horse is beneath the life of a man
-- Of a man, did I say? of thousands of men. I Will not dispute this with you,
Robert, said my friend, but you know in the eyes of the world, the one is more
esteemed than the other -- More feared answered I, hastily, I think would have
been a better word; for that they are feared, is a fact -- but esteemed! -- I
am much of opinion, says I, that if esteem was food, and kings could live on
it, there would not be a king in the world in a week. At this my friend laughed
heartily, and said, well Robert, you grow more eccentric every day -- As to
that, says I, I don't know what it is, only one thing I know, I hate kings most
heartily -- don't mistake me, added I, I mean their office and their power, as
for their persons, God be praised, continued I, I love them and all mankind --
because they are all my Father's children, though like the devils, they are in
an absolute state of rebellion to his laws. -- Well, but Robert, says he, after
all, was it not a little strange, that a horse-thief was employed? -- I cannot
see that it was, answered I -- Lord bless me, have not kings their assassins?
Emperors their executioners, whom they can send for a head without judge or
jury? Have not Seignors, and Sultans, and Moguls, their mutes? And have not
bawdy house keepers their -- bullies? And would you think it strange, that an
ambassador, a servant of a king, might not even employ a horsethief, and not in
his proper vocation either, but only as a letter-carrier? -- I confess I see
nothing strange in it; but I have but a poor brain -- there may be much in it
that I cannot see. Why said my friend, I have as little dependence on the
friendship of kings as yourself, and therefore I cannot help thinking there was
more in the choice of this person, than has yet, or perhaps ever may come to
light. It was a thousand pities that the fellow got away; on a close
examination things might have come to light, which would have been highly
advantageous. From the affair of Mr. Blount, and the repeated assurances we
have received, through very different channels, of a strong party in the United
States, favorable to the interest and political views of Britain; Liston's
letters, which are in the hands of the public; and the disagreement between the
commissioners for the settlement of British claims, I am induced strongly to
believe, that the British have not yet relinquished the idea of once more
causing the United States to bend beneath their power. Attend to the language
of her hirelings here; do they not vilify our constitution, mock at our laws,
abuse our independence, traduce and calumniate our magistrates, and talk of our
freedom as if it were slavery? Do they not speak of the English government as a
paragon of perfection? Smooth over their crimes, and convert them into virtues?
Inform our citizens, that the English are the happiest, the freest, the most
virtuous and most humane people on earth? Have they not even endeavored to
increase our system of expense? that so our citizens might be galled with
taxes, and so forced to look back to the mild era of '63, when they were happy
under the fostering wing of Great Britain. Now, continued my friend, keeping
(...)t in view, who more fit than the horse-thief, to fill an important office?
From his former vocation, you know, he was necessarily well acquainted, with
not only the intricate paths and bye-ways through the country, but also the
different persons who were conspicuous in the late contest -- remember, he was
not to go straight forward; but by a circuitous route, and of this Sir Robert
was also acquainted. It is highly probable that he was to sound several
influential characters, either directly, or indirectly, that so secret service
money might not be applied in vain: that they might know their strength, and if
opportunity offered, be able to take time by the forelock -- For it is
absolutely certain, that if the coalition of kings, emperors, seignors, and
moguls, can prevail so as to establish a monarchy in France, which God in his
infinite mercy forbid, our republic must undoubtedly fall: we must receive a
king, one of the royal brood of Great Britain, and like spaniels lick the feet
of godlike majesty -- God help us, said I, I feel very much afraid indeed; I
think I see the red coats once more march along the Delaware -- I think I hear
the groans of freeborn Americans from the hulk of the Jersy prison ship -- my
blood runs cold -- I think I behold the Crooked Billet scene acted over again,
and the poor fellows frying in the buckwheat straw -- Lord deliver us, (...)t
I, knitting my hands in agony; I see -- I see Burgoyne's Indian cantico -- I
see the savages knawing human bones -- I hear their hellish yells, and behold
more amiable Miss Crea's victims to their horrid cruelty -- Where? where? added
I, shall we hide! Shall we flee from the hospitable haunts of man, and dwell
with the beasts of the forest? Shall we -- here my friend kindly took hold of
my hand, and said, my dear friend end your terrifying apostrophe -- "the Lord
reigns, let the earth be glad." Hear what was spoken by the spirit of
inspiration 2000 years ago, Isaiah chap. 24, ver. 21. "And it shall come to
pass in that day, the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on
high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth." I am fully assured that God
has spoken this; that he will fulfill it: and I trust that you and I will live
to ssee it literally and fully accomplished. Having thus spoken, he bade me
good night, and I was well satisfied, for I found that the latter part of our
conversation had very much exhausted my poor spirits.

LETTER XVI.
MR. EDITOR,
EVER since I have known how to write my own name, I have been wonderfully fond
of new inventions -- to plod on the old beaten track, I ever thought an
evidence of a low grovelling spirit, a sneaking dependence, and an unfruitful
genius -- it is true, many a piece of good leather I have spoiled through this
itch of invention, and never found much profit from all my experiments; but I
ever comforted myself with this sentence, Well, well, if it is not good for me,
it may be good for posterity -- and so I have always gone on with much
pleasure, and little profit, to this present day. By this peculiar turn of mind
I am induced to keep a memorandum book, and whenever I hear of any new
invention -- slap -- dash, I pop it down in my book, for the good of posterity.
It will be here, says I to myself, when I am gone, as I replace my book on the
shelf -- Judge then Mr. Editor, with what keenness I took down my book, when I
heard of the baking of the poor soldier in Bristol a few weeks ago -- says I, I
have heard in England and Ireland, of gagging for impertinence, imprisonment,
and sometimes flogging for drunkenness, ducking for slovenliness, shooting for
desertion, and hanging for being an United Irishman; but BAKING, added I, is,
as the Scotchman says, vary new -- and shows the inventor to be an original
genius, and not a servile copier -- But whatever praise, Mr. Editor, may be
justly due to the inventor of this salutary and humane mode of military
punishment, which undoubtedly will confer a lasting honor on the mildness of
the United States' martial laws -- yet I trust this great genius will not be
offended with a few improvements, which, with all deference to his superior
abilities, I humbly offer for the improvement of that elegant and original mode
of punishment. One capital defect that I would first mention is, that, if I am
well informed, the inventor's oven was quite cold; now you know that in all
punishments, if fear be taken away, the punishment loses much of its effect,
and in an oven without heat there is not much fear -- there is far more fear in
a dungeon, for there a man might be eaten alive by rats. It Is true, the air
might not be very wholesome, and might occasion some slight convulsion fits,
but what does that signify? that leaves no marks; and without marks, you know,
there well be but a slight remembrance. I would also remark, that in this
punishment there is no degrees -- You may answer, yes -- degrees of duration;
but I mean degrees of external pain: for instance, Put your man when dead drunk
into your oven, he either sleeps out his time and then awakens, or sleeps the
time appointed and never awakens. In the first case, suppose he awakens at all,
what punishment has he felt? In the second, suppose he never awakens, fools and
democrats will rail against the mode of punishment -- Now to remedy these
defects, and make the invention as useful, as it is elegant and manly, the
following hints are offered. First, let the oven be carefully heated, and the
heat regulated by the best thermometer: when it stands at 90 it may be fit for
use; but this must be regulated by the crimes, as follows, viz.

Oven's Heat. Degrees. h. m. For lateness on parade, the oven at 90 2 30 For
slovenliness and rusty arms, 90 1 30 For blasphemy and profane swearing, 90 0
15 N. B. This may be pardoned, it gives a bold, soldier-like air. For
democratical principles, on full proof, 100 2 30 For abusing peaceable
citizens, if a young woman, 80 0 30 If a married do, 80 0 30 N. B. Soldiers
must be allowed some freedoms. For abusing a democrat, if a young man, 70 0 5
For abusing a democrat, an old man, 70 0 10 For abusing a democrat, if a good
federalist, man or boy, 100 2 50 N. B. And more if the crime deserve it. For
disobedience of orders in trivial cases, 140 2 00 N. B. A physician must
examine his pulse, and give him intervals, if necessary. In cases of
importance, and for desertion, the oven at 200 0 00

He must be literally baked in terrorem, as my friend the Latinist says, that
is, to frighten others -- The inventor may easily see, that I still leave the
perfecting of this new military mode of punishment to himself: for there are a
number of petty crimes, which his good sense will easily adapt his oven to --
such as quarrelling, lying, pilfering or stealing, gaming, attending houses of
ill fame, that is, democratical taverns, or disposing of any of their clothes
or accoutrements, etc. etc. I have offered these hints, merely for the good,
glory, and honor of the army of the United States, and that the inventor, when
he applies for a patent (as he undoubtedly will) to the Congress of the United
States, that so not only the profit, but the honor of the invention may be
preserved to, and for the use of himself and family, may have his whole scheme
as perfect as possibly -- I am well aware, Mr. Editor, that no mode of
punishment can be devised, which will not be objected to by you, and your
disorganizing democrats; but surely in this mode, in point of suffering for the
same crime, there can be no partiality -- flogging, you well know, has been
formerly the punishment; but a drummer may strike lighter, or heavier,
according as he loves or hates the culprit -- not so here, the thermometer
loves and hates all alike.

Some snarlers also, have endeavored to strip the inventor of the merit of the
invention -- than which nothing can be more unfair or dishonorable.
honorable. They ground their arguments on two passages, one in sacred, the
other in profane writ: the first is taken from Daniel, the furnace into which
Nebuchadnezzer cast the three children -- the second is the story of Phalaris's
bull -- But can any person in his sober senses, for one moment admit, that an
iron bull or a fiery furnace is a baker's oven? -- see the pitiful shifts envy
reduces men to -- I had some thoughts, Mr. Editor, of advising to the national
use of this same baking scheme; for instance a man might bake into obedience an
undutiful and disobedient son; a headstrong, gadding daughter might, by a good
baking or two, be sweated out of most, if not all, her prankish humors -- and
with the oven well heated, a scolding wife might be baked, until she would
learn an effectual manner of holding her tongue -- But the best of all useful
ends which our oven would answer is, that ten or fifteen, or twenty stout
officers, whether cavalry or infantry in matters not, could a-la-mode de
militaire, bake a democratical printer in such a well-heated oven, and for such
a length of time, that for the future he should never give them a single
moment's uneasiness -- But these and many other advantages, will come more
regularly before us after the patent is obtained. --

N. B. If any objections can be made to this mode of punishment, I shall answer
them all in good time --

LETTER XVII.
MR. EDITOR,
LOOKING over the last received numbers of the Aurora, which you have so
punctually sent me, and for which I thank you, I chanced to light upon that
one, in which you have given us your good friend Robert Liston's letters. The
largeness of the type immediately struck my eye -- so taking off my spectacles,
and wiping them clean -- let me see says I, as I replaced them on my nose, let
me see, what we have got here? -- it must certainly be of some importance, for
I declare he has printed it so plain, added I, that he who runs may read it --
Having thus said, I read it over, sentence by sentence, till I came to these
remarkable words, "THIS GOVERNMENT HAS GIVEN A NEW SUBJECT OF PROVOCATION TO
FRANCE." 'Tie a lie said I, a base lie -- Our government, said I to myself, is,
God be praised, too honest, too honorable, and too much bent on peace, to give
a subject of provocation to any nation, or person whatever -- so saying I arose
from my seat, and stepped into my friend the Latinist -- Did you not hear this?
says I, as I drew my chair up to his desk. What Is the matter Robert, says he,
you seem to be much ruffled? -- Ruffled says I, why flesh and blood cannot bear
it -- Why, here is that Englishman, added I, who was sent here by the king of
Great Britain for no other purpose, as far as I can see, than to breed broils,
and see -- says I, pointing my finger to the place, he has the assurance to say
our government has given another subject of provocation of France -- I never in
my life, said I, before wished to be a lawyer or a judge, or some great man,
added I, but if I were, I would undoubtedly prosecute this -- I don't know what
to call him, said I, for libelling our government -- Why Robert, says my
friend, I did not think you had been such a friend to government; sure I have
often heard you say -- this is not right, that is undoubtedly wrong, ah! I see
all is not as it should be, etc. etc. Lord bless me, said I, you almost put me
out of patience. I Will tell you a story -- When I was a young man, said I, I
possessed more courage than I do now; when a man grows a little in years his
passions lose much of their headstrongness, and he then begins to ponder, weigh
and compare, and not to run head-foremost into danger -- One night returning
home from a friend's house, where I had spent a very agreeable evening, I heard
a dreadful bustle in a house on the roadside -- I stood on the step, paused,
and would have gone on; but the wine I had pretty, freely drank at my friend's,
heightened my natural courage -- in I rushed, and to my great surprise found
the husband crushed up in a corner, and the wife banging him with a good
cudgel; I immediately laid hold of the woman, twisted the staff out of her
hand, and for my kindness received a stout box on the ear; as she made a second
blow, I took hold of her hands, upon which her husband recovering himself, came
at me with the tongs -- I ran for my life, and after receiving three or four
stout blows on my head and back, my clothes torn, and my face all all
scratched, I made a shift of scramble away with my life -- Next morning I took
one of my neighbors along with me, and went out to the house; we found them
both within -- I asked him why he used me so, when I was so serviceable to him?
-- Why friend, do you see, said he, my wife and I had a bustle -- that is true
enough -- she beat me -- and what of it? -- she is my wife still -- and may I
never, said he, be smiled upon by a woman, if I would not beat any man, aye the
parson of the parish, if he would but lay his finger on her -- What? said I,
though she was flogging you? -- Yes says he, though she was flogging me; and I
tell you again, though she was, she is my wife still; and as loving a good
natured creature too as ever lay by a man's side -- I understand you, Robert,
said my friend -- though you find fault with some part of the governmental
proceedings, yet you don't want foreigners to interfere. No, no, says I, I
would, if I had power, let all these busy, meddling fellows know, that it was
our own government, set up by our own consent, and answerable to us, not to
them, for any wrong it may possibly do: and therefore I cannot be easy to hear
this servant of a king tell his fellow servant, that our government has given a
subject of provocation to France -- Why Robert, says he, in your passion you
forget the best part of your story -- He says, ANOTHER SUBJECT OF PROVOCATION;
which, you know, presupposes that they have given some subjects of provocation
before this one -- Rot the * * * said I, and so he does; well it is good for
him, added I, that he is in Philadelphia, where we don't love to give subjects
of provocation to any body, for I am sure, if our minister in London, would
speak so of the court of London, I don't know what would be the consequence --
but I think he would surely be dismissed, and it is highly probable his house
would be pulled about his ears -- but we are the peaceable descendants of
William Penn, and therefore he is safe, though, says I, for my own part I don't
love a bone in HIS BODY, nor of any other body who would dare so to speak of
our government -- Why we could not talk in another strain, if we were as fond
of fighting France as ever buffing Jackson, or big Ben, or the tinker of
Cornwall, were of entering the list to fight for fun to the royal family of his
royal master. -- Are not you too warm on this subject, Robert? said my friend;
why, some of the people with whom I have conversed, say there is nothing in what
he says, of any consequence -- Odds my heart, says I, I wish people would speak
from them as they do to them, as the saying is. If any man speaking of me
should talk thus, It Is true indeed, Robert Slender affronted his friend, and he
pocketed it; then Robert in conjunction with some others gave him another
subject of provocation, but it is scarcely supposed to be probable, that his
old acquaintance will POCKET this ALSO -- what would the impartial public say
of me? -- would they not be very apt to say, why Robert has indeed behaved very
imprudently, first in affronting, and still more in again giving him a new
subject of provocation? -- we could not have imagined that a man professing, as
he does, to be a Christian, and a lover of peace, should evidence such a
quarrelsome disposition -- and in CONJUNCTION with others too! we really
thought he would have behaved much more manly than that comes to -- however, we
see how little trust ought to be put in profession -- Who would have thought
it? -- Well, well, we plainly see, let a man cloak as he will, the cloven foot
will out at last -- What do you think would be my feelings? suppose me
innocent, (as I know our government is) vilely traduced, and calumniated in
this manner. Could any person, possessed of any sense or feeling, blame me for
being warm? I Am sure it could not be, added I -- but continued I, I feel much
more hurt in this story than if it had been said to myself; for, as the
Scotchman says in the play, you read to me the other night, it is an affront
offered to a whole nation -- It sticks in my throat, says I, and let others do
as they will, I cannot swallow it -- "Dear Robert, says my friend, gently laying
his hand on my shoulder, moderate your passion and govern your feelings -- rest
assured that the good people of America are feelingly alive to the high
sentiments of honor, generosity, propriety, and the eternal law of rectitude
-- charity, says the scripture, suffers long and is kind; so do they; but
when the point is arrived, beyond which it would be criminal longer to bear,
they know how to assert and maintain their invaluable privileges, and unstained
national character. The kings and potentates of the world, have no character to
lose; they are so tarnished over with perjury, cruelty, merciless carnage, and
unprovoked war, that the feeling historian casts down his pen, so disgusted
with their horrid crimes that he is unable to proceed -- they would wish us to
tread the path they have already trod -- that so the very idea of justice and
virtue might be banished from the world; but he who sits on the circle of the
universe laugheth at the vain attempt -- He has recorded it in the annals of
eternity, that AMERICA shall maintain a character unsullied to the latest
generations, maugre all the wily attempts of fly ministers, of artful,
ambitious, wicked and deceitful kings, and their faithless adherents -- Having
said this, some company coming in, lest I should be troublesome, I bade my
friend good night --

LETTER XVIII.
MR. EDITOR,
SINCE you became the editor, I have, till very lately, been highly pleased
with you. I considered you as a man of a determined spirit, having one great
end in view, and steadily pursuing it. I read your paper with both pleasure and
profit, and thereby was led to form a pretty accurate judgment of men and
manners, as I thought; but I believe, sir, you have at last gone mad wrong --
Your remarks about the ship Kingston, are, I think, very unsustifiable; and I
shall now undertake to prove, that whoever they were that loaded the ship --
whoever they were who suffered her to clear out, or whoever he was who gave an
order for her clearance, all of them acted as honest men ought.

In our dealings with each other, it is a wellknown and long-established
principle, that, that which advantageth me, and does no harm to any one else,
is certainly lawful for me to do. -- In the ship Kingston, Dr. Stevens was to
sail to St. Domingo -- Does not every body know, that when you add to Dr.
Stevens's weight -- his dignity -- his office -- his ambition -- and his
well-known and well-tried diplomatic skill -- and join thereto the weight of
all his attending retinue -- that still the ship would not have half her
burden? Now this being granted -- and I cannot see how it can be denied --
unless it can be demonstrated, that an Ambassador is a sufficient burden for a
ship of as large a burden as the Kingston -- I proceed to prove, that carrying
a few articles more, if it could be of advantage to any person, and
disadvantage to no person -- could not be a crime -- my first is granted -- and
my second a moral axiom -- therefore no blame can be placed to the account of
Mr. --, who freighted, Mr. -- who cleared it out of the Custom House, or Mr. --
who gave the order to the Custom House officer, as their authority -- for their
part of the business -- and yet you have made the whole continent ring about it
-- Ah, Mr. Editor, I am sorry for thee, that thou did publish so unadvisedly
that inventory -- And so I told my friend the Latinist -- he has no right to
say a word about that business, says I, he can make nothing of it -- odds my
life, added I, what a foolish thing it would have been to have sent the ship
Kingston so far, for such a trifle, as could in reason be paid for the passage
of one man and his attendant. Why answered he, Robert, you seem to have
entirely mistaken the matter. It may be so, said I, mistakes are very common in
our days among men of the first abilities, and how then should I escape -- but
tell me, added I, in what? -- Why Robert, said he, the ship Kingston was hired
wholly and solely, for to carry Dr. Stevens and his suite, as they term it. Is
it possible you can be serious? said I. I am in reality -- it is an established
custom. And as foolish a one, said I, as ever I heard of -- a whole ship for
one man -- It puts me in mind of a laughable affair that happened about forty
years ago in England -- A Liverpool privateer took a very rich Spanish prize;
the least boy in the privateer had some thousands for his share. The sailors
came into port -- dressed themselves as fine as possible -- and every way was
taken they could devise, to spend their money: they would join in cabals,
engage all the coaches they could find; each man would have five or six, one to
carry his hat, another his cane, a third his knife, a fourth his tobacco-box --
and in this state would they ride ten or fifteen miles to buy a pound of
tobacco. But the fact was, they soon got through their money -- but, says I,
this makes it still less of a fault -- if they had the Dr's. consent, and gave
him enough of elbow room -- But still, says my friend, you seem to forget that
Congress made a law to prevent us from buying or selling any thing, or having
any intercourse with France, or her dependencies, until they would alter their
treatment of our vessels and come on honorable terms of adjustment -- No, no,
says I, I have not forgotten that -- Why, then you know, it was a breach of the
law in the most express manner possible -- By no means, said I -- I remember to
have read in the Testament, these words -- For the LAW was not made for the
righteous, but for sinners, and the rebellious -- so say I of this law, and so
I expound it -- The friends of good order and good government are not bound,
nor is it fit they should be bound, by these orders and regulations that others
are bound by. They are the righteous: Democrats are the sinners and rebellious.
Mark that -- they speak against authority and revile kings, which you know are
God's ordinance -- the law was made to bind them -- now, said I, if you can
prove that a single pair of democratical breeches were aboard the Kingston,
then I Will grant it that the law was broken in reality. -- Why, Robert, said my
friend, many a queer thought comes into your head, but this is the most
singular -- And yet, replied I, I Am sure it is true; suppose, said I, Schneider
the printer had gotten a number of men and flogged Captain Montgomery, would
the fault have been as trivial as Montgomery's flogging the printer? -- Or, had
Mr. Duane, and ten or twenty of his friends, went and kicked, cuffed and
rib-roasted any of the valiant officers who maltreated him, would the fault be
only equal to theirs? Or, to mention only one more, if the man, whom the
valorous Sterrit killed, with so much courage, had killed Sterrit, do you
believe, he would have been alive at this day? Its highly probable, said my
friend, that he would not. Again, said I, I suppose you have read the paper of
the 24th ult. upon account of which the editor was arrested, was it in any
respect to be compared with Cobbett's insolent and virulent remarks on the
nomination of R. V. Murray -- and yet you see he was not arrested -- And only
here lies the difference between them: the one is a citizen of the United
States who owes fidelity to the union; the other glories in being a subject of
the king of England, our former tyrant: -- the first mantains that all
governments originate in the people, and that they make rulers, who are
responsible to them for their conduct -- the other maintains, that kings
possess power inherently, and derive it not from the people, to whom they are
not at all responsible -- and consequently the last is a good federalist; the
friend of order and good government: the first a disorganizer, a jacobin and a
democrat, and therefore is arrested -- from all which it appears plain to me,
that I am not the only one who explains the text I have just cited in this
manner; I am pretty sure, said I, according to my poor judgment, that the law
was not made for the righteous, but for sinners and the rebellious -- I cannot
agree with you, replied my friend; I am fully of opinion the law was broken to
all intents, and that the sending those goods to the island of St. Domingo was
nothing better than smuggling -- One thing is plain -- if you or I had done so,
we should have been smugglers undoubtedly -- Why that is my story still, says I
-- "The LAW was not made for the righteous, but for sinners and the rebellious
-- But as you do not think this a complete vindication, I will propose you
another, which I think will convince you, that the editor of the Aurora was
very wrong to blame the man concerned in this affair -- Mistakes, you know, are
now pretty common -- Suppose two ships in the harbor at the same time, the one
bound for St. Domingo, the other for Hamburg; both belonging to N. Crammond,
and Co. These goods were intended for Hamburg, but by mistake take were sent on
board the Kingston instead of the other -- and suppose the mistake not be found
out till ten days after the sailing of the Kingston -- how then could the
mistake be remedied? or who could be blamed? it only was a mistake, and not
done with any evil intention, and therefore should be explained in a manner as
favorable as possible. And I protest, says I, since I began to speak, I am
much more pleased with this way of solving the difficulty than the other; and I
do, added I, seriously dedicate this solution to the parties concerned, if they
have not ere this fabricated a better -- My friend, on my saying this, got into
an immoderate fit of laughing, at which I felt so much hurt and offended, that
I immediately took my hat and stick, and came off without bidding him good bye,
protesting that I would do as I now have done -- tell you the whole story.

LETTER XIX.
MR. EDITOR,
IN reading the history of man, and attending to the important and noble
struggles of eminent individuals, either for the preserving their liberty when
assailed by rapacious tyrants, or freeing themselves from the galling yoke of
slavery and oppression, I have, said my friend the Latinist, as we sat chatting
the other day under a tree, felt for them in all their troubles; my heart has
bled for their wounds, and gladly, were it in my power, would I have acted the
good Samaritan, and poured in the wine and oil. But, continued he, I do not
remember that ever my feelings were excited to a higher pitch, than by the fate
of Jonathan Robbins. Why, what of him? said I; I think I never heard his name
before. I do not remember any of our ministers, or consuls, our generals, or
commodores, added I, of that name: if he was one of them, to be sure he might
be an object of pity -- for, says I, he might have been recalled, and
disgraced, without knowing for what -- or dishonored, by having a young
officer placed over his head -- or, when almost worn out, and grown gray in the
service of his country, a number of men might come forward in the face of the
world, and pledge themselves to support and protect all such, as from envy or
malevolence might be inclined to raise and circulate stories calculated to
injure his reputation, and fully his fair fame. -- In the half of the time,
said my friend, that you have been conjecturing, I would have told you his
story -- Odds my life, replied I, let me hear it -- has poor Robbins been
carbonadoed for going to France (as Dr. Logan did) to make peace, and keep us
from murdering one another? -- or has he been flogged, like SCHNEIDER and
DUANE, for writing the truth, as many people say? -- or -- If you go on at this
rate Robert, said my friend, the moon may change before I Will get time to tell
you the story -- Why, said I, you well know I would fifty times rather find out
a thing myself, than be informed of it by any man alive -- but I hope you will
go on, and tell the story your own way -- Some time ago, said my friend, a
British ship called the Hermoine, was taken by the crew -- the captain, and
some others, fell in the contest -- she was carried into a Spanish port, and
then sold by those who carried her in, who made off with the booty. After some
time, however, the affair was found out, and it was made appear that a Jonathan
Robbins was somehow concerned in this business -- This Robbins, a citizen of
the United States, had before that fatal affair been pressed aboard the
Hermoine, and there forced to work and fight in a cause contrary to his
conscience -- yet this man was taken in the United States, imprisoned -- tried
-- not by a jury, mind that -- and delivered over in chains to the commander of
a British frigate, who immediately sailed for Jamaica, where he will
undoubtedly be hanged like a dog. -- It Is all a joke, said I, there is no more
truth in it than there is in the Alcoran -- A CITIZEN of the UNITED STATES
delivered up to the British, to be hanged because he used every means in his
power to obtain his freedom, when actually a slave!! -- No, no, says I, it is by
circulating such stories as this, that your Democrats will lose any little
credit they may have acquired -- Don't labor under a mistake Robert, replied
my friend, it is as true as the gospel -- Well, answered I, if it is indeed
true, I am as sure as I live; that if any state government has given him up,
our President will immediately claim him -- Softly good friend, returned he,
the President advised and requested them to give him up. Did he indeed? says I,
then if he did -- but I cannot believe it -- it is all over, we must be once
more a British colony -- for if that were not the case, could any man be
blamed, at the risque of his life to obtain his freedom? I think, says I, I
have as much of the milk of human kindness flowing in my veins as any a
president or king in the world, and yet I believe in my heart, added I, if I
were taken prisoner by an Algerine cruizer, if I had it in my power to gain my
liberty by sending the whole ship's crew to Davy Jones, bag and baggage, I
would not hesitate a moment -- Nor would any one blame you for so doing, said
my friend -- but you must remember, this was a frigate belonging to his
Britannic Majesty; the chief supporter of order, good government, humanity and
religion in the world -- it matters not, says I, somewhat ruffled, what she
was, a sloop or frigate, shallop or what you please -- or whether she belonged
to Dick, Billy, Tom or Harry -- answer me only this plain question, Was Robbins
kept there against his will, or not? if against his mind, then he was as
completely a slave on board the Hermoine as if he had been in Algiers; and is
it possible that any freeborn republican, who loves, or ought to love his
freedom more than his life, can condemn his equal in rights and in liberty, for
breaking the chains with which he is unjustly bound, and which every moment
rankle in his flesh? -- My God! continued I, it is possible, that, if a British
rascal makes me a slave, beat, abuse, and compel me to fight contrary to my
conscience, and if an opportunity offers by which I may regain my liberty, once
more revisit my country, my beloved relations, and dear friends, by the
destruction of my violent oppressor and tyrannical enslaver -- must I for this
be delivered up by my country? -- must I for this be delivered up to die? --
for asserting my native right, for repelling the unjust attack of a cruel
tyrant, for supporting my independence at the risque of my life, must I be
sacrificed on the altar of despotic power? -- If this be true, added I, what
language does the unaccountable action speak to the poor American sailors? --
Does it not speak thus -- sailors of America, remember, that should you be
pressed by any of the ships of war belonging to his Britannic Majesty, ye must
there do duty faithfully and truly -- if you be set at liberty, it is well; if
not, though it were in your power to regain your liberty, you must not; for in
the attempt, should you kill any of his Majesty's subjects, your country will
undoubtedly give you up to his Majesty, the king of Great Britain -- and God
have mercy on your souls? -- Why Robert, said my friend, you talk on this
subject as if you felt it -- Feel it, replied I, is it possible for an American
citizen not to feel it? if he be not actually blinded by prejudice, or money,
which is ten times worse, his lost dignity, his injured independence, his
degraded situation, from a citizen of the American republic, FREE and
INDEPENDENT, to be a SLAVE in a British galley, must render him completely
miserable -- Good heavens! says I, if his blood does not run cold -- if he is
not agonizing through every pore -- it is because he is BOUGHT WITH A PRICE --
This is just your way, said my friend, you always get so warm on the subject
you discourse of, that I am glad always to withdraw, lest it should injure your
health -- Health, rejoined I, what is health? what is life? what is house, or
home, without liberty? but painted baubles fit only for children -- that I do
not carry my reasoning too far, said I, I Will put a case, which I would wish the
Judge Bee's of the day would rightly consider -- Suppose an English frigate, to
make up her complement of men, sends a part of her crew and presses fifty
Americans -- after some time, these men find that it is in their power to take
the frigate -- they do so; but fifty Britons are slain in the struggle -- they
run the vessel into the nearest port -- suppose a Spanish -- dispose of her,
and so return home, and openly avow what they have done -- Sir Robert Liston
prosecutes them -- pleads the article of the treaty -- and, astonishing! "our
President gives his advice that they ought to be given up*" Judge Be presides
-- and these fifty men are delivered over to be sacrificed to Molech -- Spirits
of seventy-six! said I, whither are ye flown? What shall arouse you from your
lethargy? Freeborn American! -- AWAKE! AWAKE! ere thou sleep a sleep unto
death -- But stay Robert, said my friend, have you not stated this case wrong?
-- You know that these fifty men perpetrated an high crime on, or in British
territory, that is, on board a British vessel, and by the treaty they must be
given up. It Is false, said I, I know no such thing; they acted virtuously, they
acted nobly -- they so acted, said I, that Great Britain, were they her
subjects, would load them with honor -- But let us, added I, examine this case
-- suppose says I, this frigate's crew had landed, and instead of taking men,
had gutted two or three merchants' stores, and carried away whatever they could
find valuable, what would you call them? Pirates undoubtedly, answered my
friend. And would they not forfeit, said I both the ship and their lives? I am
of opinion, said he, they would. Suppose I, or Jonathan, or Nathan, or Dick, or
Tom, says I, should kill a dozen of them, or the whole of them -- have I or he
committed a crime? -- By no means said he -- but they did not do this. I Will
prove they did worse, added I -- do not you know, says I, that in the law of
God, which we say we reverence, it is fairly stated, that he who steals from me
any of my property, must restore it fourfold; but he who steals a man, shall,
says the scripture, die the DEATH? But still, says my friend, admitting the
full force of this reasoning, for indeed it cannot be denied -- they did not
come ashore and take away Jonathan Robbins -- but pressed him out of one of our
ships -- That, says I, does not alter the case -- You know the British council
argued, that on board a British ship is British territory, and hence I would
suppose that an American ship is American territory, at least my weak brain
cannot see the difference -- And, says I, by this mode of reasoning, I prove
that a British officer pressing, enslaving, and confining an American citizen,
is a man-stealer, a pirate, a robber of the worst possible description -- and
that any American, confined and enslaved aboard any vessel of any power
whatever, as, by his confinement and slavery all ties of amity are broken which
did formerly subsist between him and them, is justifiable, in the sight of God
and man, to regain his liberty, even with the destruction of the ship's crew --
and deserves the highest approbation of his country, for asserting his right in
so noble a manner -- And, added I, it is all a joke to talk about the treaty,
because they, by pressing a single American, broke the treaty effectually --
unless, added I, there be a secret treaty, by which they are permitted to press
American citizens to aid the cause of kings against the cause of republicans --
which I have oftentimes thought before now, to be the case -- One thing, said
I, is pretty certain, there are secrets, there are clues, there are
conspiracies; -- but, whether the sagacious Harper will be able to ferret them
out -- or whether Peter will blab them, Robert acknowledge them, -- or the
Rossian committee open the way for them, is as great a secret as the secrets
themselves. But, honest Americans, it is full time ye were undeceived; it is time
ye should think for yourselves, it is full time ye should see what the fate of
Jonathan Robbins leads to -- and what security it holds out, for the safety of
our hardy sailors, and infant navy -- And ye shall be made acquainted with it,
said I, snatching up my hat, and adjusting my wig, which I had much ruffled in
my passion -- for I Will go this instant, and send it to my friend Duane, and my
friend Callendar; and, says I, to that noble fellow, that I would be very glad
to be acquainted with, the editor of the Albany Register -- and, says I, we'll
hold up the A's, and B's, and C's, and D's, and E's, who yielded up poor
Robbins to that infamous government, that they may be branded with eternal
execration. --

LETTER XX.
MR. EDITOR,
AS I sat musing the other evening, after a very hard week's work, who should
come in but my old friend the Latinist. His cheerful countenance and friendly
address always give me new spirits, and although he is a man of great learning,
yet you see he talks as familiarly with me as if I were as great a scholar as
himself. After having taken a stool -- (for you must know, Mr. Editor, that in
a country where taxes are pretty high, provisions not very cheap, and house
rent enormous, it is not easy for a poor mechanic, who has five or six
children, to purchase chairs) -- after taking a stool, in his friendly manner
laying his hand upon my knee, he thus began: Friend Robert, what is the matter?
you seem in but poor spirits. Very true, says I; I have just seen the end of
Robbins -- poor, brave, injured, betrayed, unfortunate Robbins! -- Are you
crazy -- or, -- No, answered I, I am much as usual; I have seen him with my
"mind's eye," as Hamlet says -- and a horrid spectacle it was. I have just been
composing his epitaph, which, says I, it is probable will never be engraven
upon his tombstone -- though it is certain it will go down to posterity on the
faithful and impartial page of history -- and perhaps in the very words -- Here
it is.

Reader, If thou be a Christian and a Freeman, consider
By what unexampled causes
It has become necessary to construct This Monument
Of national degradation and Individual injustice: which is erected
To THE MEMORY of a Citizen of the United States,
JONATHAN ROBBINS, MARINER;
A native of Danbury, in the pious and industrious state of Connecticut; who,
Under the PRESIDENCY OF JOHN ADAMS,
And by his advice,
Timothy Pickering being Secretary of State,
Was delivered up to the British government,
By whom he was ignominiously put to death; because,
Though an American Citizen,
He was barbarously forced into the service of his country's worst enemy,
And compelled to fight
Against his conscience and his country's good,
On board the British frigate Hermoine,
Commanded by a monster of the name of Pigot,
He Bravely asserted his right to freedom as a man, and boldly extricated
himself from the bondage of his tyrannical oppressions,
After devoting them to merited destruction.
If you are a Seaman,
Pause: --
Cast your eyes into your soul and ask,
If you had been as Robbins was,
What would you have done?
What ought you not to do?
And look at Robbins
Hanging at a British yard-arm!
He was your comrade --
And as true a tar as ever strapped a block:
He was your fellow-citizen,
And as brave a heart as bled at Lexington or Trenton.
Like you,
He was a member of a Republic,
Proud of past glories, and Boastful of national honor, virtue, and
independence;
Like him,
You one day may be trussed up, to satiate British vengeance;
Your heinous crime,
Daring to prefer danger or death
To a base bondage --
Alas poor Robbins!
Alas poor Liberty!
Alas my country!
Indeed, said my friend, I see you have wrought yourself up to a very serious
state of mind; but I much fear, as the scripture says, that this case of poor
Robbins is only "the beginning of sorrows." When the liberty of nations, and
the freedom of states, are depending on almost the turn of a beam -- when
corruption lifts its head in open day unashamed -- when bribery is reduced to a
regular and avowed system -- when religion has degenerated into hypocrisy, and
men with brazen front assert that they love God, and yet plot to destroy their
brother, covering the earth with blood, rapine, and horrid cruelty -- when such
is the state of things, said my friend, the destruction of an obscure
individual, however dishonorable and perfidious the sacrifice, will be easily
looked over, and perhaps forgotten -- for who would attend to the burning of a
taper, when Etna or Vesuvius blazes?

To enslave men, continued my friend, is now as earnest an object, as to free
them was twenty years ago -- Look at the combination, and mark the intrigues of
kings and emperors, popes and muftis, princes and bishops, nobles and priests,
with the whole train of their dependants and adherents, united as one man --
and above all, see republics betrayed into the conspiracy against themselves --
It is vain, friend Robert, to repine over the fate of poor Robbins; we may it is
true deplore the man -- but we must consider what is to become of the republic
under such a precedent of dishonor and indignity! -- Liberty or its enemies
must triumph -- one or the other must fall; and, however gloomy you may be,
considering the state of this martyr to British tyranny and influence, his
death may be the salvation of our liberties. My friend never displayed so much
sensibility, the tears trickled from his eyes -- and I was so much overcome,
that I could only squeeze his hand as he laid it once more on my knee, and
proceeded again.

My friend Robert, this sacrifice of Robbins is a very serious transaction --
and whether sailor, or farmer, every man must think upon so strange and cruel a
subject -- the scheme for restoring universal slavery is untolding fast, by the
principal actors in our country; but it will destroy itself. In other countries
liberty has been destroyed by one bold stroke -- here it is attacked by
piecemeal -- The British arms could not prevail twenty years ago -- they now
use other weapons, they gain upon us inch by inch -- The British treaty was a
bold stroke -- We now are forced to acknowledge that Grenville outgeneralled
Jay -- and the commissioners for settling British claims have discovered, that
we are completely entrapped, saddled with an enormous debt, which for ages we
could not discharge -- and for which wise behavior, the singer of discernment,
throughout the world, is pointed with rebuke at our degraded forehead -- Why
need I mention, added my friend, the alien and sedition bills -- stamp act --
standing army -- excise law -- and many others; they are but so many features
of the grand system that is so well understood, and so warmly advocated by the
friends of order and good government -- God bless me, says I, why you almost
make my hair stand on end -- I think, I see slavery rattling her chains and
sharpenig all her instruments of torture -- What shall we do? -- how shall we
escape? Must we sit still until the label "SLAVE" is stigmatized upon our
cheek, or branded on our forhead? -- Is there no help? -- Yes, answered my
friend, there is, thanks to the wise, the virtuous framers of our glorious
constitution -- the invaluable right of election is still ours -- Let us but
use this right well -- let us be diligent to canvass the character of these men
that are candidates for any office of power or trust -- let our pointed
disapprobation ever attend those who are known to have advocated the British
treaty, alien and sedition bills, stamp act, standing army, etc.; and in a
special manner, let us be careful of trusting any man who maintains, that a
republican form of government may mean any thing or nothing. Indeed, said I, I
think we ought to be careful -- If we can do any good, and do not do it, then
we are criminal, as my good old father used to say -- but it has long been a
question with me, as well as with many of my well-meaning neighbors, whether
we can do any good by going and voting at elections. I have often heard this
argument made use of -- What need I go to the election? -- let them put in whom
they will, to me it makes no difference. I must obey, let them choose who they
may. And so reasoning, they stay at home. And if a bad man is chosen, then they
comfort themselves thus -- Well, God be thanked, we had no hand in it. Indeed,
said my friend, they are much mistaken, but they had a hand in it, and a strong
one too; for by one man's staying away, the man who would honestly and
faithfully serve his country, might lose his election -- and every free elector
ought to consider his vote of that consequence, as that thereby an able man is
chosen to act for the common good; and therefore it is a duty which every man
owes to God, his country, and himself, to inform himself of the character of
every candidate for any public office, as I said before, with the greatest
strictness and impartiality -- If he be a man of true honor and of
Christian-like deportment; if he be the poor man's friend, and ever ready to
curb the rich in their domineering strides; at every time, and in God's name,
let us ever support him; for such a man is undoubtedly a treasure -- Having
thus said, my friend perceiving it grew late, bade me good night.

LETTER XXI.
MR. EDITOR,
I FEEL myself still more and more at a loss, as I journey through this strange
world. At one time, this is undoubtedly right and lawful; a few days elapse and
it is no longer so -- this day it is asserted that such an argument is quite
foreign to the purpose -- tomorrow the same argument proves equal to a
demonstration -- Is it possible, sir, that this ought to be so? -- Is it
agreeable to the nature of things? -- Perhaps it is so; if it be, I hope you will
excuse me, as I never learned Latin, and have but a poor brain.

I had just scribbled this far, when in came my friend. Well Robert, writing
again? Yes says I, I was just telling my friend how plaguedly I have been
puzzled. With what? Why, said I, you know when Judge Be passed sentence on
poor Robbins, he argued, that his being a citizen of the United States was of
no consequence -- and now we see the greatest pains are taken to prove that he
was not a citizen -- The wise men in Danbury say they knew him not, and the old
sexton was not present at his baptism -- If it had been of any importance in
any way, the wise and upright judge, would have undoubtedly known it -- and
since it was not, why search for it now? Are they going to try him again? -- or
try the judge? -- or prove him an English deserter? -- or -- I confess, added
I, I can make nothing of it -- Indeed Robert, answered my friend, I think you
might easily see the reason of this piece of cunning -- The people of America
felt more alive to the public affront that was offered to them in the person of
Jonathan Robbins, than in any thing that has happened since the era of their
Independence -- A citizen to be given up, because he nobly, like themselves,
brake the chains by which he was bound, prefering death to bondage, made every
lover of freedom and independence shudder, and with uplifted eyes exclaim -- Is
it come to this!

It appears to me pretty evident, that it was supposed, the yielding up an
obscure individual, without fortune and without friends, would never have been
noticed by the public; but when the mistake was found out -- when it was
discovered the America, from Georgia to New Hampshire, rang with it, then this
story, whether true or false I know not, was presented to the public? -- Odds
my heart, said I, what is the meaning of this? can it be imagined for a moment,
that the people are to be gulled at this rate? -- are we bound to swallow all
the stories that designing men can invent? No, added I, the days of
priestcraft and king-craft are at an end. God be praised, we can, and we will
think for ourselves. I heartily agreed with Judge Be, continued I, in one
thing; though I am not sure that I have the honor of applying it after his
manner -- His being or not being a native of America, in my opinion, is out of
the question -- one thing is certain, it has not been disputed, that several
years ago he applied for, and received a protection, as an American citizen,
attested in due form -- nevertheless, although sailing in one of our vessels,
and having his protection, on which he depended, he was pressed by these
sea-robbers; his protection despised; and in that, the government of the United
States -- For they were either bound to protect him, or they were not: If they
were not, why was he granted one? Was it to mock him? or throw him of his
guard, that so he might fall into the hands of enemies, from whom he expected,
and indeed received no mercy? -- If they were bound to protect a man, to whom,
in the usual form, a protection had been granted, then was it not as great an
insult, as could well be offered to an independent nation, to pay neither
respect to its flag, or its public and approved acts? -- I do not know,
continued I, that ever I have been more affected by any subject, than I have by
this -- Poor, unfortunate, brave men! -- why are ye thus neglected? why is any
nation on earth suffered thus to insult us? Let our government come plainly
forward and acknowledge, that it cannot yield a sailor protection: or else let
them resent such degrading behavior with proper spirit, and so for ever put an
end to the business.

I heartily wish, said my friend, this affair had never happened; for I am
convinced it will much lessen us in the eyes of the world. Our country is very
extensive -- in the increase of our population our strength exists -- to
encourage foreigners therefore, to come and settle among us, is a plan laid in
profound wisdom -- The hardy and laborious Irish and Germans, flying from
bondage, and settling among us, ought to be considered as highly advantageous;
and nothing so much encourages men to settle in any country, as a thorough
belief that there they will be protected in their lives, property, and their
invaluable privileges -- But how will this damp the spirits of Europeans; if
they should emigrate to this country, and even be admitted to the rights of
citizenship, yet with their attested certificates in their hand, they may be
pressed aboard a king's ship, forced to fight against their conscience, or
expire under the lash -- But, continued my friend, I trust this affair will not
be suffered to sleep in silence -- Our Representatives are acquainted with it,
it was not done in a corner -- it calls loudly for a close investigation --
Robbins, it is true, has suffered -- he cannot be restored -- but the like may
again happen, and we ought to be prepared to meet every difficulty -- Entirely
occupied by my friend's discourse, and my own reflections, I continued for some
time to muse -- at last -- You are absolutely right, says I, and I hope they
will pay that attention to the subject which it deserves. But -- as I said
this, I looked up, but to my astonishment my friend was gone -- which so
disturbed me, that I could pursue the subject no farther --

LETTER XXII.
MR. EDITOR,
HAVING heard that there was a tavern at about the distance of a mile or so
from my favorite country spot, where now and then a few neighbors meet to
spit, smoke segars, drink apple whiskey, cider, or ciderroyal, and read the
news -- a few evenings ago, I put on my best coat, combed out my wig, put my
spectacles in my pocket, and a quarter dollar -- This I thought was right; for
although Mrs. Slender told me eleven-pence was enough, says I, I Will even take
the quarter dollar, for a man always feels himself of more consequence when he
has got good money in his pocket -- so out I walks, with a good stout stick in
my hand, which I always make a point to carry with me, lest the dogs should
make rather freer with my legs than I could wish. But I had not gone more than
half the way, when, by making a false step, I splash'd my stocking from the
knee to the ancle -- Odds my heart, said I, see what a hand I have made of my
stocking; I Will be bail, added I, I Will hear of this in both sides of my head --
but it cannot now be helped -- this, and a thousand worse accidents, which daily
happen, are all occasioned by public neglect, and the misapplication of the
public's money -- Had I, said I, (talking to myself all the while) the disposal
of but half the income of the United States, I could at least so order matters,
that a man might walk to his next neighbor's without splashing his stockings,
or being in danger of breaking his legs in ruts, holes, gutts, and gullies. I
do not know, says I to myself, as I moralized on my splash'd stocking, but
money might with more profit be laid out in repairing the roads, than in marine
establishments, supporting a standing army, useless embassies, exhorbitant
salaries, given to many flashy fellows that are no honor to us, or to
themselves, and chartering whole ships to carry a single man to another nation
-- Odds my life, continued I, what a number of difficulties a man labors
under, who has never read farther than Lilly's grammar, and has but a poor
brain -- had I been favored with a good education, I could no doubt readily
see the great usefulness of all these measures of government, that now appear
to me so unaccountable -- I could then, said I, still talking to myself, see
the reason why the old patriots, whose blood flowed so freely in purchasing our
independence, are cast aside, like a broken pitcher, (as the scripture says)
and why the old tories and active refugees are advanced to places of power,
honor, and trust -- I could then be able to explain, why Robbins, an American
citizen, for killing an Englishman, who held him a slave, and so gaining his
liberty, was delivered to the English to be hanged -- and Sterret, who killed a
veteran sailor, who had formerly fought and bled in the cause of his country,
and then was bravely doing his duty, yet remains unpunished -- I would then be
able to see clearly the reason why James Ross should be advanced to be governor
of Pennsylvania in preference to Thomas M'Kean, which to me appears as great a
wonder as how George III. Paul of Russia, the Emperor, the humane Suwarrow, and
the wellmeaning William Pit, are well exercised, experimental Christians,
fighting for the glory of God, the support of true evangelical religion, and
the protection of civil and religious LIBERTY, and good order.

But all these things are to me, by the want of polite learning, so great
mysteries, that I have been searching for some time for a man of true learning
and goodness of heart, on whose sleeve I might six my political faith, that so
I might jog quietly on through life, without thinking for myself -- but indeed
I have not yet found him -- As I said this, by accident I looked up, and
perceived to my surprise that if I had gone but one step further, I would have
actually knocked my nose against the sign-post -- I declare said I, here I am
-- this is a tavern indeed. I then felt in my pocket, if I had my quarter
dollar, which to my joy I found -- I then unbuttoned my coat, to show my silk
waistcoat, pulled my watch chain a good piece longer out of my pocket, fixed my
hat a little better on my head -- and then advanced boldly into the tavern --
But I see I am got to the end of my page, and therefore must defer the
remainder of my adventure to another opportunity.

LETTER XXIII.
MR. EDITOR,
I STEPPED boldly in, as I told you in my last, and calling for the landlord --
a plain looking man, pretty much advanced in years came forward. Make me a good
glass of your gin toddy -- Yes sir -- And in a few minutes I found myself in
possession of a brimmer. -- I had but taken one good sup, lit my segar, and put
on my spectacles to read the news, when the conversation of two men, who came
in just as I entered, engaged my attention -- the one I found was a citizen,
the other an alien, and as I shall give you their conversation in their own
words, you may know them by these names --

Alien. I don't trouble myself much about it.


Citizen. That indeed is very strange. Have not you been here fourteen years?


Alien. Yes, I have, but what of that?


Cit. What of that? why don't you live among us? -- You have a family, and you
know what is good for the whole, is, and must be good for you.


Alien. Yes, I know that; but as I am an alien, I have no right to speak of
what I think good -- If I do, you know I may be suspected, and so informed
against, and next sent out of the country, to the ruin of my little family.


Cit. You need not be a morsel afraid -- our President (God bless him) is a
very good and a very merciful man -- You are safe enough.


Alien. I expect I am -- for let me tell you, I wish so to act as never to put
myself in the power of a man, who could sign any law that abolishes the trial
by jury.


Cit. Aye, aye, I see how the land lies -- You are a democrat.


Alien, As to that I cannot clearly say, as I don't well understand the term.


Cit. Not understand it! that is strange now. Well, I Will tell you -- A democrat
is a leveller, a destroyer of all order, a lover of the French, who wish to
overthrow all order, sacred and human -- a democrat delights in blood, murder,
and rapine -- and denies the being of both God and the devil.


Alien. God bless me -- then I am no democrat; but in the name of common sense,
who told you that a democrat is such a being?


Cit. Why Peter Porcupine, Fenno, Brown, and I don't know how many more.


Alien. Indeed! and are these your authorities? I see you are well informed
truly.


Cit. Aye, aye, these are the men whom you will not often find mistaken -- they
are good federalists.


Alien. Yes, so I suppose -- for you, I should think, know that Porcupine
vilifies your constitution, ridicules your laws, sneers at your freedom and
independence, and glories in his being a British subject -- Fenno says a
republican government is the highest note in the gamut of nonsense; whilst
Brown, and his learned partner, evidence there love of freedom, patriotism and
veracity, in every page of their impartial and well conducted Gazette -- Don't
however misunderstand me -- perhaps I am partial to Paddy Brown, for you must
know, he is my own dear countryman, though by his constant and vulgar abuse of
every thing that is Irish, he endeavors to persuade the world he is no
Irishman, but a Hottentot.


Cit. Hoite-toite -- what have I got here? I protest if any body should have
told me, I would not have believed it -- I find by your way of talking, that
Duane is your favorite, and -- you are a M'Keanite.


Alien. I told you before, I don't trouble myself much about such matters --
but I Will never deny my sentiments; if I had fifty votes, as I have not one, for
which at present, I am very sorry, I should give them all for M'Kean -- and as
I never assert any thing without a reason, I would vote for Mr. M'Kean, because
he has ever been zealous for the rights of man, true to the genuine principles
of republicanism -- I have read the journals of the debates of Congress, in 76,
77, etc. and there I saw Thomas M'Kean a very conspicuous character -- and for
his behavior at that period, the torics have not yet, nor ever will they
forgive him -- In the convention, when your constitution was formed, who
displayed the most real knowledge? Who was most active? Was it not Thomas
M'Kean? To what act has he ever put his hand, that was not highly advantageous
for the United States? I know the tories will, one and all, answer, -- to the
INSTRUMENT OF INDEPENDENCE -- and they will prove that they think so on the day
of election -- As a president of Congress, as a member, as a man, they can say
nothing to him, but that he was uniformly a foe to Great Britain -- In the
convention, on the bench, in the church, View him as a patriot, a lawyer, a
Christian, and a man -- his conduct in all these places and stations, have
woven for him such a garland of honest fame, as may make his enemies sicken
with envy, but which all their intrigues shall never be able to tarnish.


Cit. Well! and what of all that? James Ross is a good man -- he never did any
harm: he is a man of ability, and by the time he is as old as Judge M'Kean, he
may be as honorable --


Alien. No, never -- Remember, he advocated the British treaty, which every
good man in the Union reprobates -- the alien and sedition laws, which he also
supported, call loudly on every foreigner, to oppose his election; for thereby
they see clearly how much he is their friend -- His warmness on the bill for a
standing army, calls loudly on the independent farmer and true American -- They
may easily discern that, as soon as a standing army is strong enough, their
liberty is no more; and by voting for him, they openly approve of all these
laws, and many others, equally hurtful; as the stamp act, eight per cent loan,
funding system, bank schemes, etc.


Cit. Well, all this sounds well -- but there is no reality in it.


Alien. Reality -- it is every word as true as you are alive.


Cit. I don't dispute it my friend -- but there is no reality in voting that way.


Alien. Why? what the deuce do you mean by reality.


Cit. Why I Will tell you -- some years ago, I talked as you do now, about
liberty, freedom, and such notions -- got myself a member of the democratic
society, and voted for Swanwick -- Well, at this time I had a horse and a dray,
and plenty of work: but mark the consequence -- when I waited on my employers,
"Sir, bring in your bill," says one -- " How much do I owe you," said another
-- " Swanwick will employ you," said a third -- My dray stood still -- day
after day it was the same thing -- poverty presented itself -- I knew not to
what hand to turn -- At last a thought struck me, and a lucky one it was -- I
went to Mr. P. told him my story, at which he laughed heartily -- At length
says he, And suppose I should get you as much work as you could do, what then?
you would vote again for Swanwick" -- Said I, it is a folly to multiply words,
but I Will give you my oath if you desire it, that I Will never vote with the
democrats again as long as I live; only get me something to do. Away he goes,
without more ado, wrote by me a line to Mr. A. Mr. B. Mr. C. Mr. D. -- since
that to this I never wanted work -- I have now six good horses and drays -- I
own two good brick houses, and have two good lots besides. Now this is the
reason I said there is no reality in voting as you would wish. I was a
democrat, and I might have starved -- I turned tail to them, and I find there
is good picking in being a federalist; but with democrats you may suck bare
bones -- Do you understand me?


Alien. Yes, that I do persectly, and I suppose you think you are free, don't
you?


Cit. Yes, yes, I am free -- I have it in my power to vote for Mr. M'Kean and
lose all I have got, or vote for Mr. Ross, and double my possessions.


Alien. But I think you told me you was a citizen of the United States?


Cit. Yes, and so I am.


Alien. Suppose the British should offer you 1000 a year, to send them such
intelligence as they should agree with you for?


Cit. What sir! do you mean to insult me? I would not sell my country for all
the wealth in the world.


Alien. And yet according to your own words you would sell it for a small sum,
aye, and have done it too, for a little daily employment -- Right lay on one
side, interest lay on the other -- but interest weighed down right, and you
voted contrary to your conscience -- and like all traitors, you enjoy the
fruits of treason, for I can call it by no gentler name. Now, show me a man who
would vote against his judgment lest he should hurt his interest, and I Will show
you a traitor, who, were it in his power, would sell his country -- only make
it for his interest.


Cit. I confess I feel a little ashamed -- I never saw the matter in this light
before -- I will think of this more seriously -- I hope I have not been
altogether so criminal as you would make me; however, I Will act more cautiously
for the future, -- Lord bless me, I hate a traitor as I hate the devil.


As he said this, they both rose, paid their shot and departed -- And after
having taken another sup, I began to read the news.

LETTER XXIV.
OYEZ!!!
ROBERT SLENDER, to the aristocrat, the democrat, the would-be-noble, ex-noble,
the snug farmer, the lowly plebian, the bishops and clergy, reverend and right
reverend, doctors and V. D. M's. little men or title men, gentlemen and simple
men, laymen and draymen, and all other men, except hangmen, to whom he has an
aversion, throughout this great and flourishing STATE, sends greeting:

Whereas, a great and important day draws near, in which ye are to exercise a
great right, no less than to choose, elect, set apart, solemnly dedicate,
appoint, and highly honor, either Thomas M'Kean, chief judge of Pennsylvania,
or James Ross, practitioner in law, with the high sounding title, power, and
authority, of Governor of this State -- Having thrown off his apron, laid aside
his tools, and neglected for a small time, the honorable and ancient
employment of shoe- mending, he has, on account of the great division,
dissension, and contradiction that exists, the fictions, lies, stories,
calumnies, misrepresentations, wrong interpretations, addresses, resolutions,
assertions, and confutations, thought proper not to address one of you, but all
of you, to call upon you in the most solemn, awful, serious, earnest, and
interesting manner, to be upon your guard, to open your ears, and attend even
to a mender of shoes.

Ye aristocrats, and great men, whether merchants, doctors, proctors, or
lawyers, who sigh for greatness, and long for dominion, whose hearts yearn for
the glory of a Crown, the splendour of a court, or the sweet marrow bones that
are to be picked in his Majesty's kitchen -- whose eyes ache painfully, once
again to see the stars, crosses, crescents, coronets, with all the
hieroglyphicals, enigmaticals, emblematicals, and all the other calls, including
rascals, which adorn the court of kings -- give a strong, true, and decided
vote for James Ross, who supports, approves, hopes for, longs for, and sighs
for all these.

Ye bishops and clergy, adorers of the triple crown, the mitre, the sable, the
high seat in civil power, the much longed for, an established church, and the
ancient and profligate thing called tithes -- unite your forces, set
Christianity at defiance, and give a firm vote for James Ross.

Ye old tories and refugees, British spies, speculators, guides, and
pensioners, approvers of British policy, aimers and designers, who in your
hearts wish again to crouch under the protecting paw of the British lion --
arrange your forces, and give a fair vote for James Ross, he is your sincere
friend.

Ye supporters of the British treaty alien bill, sedition law, stamp act,
excise, standing army, funding system, who believe that public debt is a public
blessing, who say that republicanism is any thing or nothing, and maintain that
treaties made under the sanction of the CONSTITUTION are superior to it -- draw
near -- be not idle on the day of election, support James Ross, he thinks as ye
do, acts as you act, and will follow where ye lead. --

Ye democrats, soldiers of 76, ye supporters of our independence, ye quellers
of Great Britain, ye Americans, in heart and in hand, draw near, remember
Thomas M'Kean is your brother, the firm freeman, and the real Christian -- give
him your vote. --

Ye free born Americans, whose hearts beat high for liberty and independence,
who fear not the threats, and disdain the frown of all the tyrants on earth;
assert your right, make known that ye have not forgotten the late struggle,
that the mean devices, and shallow arguments of the X. Y. and Z's. of the
present day, are not able to trick you out of your liberties, or make you the
tools of a foreign despot -- vote for Thomas M'Kean, the constant asserter of
your rights and liberties. --

Ye honest, ye independent, ye virtuous farmers, who sincerely wish to support
that unequalled and glorious instrument, the Constitution of the United States,
untarnished and unadulterated, that ye may leave it whole and entire, a sacred
deposit to posterity -- be not inattentive, your best interest is at stake,
join not with that troop, but give an honest vote for Thomas M'Kean, the
asserter, supporter, and defender of the invaluable rights of his country. --

Ye honest and industrious mechanics, who daily sweat for the support of your
families, who, in the hour of danger, are ever found foremost in the ranks to
defend your own and your own and your country's rights -- remember the frame
law of the city of Philadelphia, and vote for Thomas M'Kean, whom great men
cannot make wink at injustice and oppression. --

Let Porcupine growl, Liston pet, the long list of English agents, speculators,
approvers of the fate of Jonathan Robbins, tories, and refugees, gnash their
teeth in vain; be true to your country, proof against bribery, true to
posterity, true to yourselves -- arrange ye under the banners of freedom, and
ONCE MORE conquer -- let the word be, LIBERTY and M'KEAN.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
SHOULD these Letters meet with a favorable reception in their present form, a
second volume will shortly be published; containing, besides those that have
since appeared separately, a variety of original ones, upon such interesting
subjects as may hereafter claim the public attention.


