SERMON DELIVERED AT FLEMINGTON, On the 4th of July, 1799.

By THOMAS GRANT, A. M. Pastor of the Presbyterian Church at Amwell, New Jersey.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

TRENTON: PRINTED by G. CRAFT. M, DCC, XCIX.

A SERMON, EXODUS xiii.3.
"And Moses said unto the people, remember this day, in which ye came out from
Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the Lord brought
you out from this place."
THE period of any remarkable and interesting event, which concern^ the
essential welfare, or the political existence of a nation, is truly deserving
of remembrance. The children of Israel once enjoyed great prosperity in Egypt;
they dwelt in the best of the land, abounded in flocks and herds, as well as in
every comfort which that fertile country afforded. ^ut through the ambition and
avarice so prevalent in human nature, those who once favored them soon became
haughty oppressors; they deprived them of their property and rights, and kept
them for many years under subjection to cruel taskmasters. Their deliverance
from this servitude (...) the event, and the time when it was accomplished is
the period referred to in the text, where it is said, " Remember this day in
which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage."

How parallel the words, and the circumstances, to the day, and the events,
which we are now assembled to commemorate. On this day we celebrate the
independence of our country; this is the day of her political existence among
the nations of the earth, the day when she escaped from civil bondage, the era
of her liberty, prosperity and glory; a day pregnant with great events, and
worthy to be remembered throughout all generations.

This is the twenty-third Anniversary of our country's freedom; on this day
three and twenty years ago, our representatives in Congress assembled, declared
these United States of America free and independent, broke the bonds that
united us to the mother country, and cast off the servile yoke, which degraded
us to a state of dependence unworthy of freemen. To defend our invaded rights
and privileges, to resist the iron hand of oppression stretched out against us,
to preserve our liberties inviolate to the latest posterity, we rose in its
defense, and appealed to the sovereign Ruler of the Universe for the justice of
our cause, relying upon his protection and support in this time of trial, this
critical and arduous contest, big with our infant country's fate. Glorious and
important struggle! What spectacle more sublime and interesting, than a nation
thus fighting in the cause of freedom, with this motto inscribed on her
banners, (...) thy conflict with oppression, when arrayed i^ (...) virtue, and
animated with the sacred flame of (...) forth to meet the rude invading foe;
how does (...) of thy sufferings fill us with grief, and thy succeeding (...)
inspire us with joy. This day reminds us of the happy issue of (...) contest,
of the difficulties and dangers we encountered, of (...) deliverance from
national bondage, of our present invaluable privileges civil and religious, and
of the obligations we are under to the God of heaven and earth, who by strength
of hand brought us out of our difficulties, and delivered us from the power of
our enemies: For in the language of inspiration* " Had not the Lord been on our
side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick." This then
according to the text (...) a day to be remembered, a day of deliverance, a day
of thanksgiving, a day of joy, the birth day of our country* And we have the
same reason to remember this day, as the Israelites had to remember that of
their departure from Egypt; for we have experienced a separation and
deliverance similar to their's, and accomplished by the same Almighty hand.

This day, then, should be employed in considering the mercies and goodness of
the Lord, the benefits and favors which he has bestowed upon our country, and
in expressions of gratitude and praise to the Father of Light, the eternal and
inexhaustible source of all our mercies, temporal as well as spiritual.

But how different is the day often kept, and how absurd is the conduct of many
upon it: Instead of gratitude and praise, they exhibit a scene of dissipation
and folly; instead of a rational and thankful remembrance of God's benefits,
they drown reason by intemperance, and banish gratitude by an abuse of his
mercies.

Our joy, therefore, should be regulated by the dictates of reason and
religion, our mirth should be mixed with a fear of offending, and our rejoicing
should be in the Lord with trembling: For if we sin against that holy and all
powerful God, who by strength of hand has delivered us out of our difficulties,
and relieved us from our fears, he can easily make our blessings curses, or
remove them far from us, and quickly involve us in all that misery which we
dread.

Indeed the late aspect of public affairs has been threatening, the alarming
prospect* of war has again been presented to our view, and peace for a while
appeared about to take its flight from our borders. From this it seems as if
the Lord still has a controversy with us for our sins; that the rod of his
judgments is yet suspended over us; and dark louring clouds in our political
horizon indicate an impending storm. This should teach us, while we rejoice for
temporal blessings, to consider the source from whence they spring, our
dependence upon God for their continuance, the obligations we are under to
render him an acceptable service, and to guard against ingratitude and abuse of
his favors.

We should, therefore, strive to keep the day in a suitable and becoming
manner, and we should remember it by having a deep and grateful (...) (...)
God's good^^s^ to ou^ (...) out of weakness he made us strong, (...) ^^mies of
our enemies, and has bestowed upon us the (...) liberty and independence. Our
remembering the day in this (...) prudent manner, will have a tendency not only
to prevent (...), and to cause our present mercies to be continued, but (...)
down still greater blessings upon our country.

As the events of the day, which we commemorate, are chiefly of a political
nature, we hope none will object to the introduction of politics in this
discourse, from a mistaken notion that they have no connection with religion,
and that the God of Providence has no concern in these affairs of men. For
nothing but ignorance and illiberality can be the foundation of such
reflections. It being evident to every enlightened and unprejudiced mind, that
as both reason and scripture require us to consider God as the author of our
private mercies, and to give thanks for them, he is no less the source of our
public political blessings; and we are under the strongest obligations publicly
to acknowledge them, and render unto him the praise which is due unto his name.

In prosecuting the subject, we propose,

I. To consider what is implied in remembering the day; which will lead us to
mention some of those great and important events respecting our country, which
on this occasion demand our remembrance.

II. Point out some of the duties, which naturally result from a recollection
of these events.

And first. We are to consider what is implied in remembering the day, or to
mention some of those great and important events respecting our country, which
on this occasion demand our remembrance.

Remembering the day evidently implies a recollection of those things which are
most remarkable with regard to it, and were the occasion of its institution,
together with all those subsequent events which proceed from it, are connected
with it, and respect the same important end, our country's welfare. If we
consider the subject in this point of light, the various public blessings of
which we are made the subjects, and the happy circumstances in which we are
placed, all rise at once and present themselves to our view. And nothing can be
more suitable, more decent, and more profitable on this occasion, than a
remembrance of the public blessings we enjoy, that we may see the abundant
reasons we have for praising the Lord, and feel deeply impressed with a sense
of our obligation to it: For thanksgiving is a continual duty, as we are daily
receiving renewed mercies; and the inspired apostle directs that we should, "
Give thanks always, for all things, unto God the father, in the name of the
Lord."

And here the great event which first demands our attention on this occasion,
is, the Revolution which established our Independence. This glorious event,
which is the foundation of our liberties and gave us an (...) (...) occasioned
by the injustice and (...). Not contented with the respectful and (...)
colonies toward the mother country, and with the (...) received from them on
all emergencies, in the face of their ^onstitution, which claims no right to
tax where there is no represen^^^^on, they arbitrarily burdened us with
repeated taxes, notwithstand^ng our frequent remonstrances; and finally,
instead of redress of grievances, resolved that they had a right to bind us in
all cases whatsoever, and determined to compel us to unconditional submission
to their unjust and arbitrary requisitions.

But Great Britain was mistaken in the spirit that actuated Americans; they
were not so easily to be deprived of their property and rights; they were not
tamely to be reduced to a state so abject and servile; they were not without a
manful and vigorous struggle for the support of liberty to be made, " hewers of
wood and drawers of water," to any nation under heaven; and the doctrine of
passive obedience and non-resistance to tyranny and oppression was too gross
and palpable a folly to meet with many admirers on this side the Atlantic.
Resistance was therefore the consequence of their attempt to enforce their
arbitrary exactions, and Americans indignant fly to arms. Now war with all its
horrors descends upon our once peaceful shores, the vast ocean itself forms no
barrier against its dire approach; for its wide surface is burdened with
numerous ships, which hither waft the messengers and implements of death. See
bands of foreign ruffians landing on our coasts; see how they cover all the
shore; see murderous instruments arrayed, the thundering cannon, the
destructive musket, the pointed bayonet, the glittering sword, the polished
spear; see martial banners displayed and long embattled ranks waiting the
signal of combat with the sons of freedom, assembled to defend their native
land! The scene of slaughter commences, the roar of cannon and musquetry, the
clashing of arms, the beating of drums, the cries of the wounded, the groans of
the dying, ascend at once in mingled tumult and confuse the ear. Rank closes up
with rank, the earth is tinged with purple gore and strewed with human
carcases. The king of terrors erects his bloody standard in the midst, and
waves it triumphant over* this scene of carnage; the grim tyrant with his
destroying sword mows down whole ranks at once, regards neither youth nor age,
spares neither virtue nor talents, cowards nor heroes, but with merciless look
stalks through the field over heaps of slain, and scatters around him
promiscuous destruction. Mark that band of heroes foremost in the fight, who
lead the sons of freedom on to battle. Melancholy scene! The rude destroyer
makes a near approach to them, strides across their way, and brandishes his
fatal dart. Then Warren, Montgomery, Mercer and other brave heroes fell. Oh!
what a fall was that for you my country! If virtue, talents, courage,
benevolence, humanity and love of country could have saved, you would not thus
have fallen. Behold them, my countrymen! The glory of America has fallen in
battle upon the high places; encircled in the arms of death they lie, and no
kind friend at hand had they, to sooth their expiring moments: But children,
wives and friends had they forsaken, to spill their blood in their beloved
country's cause: Their mangled limbs, their bleeding wounds, their breathless
bodies, are the costly sacrifices, which they (...) on the shrine of freedom,
and (...). And shall their names, their services, (...) ^t virtue; forbid it, O
my country! Let such a crime (...) land of freedom: It would be enough to make
their blood (...) us from the ground; enough to make their shady forms rise*
(...) tomb, with awful frowns advance, point to their wounds, and (...) voice
exclaim, O ungrateful country! A debt of gratitude is there (...) due to their
memory, and on this day should we faithfully discharge (...) These are the
martyrs of freedom, and dear indeed should they be to (...) for they perished
to preserve our liberty. Great was their worth, great was their patriotism: Let
their names be inscribed not only on pillars of marble and monuments of b^^ss,
but let them be more deeply engraved on our hearts; let us teach the lisping
infant to stammer out their fame; let us venerate and strive to imitate their
virtues; let us drop a tear of gratitude to their remembrance. Yes, illustrious
heroes, who fell in the cause of American liberty; your names shall live
immortal in the annals of your country; they shall never be buried but in its
ashes; one generation shall hand them on to another, till the end of time; and
at each return of this anniversary of our country's independence, they shall be
precious to the so^^ of freedom, and shall be mentioned with all that glow of
patriotic affection, which even gratitude itself can inspire.

And whilst on this day we celebrate our independence, let us thus remember the
price we paid for it, even the best blood and treasure of our country. Imagine
not my hearers that such descriptions are needless; for these scenes of woe,
this bloody tragedy, were once serious realities, in which we were too nearly
concerned to think them trifles, and we should not even now remain unaffected
at their remembrance; for unless we are deeply and feelingly impressed, with a
sense of the evils and horrors of war, we can never sufficiently value the
inestimable blessing of peace. Apathy, with respect to deliverances
experienced, borders too much on insensibility: It is our duty frequently to
recall to mind past times of difficulty and danger, and the signal mercies we
have received, that we may be thankful for them, and be duly sensible of the
different and happy circumstances in which we are placed. Happy change indeed;
the storm of war is turned into the calm of peace; the lightnings cease to
flash, the deep thunders to roll, the dark clouds are dissipated, and a bright
day ensues: Peace with her balmy wings descends and drops her olive branch upon
our coasts. Years of happiness and plenty have rolled on since our deliverance
from civil bondage, and we have been long basking in the full sunshine of
wordly prosperity, " sitting under our own vine and figtree, where there was
none to disturb or make us afraid." Blessed with a climate temperate and
salubrious, with a soil luxuriantly fertile, producing abundantly the
necessaries, conveniences and comforts of life, with an immense and well
watered territory, " a land of brooks and fountains of water, whose stones are
iron, and, like Palestine of old, flowing with milk and honey." Add to these
natural advantages, the civil and religious privileges we enjoy, and where is
the nation under Heaven so highly favored, that is made the subject of such
numerous and precious blessings, and that is under greater obligations of
gratitude to God.

(...) great importance to our country, (...) ^ould remember, is the
establishment of the federal (...) under the new constitution.

(...) plan of confederation, formed in the moment of danger, was (...)
superficial and imperfect to remain when that was past. A new con^^^tution,
therefore, became absolutely necessary to preserve and perpetuate ^ne blessings
we had obtained by our independence; to regulate, balance and define the powers
of government, in such a manner, as to secure the rights, liberty and happiness
of the people; and to concentrate the whole force of the union for internal and
external defense. These important ends are happily attained under our present
form of government, which employed for a considerable time the ablest statesmen
of our country; which in its structure affords a display of wisdom and talents,
unequalled perhaps in any nation, and which is the admiration of the most
enlightened politicians in the world.

Perhaps a more difficult and weighty task cannot be undertaken, than to
contrive a plan of republican government to suit the political genius and
principles of a nation; to give the people their due share in its
administration; to establish its various branches, so that they shall be
sufficiently extensive to include, direct and superintend all their essential
political interests, and to balance and limit the different departments* in
such a manner, that they shall not clash, or one interfere with or assume the
province of another. In ours, the powers are so defined, the departments are so
circumscribed, and the checks so strong and properly disposed, as to answer
these valuable purposes as far, perhaps, as human wisdom can effect; and to
complete its merit, provides a remedy for its own defects.

We ought, therefore, highly to value this excellent constitution, which is the
safety, happiness and glory of our country; and we should stand by and defend
this palladium of our liberty and independence, against all the attacks of
internal or external foes. Indeed it must be gross ignorance and stupidity, or
a deliberate and wicked intention, to oppose the prosperity and happiness of
America, which excites any to slander or defame our government or its
administration; for they are both the choice of the people; they are both
endeared to us by experience and trial; they are both sanctioned and ratified
by the express, the avowed, the public and repeated declarations of a great
majority of the most wise, enlightened and patriotic legislatures, as well as
individuals, throughout the Union. It is enough, then, to excite indignation in
the breast of every true friend to his country, to see men professing a great
concern for its welfare, who at the same time endeavor to promote disaffection
to the government and its administration; and under the sacred garb of
patriotism, like political assassins, conceal a dagger to plunge into its very
vitals. O Washington! thy country's hero, glory and defense* Could not thy long
tried services, thy hard earned laurels, thy disinterested patriotism, thy
noble talents, thy distinguished virtues, which compelled even envious Europe
to confer on thee the palm, could they not secure even thee from those shafts
of malice, when, like a skillful pilot, thou did direct the helm of state,
and brought us safely through the storm, in spite of threatening rocks and
quicksands? (...) v^rtue ^tself cannot escape them. For (...) is fruitless to
asperse thy name; it lives immortal (...); untarnished; and when on yonder
brilliant star that gilds (...) ^opy they cast a blemish, then let them try to
blot thy virtues (...) for ourselves we fear; we blush for the dishonor which
in this (...) some daring parricides have cast upon our country. Much injured
to (...) try; thy closed wounds are made to bleed afresh by this unnatural
conduc^ of these degenerate and apostate children. And is not this illustrious
instance enough; must we still add another to the list of defamation? O Adams!
wise, dignified, firm, enlightened statesman and patriot; thy country's pride,
its bulwark and its watchful guardian; vain are the plots, the intrigues, the
flatteries and the threats of Gallic foes, whilst thou presidest over us. But
as Washington thy predecessor, so neither have thou escaped the tongue of envy
and detraction; and like him, resplendent in thy virtues, thou may defy the
malice of these puny enemies, and laugh at their scorn; for their censure is
thy highest praise; while genius, talents, integrity and love of country
continue to be objects of esteem, thy name shall be enrolled among the foremost
of thy country's worthies. A constitution like this, administered by men of
such splendid virtues and talents, can never fail to command the attachment,
veneration and support of every judicious and enlightened mind, of all the
friends of liberty, order and good government. And how great must our happiness
in this respect appear, if we contrast it with the present French
administration, and the situation of civil government in France; where men of
the most abandoned character, the most ignorant and unprincipled wretches,
taken from the very dregs of the people, and noted for the most diabolical
cruelty, wickedness, dissipation, treachery and intrigue, have often been
entrusted with the offices of government, and have exercised a tyranny that
beggars all description. If to this we add the ease with which this great
event, a change of constitution, has been effected among us, without civil
broil or bloodshed, notwithstanding the great variety of opposite opinions and
clashing interests, which must be concerned in such an extensive territory: If
we also consider that a similar change in France, has been the occasion of the
most dreadful civil wars and scenes of more than savage cruelties and
slaughter; has overturned the very foundations of civil and religious society,
broke through all the bonds of moral obligation, and instead of a mild
republican government, as their professed object was, they have established a
military despotism, ten thousand times worse than the arbitrary monarchy which
they destroyed, and have exchanged one for many tyrants! If we consider these
things, and compare them with our own situation, it must appear even to the
most thoughtless observer, that we are indeed a happy people; that the hand of
the Lord has been with us for good in a way of distinguished mercy, and that we
are under indispensable obligations to gratitude and praise.

Thirdly. On this day it is proper also to consider the designs that have been
formed against our independence, and the attempts that have been made to
overturn our civil and religious privileges.

Strange, indeed it must appear, that such designs should be formed by a (...)
(...) us in our struggle for liberty; who here became animated by (...) flame;
who still profess to be engaged in the same glorious cause, (...) are evidently
endeavoring and determined to overturn liberty, and (...) rights of man, and
to establish a new species of improved tyranny, ^^roughout the world. But this
proves, no doubt, the falsity of their professions, and pretended views; proves
that the pinnacle of liberty is too elevated for them, and has turned their
brain; indicates that their genius is too volatile and fluctuating for a
republic; shows that their design is changed, that they have abandoned the
cause in which they first set out; and instead of establishing their own and
other nations' liberties, as they pretend their object is, this is only the
cloak with which they cover their more favorite and selfish, though dark and
horrid design of universal plunder and domination. As to religion, it is
evident, that the most daring and artful designs have been formed to
exterminate it, if possible, from the face of the earth. A number of
disorganizing, dissipated and licentious characters, headed by the leading
infidel and atheistical philosophers of France and Germany, have for a long
time been engaged in it, and with astonishing success. By means of secret
societies, combined in the same common but inglorious cause; trained to
impiety, insensibility and licentiousness, and bound to secrecy by the most
awful oaths and dreadful penalties; an extensive combination of persons and
means has been formed against God and his kingdom; against all religion natural
and revealed; and against all existing governments. The revolution in France
has afforded an opportunity for this wicked fraternity to carry on their base
designs: For the men who have been at the head of the government, and have had
the principal direction of revolutionary transactions, have generally, if not
universally been members of it: And they have employed their power, influence
and authority, in promoting the horrid plan of destroying religion, and
revolutionizing the world. The French rulers have frequently made the most
artful, flattering and specious professions, that their design was to promote
the cause of liberty, to destroy tyranny and superstition, and to free the
nations from oppression; but at the same time they have endeavored to bring
them to a state of the most abject slavery, oppressive tyranny and complicated
misery. By destroying the bonds of moral obligation; by promoting a spirit of
discontent, suspicion and disaffection to civil government; they introduce the
most un^ounded licentiousness and wickedness, destroy all subordination,
overturn the foundations of civil and religious society, and totally subvert
social order and human happiness.

The policy of France has been to divide people from their governments; thus to
weaken the strength of nations by civil dissension and party spirit, and pave
the way for an easy conquest to themselves. This has been their invariable
conduct; and it has proved but too successful with respect to many nations whom
they have subjugated, and whose melancholy fate affords an awful warning to
others, to shun this dangerous snare. That they have had the same ensnaring
views and insidious designs with respect to us, is a truth too glaring now to
be denied: For this purpose they have established these secret societies in
America, and have influenced a number of our fellow-citizens to espouse their
cause, and form a party in their favor; who, in conjunction with our foreign
enemies, have endeavored to ^^^arrass our government; to promote disaffection
and (...) ^^ecutive; to obstruct and defeat its measures; and to (...) subtle
and fatal political poison of jealousy, calumny, reproach (...) content, in
order to blast in the bud, the fair prospect of American (...) and happiness. O
love of country! which does pervade the breast (...) Laplander, in Frozen, and
of Hottentot, in Torrid Zone: Ah! whither art thou fled from us, in this mild
region of the globe; that those who are nourished and supported in this land of
plenty, and favored with its choicest blessings, should turn against their
country, and basely join a foreign foe, like cruel vultures, to prey upon its
vitals! Though it is evident that such a party has been formed among us; though
the designs of the French rulers, were obviously hostile and threatening to our
government, peace, liberty and independence as a nation; yet so wilfully blind
and infatuated were many, that they would not believe that their views were
unfriendly, or that our liberties were in danger, except from the misconduct
and ambition of our own rulers. Though, by their ambassadors, they had
frequently insulted our government, and endeavored to prejudice and excite the
people to opposition against it; though they claimed, and strove to exercise
powers derogatory to our sovereignty; though in violation of the faith of
treaties, and the known law of nations, they plundered our defenseless
commerce; though they refused to receive our minister, treated him with insult,
and ordered him out of their territory; and though they would not acknowledge
our envoys extraordinary, who were fully empowered to settle all existing
differences; yet this torrent of evidence, for a long time, was insufficient to
produce conviction in the minds of many: Numbers still remained attached to
them and their cause; they harbored unreasonable suspicions against our
government, and its executive; they exerted themselves with such resolution,
vigor and union, and in such a variety of ways, as to obstruct, retard and
frequently to render void, all energetic and defensive operations, and to
produce the most paralizing and fatal opposition, to the wise, prudent and
necessary measures taken by government, to secure us from the impending danger.

The publication of the dispatches from our envoys, and the President's* wise
and ample instructions to them, turned the scale of prejudice against France;
opened the eyes of all who were not wilfully blind; produced a ^^re general
attachment to our own government, and disarmed opposition of its principal
weapons against it. These publications plainly discovered the base, intriguing,
avaricious and treacherous designs of the French rulers, and the pacific and
candid disposition of our own; that they had done every thing to promote peace
and harmony, that was in their power, consistent with the honor, dignity and
independence of the United States.

Thus the way was prepared for greater union among the people, as well as in
our public councils; a majority in Congress was obtained in favor of vigorous
and defensive measures, and the preparations for war, which had long been
retarded, were commenced. Provision is now made, for erecting fortifications;
for raising and disciplining troops; for obtaining a supply of cannon, arms,
ammunition and warlike stores; for building and equipping a navy; and for the
defense of our merchantmen^^^ (...) flag rides triumphant upon the ocean, and
compels (...) robbers to flee before it. The President is authorized to (...)
of the country insidious and dangerous aliens; the naturaliza^^^^ of foreigners
is more carefully attended to; and a law has passed to ^^nish those who exert
themselves in stirring up sedition. Have we not therefore reason to bless God
that, in the course of his Providence, so great a change has been wrought in
the public mind, and that in consequence of it, these wise and energetic
measures have been taken, so conducive to our welfare, safety and defense: We
have reason to thank him, that many have thus been brought to see things in a
proper light; and that union, attachment to, and confidence in our government,
with a determined resolution to support its measures, have been the happy
effects.

Another special reason we have for thankfulness is, that a way has been
prepared by the faithless, plundering and daring conduct of France, for the
dissolution of the treaty of alliance, by which we were connected with her, and
on account of which we were subject to a variety of difficulties, and exposed
to many dangers. The present moral and political state of France, under the
despotic sway of men of the (...) licentious principles, and abandoned morals,
using the most artful means to sow among the nations, the seeds of sedition,
revolt and revolution; and endeavoring to subvert the christian religion, that
in its stead they may promote the general spread of atheism, infidelity and
profanity; renders it highly dangerous to have any political connection with
that nat^on: And indeed it is a melancholy truth, that our late intercourse
with the French, and the inconsiderate and enthusiastic attachment of ma^^
among us, to them and their cause, have already had a great influence a causing
that awful spread of irreligion, infidelity, licentiousness, and disorganizing
principles and practices, already so visible in our country: And we may well
take the warning given in the book of Revelations, " Come out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."
Our religious and spiritual concerns, therefore, as well as our political
interests and independence, are greatly benefited by the dissolution of our
connection with France; and we have reason to rejoice in this important event.
Further, when we consider the part which the President has acted on this trying
occasion; his penetration in discovering the insidious designs of our enemies,
and his precautions in guarding against them; his great and distinguished
abilities, for his high and important office; his wisdom, integrity, prudence
and firmness, displayed on various occasions; we have abundant reason to be
thankful^ to the Supreme Disposer of all events, for raising up, and qualifying
so eminent a character, to fill this exalted station; and for overruling events
in such a way, that he should be called by the public voice, to take the helm
of government at this interesting and critical period. If to these things we
add the appointment and acceptance of the illustrious and beloved Washington,
to the command of our armies, at this important crisis, the detail of our
country's prosperity seems complete; and we are made to rejoice, equally, at
our own happiness, and at the exalted height to which his condescension, in
this respect, has raised his fame.

Can we then sincerely view the great events which (...) us; can we contemplate
the inestimable worth and (...) religious liberty, advantages and privileges,
and consider how (...) preservation and enjoyment of these, depend on the
preservation (...) civil liberty and political independence; can we think of
the (...) designs now carrying on for the overthrowing all religion, and
reducing the nations under the sovereign control of one despotic, arbitrary
government, headed by a set of wicked and abandoned infidels; can we then turn
our minds to the great and interesting change, which has taken place, in the
public mind and measures here, and those things which have led to it, by which
we are enabled to guard against, and resist their base and treacherous designs;
can we deliberately contemplate these and other things which have been brought
to our remembrance, this day, without a deep and thorough conviction, that God
has indeed wrought wonderfully for us; without seeing and acknowledging his
unsearchable wisdom and goodness, his great and distinguished mercy toward us,
and feeling ourselves impelled to render him sincere and fervent praise.

II. I proceed briefly, to point out some of the duties, which naturally result
from a recollection of these events.

First. Gratitude to God, the author of all our mercies, is a duty essentially
necessary, and highly incumbent upon us: " For by strength of hand, says the
text, the Lord brought you out from this place." And it is the Lord alone that
brings us out of all our difficulties; that defends us from the snares of our
enemies, and provides a way for us to escape out of their hands; he cuts the
bars of brass asunder, opens the prison doors, and sets the weary captive free:
And when we consider the many and great deliverances we have experienced; the
number and power of our enemies; the many stratagems, and insidious designs
that have been formed against us, our own weakness and helplessness, the
apparent impossibility, at times, of being able to extricate ourselves from the
labarynth which enclosed us; we may truly say, " by strength of hand the Lord
brought us out of our troubles, and delivered us from the power of our enemies,
even by his Almighty and out stretched arm." Where is the nation on the globe
that is more prosperous and more happy, more favored in its political and
civil institutions, more blessed with temporal as well as spiritual privileges.
We should, therefore, frequently recollect the numerous and distinguished
mercies, which the Lord has conferred upon us, and endeavor to be truly
thankful for them. We should also recollect the many and aggravated sins we
have committed in the face of these mercies; for ingratitude and abuse of God's
goodness, disobedience, profanity, idolatry, dissipation and infidelity too
much abound. It is our duty then to be truly humble on their account; and the
goodness of God which we have so remarkably experienced, should have a tendency
to lead us to repentance, and a suitable improvement of his mercies: In this
way our land would become Emanuels, where he would delight to dwell; God would
be in the midst of us for good; would be our strong tower and rock of defense,
a wall of fire round about us, to preserve us from all our enemies, and he
would cause that no weapon formed against us should prosper.

(...) duty at this period highly necessary, is that (...) to promote union
among ourselves, and attachment (...). Our blessed Savior declares, and daily
experience evince^ (...) of the declaration, that " a house, or a kingdom
divided against (...) cannot stand:" It is impossible in the very nature of
things. This (...) been verified in the fate of all the that France has lately
(...) Venice, Genoa, Sardinia, Geneva, Holland, Switzerland -- all have fallen
and perished in the fatal snare; distrusting and suspecting the views of their
own governments, and confiding in the fair and deceitful promises of the
French, they became divided among themselves, and thus all possibility and hope
of union for defense being taken away, they became an easy prey to their
enemies. This seems to be the main object and principal design of the French,
to promote division and party spirit, among the people, and to wean their
affections from their government: If they can succeed in this, their triumph is
complete, the walls of defense are thrown down, and invasion immediately
ensues. This they tried in America; and though defeated in the end, yet for a
while were so successful as greatly to retard defensive measures, and to clog
the wheels of government. Let us then f^rmly believe this important and eternal
truth, that if we are united we may stand, but divided we must fall; and let it
produce its full conviction in our minds and upon our conduct. Government is
the great bond of union to a people: If we distrust it, and place no confidence
in it, all is lost; there is no center of union, information, or of action; no
plan of safety, no measures of defense. Let us then cultivate affection and
esteem for the government of our choice, and place the utmost confidence in it.
If any thing be wrong, as no human system is perfect, and time frequently
discovers errors, let us not despise and reject it, on that account; but use
the means prescribed for a constitutional reform. As republicans we ought to
have wisdom, virtue and good sense enough, to know and feel that the majority
must govern; that the rulers whom we have chosen, and they only, must direct
our public affairs; and that if their views and measures are not conformable to
our judgments, we are more likely to be wrong than they, who are at the source
of information, and have a combination of facts and circumstances, to influence
their decisions, which to us are often out of sight. Let us strive to cultivate
knowledge, that we may have enlarged views of our political concerns, and
discern where our true interests lie. Let us beware of ignorance, the disgrace
of human nature, the enemy of civil society, and the ruin of republics. It is
because we are ignorant of our political duties, of the nature and excellence
of the civil institutions that we enjoy, that we undervalue, and disregard
them, and do not give them our utmost support. It is because we have too little
of that virtue, which is the principle and spring of our government, that many
are so unreasonably difficult, absurdly censorious, suspicious and seditious;
so very backward to exert themselves in their country's service. Let us then
endeavor to conform our disposition, sentiments and conduct to the genius of
that form of government which we have chosen; let us cultivate republican
principles, manners and habits, and make our country's welfare, the chief
object of our pursuit; and let us banish these mean, unfounded suspicions and
jealousies, which are the effects, too frequently, of criminal and wilful
ignorance, of prejudice, envy or a levelling disposition, and which constitute
(...) ban^ of our political happiness: Let us, in find, (...) ^urselves,
attached to our government, vigorous and active (...) measures and laws; and we
need fear neither the intriguing (...) ^he arms of the most powerful nation
upon earth.

Lastly. Another duty to which we are called by the recollection of (...)
events laid before us this day, is, a determined resolution to defend (...)
liberty and independence.

These, we see, have been attacked at different times, and in various ways; the
most artful plans have been laid to ensnare, and divide, in order to conquer
and subjugate us; and even a number of our fellow-citizens have been led to
turn against the country which gave them birth, and to join a base, insidious
foe. This shows the necessity we have to be constantly on our guard, and
resolutely determined to defend our country, when occasion requires, both with
our fortunes and our lives. Have they not already threatened, that we shall
share the fate of Venice and Genoa, if we do not comply with their insolent,
arbitrary and unjust demands. And shall we tamely sit upon our lees, and see
our country plundered by these daring enemies of God and man? Shall we begrudge
a part of our property, to defend the whole, or repine at the expense? Or shall
we save it to reward the French, for the mild blessings of their better
government, to pay their soldiers for conquering our country, for burning our
villages and towns, for butchering our patriots, for plundering our houses, for
desolating our farms, for violating our females, for destroying every vestage
of that holy religion, which is our only hope. What better purpose then can our
property answer, than to save us from these barbarous, horrid scenes; and why
do any complain of taxes imposed for our defense against them? Shall we be
backward even to venture our lives in such a cause? It will be desirable, it
will be honorable, it will be glorious, to fall in the defense of our country,
of our liberty, of our religion, of our property, families, wives and children.
In this struggle we contend for all that is worth preserving, for all that is
dear to man, and without which life itself must be a burden! We contend that
our independence, rights and privileges, civil and religious, may descend to
our children, that they may have these precious blessings handed down, pure and
entire from us, and may be preserved from that system of civil and religious
disorganization, which is the disgrace and ruin of human nature.

Let us then animate ourselves, to a defense of our independence, on this day,
sacred to its memory, by considering what it cost us. The years of anxiety and
toil, the arduous and painful exertions; the scenes of plunder, desolation and
burning; of misery and woe; of destruction and carnage; how much blood and
treasure, how many precious and invaluable lives; here an affectionate father,
there a dutiful and promising son, here a fond brother, there a near relative
or friend! Can you contemplate this scene of suffering, and not be affected
with it; can you consider these costly sacrifices, made to secure your
liberties, and feel unconcerned or indifferent about them, feel willing to
resign them even without a struggle to such sacrilegious, daring and insulting
enemies? Certainly no; you will not so disgrace your country: I see a brightg
(...) (...); the Ameri^^^ ^^iform before me, (...)! I see indigna^i^n flashing
in your faces, at the (...) of your patriotism! I see the flame of liberty
rising in (...); a martial ardour animates your frame; you glow with courage
(...) country's cause; you grasp with eagerness the standard of free^^n, and
with sword in hand declare you will never resign it but in ^eath; you will make a
rampart of your bodies to defend your country, (...) with her expiring liberty
you will perish! Glorious resolution, worthy of the sons of freedom. Prepare then
to march with boldness, when your country calls; prepare to guard her injured
and invaded rights; and if in her defense you take the field, may the God of
armies shield you in the (...) of battle, give you the victory, and scatter
your enemies before you.

To the protection of the Eternal, we commit our country and her cause. The
same Almighty arm that once appeared for our relief, that conducted our
forefathers to this American wilderness, which he has made to blossom like the
rose, is still able to defend our rights, our liberty and our religion, against
the bold despisers of his name, his word and worship; and he will not suffer
them long to triumph with impunity; " For the day of their calamity is at hand,
if not already begun, and the things that shall come upon them make haste." Our
trust then is not in (...)* and in horses, but in the Lord Jehovah, in whom is
everlasting (...).

FINIS.

