MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF MRS. SARAH OSBORN, WHO DIED AT NEWPORT, RHODEISLAND, ON
THE SECOND DAY OF AUGUST, 1796.

IN THE EIGHTY THIRD YEAR OF HER AGE.

BY SAMUEL HOPKINS, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN NEWPORT.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY LEONARD WORC^STER.

1799.

Contents.
PART I. Containing an Account of the first thirty years of her Life. Page 5
PART II. Containing a general Account of her Life. Page 58 PART III. Extracts
from her Diary. Page 84 PART IV. The Conclusion of her Life. Page 352
THE LIFE OF MRS. SARAH OSBORN.

PART I. Containing an Account of the first thirty years of her Life, written
by herself; with a brief Introduction.
MRS. SARAH OSBORN, was born in London, on February 22, 1714. Her father was
Mr. Benjamin Haggar. Her mother was Mrs. Susanna Haggar, whose maiden name was
Guyse. She was sister to the Reverend Doctor John Guyse of London. Mrs. Osborn
came to America, with her mother, in the year 1722, in the ninth year of her
age, her father having been here for some time before. They lived in Boston a
short time, and then moved to Freetown, on the east side of Taunton river, near
fifty miles south of Boston, and above twenty miles from Newport. In the year
1729, they moved to Newport on Rhodeisland, where she lived till her decease.

The following is a more particular account of the first thirty years of her
life, written by herself.

HAVING been for some years strongly inclined to write something of what I can
remember of the dealings of God with my soul from a child, I now, being about
thirty years old, attempt to do it; hoping it may consist with the glory of
God, at which I trust, through grace, I sincerely aim: And the good of my own
soul, as a mean to stir up gratitude in the most ungrateful of all hearts, even
mine, to a glorious and compassionate Savior, for all his benefits toward so
vile a monster in sin as I am: And for the encouragement of any who may
providentially light on these lines after my decease, to trust in the Lord, and
never despair of mercy, since one so stubborn and rebellious as I have been,
has obtained it, through the sovereign riches of free grace. But Oh, let all
tremble at the thought of abusing a Savior so, lest God should say, "Let them
alone, they shall never enter into my rest."

Lord, humble me for my base ingratitude; and help me, by affording me the
influences and assistance of thy blessed Spirit, that I may be impartial in
this work, declaring the truth, and nothing but the truth; and in all that,
have a single eye to thy glory. O, for Jesus' sake, suffer me not to do any
thing that will tend to puff up self. O, remove all spiritual pride, and keep
me low at the feet of Jesus. Fill me with adoring and admiring thoughts of
thee, O God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, who has so
wonderfully contrived and wrought out my redemption; and though thou have,
through infinite wisdom, hid these things from the wise and prudent, yet have
revealed them unto babes; and even to me, the most ignorant and vile of all
creatures: Whose deep rooted enmity against thee and thy laws broke out into
action, as soon as I was capable of any. The first that I can remember of
actual sins, of which I was guilty, was telling a lie. And then that text of
scripture often rang in my ears, "All liars shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone."

I was frequently under the strivings of the Spirit of God, pressing me to
forsake sin, and repent and perform duties: But sometimes found them very
burden some to me; such as praying and saying many good things, which I was
frequently taught. Blessed be God for such instructions. Sometimes I loved
them, and was much affected with them: But my corruptions prevailed dreadfully,
an angry temper stiring in me; especially when corrected by my mother. But I
acknowledge, to the glory of God, that he preserved such a tenderness of
conscience in me, that if at any time my mother convinced me that she did it
because it was her duty, and for my sin against God, I could bear it patiently,
and willingly, yea thankfully.

Thus I continued till I was about seven or eight years old; when, my father
being in New England, my mother put me to a boarding school, about three miles
from London, where every thing was delightful to me. I was constantly taught
things that were religious, and they all became sweet to me, so that I verily
thought I lived a heaven upon earth. O, how sweet were Sabbaths! And for secret
praye^, I would ^o^ have omitted it for all the world; (...) the (...) omitting
it appeared so monstrous, ^and such (...) dreadful thing, that I dare not lie
down without it: In this I was doubtless governed by a legal spirit. I was
frequently much enlarged in that duty, and used to weep much when confessing my
sins, and pleading for the pardon of them, and for an interest in Christ. The
name of Christ was sweet to me, and sin appeared more hateful. I often used to
reprove others, when guilty of it. But once in particular, I remember, when I
was at Hartford, where my grandmother lived, and my brother with her, a little
time before we came to New England, my brother did something which I thought
was wicked, and I reproved him sharply for it; but was much perplexed, after I
had done it, with these words of scripture, "Thou hypocrite, first cast out the
beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote
out of thy brother's eye." This frighted me exceedingly. I thought I was a vile
hypocrite, and should never dare to reprove any body again. And, I suppose, a
hypocrite I was. But at last I told my grandmother of it, who encouraged me to
go on, telling me i^ was my duty so to do; and if I was faithful, God would
bless me, and love me.

So I continued for a while, as I thought, to delight in the ways of holiness.
But alas! alas! how soon was it over! My goodness was like the morning cloud
and the early dew, which soon passes away; for when I was in my ninth year my
father sent for my mother and me to come to New England to him. And on board
the ship ^ost my good impressions, and grew vile, so that I could then play
upon the Sabbath. But was convinced of that sin by an accident which befell me;
or (...) was ordered by infinite wisdom for that end. For as I was busy in
boiling something for my amusement, I fell into the fire with my right hand,
and burnt it all over; which I presently thought came justly upon me for
playing on the Sabbath day: And I was ashamed and sorry I had done so.

But after this I do not remember any particular conviction for some years; but
was changeable and inconstant, sometimes quite careless, and then more diligent
in the performance of prayer. I had always, as I thought, a great love for
those who I believed were good people, especially ministers. My very heart
would leap with joy, when I could see, or come near enough to touch them. I
mention this as a childish notion, that I took such pleasure in touching them.
I used to go secretly behind them for that purpose. I thought I could do any
thing in my power to serve them.

About two years and an half after we came to Boston, my parents moved to
Freetown, and I with them. And when I was about thirteen years old, my mother
went from thence to Newport on Rhodeisland, and went to visit Mr. Clap, who
gave her a little book of spiritual songs for me, and desired her to give it to
me, and tell me that it came from one who was a hearty well wisher to my soul.
These words immediately seized me, and filled me with shame to think that one
whom I never knew should take such care of my precious soul, while I was so
careless myself. And from that minute I thought I had a grateful love for Mr.
Clap (...) longed to sit under his ministry. I was then for some time under
strong convictions. Had such a sense of the hardness of my heart, that I often
thought it was impossible for me to be sufficiently awakened by any ordinary
means; and prayed that God would do any thing with me, though ever so terrible,
so that I might be driven from my evil courses, and turned to God. Some change
I thought must be wrought in me, or I should never get to heaven; but after
what manner, I knew not. However, I resolved to persist in the way of duty, as
I called it, and to forsake my sins, and lead a new life. But, fool that I was,
I made resolutions in my own strength, and built upon my own works; and so soon
fell again. O, amazing grace, that God should spare such a wretch as me, such
an abuser of mercy!

After this I found myself dead, and to have no heart, as I thought, to pray,
nor any sweetness in it, when I did. Then, O how I longed for the return of the
spirit of God, imagining he was withdrawn from me. Sometimes I did agonize in
prayer, and plead with God that he would return to me by his Spirit once more.
But was often answered by these words, "My Spirit shall not always strive with
man." Then I would beg, and promise that if God would try me this once, I would
never grieve or resist his Spirit again. O, wretch that I was! thus to lie to
the glorious God, who was then striving with me, to bring me to his Son; for I
did, I did quench his motions, and soon forgot my promises. O, deceitful and
dreadfully wicked heart! who can know it? Lord, I am amazed at thy patience
that I am out of hell.

Sometime after this, contrary to my parents' commands, I got into a canoe to
paddle about in the river, Their house stood by Taunton river, which was
navigable.
and could not get on shore again. It being in the night, though the moon
shined bright, I expected no other but to be drowned. Once I thought to get
out, and pull the canoe to the shore; but tried first if I could reach the
bottom with my paddle: And finding I could not, durst not venture. Then I could
see no probability of escaping death. So I kneeled down and prayed, and all my
former convictions revived: And the sin of disobedience to my parents
especially appeared odious. I thought it was just that God should bring me into
this distress for this sin; and with great vehemence and self abhorrence
confessed my sins, with their aggravations before God, pleading for an interest
in the blood of Christ, and for pardon for his sake, for that, and all my other
sins. And while I was praying, I felt a secret joy, verily believing that I was
forgiven, and that Christ had loved me with an everlasting love, and that I
should be happy with him, and longed for the time. I was immediately resigned,
as I thought, to the will of God, quite willing to die, and willing to live;
begging that God would dispose of me as most consisted with his glory. And
after I had thus resigned myself, as I thought, soul and body into the hands of
God, to do with me as seemed good to him, I was as calm and serene in the
temper of my mind, as ever in my life.

But at length I bethought myself, that self preservation was a great duty, and
therefore I ought to try to get on shore. So I hollowed as loud as I could to
the neighbors, who with much difficulty were made to hear, and came to me, some
hours after. There was not another canoe within two or three miles; for I had
been driven by the tide some miles, first up and then down the river.

How it would have been with my soul, if God had taken me out of the world at
that time, he only knows. Some christians have thought, a saving change was
then wrought, and that I should have been happy.

After this, I was more diligent in pursuing, as I thought, the ways of
holiness in the way God had appointed; and more watchful against sin. My life
was pleasant and sweet. I had great enlargements in duties. But at length grew
cold again. O ungrateful soul! to forget such a remarkable deliverance from
death.

The next winter I was as wonderfully preserved. The weather being exceeding
cold, the river was frozen, so that people, horses and teams went over on the
ice. But while it was hard and slippery, I durst not venture on it, for fear of
falling. But after a great thaw, so that the ice looked quite black, I,
contrary to my parents' orders again, they being from home, went quite over to
the other side, which was a mile. But the tide was rising, so I could not get
on shore: And when I looked round me, I could see nothing but great holes, as
large as houses, or larger, some of them. There was no way for me, but to go
straight back again; which I did. But the water was almost over shoes all the
way; and the ice, it seemed to me, bent every step I took. And when I got back,
the water was so risen, that I was much beset to get on shore: And it was in
the dusk of the evening. But at last, with much difficulty, I found a strip of
ice, as narrow as a bridge, which reached the shore, by which I got to land.
But when I had got off, and saw the imminent danger to which I had exposed
myself, by my folly and presumption, it made me tremble exceedingly. I
presently thought again, how just God would have been, if I had been drowned
for my disobedience to my parents; and wondered at his patience in sparing me:
But do not remember, that I felt any abiding impressions; so great was my woeful
stupidity: Though I think I kept on praying, etc. As to the river, the wind
rose presently, and blew very hard from the south, so that it, with the tide,
broke it up, that before bed time there was not a piece of ice of any bigness
within sight of our house, which stood close by the river. I am amazed, when I
consider how wonderfully God preserved me, a poor finful worm, so unworthy of
the least mercy.

The next March, we removed to Dighton, A town on the other side of Taunton
river*
where we lived one year. I remember but one awakening in that time; and that
was by hearing of the death of one of my former associates in Freetown, a young
girl, about my age.

Then I was again astonished at the patience of God, in sparing me alive and
out of hell. Then I renewed my resolutions to lead a new life. But instead of
that, in the spring we moved to Rhodeisland, where I soon got into company, and
was full of vanity. But my conscience would not let me be easy.

After some sore trials and temptations, I was more comfortable, and had a
great desire, I thought, to forsake all sin, and to comply with every commanded
duty. I longed to join to the church; but thought I was unworthy. I thought I
thirsted for communion with God in the ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and used
to think, if I came to that, it would certainly be a restraint upon me, so that
I should not dare to sin as others did. And when I stayed to see the ordinance
administered, I used to think I could give all this world, I were fit to attend
it. My spirit would even sink within me for the longings I had. Some times I
should weep so that I could not conceal it. One Sabbath, I went to hear Mr.
Clap preach at his own house, where I inclined to go constantly; but my parents
went to the other meeting, and were not pleased I should go from them: So I
went but seldom. But at this time there was a girl of about fourteen years old
baptized, which so affected me that I could hardly refrain from crying out in
the meeting, when I thought how I had broken the covenant engagements, which my
parents had made with God, in my behalf, in my infancy, and so long abused so
great a privilege, as being a child of the covenant: And she, who had not had
so much done for her, should now come to desire it herself! I saw, as I
thought, such a beauty in her, that I loved her entirely, and wished to be as
good as I thought she was. I made new resolutions to live answerable to the
mercies I had received: But being made in my own strength I soon fell again. I
thought I trusted in God; and used frequently, in times of trial, to go and
pour out my complaints to him, thinking he was my only support. But I dare not
now be positive, or really conclude, that I knew what it was to put my trust in
God; for my conduct after this seems so inconsistent with grace, that I dare
not say I had one spark of it then; but rather think I was only under a common
work of the Spirit: Though some times I think I had true grace, though very
weak. God only know^ how it was. O that he would enable me now to give
diligence to make my calling and election sure, that I may not be deceived in a
matter of so great importance. But to go on. After this (O that with deep
humility of soul, with sorrow and shame, I could speak of it) I relapsed again,
and was full of vanity. I kept company with a young man, something against my
parents will. But that was owing to false reports raised of him; for at first
they liked him. I made resolutions, that, after I was married, I would lead a
new life, flattering myself that then I should not have the hindrances which I
now had. I used bitterly to reflect upon myself, when I had given myself
liberty to be merry; for though I appeared outwardly so, I had no real
pleasure: But still put off repentance, or an entire breaking off from vanity,
till a more convenient season; and so resisted the Spirit of God. O Lord, how
just had thou been, if thou had left me entirely to myself! And if thou
had, nothing would have been too bad for such a vile wretch as I to have
committed. But blessed be God, who withheld me from such sins as would have
brought me to open justice, and exposed myself and family to shame and disgrace.

In process of time, I was married to Mr. Samuel Wheaten, being in my
eighteenth year, October 21, 1731, and went with my husband, the next winter,
to see his friends in the country; where I stayed almost five months; and was
almost all the time under strong convictions. Oh, how I did sweat and tremble
for fear my convictions should wear off again, and plead with God to set home
strong convictions, and never, never suffer them to cease, till they ended in a
sound and saving conversion; till I knew and was sure that I had a saving
interest in Jesus Christ, and was freely forgiven for his sake! And this was
the substance of my frequent prayers ever after, when I could pray at all with
earnestness; that I might never rest more, till I was sure my peace was made
with God.

From this time I had a hope again, at times, that Ch^t was mine. But it was
some years after before it pleased God to answer it fully, by giving me an
assurance of it. But then I longed again for the ordinance of the Lord's
supper, though some times shocked by that awful text, "He who eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself." But resolved at
last, if I lived to get home, I would venture, in obedience to the commandment
of Christ; and throw myself into the arms of mercy. I longed to commemorate the
death and sufferings of a crucified Jesus. I thought nothing should tempt me to
delay any longer. But, oh my sinful soul, must I yet add to the number of thy
backslidings! Could not the time past suffice, that thou had provoked a
compassionate God! Was it not enough, and more than enough, that thou had
rebelled so long against a glorious Christ, and grieved his blessed Spirit
(...) But must I go on again, after such awakenings as these, which one would
have thought impossible! But, oh deceitful heart, thou did, thou did! Lord,
I blush and am ashamed, when I remember my notorious ingratitude. O break this
heart of flint, dearest Lord, that it may melt into tears of contrition: And
never suffer me to forgive myself, because thou have forgiven me.

After I came home, I met with much affliction in many respects. It seemed to
me that the whole world were in arms against me. I thought I was the most
despised creature living upon earth. I used to pray to God in secret to relieve
me; but did not, as I ought, see his hand in permitting it so to be, as a just
punishment for my vile sins: And therefore was not humbled under it as I ought;
b^et nature rise, and acted very imprudently, in many respects. I was then with
child, and often lamented that I was like to bring a child into such a world of
sorrow: But some times found a disposition to dedicate my babe to God, while in
the womb; and did so, at all seasons of secret prayer. And, after it was born,
my husband being at sea, I could not rest till I had solemnly given it up to
God in baptism. And I thought that I did indeed give up both myself and it to
God.

I met with many trials in my lying in, it being an extreme cold season. My
child was born on Oct. 27, 1732. The next spring, my husband returned home; but
went to sea again, and died abroad in November, 1733. I was then in my
twentieth year. The news of my husband's death came to me on the first of the
next April. And I was prepared the evening before to receive it, by being
uncommonly exercised in my mind about spiritual things: And that text in
Hebrews was continually in my thoughts, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation?" This put me upon pleading with God, that I might not be found
among the neglecters of it. I went to bed in a house all alone, my child being
at my father's. And about eleven or twelve o'clock at night was awaked to hear
the heavy tidings. But God appeared wonderfully for my support. I saw his hand,
and was enabled to submit with patience to his will. I daily looked round me,
to see how ^uch heavier the hand of God was laid on some ^ers, than it was on
me, where they were left with a large number of children, and much involved in
debt. And I had but one to maintain; and, though poor, yet not involved.
Others, I saw, as well as myself, had their friends snatched from them by
sudden accidents. The consideration of these things, together with this
thoughts of what I deserved, stilled me so, the though the loss of my
companion, whom I dearly loved, was great; yet the veins of mercy, which I saw
running through all my a^ictions, were so great likewise, that, with Jo^ I
could say, "The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be the
name of the Lord." I had then the promises of the widow's God to plead, and
seemed to cast myself more immediately upon his care, verily believing, as I
thought, he would provide for me, with my fatherless babe; for whom I often
pleaded for covenant blessings, since he had been cast upon God from the womb.

O, how much comfort do those parents lose, who never gave their children up to
God in baptism in their infancy! And how sad for children themselves to be
deprived of the privilege of pleading with God for covenant blessings! My being
dedicated to God in my infancy always put an argument into my mouth, to beg of
God that I might not cut myself off, since I was a child of the covenant, and
from a child given to him in baptism. But, to return:

As before this affliction every one seemed to be enemies to me, so from that
time, all became friends. My parents treated me very ten^ and God inclined
every one who saw m^ kind to me. My brother was come into (...) England: And
being a single man, we went ^o housekeeping together. But in three months after
he married, and I soon found it would not do to live as before; and began to be
thoughtful how I should do. I could see no way in which I could get a living.
All doors seemed to be shut. But I verily believed that God would point out a
way for me. And accordingly, the very day I came to a resolution to move as
soon as I could, a stranger to my case, who kept a school a little way off,
came to me, and told me that she only waited for a fair wind to go to Carolina;
and, if it would suit me, I should have her chamber and scholars; which I
joyfully accepted. Thus the widow's God remarkably provided for me. This was on
Nov. 19, 1734. I was then placed in a family, who discovered a great deal of
affection for me; and in all respects used me as tenderly as if I had been a
near relation.

It pleased God the next May to lay his afflicting hand on me, by a sharp
humor, which broke out in my hands, so that, for three months, every finger I
had was wrapped up in plasters; and I could help myself but very little, and
was under the doctor's hands. In the fall I was taken with violent fits, and
was quite deprived of sense by them five days. I was blistered almost all over
by the doctor; and my hands and arms were all raw, from my fingers' ends, up
above my elbows, attended with a h^ fever. But all my friends were exceeding
and to me, and those in the house took care of me, and of my children too; so
that my school was not broken up, till I was able to take care of it myself
again. But the sharp humor continued very violent, at times, for some years:
And still continues at some seasons. But, in all this time of illness, God
wonderfully provided for me. I wanted for none of the comforts of life: Neither
was I cast down; for his mercy held me up.

The instances of the remarkable hand of God in his providence, in ordering my
temporal affairs, are innumerable. But, oh vile wretch! after all this I grew
flack again, and got into a cold, lifeless frame. As I grew better in bodily
health, my soul grew sick. I daily laid up a stock for repentance. But, through
rich grace, I was again convinced of my stupidity, and began to be more
diligent in attending on the means of grace. But I found I could not profit by
the word preached: Nothing reached my heart; all seemed but skin deep: And the
more I went to meeting, the more I found it so. Then I began to think I must
take some other course.

Not long after I went to hear Mr. Clap; who told me the very secrets of my
heart in his sermon, as plain as I could have told them to him, and indeed more
so. His sermon was very terrible to me. My sins, from my cradle, were ranked in
order before my eyes, and they appeared dreadful. I saw the depravity of my
nature; and how I was exposed to the infinite justice of an angry God. All my
former convi^ions were brought to my remembrance. I saw how I had stifled the
motions of the blessed Spirit of God, and resisted all the kind invitations of
a compassionate Savior. I was heart sick of all my works. And as it had been
often suggested to me, I believe from Satan, that it was time enough for me to
repent hereafter, it was now strongly impressed on my mind, that it was now too
late for me to find mercy. Once I might have had a Christ; but now my day was
past. And it was suggested that I had committed the unpardonable sin; because I
had sinned against light and knowledge, even against the convictions of my own
conscience. This I knew I had done; and therefore believed I had committed that
sin which could never be forgiven.

In this distress, I went to my Bible; but could find nothing but terror there.
My whole attention was turned to such passages as the following. "After thy
hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up wrath to thyself against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will reader to
every man according to his deeds. All liars shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone. Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. Consider this, ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. He that
being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. Ye have set at naught my counsel, and would none of my reproof:
I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Who among us can dwell
with everlasting burnings!" All these, and many more such terrible passages of
scripture, I found, whenever I opened the Bible. My eyes were open to nothing
else, and not one word of comfort could I find. And if I thought of complying
with any commanded duty, I seemed to be frowned away by these words, What have
thou to do to take my covenant into thy mouth? Oh, the distress and anguish of
soul I then felt, neither my tongue nor pen can express, when I was brought to
believe there was no mercy for such a monster in sin as I was, and expected
every moment that hell would open its mouth and swallow me up, amazed that God
had kept me out so long!

When Satan, and my wicked heart, had prevailed so far as to make me despair of
the mercy of God, and verily to believe hell would be my portion, I was tempted
to try to get the easiest room there; and, to that end, to keep myself as
ignorant as I could; it being suggested to my mind, that the servant who knew
not his Lord's will would be beaten with few stripes; while he who knew it, and
did it not, would be beaten with many stripes: And as my time was over for
doing his will, I had better leave off reading, praying or hearing the word
preached any more; for I should fare better, if I did. And oh, vile wretch as I
was, I yielded in some measure to the subtle adversary of my soul and
salvation. O, astonishing grace, that God did not strike me down into hell the
very moment I thought to do so! God had been just if he had done so, though I
must have weltered under the scalding drops of his wrath forever and ever.

But, O! what shall I say, or how, with gratitude enough, express the wonderful
goodness of that God, who preserved me, even when I was, in my own
apprehension, upon the very brink of hell, weltering in my blood; when no eye
pitied me, and no created arm could save me: Even then did he spread his skirt
over me, and said to me, Live. After I had been near a week in this distress,
my very soul racked with fear of what I must undergo to all eternity, those
words, " Depart from me," sounding in my ears, and I uttering the language of
hell, "There is no hope! There is no help! The door of mercy is shut against me
forever!" all at once, I was alarmed with these thoughts, which seemed to be
conveyed to my mind in the following words. "Who has told you, that your day of
grace is over? Are not the doors of the meeting house open? Cannot you hear the
offers of salvation? Have you not your Bible to read? And you may pray:
Therefore, you see your external day of grace is not over. And how do you know
but you may yet obtain mercy? It is the devil who has suggested all this to
you; and he is a liar from the beginning." I was then convinced, that it was
the devil who had been tempting me to despair of the mercy of God, which I did
not perceive before, but verily thought what he suggested to me was true, viz.
That there was no hope for me.

During the time of this distress, which was from Saturday night to the next
Saturday night, I slept no more than just to keep me alive. And when I did
sleep, it was filled with terrors. It was the same with my necessary food; I
thought myself so unworthy of the least mercy, that I know not how to eat. I
found that expression of Solomon to be true, "The spirit of a man will sustain
his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?" For sure I am that no
affliction or pain of body whatever, is to be compared with what I then
underwent. Oh how terrible must it be for those poor souls who are on a death
bed, to have such hard work to do! I have often thought if I had not been in
bodily health, I could not have lived through it. But, blessed be God, it was
when I was as well in body, as I have been for many years; which has been a
comfort to me on all accounts; and particularly because sick bed repentance too
frequently wears off. But to proceed:

After I saw that I was tempted by Satan to despair, and knowing that he was a
liar, I began, for a few minutes, to have some glimmering of hope that it might
possibly be, that Christ would receive me, because he had spared me hitherto,
on this side the grave, and out of hell. Who knows, thought I, but I may yet be
a child of God. Immediately upon these thoughts, I was furiously assaulted with
new temptations by Satan, I believe, not to flatter myself with the thought
that I should be a child of God; for I was not elected, and therefore could not
be saved. Besides, God did not leave his children to be tempted by him, as I
had been. I might be sure, if I was one of God's chosen, he would not have
suffered me to be tempted so; but I belonged to Satan, and he was sure of me.
And I, like a fool, yielded to these suggestions, and at once cast off my hope
again, verily believing it was impossible that I could ever be a child of God.
Now I was brought to the greatest e^tremity, and plunged into as deep an agony
as ever. I saw myself utterly lost without a Christ. I thought I could have
suffered all the torments in the world for an interest in Christ. If I could
have purchased him by doing any thing, though ever so hard, I should then have
thought it nothing. But oh, base, proud, unbelieving heart^ I could not take
him freely, upon his own terms; because, though I had no doubt that he was able
to save me; yet I could not see him willing to receive so vile a wretch. In
this dreadful agony, I opened my Bible, and the first words I cast my eye upon
were these: ^ Co^. x.13. "There has no temptation taken you, but such as is
common to man: But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able; but will, with the temptation, also make a way for your
escape, that ye may be able to bear it." These words were accompanied with
those powerful influences of the spirit of God, which excited in me a sense of
the excellence, glory and truth of God, and I had a pleasing confidence and
rest in the divine faithfulness, and embraced the promises in these words. As
it is not possible for me to express the greatness of the distress, in which I
was before; so it is as much impossible for me to make any one sensible of the
joy, with which I was instantly filled by this gracious promise; except those
who experimentally know what it is; for God was pleased, at that moment, to
give me faith ^o lay hold on it. O, how did it fill my heart and mouth with
praises, and my eyes with ^oods of tears! I was humbled to the dust, and (...),
as I paraphrased upon every branch of the text. It surprised, and comforted me
too, to find that there had no temptation taken me, but such as i^ common to
man, wh^ but a few minutes before I had been thinking that none had ever been
tempted as I was. But as I perused the other part, viz. That God was faithful,
and would not suffer me to be tempted abo^ that I ^a^ble; but would, with the
temptation, make a way for me to escape, that I might be able to bear it; my
transpor^: of joy was so great, that it was more than my poor feeble frame was
able to sustain; for my nature even fainted with excessive joy. Then I saw
Christ not only able, but willing to receive me; and could freely trust my soul
in his hands.

O, how was that scripture verified, which says, "By grace are ye saved,
through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God." Sure I am, I
can never boast; for it was as much impossible for me of myself to believe, as
it was to create a new world, owing to the c^i^inal blindness and obstinacy of
my heart, which could not be subdued by any thing short of infinite power.
Neither could any power, less than that which raised Jesus from the dead, cause
me to venture upon Christ, and accept him upon his own terms.

Now my Bible appeared quite different from what it did but just before. I
could find cordials in great numbers of texts of scripture; and all, as well as
that just mentioned, looked to me as if I had never read them before. I think I
did not sleep any that night; but continued praising God. The next day I went
to meeting: And, it being sacrament day, I stayed to see the ordinance
administered. But O, what a condition I was in, when I viewed the dear children
of God sitting with the Redeemer at his table! By faith I saw a crucified
Savior pouring out his precious blood to redeem ^s people from their sins. And
believing that I, through grace, was one of them, O, how did my heart melt, and
my eyes slow with tears, when I thought I saw my dearest Lord in his bitter
agony in the garden: And then crowned with ^s, b^ssetted and beaten; and at
last nailed to an accu^sed tree: And all to free me from the torments I had so
lately dreaded! It caused me bitterly to reflect upon myself, and cry out, "My
sins, my sins, O Lord, have been the procuring cause of thy bitter sufferings!"
Oh, how odious did my sins appear then! And especially the monstrous sins of
ingratitude and unbelief, which I had been guilty of, in abusing so long the
kind invitations of a bleeding, expiring Jesus. Oh! when I considered how often
and how long he had stood knocking; but could have no entrance into my hardened
heart, I was astonished at myself, that I could possibly be so cruel; and
astonished at free grace and redeeming love, that I was spared to see that
happy day. O then I begged that the everlasting doors of my soul might be
lifted up, that the King of glory might enter in and take full possession. O,
how gladly did I embrace a Savior upon his own terms, as my Prophet, Priest
and King! He appeared lovely, the chief among ten thousands, and wasten
thousand times welcome to me. And I was enabled, through grace to own the
covenant, and give up myself in an everlasting covenant, never to be forgotten,
resolving, God's grace assisting me, to comply with every command of my dear
Savior. And these words loudly sounding in my ears, " This do in remembrance
of me," adoring my dear Redeemer for his infinite goodness in appointing such a
glorious ordinance for the nourishment of his dear children, in which they
might have ^mate communion with him, I promised, God enabling to keep it, that
I never would omit that duty. (And I never did.) The critical reader will
probably observe a defect in ^is relation, and that it is expressed in
language, which appears too sel^ Mrs. Osborn was sensible of this defect when
she reviewed it, and wrote in the margin a note to the following purpose. "The
language her^ used was common among christians, at that time, in relating their
religious experiences, which now appears to me improper and defecti^ If I were
not conscious of views of the excellence and glory of the divine character, and
did not distinctly remember exercises of a higher and ^tter kind, than are here
expressed, I should doubt of their being genuine."

They who were acquainted with her manner of conversation ^n ^ligious subjects,
her consequent writings, and her conduct, had the most satisfactory evidence,
that her religion was not of the selfish kind* (...) that it consisted most
essentially in seeking the glory of God, and benevolence to men.

See note on her Diary, of March 6, 17^.


In this condition I remained during the time of the administration of the
ordinance, filled with such a mixture of joy and grief, that I was not able to
restrain myself, but was obliged to get down on the floor, and lean on the
bench; for I could neither stand nor sit; but, being in a pew in the gallery,
alone, my condition was not discovered by any, as I had no desire it should;
for I strove to conceal it as much as possible.

Thus, through rich unlimited grace, was I brought to lay down my arms of
rebellion, which I saw I had held as long as I could. Blessed be God, that I
was then compelled to come in, and list under the banner of Christ. Sure I am,
whatever others may boast of a free will, I have none of my own, but to do
evil; for I resisted to the last moment. O my God! I adore thy sovereign power,
which made me willing in the day of it. If ever there was a monument of mercy,
sure I am one. O, so let me remain forever and ever, for Jesus' sake.

The next day I went to see Mr. Clap, wit^ an intent to acquaint him with my
desire to join the church, these words, This do in remembrance of me, still
sounding in my ears. But I appeared so vile in my own eyes, that I knew not how
to ask the privilege of him. But when I came, after some usual questions
concerning my welfare, he asked me when I had been to see him before. I
answered, I had not for a long time. Then he asked me the reason of it. I dare
not now make any formal excuses as usual; but burst out into tears, and told
him, I had been too wicked. He no sooner perceived what my condition was, but
like a tender father to a little child, bid me not grieve, if that was the
reason; I was welcome to him now: And he would do all he could to help me
forward. And after some more conversation, contrary to my expectation, he asked
me if I did not desire to join to the church? I said, that was indeed part of
my business. I had met with many hindrances, and particularly that awful text
of scripture, "He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself," had made me afraid to approach the Lord's table. But now
resolving, through grace, to rely upon Christ alone for assistance and
acceptance, renouncing all my own righteousness, believing it to be a positive
commanded duty, I dare not omit it once more, if I might be received. Upon this
he told me he should inquire into my character. This I told him I expected; but
could tell him more of myself, than any could say of me, having been, through
restraining grace, kept from open and scandalous sins. Then he said I had great
cause to be thankful. He bid me come to him, as often as I had a desire, if it
was morning, noon or night, and I should be always welcome. And he lent me a
book, entitled, "But they seek a better country, even an heavenly." I was so
delighted with it, that I sat up all night to read it two or three times over.

I visited Mr. Clap very often; and he as often expressed his willingness to do
me good. And once in particular, after he had done so, he lifted up his hands,
giving me his blessing, and said, "You see I am willing to do you all the good
I can; and if such a poor, sinful creature as I am, is willing to do so, think
with yourself, how much more willing your glorious Lord is to receive you."

These words having so much reason in them, filled me with joy unspeakable. I
hardly knew how to get home. I saw Christ willing, and I, through grace, made
willing. I could utter no other language but, "Come in, Lord Jesus, take full
possession; I will come to thee, thou art mine, and I am thine. Even so,
Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." I immediately retired when I got
home, to give vent to my feelings. But O, what a rapture was I in, when I
renewed my solemn engagements to be the Lord's! Enabled, I trust, by grace,
sincerely to take the Lord Jehovah for my covenant God; the Lord Jesus to be my
Prophet, Priest and King; the Holy Ghost for my comforter, guide and
sanctifier; the scriptures for my rule to walk by: Giving up myself, soul and
body, all my faculties and members, as instruments of righteousness. O, how I
could sing of redeeming love and free grace! Surely my heart reached forth in
burning desires after the blessed Jesus. O, how was I ravished with his love!
And when examining myself, thrice putting the question to my soul, which Christ
put to Peter, Tell me, O my soul, love thou the Lord Jesus? How did my heart
melt, and my eyes slow with tears, in appealing to him! Lord, thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee. And when inquiring into the cause of
this love which I felt, and from whence it flowed, it still overcame me more,
because I knew I was brought to love him, by the powerful grace of Christ, who
was before an enemy to him. This caused me to loath myself, and cry out Lord,
what a traitor have I been, and yet thou have freely loved me! O, why me, Lord!
Why am I not in hell! Why among the living to praise the Lord! There can be no
other reason, but this; where my sins have abounded, thy grace has much more
abounded. O, amazing grace! Have thou snatched me as a brand out of the
burning! O, have thou ransomed my soul from destruction, and delivered me from
my own lusts, and out of the clutches of a cruel tyrant, who had so long
enslaved me, and tyrannised over me in misery! O, then how sweet was a Savior!
I could heartily subscribe to those words of scripture, "Unto you who believe
he is precious. The chief among ten thousand, altogether lovely."

Thus I continued from day to day, in such ecstacies of joy, thirsting for full
sanctification, and more intimate communion with God; daily asking what I
should render to him for all his benefits to such an hell deserving sinner;
earnestly begging that God would find out some way for me, that I might be made
instrumental in advancing his kingdom and interest in the world. O, how I
dreaded being an unprofitable servant: The employment I still followed seemed
to encourage me to hope God intended to make use of me for the instruction of
little ones; which caused me often to bless God for placing me in that calling.
And though I know that it every thing I offend, and in all come short of God's
glory; so that every performance has need of washing in the blood of Christ;
yet it is a comfort to me, to this day, that I was enabled by grace to labor
with the little souls, then committed to my charge; but desire to be humbled
that I did no more. O, that I had been more faithful I Surely I longed that all
the world, but especially those dear to me by (...) bonds of nature or
friendship, might be convin^ed of sin, and come to a glorious Christ. ^ thought
I could even spend and be spent f^ them. I thought I could travail in birth ^
Christ was formed in them. And when I s^ any giving themselves a liberty to
sin, I cou^ not, at some times, refrain from reproving them. Some would tell me
I was turned fool, and di^tracted, when I said I had been a vile sinner, ^
every body knew I had been a sober woman ^ my days; and yet I used to do such
things to^ as well as they: And what was the matter now (...) Sometimes they
would say, "This fit will be over quickly." But all such answers as these, ^
which I had a great many, would serve to humble me yet more, and put me upon
pleading f^ persevering grace, that I might never bring dishonor upon the name
of God. And indeed all the trials I met with, which were various had, through
the abounding goodness of God this effect, to quicken me yet more.

But Satan had still a desire to sift me as whea^ He assaulted me daily; but
those words of the blessed Jesus were frequently applied for ^ support, "I have
prayed for thee, that thy fait^ fail not." One night in particular, when
watching with a dear friend, who was sick, Satan assaulted me in as furious a
manner, seemingly as though he had appeared in bodily shape* though with my
bodily eyes I saw nothing. ^ believe the combat lasted, at least, two hou^ as
fierce as though I had talked with him fa^ to face. He again ranked all my sins
befo^ my eyes, telling me it was impossible, not withstanding my great hopes,
for me ever to be saved. He was still sure of me, and would not let me go. I
should surely turn back again, and be worse than ever. It is impossible to
relate the tenth part of the fiery darts he slung at me. But I was composed,
not in the least daunted; but could prove him a liar in every thing he
suggested, by scripture, which flowed into my mind, as though I had learned it
all by heart. Never had I such a variety of scripture texts at my command in
all my life, either before, (...) since. There was nothing he could allege
against me, but if I knew it was true, I immediately subscribed to it; and then
flew to the particular properties of the blood of Christ, which I found
sufficient for me. Thus I overcame him by the blood of the Lamb; and was left,
in the issue, filled with the consolations of the blessed Spirit; triumphing
over Satan; blessing and praising God for delivering me out of the hand of this
cruel tyrant; adoring the lovely Jesus. And thus I spent the remainder of that
night. O, how sweet was it to me! I longed for more strength to praise and
love; and even to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Thus I continued for some time, rejoicing and resolving, by assisting grace,
to press forward, and by all means to make my calling and election sure. Then I
wrote my experience to be communicated to the church; and I was admitted,
February 6, 1737, to partake of that holy ordinance of the Lord's Supper. But
it is impossible for me to express the ecstacy of joy I was in, when I saw
myself there, who was by nature a child of wrath, an heir of hell, and by
practice a rebel against God, a resister of his grace, a piercer of the lovely
Jesus, unworthy of the crumbs that fall; yet, through free grace, compelled to
come in, and partake of children's bread. It was indeed sweet to me to feed by
faith on the broken body of my dearest Lord. Surely it did humble me to the
dust, and filled me with self abhorrence, as I meditated on his sufferings and
death, and knew my sins to be the procuring cause. But when I came to take the
cup, and by faith to apply the precious properties of the blood of Christ to my
soul, the veil of unbelief seemed to drop off, and I was forced to cry out, "My
Lord, and my God," when I beheld the hole in his side, and the prints of the
nails. And I could not but, in the words of Peter, appeal to him, Lord, thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee." O then I was admitted, with
the beloved disciple, to lean on his breast! O, astonishing grace, and
unspeakable joy, to see God reconciled to me, in and through him; and he
bidding me welcome to his table! The Holy Spirit, by his powerful influences
applied all this for my strong consolation. O, what a feast is this, when
intimate communion with the glorious God is thus obtained! When strong covenant
engagements with him are renewed; I being assured that he was my God, and
giving myself, body and soul, to him forever, and rejoicing in him as my only
portion forevermore. Surely, I thought, I could never enough adore the lovely
Jesus for appointing such an ordinance as this.

But I cease to say any more of this; for it is impossible for me to describe
the thousandth part of what I then felt. O, that I could always live as one who
had thus been on the mount with God! The next morning I was as much refreshed
by meditating on the 32d Psalm, from the first verse, to the end of the 5th.
This caused me yet more to adore distinguishing grace, and even to be swallowed
up with love to the immaculate Lamb; and resolve more and more, with full
purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord. The frequent language of my soul was
this, "Whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is none upon earth that I
desire beside thee."

I daily renewed my covenant engagements with God: But that they might be more
inviolably kept, I resolved to write them. And accordingly began to do it; and
went on comfortably, till I came to write these words, "That I would leave,
lose, and deny all that was dear to me, when it stood in competition with God,
even life itself, if he should please to call for it, rather than to forsake
him and his ways." Then Satan beset me, and furiously assaulted me. He
suggested to me that I was now lying to God: For I had nothing in me, that
would stand by me, when an hour of trial should come; but, with the stony
ground hearers, would fall away. This gave me a dreadful shock at first, and
caused me to stop a while, to plead with God for a discovery of my state: That
he would search me and try me, and see if there were any wicked way in me: And
grant me real and persevering grace. And in answer to my petitions, the
following portion of God's word was powerfully set home to my heart, "My grace
is sufficient for thee." And then my heart was filled with joy and praises,
firmly believing he was faithful who had promised, and therefore would perform
it. So I proceeded to write with more fixed resolution than before.

But again Satan with great fury assaulted me, and told me, my hope would
surely perish; and I should turn back, and be worse than ever, and brought to
shame; and ranked in order my sins of youth. But I immediately opened my Bible,
being dreadfully shocked with fear lest it should be so. And the first lines I
cast my eyes upon were in Isaiah live. 4, etc. "Fear not; for thou shall not be
ashamed: Neither be thou confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame: For
thou shall forget the shame of thy youth, and shall not remember the reproach
of thy widowhood any more. For thy Maker is thine husband, the Lord of hosts is
his name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole earth
shall he be called. For the Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken and
grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, says thy God.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather
thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me. For as I have sworn that the waters
of Noah should n^ (...) go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be
wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills
be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee." These
gracious promises were so adapted to every particular of my circumstances, and
applied by the Spirit of God, with such great power, that they strengthened me
exceedingly.

But O, when I had finished writing my covenant, which was on the 26th of
March, 1737, and came to spread it before God, and with prayers and tears to
deliver it to him as my own act and deed, it verily seemed to me that all the
heavens rang with acclamations of joy, that such a prodigal as I was returned
to my God and Father. And my joy was so great, that my bodily strength failed,
and I was, for some time, as one whose soul was ready to break loose, and wing
away into the bosom of my God. O, how welcome a messenger would death then have
been to me! But my great petition was, that I might with patience wait my
appointed time, and glorify God upon earth.

After I had so solemnly delivered my solemn covenant engagements to God, under
hand and ^eal, I went on my way rejoicing; this being the language of my soul,
"Who shall separate me from the love of God? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No. I am persuaded,
that neither life, nor death, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus my Lord." And I am astonished, when I remember the amazing condescension
of my God! He granted me near access to the throne of his grace continually:
And in almost every thing for which I earnestly prayed, I was remarkably
answered; and so surprisingly, at some times, that I was afraid to think it was
so.

Once in particular, in that same month of March, as I was asleep in the bed,
early in the morning, I was awaked with the most terrible wind that I ever
knew. It immediately tore off both my windows, and carried them into the
street. I rose directly, and looked out. I think I never saw the heavens and
the water look so dreadfully before: And the wind blew exceeding hard, so that
it appeared that all the vessels in the harbor would soon be broken to pieces.
I thought of those poor souls who were exposed to the fury of the storm; and my
heart was filled with tender pity and compassion for them. I retired, for
secrecy, into the garret. After I got there, I expected every moment that the
roof would be ripped off and blown away. But I was very earnest with God to
abate the violence of the storm, and to have compassion on the poor souls in
distress. And while I continued pleading with God, I had an affecting view and
sense of the sufficiency of one word of Christ to do it. It was only for him to
say, "Peace, be still," and the winds and sea would immediately obey him. And
after I had some time thus wrestled with God in prayer, I went down. I had been
so earnestly engaged, that I had not perceived any abatement of the storm; but
looking again out of the window in my chamber, I was surprised above measure.
The sea looked as calm and pleasant to me, as if there had been no storm. I
immediately retired again, and returned thanks for it, as a remarkable answer
of prayer. But have often heard since, that it was a piece of pride and
presumption for me to think it so. However, this I know, God is both the hearer
and answerer of prayer, for Jesus' sake.

I could not avoid, when there was opportunity for it, expressing my love and
thankfulness to God, for snatching me as a brand out of the burning: And when I
did this once to my mother, with tears of joy running down my cheeks, she said
to me, "Ah, child, you will not always find your love thus flaming to the
blessed Jesus. After a while you will be more cool again." But I hastily
answered, too much like Peter, It was impossible I could be such a monster for
ingratitude. But she told me, she did not mean that I should in reality love
him less, but compared the first espousals of a soul to Christ, with that of a
husband and wife, which was generally attended with more fondness and joy, than
afterward, though the love might be the same, or stronger.

I continued to go on my way rejoicing for some time, without knowing what is
was to be deserted one hour together, or entirely to lose sensible communion
with God in any duty or special ordinance, or ever to lie down without God; or
to awake without some sweet and refreshing portion of the word of God in my
thoughts. My very sleep was filled with pleasant thoughts of divine things.
Surely I enjoyed some foretaste of heaven at this season.

These were happy days. -- But now how shall I speak! Oh that I may do it with
a heart truly broken for my sins! After all this, I began to grow more
conformed to the world. Things which, when I was thus lively, appeared insipid,
and indeed odious to me, began to grow more tolerable, and by degrees in a
measure pleasant. And depraved nature and Satan together pleaded for them thus,
"That there was a time for all things; and singing and dancing now and then,
with a particular friend, was an innocent diversion. Who did I see, besides
myself, so precise and strict? Other christians allowed themselves in such
things, who, I had reason to think, were far superior to me in grace;
especially one with whom I was very intimate. Sure, if it was sin, she would
not allow herself in it. ^t was for extraordinary christians, such as
ministers, and others who were eminent for piety, to avoid the practice of such
things, and not for me. Who did I think I was, that I should pretend to outdo
other christians? They could talk of worldly things. What ailed me?" Thus the
devil and carnal reasoning argued me out of a great part of my resolutions for
strict godliness; and, in short, made me, in a sort, believe that it was only
pride and hypocrisy, and to be seen of men, that had ever made me pretend to it.

Thus I sunk by degrees lower and lower, till I had at last almost lost all
sense of my former experiences. I had only the bare remembrance of them, and
they seemed like dreams or delusion, at some times. At others again, I had some
revivals. I still constantly attended the means of grace, and Sabbaths were
sometimes very sweet to me. At times I had access to the throne of grace, and
obtained some communion with God, and resolved to be more circumspect, and
renewed my covenant engagements with God. But I knew I was a dreadful
backslider, and had dealt treacherously with God, and sometimes dare not, with
any boldness, look up to him; guilt would stop my mouth. At other times
gracious invitations to backsliders to return, would revive me. Thus I
continued, for a great while, some times revived, and sometimes sunk, and
dejected.

In Sept. 1740, God in mercy sent his dear servant Whitefield here, which in
some measure stirred me up. But when Mr. Tennent came soon after, it pleased
God to bless his preaching so to me, that it roused me. But I was all the
winter after exercised with dreadful doubts and fears about my state. I
questioned the truth of all I had experienced, and feared I had never yet
passed through the pangs of the new birth, or ever had one spark of grace. And
what confirmed this to me, my dear aged pastor, Mr. Clap, frequently preached,
that they who had real grace, had growing grace. This used to make me tremble,
because I could not perceive any growth; but thought I rather went back, and
grew worse. Thus I was covered over with thick clouds for months together. Oh,
the dreadful fruits of backsliding! At last, I applied to Mr. Clap, and begged
of him, that if he knew of any thing which I had left undone, by what I had
told him, or wrote for my admission into the church, he would let me know it,
that the mistake might be rectified before it was too late. I was indeed
possessed with the thought, that he saw so clearly into my state, that he knew
I was a hypocrite, though I did not till then. I told him of this. But he said,
he never thought so; and put me upon renewing covenant engagements with God,
and giving myself up to him then; and perhaps I should find I had done so
before. This I endeavored to do, and did get some relief; but was not yet
satisfied. The tokens of a woeful backslider were upon me. I had forsaken my
first love, and God justly deserted me. Sometimes that text would refresh me,
"Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings." My heart
would answer, "Behold I come unto thee; for thou art the Lord my God." And
sometimes that passage, "I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions,
and as a cloud thy sins: Return unto me; for I have redeemed thee." But ye^ all
this time I could not get clear of doubts; but thought such dreadful formality
and hypocrisy, as I perceived to be in my heart, could not consist with grace.
I labored along thus all the winter, unresolved how the case stood between God
and my soul: And an uncomfortable, dreadful life it was. At some times I was so
covered with darkness, that I seemed to be sure I had not one spark of grace:
At other times afraid of ingratitude, afraid to deny what God had done for my
soul. Oh, these were the dreadful fruits of backsliding, and losing my first
love! The Lord in mercy preserve me, that I may never do so any more!

I continued thus till March, 1741. And then it pleased God to return Mr.
Tennent to us again, and he preached twenty one sermons here. But while he was
here, I was more than ever distressed. I had lost the sensible manifestations
of Christ's love. I had no more but a bare remembrance of some things, which I
had experienced; and yet I was afraid to draw up a conclusion, one way or the
other. I applied to Mr. Tennent, and he discoursed very suitably with me. But
still I was not quiet, but exceedingly distressed.

I had some light and refreshment under his preaching the next day; but my
darkness returned again, and I sunk very low. I was so afraid of presumption,
that I dare not conclude my state was good. And he struck directly at those
things, for which I had so foolishly and wickedly pleaded christian example,
such as singing songs, dancing, and foolish jesting, which is not convenient.
He said, he would not say there was no such thing as a dancing christian, but
he had a very mean opinion of such as could bear to spend their time so, when
it is so short, and the work for eternity so great. Then, and not till then,
was I fully convinced what prodigal wasters of precious time such things were.
And, through grace, I have abhorred them all ever since. And to the glory of
God be it spoken; for it is only from his sovereign wonderful goodness to me.

I am indeed now astonished when I think how I myself, or any other christian,
who has once tasted one moment's sweet communion with God, can have any relish
for such vanities as singing and dancing, etc. O, how much greater is the
pleasure which is to be enjoyed in the exercise of religious duties, than any
such thing can afford! Not only so; but I am amazed to think how I could
possibly want such things to pass away time: For I now find the precious
moments fly so fast, and my work so great, that I am often hard beset to know
how to spend my time as God requires, between the immediate exercises of
religion, public, private and secret, and the calling, in which God has placed
me. I know the same God, who has bid me hear, and pray, and search the
scriptures, has bid me work; and both in their place is my duty. And I find it
very difficult to yield a uniform obedience; to give to God, what he requires
for himself, and to the world, what is required as a duty, and no more. Besides
all this, my heart is so perverse, that I have enough to do to watch against
pride, sloth, wanderings, formality, hypocrisy, and the temptations of Satan,
who is always ready to disquiet me. All these, I find, are employment enough to
take up all my time, without those former recreations. If I am cheerful, a song
of Zion is more sweet and refreshing to me, that all the vain songs in the
world ever were, or can be. And sure I am, whatever any may plead, that there
is a time for all things, God never yet allowed time for sin.

O Lord, humble me for the bad example I have set, since I called myself a
Christian; and forbid that any should ever again be able to plead my example
for vanity. And oh, that all who name the name of Christ, may be enabled to
depart from iniquity, and abstain from all appearance of evil! And if we
pretend to be in Christ, oh that we may walk even as he walked! For I am
persuaded, that the careless walk of professing christians, lulls more
consciences asleep, when the devil, and flesh and blood set in to plead their
example, than the vices of all the world besides, who make no profession. And
oh, what a dreadful thing for christians to be the means of ruining precious
and immortal souls, and diminishing that kingdom and interest, which they
should be forever engaged to promote; and promote his kingdom and interest,
against which they should always proclaim open war! Oh dreadful indeed! that
Christ should be so wounded in the house of his friends! Lord, make me yet more
circumspect, for Jesus' sake. -- But to proceed --

I still continued in very dark and melancholy circumstances, between hope and
fear, afraid to conclude one way or the other. And having no opportunity to
speak with Mr. Tennent again, I wrote to him as well as I could, briefly
relating what I had experienced, and begged of him to try it by scripture
rules, and judge of it accordingly, and give me his opinion; that I might not
sin by denying the grace of God, if I had it; nor speak peace to my soul, if
God did not. To which he returned the following answer.

"MY DEAR FRIEND,
"I LIKE your experiences well. They seem to me to be scriptural and
encouraging; and I think you may humbly take comfort from them, and give God
the glory of his pure grace. They who have been so humbled and distressed for
sin, as to be divorced from the governing love and practice of it; and have
been by the Spirit of God made willing to embrace the Redeemer deliberately,
unreservedly, and resolutely, upon his own terms, have a sure interest in the
great salvation. John i.12. To as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. And whatever
involuntary defects they are guilty of, they shall not break the everlasting
covenant between God and their souls. Though they have played the harlot with
many lovers; yet they may return to their first husband. Though God may hide
his face for a little moment, yet with everlasting loving kindness will he
return. Though they be sometimes easily beset with sin; yet he, who was the
author, will be the finisher of their faith. I add no more but love, and
remain, your real friend,

March 22, 1741. G. T."


I have transcribed this letter, that, if Providence should ever cast these
lines into the hands of any in like circumstances, it may, if the Lord will,
have the same happy effect on them, as, by the blessing of God, it had on me;
which was this -- The letter itself was exceeding sweet and refreshing; but the
precious texts of scripture, which were quoted, were so powerfully set home on
my mind, that they scattered all my clouds immediately, and I was as one
restored from the grave. Then with life and courage I again renewed my written
covenant engagements with God, and became more lively and zealous for God than
ever. O the amazing goodness of God to me! I have heard of some christians who
never recover such backslidings all their days. But I have not since lost my
evidences of grace. Though I have been sometimes under desertion, yet I could
frequently say, "Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the light of my
countenance, and my God."

After I was thus revived, my longings to be made useful in the world returned,
and I earnestly pleaded with God that he would not suffer me to live any longer
an unprofitable servant; but would point out some way, in which I might be
useful: And that I might now be as exemplary for piety, as I had been for
folly. And it pleased God so to order it, that I had room to hope my petitions
were both heard, and in a measure answered. For soon after this a number of
young women, who were awakened to a concern for their souls, came to me, and
desired my advice and assistance, and proposed to join in a society, provided I
would take the care of them. To which, I trust with a sense of my own
unworthiness, I joyfully consented. And much sweetness we enjoyed in these
meetings. (And blessed be God, they are yet kept up.)

About this time it pleased God to lay his afflicting hand upon me by the
removal of my only brother by death. As to the loss of his person, I found I
could quietly submit, and say, "The Lord gave, and he has taken away, and
blessed be the name of the Lord." But I had a sinful curiosity to know how it
was with his precious soul: And being filled with fear about it, I was very
much dejected. But I knew my curiosity was sinful. And I pleaded earnestly with
God, that he would not suffer me to attempt to pry into the secrets of his
will; but give me a quiet submission. I continued wrestling with God for
resignation to his will, till about two o'clock in the morning, and then I went
to bed, still begging that I might never spend another day unresigned. And just
about break of day I awaked with the following words strongly impressed on my
mind, "Secret things belong unto God, but those which are revealed belong unto
us. The will of God is done, the will of God is done." These words quieted me,
so that I arose as cheerful, composed and thankful, as if I had met with no
affliction at all, and I think more so; and never did from that hour, nor could
mourn as I had done. This I considered as a remarkable answer to prayer.

After this my business failed, and I found I could not keep my room where I
lived; and which way to turn, I knew not. But was persuaded God would point out
some way for me. I had several offers to go into the country to keep school in
credible families, where I had a prospect of wanting for nothing of the
necessaries of this life. But I could not bear the thought of going from the
means of grace, and other precious privileges, which I then enjoyed. And the
society of young women often entreated me not to leave them. I had double ties
every way, and knew not what to do. But I was not distressed, believing God
would provide for me. Accordingly he did so; though by an afflictive
dispensation. It pleased him to remove a dear friend by death, with whom I was
very intimate. Her husband was a very sober good sort of a man, and wanted me
to keep his shop for my board, and wash for myself. This offer suited me very
well; for hereby I was not likely to be deprived of any of my religious
privileges. So on the first day of July, I went there to live, and indeed had
much comfort. Dear Mr. Clap met with the society at his house twice every week,
which I constantly attended; and religion seemed to be the chief business of my
life. Had much comfort in all the duties of religion, public, private, and
secret: And had as much time to spend in them as I could desire.

About this time I had the offer of a second marriage, with one who appeared to
be a real christian (and I could not think of being unequally yoked with one
who was not such.) I took the matter into serious consideration. I foresaw
there were difficulties which I must unavoidably encounter; and many duties
would be incumbent on me, to which I had been a stranger: Particularly, in my
being a mother in law to three sons, which my proposed husband had by a first
wife. But after weighing all circumstances, as well as I could, in my mind, and
earnest prayer* which God enabled me to continue in for some ^e. I concluded it
was the will of God, that I should accept of the offer, and accordingly was
married to Mr. Henry Osborn, on the fifth day of May, 1742.

The next July after I was married, I went with an intimate friend, to Little
Compton, on purpose to join in a fast which was appointed there to implore the
outpouring of the Spirit of God on that place; which was attended with much
solemnity. The next day, which was the 29th day of the month, my friend and I
were riding to a private religious meeting, and my horse stumbled and threw me
over his head. My stomach came first to the ground; and yet was comparatively
but little hurt; and close by the spot where my head came was a large rock,
which must, in all probability, have ended my days, if I had fallen upon it.
This gave me a sense of the goodness of God in preserving me. I got safe to the
house to which I proposed to go. And in the evening Mr. Tylar preached a
sermon, which greatly affected the people, who were under concern before: But
they with much difficulty kept silence, till the sermon and prayer were ended;
and then cried out in vehement agonies, lamenting their lost condition without
a Savior, and pleading with God to have mercy on them, and give them an
interest in Christ. At this time I had an awful sense of the state of the
damned, who were crying out under their torments; but past remedy.

Then a number of young women with myself withdrew into a chamber, in order to
form a religious society. Where we spent some time in praying, reading,
conversing and singing. At the same time a company of young men were engaged in
another room in the same exercises. We happened to sing in both rooms at the
same time. The melody was very sweet, and gave me lively apprehensions of the
glorious employment, and blessed enjoyment of the saints in the New Jerusalem;
and filled my soul with adoring thoughts of God.

But in my return to the place where I lodged, it being late in the night, we
were overtaken in the most awful storm of thunder and lightning that I ever
heard or saw. During the terrible claps of thunder my horse stood trembling;
and as soon as they ceased, ran with full speed. I was then filled with a
greater sense of the awfulness and majesty of a God, than I had ever
experienced before; and more realizing thoughts of the solemnity of the last
day. I did not imagine that was the time; but thought it a great resemblance of
it. And I expected every moment to be called to appear before my Judge, either
by the thunder and lightning, or a fall from my horse. This put me upon
examining myself, to see where the foundation of my hope was laid; and whether
I had real grace, and a sure interest in Christ; that he might then be my
advocate. I earnestly pleaded that this might be my very case. Upon strict
search, I found such evidences as kept me from all fears of hell. Though I did
not then feel the manifestations of the love of God, as at some other times;
yet I found Christ was my only refuge. But just after the last hard clap of
thunder, my horse turning suddenly round a corner, threw me off backward. My
right temple came first to the ground. As I fell, I committed my spirit into
the hands of my Savior, expecting death: But was wonderfully preserved; so that
I was but little hurt. Thus God showed me, in this day and night of large
experience, what he could do with me, in a way of judgment; and what for me, in
a way of mercy, in preserving me, when in imminent danger of death. Lord, for
thine own name's sake, write a law of gratitude in my heart for this, with all
my other mercies. O Lord, what am I, the chief of sinners, that thou art thus
mindful of me!

Soon after this, we fell into disagreeable and difficult worldly
circumstances, with respect to living and paying the debts we owed. My greatest
concern was with respect to the latter, lest we should not be able to do
justice, and so wrong our creditors, and bring dishonor on God, and our
profession. Under this pressure and distress, I was relieved and supported by
the following words of Scripture, "Let your conversation be without
covetousness; and ^e content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." I lived cheerfully, upon this
promise, for a considerable time. And God ordered things so that our creditors
were paid to their satisfaction.

I have often thought God has so ordered it throughout my days hitherto, that I
should be in an afflicted, low condition, as to worldly circumstances, and
inclined the hearts of others to relieve me in all my distresses, on purpose to
suppress that pride of my nature, which doubtless would have been acted out
greatly to his dishonor, had I enjoyed hea^h, and had prosperity, so as to live
independent of others. I will therefore think it best for me; for the
tenderness of my friends to me, has always had a tendency to humble me greatly,
and cause me to admire the goodness of God to me, that while others were daily
complaining, that the rich have many friends; but the poor is despised by his
neighbor, I could never say I had not as much love and respect showed me, as if
I possessed great riches, and that by the rich, as well as the poor. So that,
on the account of my poverty, I never was despised. Mrs Osborn appears to have
possessed from her youth, a high taste for a genteel independent way of living:
And consequently a proportionable aversion to that poverty and dependence which
would reduce her to the lower walks of life. God was pleased to order things so
in his providence respecting her, as most effectually to cross and mortify this
strong propensity; which was the occasion of much pa^n, hard str^ggles and sore
conflicts, until she was brought to a settled and abiding submission, and
constant acquiescence in the will of God, in ordering and fixing her outward
circumstances; in consequence of which she enjoyed great and constant calmness
and serenity of mind the last twenty years of her life, when she was brought to
such poverty as to have nothing of her own on which she could live, and was
wholly dependent on others for daily support; and yet wanted nothing, in a
happy contentment with her lot, and such things as she had; giving thanks to
God for his constant and wonderful goodness to her; and really, in the highest
and best sense, possessing all things.


AND now I have, according to my desire, committed some of the many thousands
of my experiences to writing. And I will give my reasons for doing it. The
first motive, as I mentioned in the introduction, was, that I might be excited
to praise and glorify that God who has wrought such wonders for me. And through
the influence of his blessed Spirit, moving me thereto, it has had this effect,
in some measure, throughout the time of my writing it. The Lord grant I may
continue so all my days; and then my first great end will be answered. Secondly,

I have always reaped much benefit myself, by reading the lives and experiences
of others. Sometimes they have been blessed to convince me of sin -- Sometimes,
to scatter doubts -- And sometimes to raise my affections into a flame. When
expressions have been warm, they have put me upon imitating them as well as I
could, by breathing out my soul in like manner. And though I fall ever so short
of the excellencies with which others have been endowed; yet I know all things
are possible with God. He can bless a word from the weakest, meanest, and
unworthiest of all creatures, even me. If a word in these lines ever prove
useful to one soul, after my decease, it will be ten thousand times more than I
deserve from the hands of a bountiful God: To him alone be all the glory. It is
his glory, I trust, through rich grace, at which I sincerely aim. And if it
does not consist with that, to have these lines seen by any, either before or
after my decease, I heartily desire, so far as I can possibly fathom that
unfathomable deep, my own deceitful heart, and know it, that they may be all
buried in oblivion. Surely, I had rather my name, and all belonging to me,
should be forgotten among men, than remembered to the dishonor of my God. I am
an ignorant short-fighted creature: But God knows what will be for the best. To
him I commit it, praying that, in his all wise providence, it may be disposed
of as he sees meet.

N. B. Finished writing this, Dec. 18, 1743, in the 30th year of my age.

PART II. Containing a GENERAL ACCOUNT of her LIFE*
THE parents of Mrs. Osborn were never in affluent worldly circumstances; and
had little or nothing to give to her when she married: And perhaps did not give
her all the assistance which they were able to do, as they were not pleased
with her marrying to the person whom she chose. He was young, and used the sea,
and had nothing beforehand, and died in the second voyage after he was married,
and she was left a poor widow with one young child before she was twenty years
old. She continued a widow more than eight years. In which time she did no more
than just support herself and son, by her industry, in keeping a small school
part of the time; which business she was, at length, obliged to relinquish, by
sickness, in which she needed and had the assistance of some of her kind
friends. Thus she continued a poor widow, till she married the seccond time, in
the twenty ninth year of her age.

Her second husband was in some trade and business when she married him; but
soon appeared to owe to his creditors more than he was able to pay. They gave
up all they had and their creditors were paid, so that they were all made easy,
and gave them a discharge. From that time he did but little or no business, by
reason of bodily disorders, and other infirmities. At the same time he had
children who were poor, and wanted assistance. In these circumstances, Mrs.
Osborn began to keep school again in May, 1744. In which business she continued
about thirty years, till her eyesight and bodily strength failed, so that she
was obliged to give it up. She was, during this whole time, attended with
bodily weakness, pains and infirmities; her constitution being greatly injured
by taking mercury in an improper manner and degree, which was prescribed by her
physician when afflicted with the distressing disorder, which she mentions in
the account she has given of her life, the weakening and painful effects of
which attended her to the day of her death. Under these disorders, which were
at times very distressing, she persevered in her business, which in her
circumstances required a diligence, circumspection and resolution, which have
been equalled by few or none, until she lost her sight and strength, to such a
degree as obliged her to desist.

For this space of about thirty years she presided in a school, which was most
of the time so large that she was obliged to employ assistants. The whole
number of children in her school amounted sometimes to seventy or more, some of
whom, at times eight or ten, she boarded.

But, having a considerable family of her own to maintain, and other dependents
which she thought it her duty to help, and the price for schooling and boarding
being low, she, through this whole time, was not able to lay up any thing; but
was reduced to great straits and difficulties; and at the end of the year she
frequently found herself in the rear, rather than to have gained any overplus
or stock for the next; this kept her in a constant state of peculiar trial, and
temptation to worldly solicitude and anxiety, which required an uncommon degree
of faith and piety to surmount. And sometimes, under the darkest appearances,
her faith would so far fail that she would sink into gloom and dejection,
especially in the former part of this time. But she evidently made advances in
her faith and cheerful resignation to the divine will, and happy contentment
with the allotments of Divine Providence, while her trials and worldly straits,
continued as great as ever: So that she appeared, at length, to have got the
victory over the world to an uncommon degree, and to have enjoyed a calm, sweet
resignation and contentment in her worldly circumstances, which was the source
of high religious enjoyment, in the constant and strong exercise of that piety,
by which she enjoyed God as her only and eternal portion. This appears from her
diary; and was especially manifest to her intimate friends, after she was
obliged to give up all business, and was wholly dependent on her friends for
support; of which a more particular account may be given, before these memoirs
are finished.

Mrs. Osborn began to keep school the second time, as has been observed, in the
month of May, 1744, in the thirty first year of her age. With respect to which
some things are noted in her diary, which may be properly transcribed here.

" Saturday April 28, 1744. -- This day I am determined, if the Lord will, to
enter again into the calling of keeping school. Will the Lord in mercy bless my
endeavors, and prosper the work of my hands, and overrule this for his own
glory, by making me instrumental in promoting the good of souls. O Lord, if
thou will again employ me, and make me faithful, my tongue shall sing aloud of
thy righteousness. Oh, preserve me from making dependence on any thing I can
do, either for soul or body: But if it may consist with thy will, O bless me in
this lawful undertaking. But above all, O Lord, go on to resign me to thy will.
Not mine, but thine be done. Lord, I desire to leave it with thee. O undertake
for me, and deal graciously with me, for thine own sake, as thou usest to do to
those who love thy name. Help me to eye thee in all thy dispensations of
providence, and be thankful to thee for every temporal mercy. Dear Lord, order
it so that thine own honor may be secured, and thou may be glorified in me,
and it is enough. Once more, I beg to be resigned, and to take all things well
at thy dear hand. Whether thou smile or frown, let me bless and love; for this
is my duty, and what thou justly expectest of me. Lord, thou art worthy of
infinitely more love and praise than I am capable of giving: But oh, accept my
attempts to love and praise, for Jesus' sake alone. In his name I come to thee
for all blessings, spiritual and temporal.

" Friday morning, May 4. -- At this time much straitened in myself to know if
it is my duty to pray evening and morning in my school, if the Lord bless me
with one. I am afraid of ostentation, afraid of doing any thing to be seen of
men. I am afraid of neglecting it, on account of what others will say or think,
lest that should be being ashamed of Christ and his ways, in this wicked
generation; and yet, I am afraid of bringing religion into contempt. O Lord,
direct me to do, in this case, as will most consist with thy glory. For I
beseech thee, dear Lord, that thou will not suffer me to enter into this
calling, except thou will be with me, and bless me in it. Oh, make me
instrumental of the good of their souls committed to my charge, as well as
faithful to their parents in instructing them. And if it be thy will that I
pray with them, as well as for them, oh strengthen me and encourage my heart.
Lord, pour out on me a spirit of prayer and supplication, that I may ask for
things agreeable to thy blessed will. O Lord, I leave this case with thee. I
beg thou will direct me, and suffer nothing but pure aims at thy glory, and the
good of souls, to be the governing principle in me. Lord, I am afraid of the
reasonings of my own deceitful heart. It easily imposes upon, and deceives me.
But, blessed be thy name, it cannot deceive thee. O, do thou search it and try
it, and discover to me more of its vileness, that I may never be a fool,
trusting to it. Lord, it is thine: Oh mould it into thine own likeness, fill it
with thy grace, and possess it forever.

" Thursday May 10. -- I desire to record it with thankfulness, that God in his
providence gave me an opportunity last evening to advise with my dear aged
pastor (Mr. Clap) about praying with my scholars. He rejoiced much in the
proposal; and advised me, by all means to proceed, and let nothing discourage
me, and fear no scoffs; for it was God's cause, and he who put it into my heart
to do it, would take care of his own glory. He likewise reminded me how highly
Christ resented it, when his own disciples would have deprived little children
of privileges. He advised me to be brief and plain, and often to mention those
words in Matthew. vi. "Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock,
and it shall be opened unto you." And those in Prove. "I love them that love me,
and those that seek me early shall find me." And to make confession of sin, and
plead for pardon for Christ's sake. -- Endeavor to follow him in plainness, so
that the little ones might understand what I meant, etc.

"As I think I never saw him more joyful, and pleased with me, so I know not
when I have come away more comforted: For my scruples all vanished. And now, by
assisting grace, I determine to proceed, as God shall enable me. Blessed be
God, that I enjoy so great a privilege as my dear pastor, who has thus
encouraged my faith, obedience and joy; and helped me in my strait. And now, O
my God, I am convinced it is my duty to pray with my dear children, I fly to
thee again for assisting grace. Lord, without that it will be only a piece of
formality, and will never prove serviceable to any. I beseech thee, O Lord,
pour out on me a spirit of prayer, and fill me with bowels of compassion to
poor little ones."

Mrs. Osborn not only prayed daily with the children in her school; but was
constant and careful to instruct them in the principles of religion, and in
their duty to God and man; and at certain times, and on particular occasions,
seriously addressed them on the concerns of their souls, urging their attention
to the Bible, to Jesus Christ, and the way of salvation by him; and to give
themselves up to him, to fear and serve him, etc. Her discourses with them on
these subjects frequently appeared to make impressions on their minds, and
greatly to affect them: And most of the many hundreds who were instructed in
her school, retained a love and esteem for her in the future part of their
life, and numbers of them, how many cannot be now known, have never lost the
serious impressions, which they received by her instruction and admonitions;
but they have issued in their saving conversion to God. And we may reasonably
consider some of them now in heaven with her, as her glory, and joining with
her in mutual joy.

She composed and committed to writing a number of particular directions and
rules for the children in her school, pointing out the decent and proper manner
of their behavior toward her, and each other in school, and when going away
and returning; at home and abroad; when in the house and by the way; and their
manner of speech and behavior toward all with whom they had any connection and
concern; which rules were to be often read in school. These rules discovered
her good judgment and taste, respecting the propriety and decency of conduct of
children in all situations, and toward superiors, equals and inferiors, in age
and other circumstances. They might be very useful to teachers of schools and
to their pupils, were they transcribed; and were they not too lengthy to be
inserted here.

A FEW months after Mrs. Osborn began to keep school the second time, her only
son, Samuel Wheaten, died, being near twelve years old, who was an apprentice
in the country above twenty miles from Newport, and was a promising youth. She
has recorded some of her exercises under this trial, part of which will be here
inserted.

" Friday morning, September 22, 1744. -- On Thursday afternoon, the sixth day
of this month, I had the sorrowful news that my only son was sick unto death.
God in his providence provided presently for me -- My dear Susa Anthony to keep
my house -- A horse for my husband and myself to ride, and all other things
comfortable. And on my way God gave me such a sense of his goodness to me in a
thousand instances, that instead of sinking under my sorrow, my mind was
employed in attention to, and blessing God for my mercies. Sometimes, that he
was not snatched from me in a moment, by some awful accident -- That he was not
at so great a distance, but I might be allowed to go to him, with hopes of
finding him yet alive* And those precious promises which in the morning had
supported me, still continued as a refreshing cordial; even these. "Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. This poor man cried, and the
Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his troubles."

"On Friday morning we got to Rehoboth^ where I found my son much swelled with
a dropsy, and pined to a mere skeleton with the jaundice, scurvy and
consumption, all combining. He rattled in his throat, like a dying person,
laboring for every breath. He was given over by the doctors and all friends,
who lamented him, and did the best for him in their power, as to the body. But
alas! my great concern was for that precious jewel, his immortal soul. I
endeavored to improve every opportunity to discourse with him, and read to him
such portions of scripture as I thought suitable, with passages out of Mr.
Allen's Alarm, etc. And I was enabled to pray all the day, by ejaculatory
breathings, and sometimes to plead and wrestle with God on his behalf: Though
alas! God was pleased to hide his dealings with him altogether. For I could
discern no evidence of a work of grace wrought on his soul* for which I did
plead from day to day. I did not so much as once, in all his sickness, pray for
his life; but for some evidence that his soul might live. And for want of this,
I sometimes seemed to be crushed down, having a sense of his doleful case, if
not reconciled to God. On Thursday, Sept. 13, the day before he died, I was
just ready to give up, and sit down discouraged. My heart even almost died with
fear of what would become of him. But just in this juncture, God in his
providence ordered it so that I received a letter from my dear S^sa, which was
a cordial to my drooping spirits.

"In his dying moments I had an awful sense of his deplorable condition, if his
naked soul should launch into a boundless eternity, without a God to go to. I
had also a view and sense of his and my utter inability to help ourselves, and
utter unworthiness that God should help us. And with the woman of Canaan, I
cried out, Truth Lord, I am as unworthy as a dog! But I pleaded for the crumbs
that fell, one of which would be sufficient for me and mine. I had a clear
discovery of the fullness and sufficiency of Christ to make satisfaction. I
pleaded that he would have mercy, as on the theif on the cross, then at the
eleventh hour; apply but one drop of his precious blood, and it was enough.
Thus I was enabled to fill my mouth with arguments, and in bitter agony of soul
I wrestled with God for mercy for him. Surely the pangs I then endured for his
foul far exceeded those that brought him into the world. But as soon as the
soul had taken its flight, I was eased of my burden. I immediately cast myself,
and my burden too, on God. I adored him as a sovereign God, and blessed his
name; for he had given, and it was he who had taken. Surely he was better to me
than ten sons.

"I then arose from my dead child, and was quieted, for the will of God was
done, and my work was done, as it respected my child. And God was pleased to
give such evidence of his love, that my mouth was filled with praises. But when
I looked on the young people who stood round lamenting him, I felt bowels of
compassion for them, and besought them to take warning, and make their speedy
flight to the blessed Jesus, before sickness and death overtook them.

"While friends were putting on his grave clothes, I went out into the field
and walked, where, with more secrecy and freedom, I could breathe out my soul
to God. And the sweetness of that season I cannot express. God discovered
himself to be my God, my covenant God, my Father, my Friend, my only portion
and happiness, my sovereign, my all in all, my infinite fountain of all
fullness. And these were some of the breathings of my soul after him. "Lord, I
adore thee as my all. I rejoice in thee as my only portion. Lord, if I have
thee, I have enough. Though all the streams were cut off; yet the fountain
remains; I cannot be poor. Whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is none on
earth I desire besides thee. Though my flesh and my heart fail; yet God is the
strength of my heart and my portion forever. Blessed God, though death separate
from all things here below, it cannot separate between thee and me." O, here I
rejoiced again, chose my God again, and again renewed the dedication of myself
to him, my whole soul and body, with all I have, am, or can do. O, his word
comforted, his rod comforted me. I saw no frown in it: No, but the kind
chastisement of my indulgent Father. This portion of scripture was very sweet,
"If ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
bastards, and not sons. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth." Therefore I
cried out, "I know, O Lord, thy judgments are right, and in very faithfulness
thou have afflicted me."

"But I must cease. -- For such blessed seasons are better felt than expressed.
I continued so composed and comfortable, that I feared those who knew not the
cause would think me void of natural affection; till my taking my last farewell
at his funeral. And then I found the bonds of natural affection very strong;
and I wept much. But as I followed to the grave, I pleaded thus with God,
"Lord, I adore thee still as my sovereign. I do not repine at thy hand. But,
dear Lord, pity me, and suffer me to weep under the smart of thy rod; it is my
only son." Then I thought on Psalm ciii. "As a father pitieth his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him." This comforted me. But as I inquired
again, if my tears were not sinful, and the effect of an unresigned will, which
I dreaded most of all, I was comforted again by reflecting, that when Martha
and Mary wept for their brother Lazarus, the blessed Jesus was not angry, but
wept with them. O, then I again adored a sympathising Savior, a glorious high
priest, who was sensibly touched with the feeling of my infirmities. These and
such like were the exercises of my mind, while following and laying my dust
into the grave. And ever since I have been kept composed and cheerful.

"The Lord in mercy grant that I may more and more glorify him in this
affliction. O that my sins may be more mortified. Lord, grant I may come out of
this furnace as gold purified and fitted for my master's use. If I have behaved
in any measure as becomes a child of God, and any resignation has appeared in
me, Lord, it is all owing to the riches of thy glorious and special grace: For
had not thou by that compelled me to act otherwise, I should have flew in thy
face, murmured, fretted and repined at thee; cast away all my other comforts
and mercies, and said I had none left, because thou had taken one from me.
Lord, these, and more than these, would have been the effects of my perverse
nature. Therefore, not unto me, not unto me; but to thy glorious name be all
the glory forever and ever. Amen."

IN the year 1741, a religious, female society was formed under the care of
Mrs. Osborn, they having chosen her to be their head. Of which she makes
mention in her account of her own life, which has been transcribed, page 49.
This society met for some time twice every week, viz. on Tuesday and Friday
evenings. Afterward they agreed to meet but once a week, on the afternoon of
Wednesday or Thursday. Mrs. Osborn was continued and considered the head of
this society from that time to her decease, which was above fifty years; and it
still subsists, and there are above thirty members of it who are now living. It
has consisted of a much greater number of members. About thirty years ago,
above sixty persons were members of it. But the war, and other evils which have
since that time taken place, have diminished it.

This society have met constantly once every week, during this whole time of
above half a century, excepting a few interruptions, by some extraordinary
occurrences. They also have observed four whole quarterly days in every year,
as days of fasting and prayer, confessing their sins, and seeking God for
spiritual blessings on themselves, on the church of Christ, and on all nations.
They also have been wont to spend the afternoon of every first Thursday of each
month in prayer together; and the afternoon of every Saturday before the
monthly administration of the Lord's Supper. They have a box, which stands in
the room where they meet, into which money is put by each one, as she is able
and inclined. And at the end of the year, or any other time, when they think
proper, the box is by their consent opened, and the money contained in it
counted, and generally given for the support of the gospel.

They did agree upon a number of articles and rules, which were committed to
writing, to be observed by the society and by each individual, and to be signed
by every member, and by every one who should afterward be admitted. The
substance of these is as follows:

At the weekly meeting of the society, when the appointed hour arrives, and a
number are convened, the exercise shall begin by reading in some profitable
book, till all have come in who are expected. Then a prayer shall be made by
one of the members; and after that, a chapter in the Bible shall be read, and
religious conversation be attended to, as time shall allow. The meeting to be
concluded by another prayer. Four quarterly days in the year, in January,
April, July and October, beginning on the first day of every January, to be
observed as days of solemn fasting and prayer. We promise not to ridicule or
divulge the supposed or apparent infirmities, of any fellow member; but to keep
secret all things relating to the society, the discovery of which might tend to
do hurt to the society or any individual. We resolve to be charitably watchful
over each other, to advise, caution and admonish, where we judge there is
occasion, and that i^ may be useful. And we promise not to resent; but kindly
and thankfully receive such friendly advice or reproof from any one of our
members. We will endeavor that our discourse while together shall be on the
serious and important subjects of religion: And when separate, that our speech
and behavior shall be such as become christians, that we may be holy in all
conversation.

If any member commit any scandalous sin, or walk unruly, and after proper
reproof continue manifestly impenitent, she shall be excluded from us, until
she give evidence of her repentance. Each one shall pay her proportion to
defray the necessary expenses for wood, or any thing else, unless excused by
the society.

When any person shall manifest to any one of us a desire to join the society,
it shall be mentioned in one of our meetings, that all may have opportunity,
who desire it, to satisfy themselves, respecting the character and conversation
of the person offering to join. And if at the meeting on the next week, there
be no objection to her being admitted, she may apply to the head of the
society, who will read our articles to her, and if she is willing, and do sign
them, she shall be considered as a member of the society, regularly admitted.

As to any other matters, which we shall hereafter find conducive to the
benefit and good regulation of our society, we engage to leave to the
discretion and decision of a major part of us, to whose determination we
promise quietly to agree and submit.

This society has evidently been of great advantage to many if not all the
members of it, to the church and congregation to which most of the members have
belonged, and to the interest of religion in general, especially in Newport, by
their prayers, and apparent sincerity and engagedness in religion, and
exemplary conduct.

Mrs. Osborn was by unanimous consent the head of this society above fifty
years, as has been observed, even from the first institution of it, to the day
of her death; and a great part of the time their meetings were attended at her
house. And she was distinguished in her usefulness in this station and
capacity, by her prayers, her conversation, advice, judgment, prudence and
example; by which she was a principal medium of the long and happy existence
and union of the society. Her influence apparently reached to every member, and
her steady, prudent zeal and activity, and her amiable character, were very
much the means of their continuance and edification. The society continued to
meet in the room in which she lived, till her bodily infirmities were so
increased that she was no longer able to sustain their company, and the
exercises of the meeting. They then withdrew into another room in her house,
where she was tenderly remembered in their prayers; and she was present in
spirit with them, and partook largely with them in their exercises and
enjoyments.

MRS. OSBORN was esteemed as an eminently pious, exemplary christian, by all
who knew her. And even the irreligious and profane had a degree of veneration
for her, as a remarkably good woman. Few or none have obtained this character
more universally than she did, among all sorts of people, who knew her or heard
of her: And not many women had a more numerous acquaintance, or more extensive
fame. Many educated in her school were afterward settled in distant parts, and
spoke in favor of her character and school to their friends and acquaintance.
And as she had a great respect for the ministers of the gospel, she
corresponded with some of them; and many others visited her, agreeable to her
inclination and desire, when they came to Newport, as did many other religious
persons. By this, as well as what has been before mentioned, her name and
character was spread abroad, as few or none who visited her, went away
unimpressed in her favor, as amiable in her conversation and behavior, and
eminently pious and benevolent. In conversation she appeared remarkably mild,
pleasant and cheerful, and discovered a modest, meek, humble, tender and
benevolent mind, impressed with the serious, important and pleasing truths and
duties of Christianity. The law of kindness was in her tongue to an uncommon
degree. She had a strong, habitual aversion to any thing like aspersing the
character of others, being careful to speak evil of none; and when occasion
offered, was disposed to say all that could be said with truth in favor of the
worst. She was often greatly grieved and rendered very uncomfortable, in
companies where slander and detraction took place, and would endeavor, when
there was opportunity, to divert the conversation from topics so disagreeable
to her. This part of her character, of which the above is an imperfect sketch,
rendered her agreeable, and recommended her to the esteem and affection of all
religious persons who were acquainted with her, or heard a true report of her.
And this procured to her the general approbation of all, of every denomination
and character, as an eminently good woman.

IN the years 1766, 1767, there was an uncommon attention to religion, which
turned the thoughts of many to Mrs. Osborn. They repaired to her as a known
pious, benevolent christian, to whom they could have easy access, that they
might enjoy her counsel and prayers. This was the occasion of numbers resorting
to her house. When she saw this, and that the number increased, she was at a
great loss what to do. She trembled with fear that if she encouraged their
meeting at her house, it would be going beyond her sphere, offend some of her
christian friends, and give occasion to some not friendly to religion, to speak
evil of her and of religion, and so do much more hurt than good. On the other
hand, she was afraid to discourage them, and refuse to let them come to her and
meet at her house, when under apparent concern about their souls, lest, by
this, their attention and concern should abate and cease. She advised with her
christian friends, and some ministers; and upon their advising her to encourage
them and attend to them, she granted them liberty to come, and appointed
particular times for their coming. The poor Blacks appeared more generally
concerned and engaged, than others. They agreed to meet at Mrs. Osborn's on the
evening of the Sabbath. She admitted them, on condition that they should behave
orderly in coming and retiring, and always break up seasonably, and that those
who were not free should not come without the consent of their masters, and
that they should not make any acknowledgment to her by attempting any
compensation by presents, or any other way; declaring that she would not
receive any thing of this kind from them. On these conditions they convened in
great numbers, commonly to the amount of sixty or eighty, and some times more.
Mrs. Osborn, finding their attention was so much to her, was greatly cautious,
fearing to go beyond her line, as a woman, in endeavoring to promote their
instruction and religious impressions for the good of their souls. She used to
select passages of scripture, which she thought would be most useful to them,
and from other religious books, and read them to them: And when she had
opportunity, she would invite some christian man to pray with them. She took
opportunity to converse with individuals, and some times would give a word of
advice to them all. And where she could, she obtained some minister to preach
to them, and converse with them; the pastor of the church, to which she
belonged, not being able to attend.

These meetings continued a year or more, and were the means of the apparent
reformation of many, and of the hopeful conversion of a number. Among whom were
two in particular, who were slaves, but some years after joined to buy a ticket
in a lottery, and drew a prize, by which they both obtained their liberty.
Their names were BRISTOL YAMMA, and JOHN QUAMINE. As they were men of good
natural abilities, and appeared truly pious, and retained the knowledge of the
language of the nation from whence they were taken on the gold coast, it was
thought proper to attempt to fit them to be missionaries, to endeavor to spread
the gospel among the heathen Africans, their brethren, for which they appeared
greatly desirous. To promote this design a considerable collection of money was
made in New England. And the Society in Scotland for propagating christian
knowledge, sent money over, which was laid out on them to fit them for the
proposed mission. But when they were judged to be fit to enter on the mission,
the war between Great Britain and America came on, which put a stop to the
design. And before the war was over the latter died; and the former not long
after fell into an ill state of health, and died also. John Quamine was brought
from Africa when he was a boy. He said his father was one of the chief men at
Anamabo, and that he sent him by the captain of a Guineaman to America, to be
put to school and instructed in the learning of this country; which the captain
engaged to do: But, contrary to his promises, he sold him a slave for life.
After his freedom was obtained, and he was preparing to go to Africa, a letter
was written to a black missionary at Cape Coast Castle, informing him of the
proposal of sending him with his companion missionaries to Africa: And relating
the substance of the story which John Quamine told of his father, and the
reason of his being sent to America; and desiring him to make inquity
respecting the fact, and inform what he should learn concerning it. The
following is an extract of his answer.

"CAPE COAST CASTLE, AUGUST 30, 1773.
-- "It is with great pleasure and satisfaction I acquaint you, that my
inquiries after the friends and relations of that gentleman have not been
fruitless. The minute account which he has given you of his family and kindred
is just: For by inquiring, have found his father's name to be the same as
mentioned in your letter; who has been dead many years. His mother's name
answers your description; who is still alive; and whom I have had the pleasure
of seeing. But the bowels of maternal affection, in truth do I declare, appear
to yearn and greatly agitate her, with tears of joy, like that of Jacob's, when
he heard that his beloved son Joseph was yet alive. The joy it kindled on the
occasion, the expectation of seeing once more the fruit of her loins, before
she, with her gray hairs go to the grave, fills her with ecstasies resembling
Jacob's, who in raptures breaks forth, and says, it is enough! My son is yet
alive! I hope, through God's blessing to see him before I die. His uncle's name
^s the same which you me^ion. In short, every circumstance agrees with the
description given me in your letter. His uncle, or some great personage of his
family, who now possesses his father's estate, desires with importunity that I
would earnestly petition you, for his returning to his nat^e country as soon as
possible; and promises that nothing shall be w^ing conducive to make him, and
all about him happy, and live satisfactorily among his own kindred. The family
unanimously desire me to e^press to you all the thanks they are able to return
for your paternal care and affection expressed toward him."

It may here be added, that the way to this proposed mission yet lies open, and
the importance of it, and the encouragement to it, are as great as ever. All
that is wanted is money, exertion, and missionaries to undertake it. There are
religious blacks to be found who understand the language of the nations in
those parts, who might be improved, if properly encouraged. And if they were
brought to embrace Christianity, and to be civilized, it would put a stop to
the slave trade and render them happy. And it would open a door for a trade
which would be for the temporal interest of both Americans and Africans. As
attention to sending the gospel to the heathen appears to be now spreading and
increasing in America, it is hoped that the eyes of many will be opened, to see
the peculiar obligations they are under to attempt to send the gospel to the
Africans, whom we have injured and abused so greatly, even more than any other
people under heaven; it ^ing the best and the only compensation we can make.





This particular respecting the Blacks will be concluded by inserting here some
of her exercises on this occasion, found in her diary.

" Lord's Day evening, Nov. 23, 1766. -- About eighty six below, and fourteen
above; an hundred, in all, here this night: The Lord command a blessing for
Christ's sake. O for divine influence! O thou dove of heaven, descend. I am
waiting for influence from heaven. Lord, except thou do take the work into
thine own hand, all will come to nothing; the poor impotents will either grow
weary of the means, and turn away from them: Or, if they still lie by the pool,
they will grow worse and worse. None can help them in; nor can any one, of
himself, obtain healing. O, dear Redeemer, come and make them whole, for thine
own honor and glory's sake; not for mine. If they should all turn back and I
should be reproached, What is my name, to thy glory, and their salvation? I
would have no self in pleading that thou will crown my poor labors with
success; but a single eye to thy glory. O that thou will order every step I
take, and guide me by thine eye, and employ me just as thou will, only glorify
thyself, and still serve thyself of me. Here am I, Lord. Use me as thou will;
only preserve thine own honor, and it is enough."

" Monday morning, January 26, 1767. -- It snowed yesterday, and I was not
well; yet in the evening I was more strong and lively; and I trust God did help
me to converse to the edification of the poor, dear souls. O Lord, seal
instruction. Own thy worthless nothing, and the glory shall be, it will be,
thine forever. The house was full, no weather stops them. The Lord bless them!
Lord, teach me what thou will have me to do. Let me be influenced by divine
teaching alone, and not by Satan, or indwelling corruption. I want none of
their influence or teaching. Make me quick to discern what is from thee, and
what is not. And O God, I pray thee, make the path of duty straight and plain
in this matter: And either spirit me to the work, and enable me to do it
judiciously, in such a manner as will stand the (...) or else to lay it aside,
and do nothing at (...) Lord, may I approve myself to thee in all I do in this
matter, and have a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man. I
commit this cause to thee. I would be influenced by thy word. I have chosen it
as my rule to walk by."

Not only Blacks; but numbers of other people met at Mrs. Osborn's in this
time. A number of young men used to meet on the same evening with the blacks in
a different apartment; for prayer, reading and religious conversation. And on
Monday evening a number of young women from nine to twenty years old, often
above forty or fifty, met together at her house, to enjoy her prayers and
instructions. Mrs. Osborn at first was in doubt about the propriety and
expe^iency of praying with them. But after maturely considering the matter, and
seeking direction, she concluded it was her duty, and accordingly practiced it,
and read to them, and gave them that instruction and advice, which she thought
proper and important. And they appeared so attentive, and at times some of them
were so impressed and affected, that she was encouraged to proceed. On Tuesday
evening a large number of boys met in her room for a considerable time to
receive her instruction and blessing. Wednesday evening was devoted to the
stated weekly meeting of the society of women. On Thursday or Saturday, or
both, she catechized the children of her school, when a number of children who
^id not belong to her school often attended to ^eceive instruction from her and
hear her prayers. On Friday evening a number of heads of families used to meet
at her house for prayer and religious conversation; so that every week some
hundreds of persons met at her house for religious purposes. This gave constant
employ to Mrs. Osborn, and called up her attention, and strong and constant
exercises of mind, while she at the same time presided in a large school of
children. Some of her exercises respecting her house being thus crowded with
people for religious purposes, were as follows, taken from her diary:

" Tuesday morning, January 27, 1767. -- O my Lord and my God, appear for my
help now, as thou have appeared for my help heretofore. Fain would I raise a
tribute of humble praise and thanksgiving for thy condescension and grace to me
in the year past; for the Lord himself has vouchsafed to be my protection from
errors and confusions, amidst the throng he has gathered round me. To thee be
all the glory forever. In July last the number had amounted to three hundred
souls. And now the Lord has increased it to five hundred and twenty five, who
have statedly resorted here. And yet no evil has followed, though my fears have
often been alarmed, with respect to Lord's day evenings; yet all is quiet, and
every company more seriously composed and settled in steadily pursuing after
knowledge. Blessed be God, who indulges me with frequent tidings of Blacks and
little ones being more concerned, and getting alone to pray. O (...) the Lord,
in his infinite wisdom, will carry (...) his own glorious work, in his own
gradual way which he has chosen; and confound all the wisdom of the wise. We
have been lotting upon great and extraordinary impressions upon souls here, and
by great and extraordinary means; but God will take his own way, and use what
clay and spittle he pleases to open blind eyes, and cause the walls to fall, by
what rams' horns he pleases. Amen. Let the most despicable worm upon earth be
employed for God, that the glory may evidently be his own."

" Tuesday, June 2, 1767. -- Blessed be God, who gave me opportunity to
converse with forty two young girls last evening. The Lord seal what was said
and read for instruction; and hear my poor cries for converting grace. O have
mercy on these souls! Lord, secure them for thine own: O take the prey from the
mighty. Snatch them as brands out of the burning, I pray thee. Thanks be to God
for the solemnity, assistance and refreshments of the last evening. O help me
still to hope in thy mercy, under all discouragements, thou faithful, merciful
God."

From the year 1770, to the time of the British taking possession of Newport,
the church, both male and female, used to hold their monthly meetings at her
house; as this was peculiarly agreeable to her, and she lived in a convenient
room. And there was a weekly meeting at her house of a number of professors for
prayer; which continued most of the time ^ing the war. Thus her house was
indeed, ^in an eminent sense, A house of prayer.

PART III. EXTRACTS from her DIARY.
Thursday, June 21, 1744.
YESTERDAY very much overcome in God's house, at the solemn ordination of the
Rev. Mr. Helyer. My heart was then filled with joy and praises; and God excited
and enabled me to breathe out my soul in vehement cries to him for all needful
grace, for his servant, and for his church. Rejoiced much to think I was once
more to enjoy the glorious feast, instituted by my dear Redeemer. I longed to
render a tribute of praise, and even to be swallowed up with praises all my
life long, because God had so graciously given me the desire of my heart. But,
alas! how short lived are my praises. All this day, with bodily indisposition
and my own declining heart, I have been as water heated, returning to my former
coldness again. O! it makes eternity glorious, that praises shall never cease.

Sabbath day, June 24. -- This morning, through the goodness of God, to the
satisfaction and comfort of my soul, I was engaged in the work of self
examination, to see how the case stood between God and my soul, and found cause
to bless him, that, by his grace, "I (...) what I am." Some time after that I
was ag^ overcome with a sense of the amazing goodness of God to me, in giving
me such a dear Pastor, and attempted to adore and praise him with all my powers
engaged. This was a sweet season, for my heart was warmed. I went to the house
of God, but was too cool there. In the intermission season I trust I was
serious, but not lively. But this afternoon, blessed be God, I was filled with
joy, grief, love, prayer and praises, God's word being powerfully set home. I
was enlarged, in pleading for grace and strength to be bestowed on my dear
young Pastor; that, though of himself he is insufficient for his great and
difficult work; yet, his sufficiency being of God, he might be made successful.

Sabbath noon, July 15. -- Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. I have been to the table of the Lord, and he brought me into his
banqueting house, and his banner over me was love. I sat under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. My soul said, It is good
for me to be here. I was enabled, with all my powers engaged, to renew my
dedication of myself to God, and rejoice in my choice of him. I was, in a
measure, brought to behold his glory in the perfections of his nature. I was
enabled to wrestle with him for victory over my sins, and to be made more holy.
These seemed to be my chief errands; and as I was pleading that promise, "They
that have clean hands shall grow stronger and stronger," this promise seemed to
be whispered, I will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee by the right hand of
my righteousness; and sin shall not have dominion over thee. From Mrs. Osborn's
manner of expression here, and in a number of other places, some may suspect
that she thought promises were made to her by some particular, immediate
revelation, or divine impulse, by which she was assured that they were then
applied to her, which would be a high degree of enthusiasm. The truth appears
to be this: She had a fixed belief and confidence, that she was a believer in
Jesus Christ, and consequently interested in all the promises contained in the
covenant of grace, and in the whole word of God, whether made to the church
collectively, or to individuals, as the servants of God, or christians.
Therefore, when her mind was quickened and turned to some promise, or any
number of promises in the word of God; and influenced to a strong belief and
affecting sense of the good things contained in them, and of the truth,
reality, and excellence of them, she considered them as made or belonging to
her: And could not THEN doubt of it, as the evidence that she was a real
christian would be clear and irresistible to her own mind, in proportion to her
lively view and sense of Christ, and the good things contained in the promises.
In this way she considered the promises to be applied to her by the Spirit of
God, as he was the author of that spiritual sense and discerning, by which the
promises were brought into her view, and she was led with strong faith and
affection to embrace them. And this every christian has a warrant to do. See
Heb. xiii.5. compared with Josh. i.5.


In time of partaking of the element of bread, my heart seemed to be most
broken for sin: When feeding upon his broken body, I was filled with
astonishment, and made to cry out, "Lord, why me! Why have thou given thyself
for me!" His blood was sweet to me, as it was shed for the remission of sins.
At last I broke out in a rapture, "I found the pearl of greatest price, my
heart does sing for joy." I longed to get still nearer, while I seemed to be
resting and leaning on my beloved. Surely I did find him whom my soul loves. O
astonishing, all conquering grace! O happy earnest of more near and intimate
communion! O what a feast is this! O blessed Savior, for appointing such an
ordinance! O my soul, bless God, for bringing me to partake thereof. Thanks be
to God, for such gracious smiles upon his Church today: That thou have restored
this former privilege. Thanks be to God, for his presence with his poor,
helpless, necessitous worm. Thanks be to God, for Jesus Christ.

Sabbath noon, August 26. -- I desire to bless thee, my God, for the word of
thy grace I have been favored with. O Lord, help me to wrestle with thee for
the ministers of thine everlasting gospel. O Lord, let thy word run and be
glorified. O grant, that thy laborers may, by spreading the gospel net, catch
great numbers of souls. O send forth thy light, and thy truth, into the dark
corners of the earth!

Monday morning, August 27. -- I desire with unfeigned lips to praise the name
of my God, for he did meet with me in his house, in the afternoon, and gave me
the same compassionate look he gave his Peter; which, in one moment, dissolved
me into penitential tears. I bless thee, dear Lord, that I heard the difference
between a legal, and an evangelical repentance, and that at the same time I
dared appeal to thee, that it was thy dear, thy sweet look, that pierced my
heart, and caused mine eyes to flow. O, that look is worth more than a million
of worlds! O sweet Jesus! I adore thee as a God of infinite power, because thou
have looked such a rebel heart as mine into repentance. O Lord! I abbor myself,
because I have sinned against such dear love and grace. Oh! it is more than
enough that thine enemies dishonor thee: But that I should do it is intolerable
ingratitude! O dear Jesus! still look me into deeper repentance. Look me into
faith. Look me into flaming love and zeal. Look me into constant and universal
obedience to all thy just, holy, good commands. A look will do all this. Do but
look, dear Lord, Satan shall flee before thee: Every rebel lust shall quit the
field: Unbelief, pride, hypocrisy, self confidence. If thou will work only by a
look, none shall let. Only look, and every grace shall at once, be up and
doing, all upon the wing to execute thy commands, and to embrace thee. -- O my
soul, what mean these trembling fears at one time and another, that one or
other of thy lusts will prove thy ruin, when only a look of Christ can conquer
them all. O look unto him by faith, for all supplies of grace and strength: He
will look upon thee and help thee.

O Lord, bless thine handmaid, who has listed under thy banner. O make her
faithful unto death. Lord, let the covenant stand ratified and confirmed in
heaven. O be with her of a truth, throughout her warfare, and make her valiant
for the truth at all times. O fill her precious soul with the gifts and graces
of thy blessed Spirit, and make her an ornament to her profession all her days.
I bless thee, O Lord, that I have been permitted to see one addition more made
to thy church. O add daily to it, of such as shall be saved. O make this vine
flourish, and build up the walls of thy Jerusalem.

Wednesday evening, October 3. -- Blessed be God, I have been kept, for the
most part of this week, in a cheerful lively frame, depending on God for every
thing needful for soul and body. Yesterday morning, in an especial manner, I
had access to the throne of grace, had my mouth filled with arguments, and did,
I trust, in the arms of faith and prayer, carry my children to Jesus for
spiritual blessings: -- Rejoiced in him as a glorious conqueror, as able to
subdue the stubbornness of their wills, as a Levi's and mine. O Lord, in mercy
overcome them by thy sovereign grace. Lord, pity them, and work by whom thou will work; send by whom thou will send. I will not dare to limit the Holy One
of Israel, though I should rejoice if thou would make poor worthless me, an
instrument to do them good. But if thou deny me success in conversation, yet,
for Jesus' sake, forbid me not to pray, neither let me be straitened in prayer
for them; but help me, O my God, to pray earnestly for those who will not yet
be persuaded to pray for themselves. O Lord; awaken them, that they may pray
also, and do thou hear, not for our sake, but for thine own sake, that the
riches of thine own grace may be glorified, admired, and adored, to all
eternity.

Tuesday evening, October 30. -- I desire to record, to the praise and glory of
God, that he has this day been very gracious to me. In the morning, I was
enabled to rise early, and dedicate myself anew to him. This afternoon the
clouds gathered blackness, so that it was very dark, and looked awfully. I
spoke to my children, and desired them to be silent, which they immediately
complied with, and I perceived an unusual solemnity among them in general, and
presently one of them rose, and desired me to pray with them, which I joyfully
did, and was much affected and enlarged in pleading with God, for grace for
them, that they might be brought savingly home now in the days of their youth;
and such visible convictions I never saw before in them. There were six, in
particular, who seemed quite distressed, and wept very much, while I was
praying, and talking to them for nearly an hour; and they continued grave and
serious till school was done. The Lord in mercy fasten conviction, and never
suffer it to cease till it end in a sound conversion. O that I might see so
much of the presence of God every day in awakening my little ones.

Tuesday, January 1, 1745.
LORD, I bless thee that thou have brought me to see the return of another new
year's day: And now, O my God, assist me, and I will renew the dedication of
myself, soul and body, with all my faculties and members to thee. Lord take a
fresh, a free, a full and everlasting possession of me; for I protest to thee I
am thine own. Lord, I am thine, forever thine, blessed be thy name. I am not
only so by creation and preservation, but by Redemption too; yea, and thou art
my covenant God. O Lord for this my soul rejoicjoices. O my God, my only
portion, I protest I renew my choice of thee, and rejoice in it more than in
all this world, ten thousand times over. O my God, now for Jesus' sake I
beseech thee hear the voice of my supplication. Lord, pardon the iniquities of
the year past: Forgive me, dear Lord, for all my worldly mindedness, coldness
in religious duties, unprofitableness under the means of grace, want of love to
thee and thy children, want of faith, holy zeal and courage in thy cause,
omission of duties, secret, or relative. O Lord, my sins are past finding out;
I cannot reckon them up in order unto thee. Lord, pardon mine iniquities, for
they are very great. O, blessed be thy name, there is forgiveness with thee for
sins of a crimson die, and she, to whom thou forgavest much, loved much.
Therefore, O my God, that I may assuredly know that my sins which are many, are
forgiven, make me love much. O Lord, blow upon the spark of love in my soul,
and make it flame so vehemently, that many waters cannot quench it, neither the
floods drown it. Lord, if I love much, I shall obey much, for they who love
thee keep thy commandments. O let this grace be in lively exercise all the
ensuing year, if I live to see it, and bestow on me all the other graces of thy
blessed Spirit, for Jesus' sake. Amen.

Monday morning, May 15. -- Last evening I went to see the dear Mr. Helyer, who
told me a few days more would make the turning point. And as he earnestly
entreated us that were around him, whom he called his friends, to pray for him,
Lord, I beseech thee teach me for what and how I ought to pray. O Lord, in the
arms of my faith and prayer I would bring this thy dear sick servant to thee,
even him whom thou love, and beg thou will make his bed now. Lord, ease his
pain, by darting the beams of thine everlasting love into his soul: Now, now,
Lord, let him begin to reap the fruit of all his labors of love: Now let him
taste and feel that the Lord is gracious. O now, thou blessed Jesus, kiss him
with the kisses of thy mouth. O, if it be thy will, let him triumph over the
king of terrors. Lord, let his will be swallowed up in thine, and grant that he
may bear a testimony for God in his last breaths. Lord, I bless thee, that thou
have scattered his clouds, and that he is panting after thee. O suffer not
Satan any more to darken his evidences. Abba, Father, with thee all things are
possible. Thou can, if thou please, yet raise him. I leave him in thy
merciful hands, and beg thou will bow my stubborn will to thine, for Jesus'
sake. Amen.

Monday evening, May 27. -- This morning it pleased the great and glorious God
to take to himself my dear, dear Mr. Helyer. O he is gone from me. I shall
never more hear any of his precious sermons or solemn counsels. O my God,
preserve me from murmu^ng at thine holy hand. I desire to bless thy dear name,
that thou did lend worthless me so sweet a pastor, so long: And now thou have
in infinite wisdom bereaved me of my shepherd, I would give myself wholly to
thee thou great shepherd and bishop of souls. O be thou my all. Now, Lord, thou
have laid thy hand heavily upon me: Thou have touched me in a tender part: Thou
have cut off a stream, from which much comfort has flowed to my poor soul: Now,
my God, appear for me, and refresh my soul with streams more immediately from
the fountain. Lord, sanctify thine hand to me, to his dear consort and all
relations, to my dear aged Pastor, to the whole Church. O let this awful,
dispensation of thy providence awaken secure souls, and quicken the awakened. O
let the fruit of all be to take away sin. Lord, I confess thou might justly
deprive me of all precious means: But pity me, dear Lord, and still afford us
the means of grace. O give us a Pastor after thine own heart. Blessed be thy
name, the residue of the Spirit is with thee. Lord, I desire to trust thee for
all future events; but I beg, I beseech thee, bring me nearer to thy blessed
self, by this great turn in the wheel of thy providence. O Lord, enable me to
be, in good earnest, preparing to follow him, who through faith and patience is
gone to inherit the promises. O Lord, hear me; Lord, answer me, for Jesus
Christ's sake, in whose name I beg all, to whom be glory forever. Amen.

Now, with sorrow of heart, I am again going to record the repeated blow of
God's hand, in bereaving me, and the mournful church to which I belong, of our
dear aged Pastor, the Rev. Mr. Clap, who died on Wednesday evening, October 30,
1745. The Lord in mercy sanctify this rod, and enable us all to see it, and who
it is who has appointed it, and with truly resigned, humble souls to say, "The
Lord gave, the Lord has taken away: Blessed be the name of the Lord." Lord
help us to bless thee, that thou have indulged us so long with so eminent a man
of God, and O, for thy mercy's sake, pardon our iniquities, and go on still to
be gracious to us, and give us another Pastor, after thine own heart. Lord,
direct thy people in choosing such an one as thou will delight to bless, and
incline the heart of thy servant to accept the invitation. O keep out all
contention, thou God of peace and love. Unite thy church in peace and concord.
O blessed Jesus, thou great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, suffer us not to be
scattered as sheep without a shepherd. O preserve us from wolves in sheep's
clothing. O King Jesus, thou great head of the church, we trust we are a vine
of thine own right hand's planting. O delight to build us up, and not to pluck
us down. Lord, help us to cast all our care upon thee: But, O pour out upon us
a spirit of prayer and supplication, that in every thing, thereby, with
thanksgiving, we may be making known our requests to God, and O hear for Jesus'
sake.

On Monday, November 4, the dear and venerable Mr. Clap was decently interred,
attended by a numerous throng of people, of all ranks and denominations. O that
all who followed him sorrowfully to his grave, might joyfully meet him in the
morning of the resurrection: And, O my God! grant that I, thy poor worm, may
then see his face with joy. Lord forgive me that I have improved his precious
counsels and solemn warnings no better. Lord, humble me for this, and at the
same time accept of praises, that thou did make him so dear and helpful to
me. Thou, Lord, know how often thou have set home thy word, dispensed by him,
with power irresistible upon my poor soul, sometimes to arouse, convince and
awaken me, sometimes to strengthen and establish my faith, sometimes to
encourage me in the way of duty, sometimes to remove doubts and fears. Lord,
thou know, also, how sweet it was to me to have recourse to him in all times
of difficulty and trial, and how ready he was to afford me his counsels. For
all these favors, Lord, I would humbly bless and adore thee, thou blessed
author and bestower of them: And since thou, in thine all wise providence, have
deprived me of all these former privileges, and I can never more in this world
have recourse to thy servant for any solemn counsels, I beseech thee, dear
Lord, I beseech thee, that I may have more free recourse to thy blessed self. O
give me access to thy throne, that in every thing, by prayer and supplication,
with thanksgiving, I may be making known my requests unto thee. O, now thou art
removing the means and instruments by which thou wast wont to convey the graces
and comforts of thy blessed Spirit to me, O now refresh my weary sin sick soul,
with streams more immediately from the fountain, and guide me by thine unerring
counsel. Lord, in thine own time restore the means of grace, I beseech thee,
and grant I may be made meet for heaven, and receive me to glory, for Jesus'
sake. What relates to Mr. Clap's death and funeral is inserted here* though he
died five months after the decease of Mr. Helyer, that the whole, which Mrs.
Osborn wrote relating to the death of her two dear and worthy pastors might be
together.

Mr. Nathaniel Clap was born at Dorchester, near Boston, A. D. 1667. He had his
public education (...) Harvard College in Cambridge. Began to preach at Newport
(^cisland) A. D. 1695, and continued a preacher of the gospel there to A. D.
1720, when he was ordained pastor of the first congregational church in
Newport. He died October 30, 1745, in the 78th year of his age. He left no
family, having never been married.

He was the father of the congregational interest in Newport. When he first
began to preach there, he had but a small number of heare^, who had no house
for public worship. His congregation soon increased in number and
respectability. But he continued there twenty five years before a sufficient
number appeared qualified and disposed to unite in forming into a christian
church. Yet he lived to see two respectable congregations, which rose from this
small beginning, who built two decent houses for public worship, which
continue, and (...) improved to this day.

Mr. Clap was universally respected, as a man of eminent play. Mr. Callender,
who preached his funeral sermon, says, "The man stroke in his character, was
his EMINENT SANCTITY and PI^TY, and AN ARDENT DESIRE to promote the knowledge
and practice of true godliness in others." He was remarkable for taking great
pains to get the attention of children and servants; and to instruct them in
those things which were suited to promote their salvation.

When the infirmities of old age increased upon him, the church and
congregation invited Mr. Jonathan Helyer to settle colleag^ with Mr. Clap. He
was born in Boston, April 19, 1719, and educa^ at the college in Cambridge. He
came to Newport, September 1^, 1743, and was ordained June 20, 1744. But he did
not live a year after this. He died of a consumption, May 27, 1745, aged 27
years* He was a man of servent piety. His ministry was attended with gre^
satisfaction, and growing success, and the congregation was greatly increased
in the short time in which he lived. -- Thus the church and ^gregation were
ber^aved of both of their beloved pastors, in the (...) of five months!




Sabbath Day, July 28. -- The week past I have, through God's goodness, been
carried safely to see my mother, where I saw a letter to her from --, in which
he seems to intimate his fears that I am much lifted up with spiritual pride,
and stand in great need of caution from christian friends. Lord God Almighty,
thou searcher of hearts, thou trier of the reins, convince me, I beseech thee,
if this be the principle I have acted upon, in communicating to others thy
remarkable, gracious dealings with my soul. O Lord, the jealousies of thine own
experienced children make me jealous too. O search me, and try me, and suffer
me not to deceive myself. O, is it indeed so? Have I been practically saying to
any, Stand by thyself, for I am holier than thou? boasting myself, as though I
were something of myself? Lord, if this has been the case, O convince and
humble me, for thou know I thought I boasted in none but thee. Thou know
I thought it was thy love constrained me thus to speak, and declare thy
wonderful works. O Lord, pity me, for thou know how often conscience reproves
me for being so ungrateful to thee, so little speaking to thy praise and glory,
and I think justly too. But, Oh! how shall I behave! If I speak, I stumble and
grieve even thy dear children and servants. Lord, direct me, and O hasten the
time when I shall find no more backwardness to praise thee, nor fear of giving
offense or grieving any; but shall chant forth praises throughout an endless
eternity. I bless thee, O my God, that there is a day of judgment appointed,
wherein the secrets of all hearts will be disclosed, and I trust it will
appear, that the little zeal and gratitude I have shown did proceed from right
principles, through the infinite riches of thy grace in Jesus Christ. In the
mean time, help me daily to approve myself to thee, who infallibly know my
heart, and grant I may be a stumbling block to none in any respect. O quicken
me, Lord, in thy way, for Jesus' sake.

Friday morning, September 12. -- Last evening I went to visit my dear Susa,
who is sick, and rejoices in hope of being sick unto death. She tells me, that
every approach of death is welcome. There is nothing that she has the least
desire to stay to see accomplished, except the settlement of the church, and
that she can cheerfully leave with its great Head. She thus addressed herself
to me: Dear Mrs. Osborn, as you love me, I entreat you, nay, I charge you, not
to be earnest with God for my life. Ask it on no other terms than if it is most
consistent with his glory, and his having something for me to do. O pray with
submission. O, I long for one christian friend, to unite with me in pleading
with God, to take me to himself, that I may be freed from the body of sin and
death. And now, my God, I desire to commit the case of this thy dear child to
thee. O deal with her as may most consist with thy glory. If thou have any
thing for her to do, that she may still glorify thee on earth, O spare her to a
miserable world and to me, that we may still get good by her. Lord, thou
know how dear thou have made her to me, by the bonds of special grace:
Surely our very souls have been knit together as one soul, and thou alone
know how great the loss of her will be to me* Nevertheless, Father, thy will
be done. If (...) does most consist with thy glory, O take her and satisfy the
desires of her longing soul, and let her be full of God. But, O my God, pity
me: And if thou see meet to cut off this stream too, O fix my whole heart and
soul on thy blessed self. O be thou my everlasting all. Dear Lord, sanctify thy
dealings with me, bring me nearer thyself by all, and hear every petition thy
dear child may put up for me, while she lives, for Jesus' sake.

Thursday evening, February 12, 1747.
I HAVE been this evening to see my dear, dear Susa, who has been wont to
refresh my soul with her sweet and edifying conversation; and, blessed be God,
has at this time been made an instrument to warm my heart. The Lord grant the
impressions may be abiding. I am astonished to find what a lively, zealous and
active life she lives, to what poor worthless I do: What vehement love, and
strong faith, she is in the daily exercise of: Longing after God and perfection
in holiness, while poor I grovel in this low earth. Lord, stir me up to imitate
her, wherein she imitates the blessed Jesus. O sanctify this conference, I
beseech thee. Lord, thy grace is free, and thou can as easily bestow it on
unworthy me, not for my sake, but for thine own honor's sake. Lord, pity and
revive me also. O let thy grace triumph over mine unworthiness, and bring me
nearer to thy blessed self. O remember thy gracious promise, and heal my
backslidings, for Jesus' sake. Amen.

Sabbath day, May 3. -- This is the third sabbath that I have already been
detained from the public worship, the first by a great cold, the second and
last by a course of physic, which confines me to the house. O that while I am
using means for the recovery of my bodily health, my soul may not grow more
sick. O that an indifference to the house and worship of God may not come upon
me, now I am hindered from going there. Lord, meet me, and condescend to
commune with me. Hear the prayers of thy ministers and people, for those
necessarily detained, and send me a blessing out of thine house. O give me a
double portion of thy blessed Spirit, that while I am denied the use of
ordinances, I may enjoy the God of ordinances. Lord, I thank thee for the
assistance thou have this day granted me in drawing near to thee. I thank thee,
for those thirstings after grace I have this day experienced. O God, hear and
grant those petitions for increase of grace and strength to do thy will. Now,
Lord, make me to know assuredly how the case stands between thee and me. If I
am not grafted into the true vine, the Lord Jesus Christ, it is no wonder I do
not thrive and flourish. O, if this be the case, for Christ's sake convince me,
and let me be grafted into him, and have real vital union to him; and if this
be now the case, if I am really united to him by faith, then, Lord, cause me to
derive spiritual strength from him, who is the head of influence. Dear Jesus,
it has been a long, cold, dark winter with me. My graces have been long nipt
and withering; but O! as it is now spring time, and thou art causing the warm
beams of the sun, and refreshing showers to descend on the earth, so that every
herb and tree rejoices, and grows, and blossoms, so, Lord, shed abroad the
influence of thy grace, and I shall yet grow, and bring forth fruit. O, nothing
is too hard for thee. Thou can yet cause, that the beautiful lineaments of
the Lamb of God may be more seen in me day by day. O help me, Lord, to lay hold
on thy strength, and hold out to the end. O let me "run and not be weary, walk
and not faint."

Sabbath evening, February 21, 1748.
I AM now within a few hours arrived at the age of thirty four years, and
surely I have had experience of the goodness of the Lord, all my life long, and
especially since I have avouched him to be my God. It is now better than eleven
years since I solemnly gave myself up, in covenant, to him and his church; and
notwithstanding all the fears and temptations I have had from the world, the
flesh and the devil, yet hitherto the Lord has helped me, and, blessed be his
name, preserved me from falling into any open, scandalous sins, to the dishonor
of his dear name and my profession. I will therefore humbly trust, that he will
still keep and "preserve me ^y his mighty power, through faith unto salvation:"
And, O my God, suffer me not to dishonor thee by a cold, lifeless conversation;
but enable me to "adorn the doctrine of God my Savior in all things." O may I
so behave myself, that all around me may take knowledge of me, that I have
indeed been with Jesus. Lord, help me to live in the constant exercise of every
grace. O bring me near to thyself: Give me transforming views: Reinstamp thy
beautiful image, more and more, upon my poor soul: Meet me in all duties and
ordinances, and let me be by them fitted to meet thee in glory, for Jesus sake,
on whom all my hopes are grounded; to whom with thee, and thy blessed Spirit,
be everlasting praises. Amen.

June 4. -- I have this week been to see my dear Susa, and found much cause to
rejoice, and bless God, who is causing his grace to triumph, and making her
more than a conqueror through him that has loved her, in that he is enabling
her to speak as highly and honorably of Christ as though she was under the most
clear discoveries and lively manifestations, which, she assures me, is not the
case. The Lord in mercy strengthen her yet more, and grant her grand enemy may
never get an advantage against her; and I trust he never shall, since her
dependence is all on the Lord Jesus. And now, my God, I have seen what great
things thou art enabling thy child to do, while she is flying to, and relying
on Christ by faith: Help me also, in like manner, to make great use of my dear
Redeemer. Lord Jesus, if thou will strengthen me, I can do all things too. Oh
why, my soul, do thou so often sit down discouraged, since there is such
fullness and sufficiency in the glorious Media or, that great Prophet and High
Priest, who has undertaken for me, that blessed King, under whose banner I am
listed; he will ere long set his foot on the neck of his enemies. Come, my
soul, rouse up, and run again in the strength of the Lord Jehovah. Who can tell
but thou may yet be a growing christian, notwithstanding all thy vileness.
Lord, grant it for Jesus' sake.

June 13. -- I would fain write as one who has listed under the banner of the
Lord Jesus, that great Captain of our salvation, viz. without complaints,
discouragements and sinking fears. I would fain joy and triumph in my great
Redeemer, amidst all difficulties; but, alas! the wheels of the soul are so
taken off by sin, that I drive on very heavily in the road. Nevertheless, this
I will say, the fault is all my own. There is strength enough in Christ for me,
if I had but skill, by faith, to derive it from him. O how plainly do I see
this, "will not come to me," as well as "cannot." Lord, subdue this will, and
all shall be well. I will run to thee, clasp thee in the arms of faith, and
rejoice in thee, though earth and hell were combined against me. Lord Jesus,
pity thy rebellious worm, and now, as at the first, subdue me to thyself. Lord,
I beseech thee have compassion on me, and pity, pity, Lord, the soul that longs
for a freedom from sin and for increase of grace. O grant it for thine own
honor's sake, not for mine, be it known unto me. Amen and Amen.

Thursday morning, September 7, 1749.
O MY God, since, by the permission and concurrence of thy providence, I am
determined to set out on a journey this morning, I would now fly to thee, and
besiege the throne of thy grace, that I may have thy gracious presence with me
and my dear consort. O Lord, except thou go with me, let me not stir hence.
Preserve me in all my ways; and O that thou would condescend to draw near to
me, and incline me to commune with thee while freed from the encumbrances of
business. O let not my vain frothy heart, be taken up with trifling pleasures,
neither let me be hewing out broken cisterns, while I am pleasing myself with
hopes of being refreshed by christian conversation. Lord, bless this to me, if
it be thy will; butenable me to fly from all dependence on any thing, but
Christ Jesus, the head of all gracious influences. Thither let me fly -- there
rest and bathe my weary soul, which has long been at an awful distance. O let
me enjoy thee in my journey, and that will be a thousand times more comfortable
than all other enjoyments can be. O let thy glory, I beseech thee, lie
exceedingly near my heart, and be the ultimate end of all my actions. Lord,
thou alone know what lies before me. I desire to submit myself, soul and
body, with all my affairs, in life or death, to thy care. The Lord bless my
friends, to whom I am going. The Lord bless all dear to me, whom I leave
behind; in special thine handmaids, who take care for me. Lord, make things
easy and comfortable for them. Let not their communion with thee be
interrupted, but abundantly refresh their souls with the incoming of thy
blessed Spirit. Bless thy servant, my dear Pastor, with the best of blessings,
with his dear consort and little one. Bless all my flock of little ones, and
grant that, if I should never meet them here again, I may meet them at thy
right hand in the great and last day. Bless all under this roof, with spiritual
blessings. And hear these petitions, and grant them, not for my sake, but for
Jesus' sake. Amen.

August 20, 1750.
I HAVE at this time had the most sweet communion with God in prayer, that I
have experienced this long time. God has discovered to me much of his
perfections, and caused me to rejoice in him, as a faithful unchangeable God,
my only portion and happiness, and in Christ Jesus, as a suitable Savior, just
such an one as I want. O how does the sweetness of enjoying God in duty exceed
all other pleasures, and render them trifling. Surely, compared with this, they
are all very vanity and nothing. The Lord make me thankful for this golden
season, and yet preserve me from depending on it, for Jesus' sake.

August 22. -- I desire to record, with a truly grateful soul, that God has
permitted me to draw near to him in prayer, and other duties, every day this
week. O what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? Now let me take
the cup of salvation, and pay unto the Lord my vows. O Lord, strengthen me by
thy grace, that I may do so, I beseech thee, for Jesus' sake, to whom be glory
forever. Amen.

Sabbath evening, March 10, 1751.
I WOULD now record to the praise of God, and for my future encouragement, that
I have this day been permitted to wait upon God in his house and at his table;
and, adored be his name, I was not suffered to be altogether barren. No: God
there enlarged my desires after Christ, and grace. I longed to be made holy,
yea, completely so, and for the utter destruction of every sin. I dreaded
returning to the practice of it, but knew I should if left to myself. I was
enabled to fly to that promise which truth itself has made, that he will put
his fear into his people's hearts, and they shall not depart from him. Here I
seemed to derive some strength, and again to hope for perseverance in grace to
the end. My sins indeed appeared as a thick cloud* and of a crimson and scarlet
die; but that gracious promise in Isaiah i. "Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be white as snow, etc." revived me much. In a word, the merits of
Christ, and riches of God's grace, in and through him, appeared infinitely
great, and, with the woman of Canaan, I knew that the least crumb, or drop,
applied, would be sufficient for me. And now, O my God, I would praise and
adore thee for thine amazing goodness to me, thine unworthy worm, that,
notwithstanding all my unbelieving fears and other abominations, thou have
again triumphed over my unworthiness, and shown me, that "where sin has
abounded thy grace has much more abounded." Now will I set up mine Ebenezer,
for lo! these fourteen years, has God preserved me, since I gave up myself to
him and his Church, in an open and solemn manner. Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth thy sin, who heals thy
diseases; who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercy. Bless the
Lord, O my soul, for hitherto he has helped thee. And now, O Father, Son and
Holy Spirit, I renew my choice of thee, for mine only and eternal portion, and
a new give up myself, soul and body, to thee, to be thine, and thine only,
forever. Lord, I commit mine eternal all into thy merciful and faithful hands,
believing that thou will graciously keep what I have committed to thee till
that day, for Jesus' sake. Amen.

Saturday, August 31. -- I have, through the goodness of my God, this week been
kept for the most part, in a thoughtful frame, and at sometimes, I trust, in
the lively exercise of grace. At lecture, the Rev. Mr. Vinal treated on the
ascension of my glorious Redeemer: And O, if I am indeed risen with him, let me
now in good earnest "set my affections on things above, where Christ is." Lord,
art thou ascended on high, far above all heavens, exalted at thy Father's right
hand, possessed of all the glory and majesty of an infinite God, and do thou,
notwithstanding, condescend to visit so vile and despicable a worm as me, by
the influences of thy blessed Spirit here; and more than this, art thou gone to
prepare a place for me, that I may ere long be with thee to behold thy glory?
Amazing grace. Infinite stoop! Well, since infinite power is engaged, that same
Savior, who, by the virtue and energy of his own Godhead, raised himself from
the dead, and ascended up into heaven by his power, to take possession for me,
will surely accomplish what is lacking in me, and by the same power carry on
the glorious work he has begun in my soul. Amen. So come, Lord Jesus.

I now solemnly renew my choice of thee, in all thy offices, with all thy
benefits: Yea I would, by faith, adopt Three glorious Persons, in one eternal
Godhead, for mine everlasting portion. O happy portion! Lord, I solemnly
declare, I am and will be thine for ever and ever.

Blessed be God, amidst all my dec^ensions and failings, as to the performance
of duties, I have never yet revoked the bargain I made, when I covenanted with
God for him to be mine, and I to be his forever. No, no: In this I will
rejoice. O may this covenant stand ratified and confirmed in heaven. Lord, by
thy grace assisting, I will be for thee, and none other.

SARAH OSBORN.

Tuesday, September 3. -- I was permitted to go to God's house and table, and
there was refreshed, first, in hearing the marks and evidences of love to God,
as choosing God, in himself, because of his perfections, for our only portion,
above all others: Acquiescing in his adorable sovereignty, in the way of
salvation: Loving Christ, as he is the express image of his Father's person,
full of grace and truth: Hating sin, as sin, because contrary to God: Love of
holiness for itself: Love of the image of God, wherever seen, though in those
of other denominations. To every one of these, I think, by the assistance of
God's Spirit, I was enabled to answer in the affirmative, having, at the same
time, discoveries of the excellency and beauties there are in God, the Father,
Son and Holy Spirit and renewedly choosing him for my everlasting portion. --
At the sacrament, my thirst for higher degrees of grace were increased. O when
shall these hungerings be satisfied? I trust ere long they shall, through the
intercession of a glorious Mediator.

Wednesday evening, November 6. -- Tomorrow is set apart for a day of
thanksgiving, and as there is to be a collection for the poor, I have
endeavored to get something for that purpose, but am yet altogether
disappointed, and know not how to make out one mite; but hope Providence will
still provide for me.

November 7. -- I desire to bless God, the difficulty I mentioned last evening
is removed, and upon a review of the gracious dealings of God with us the year
past, I find I have abundant cause to keep the day in thanksgiving. Blush, my
soul, at the backwardness to this duty thou have experienced! Has God preserved
us in health almost all the year past, so that I never perhaps enjoyed a year
of more confirmed health in my life, or for twenty years past, and shall I not
be thankful for this great mercy? Again, has not God in his Providence provided
for us a comfortable house, while hundreds have been destitute, and knew not
where to go? Have we not had a sufficiency of fuel to keep us warm, while many
are filled with distressing fears of a hard winter, and can get no wood to
burn? Have we not also had, all the year past, a sufficiency of wholesome food
to satisfy our craving appetites, while many as good, or better than we, have
been pinched with hunger? Have we not also had raiment to put on, that is
decent and comfortable, while many others have been clothed with rags, and
suffered with cold? How many have been called to part with near and dear
relatives, while death has not been permitted to bereave us of any one? And as
I have great cause to sing of mercy as to temporals, much more have I as to
spirituals. Has not God indulged me with almost constant opportunities to wait
on him in his house, and, blessed be his name, often met me there, and at his
holy table, and many gracious visits condescended to make me, which I had a
thousand times forfeited into the hands of his justice? And, notwithstanding a
thousand unbelieving fears and distrusts of his grace, he has preserved me from
falling into any scandalous sins, to the dishonor of his dear name. And though
I have cause to lament, that I have walked no closer with him, yet have I not
abundant reason to be thankful for the precious moments I have enjoyed, for the
evidences of grace at sometimes clear, for the hopes of glory, for the dear
Mediator's sake, that dear and precious gift? O my soul, be thankful, and again
I say, be thankful. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits;
who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies; who heals thy
diseases, who forgiveth thine iniquities, who heals thy backslidings, and is
still thy covenant, faithful God. O inscribe mercy, truth, and faithfulness, on
all his dealings with thee, and be forever for him, and none other. Lord, help
me, and I will, for I am absolutely thine.

Tuesday evening, December 31, 1751. -- Now, my God, thou have brought me to
the close of another year, I beseech thee freely pardon all the sins of the
year past, with all the transgressions of my whole life. Lord, they are more
than the hairs of my head in number, and cannot be reckoned up. They are
greatly aggravated. I cannot answer for one of a thousand, no, nor for any one
of them. Should thou be strict to mark iniquity, Lord, who could stand I fly
to the blood of Jesus: O let that be applied for my cleansing, and accept me
for his sake alone. Lord, it is only in and through him I dare approach thee,
and ask for pardon. Thou art a consuming fire: But oh! for his sake freely
pardon, and bestow on me all the grace and strength I need to carry me safe
through all the trials I am still to meet with in a world of sin and sorrow. Be
with me in the ensuing year, I beseech thee. And, O gracious God, forbid I
should so grieve thy blessed Spirit therein, as in the year past. O let me not
backslide from thee; but keep me near; and grant I may indeed sensibly grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Whatever thou
deniest me, give me this, and all shall be well.

And O let me be in an actual preparation for death, which may come long before
the return of another year: If so, O let it be a safe and happy messenger. O
may it put an everlasting period to sin and sorrow. Then let me find thou art
in deed and in truth my covenant God, whom I shall adore and praise, without
weariness, to all eternity.

Lord, I bless thee for all the experiences of thy goodness in the year past;
and again renew my choice of thee, O God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for
my only portion, through time and eternity: And desire unfeignedly to resign my
whole soul and body to thee forever. Lord, accept of me; for I am, and will, by
assisting grace, be for thee, and none other.

SARAH OSBORN.

Sabbath evening, February 9, 1752.
AH, LORD, how deceitful do I find my heart to be! How often have I thought I
desired nothing more of this world's goods, but just daily food and raiment;
and wherewith to render to every one their due: Yea, I have, once and again,
told thee so. And thou have in thy good providence granted me all that I asked
of thee: Yea, thou have given me to the utmost of what I then desired. And now,
ere I am aware, I find myself busy in providing for futurities; want to lay up
a little for this, and a little for that. And from thence, I begin to want a
great deal, to provide for sickness and old age, and what not!

Lord, I am afraid of this worldly mindedness. I know not where it will end.
Oh, I pray thee, subdue it by thy grace, or all my strivings against it will be
ineffectual. Oh, do I begin to lay up a treasure here! then I fear my heart
will be here also. Lord, I dread being glued down to the things of time and
sense. I pray thee, give me no unsanctified prosperity; but sanctify my fancy,
and let not my vain imaginations carry my heart off from God, and bury it in
this world. Oh for some discoveries of eternal things, that this vain, empty
world, with all its enjoyments, may shrink into nothing, compared with that
more durable substance, that one thing needful, an interest in the blessed
Jesus. O Lord, help me more and more to lay up all my good in God; so that it
may overbalance the sweetness and bitterness of all creatures.

Lord, I would not ungratefully forget to thank thee for the care of thy good
providence, in so providing the comforts and conveniences of life for me: But,
Oh, I deprecate having the^e as my portion! This is not the portion I have
chosen. Oh no! but thyself, thy Christ, and the sanctifying influences of thy
blessed Spirit, that I may be enabled to live to thy glory here, and to all
eternity. O grant these desires, give me this portion, I beseech thee, for
Jesus' sake.

March 1, 1752. Sabbath day. -- O my Lord and my God! How art thou giving me an
undeniable testimony of thy absolute power, truth and faithfulness! How thou
art discovering thyself, and once more enabling me to draw near, and by faith
take a view of thy adorable perfections! How beautiful is thy adorable
sovereignty! How majestic is thy infinite power, that is all sufficient to
break down all the walls that Satan and unbelief can raise to separate between
thee and me! O how sweet appealing to thy omniscience for my sincerity,
notwithstanding, at the same time, a humbling sense of my own vileness! O how
precious a season is this! How lovely, my God, art thou, in thy justice, truth
and faithfulness! The same yesterday, today, and forever. The God who remembers
the day of my espousals. The God who has made with me an everlasting covenant,
ordered in all things and sure. O how unchangeable art thou! notwithstanding
all the provocations I have given thee, though thou hidest thy face for a small
moment, yet with loving kindness do thou return. O that I may now by s^ith
keep sight of thee, and never let thee go, till I awake in thy likeness.

Now, blessed Jesus, let me derive strength from thee, the head of all gracious
influences, to run the ways of thy commands. Lord, now let my obedience be
universal. Destroy all selfish views and principles; and let thy glory be the
ultimate end of all my actions. Now, my dear Savior, let me approve myself thy
friend; one who loves thee unspeakably more than all other objects (as thou art
infinitely more worthy) by doing and keeping thy commandments. Now sway thy
scepter, glorious King: I will, by thy grace, espouse thy cause. Now come in,
glorious Trinity, one incomprehensible God, in three persons, and possess the
most secret recesses of my soul forever and ever.

November 16, 1752. -- A day of public thanksgiving. O my soul, adore the
matchless grace, and adorable sovereignty of God, since thou have a hope,
through grace, that he has enabled thee to comply with the terms of salvation.
And now reflect, and say if thou ^ast not cause to be thankful for the mercies
of the year past. God has preserved thee from falling into any open, scandalous
sin, to the dishonor of his dear name. He has also revived thee again, and
again, from low, grovelling frames; given thee blessed views of his adorable
perfections; especially of his faithfulness in keeping covenant, and ordering
all things so, as should tend most to his own glory, and thy best good here:
And also comfortable prospects of approaching death and eternity! O, how often
has he met with thee in his sanctuary; and at his table spoke peace and pardon!
O what a God is this! Thus to do, after so many base declensions and aggravated
provocations! -- Blush, my soul, at thy monstrous ingratitude, and adore him as
a God of infinite mercy and faithfulness, who will never, never forsake the
soul once espoused to Jesus Christ by faith! Lord, increase my faith.

Again, bless the Lord, O my soul; for he has given thee a good degree of
health, the greatest temporal mercy: And likewise prospered the work of our
hands, so that we have a comfortable supply of the necessaries of life; and
also something to spare, to relieve the afflicted. The Lord make me thankful
for this, and when at any time things have looked dark, in any respect, O how
has he enabled me to stay myself on him, and rely on his tender care! Surely
this is the Lord's doing: May he have all the praise; while I, worthless I,
reap the comfort of such a frame. He has not suffered any real afflictions to
come near me. Satan has been restrained, and not permitted to distress and
hurry with violent temptations. No deaths of those relatives who are exceeding
dear.

O what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits! O Lord, thou art a
liberal giver. Thou upbraidest not. Now, for thy Son's sake, add to all those
mercies a spirit of prayer; more sanctifying grace, that I may run the way of
thy commands with delight; yield universal obedience. I will rejoice and praise
thee: And all the glory shall be thy own.

Sabbath evening, March 11, 1753.
I DESIRE to record, for God's glory, and for my future encouragement, that God
has carried me through the difficulties of my calling the last week, with a
considerable degree of composure; and kept my thoughts more fixed on his
adorable perfections, than usual: Given access to his throne of grace several
times, and filled my mouth with arguments.

This day I have not been able to wait on God in his house: But God has greatly
refreshed my soul by discoveries of himself; causing me to rejoice; to admire
and adore him, because he is a Being of such spotless purity and holiness. Yea,
because he is just such an one, as he is, altogether excellent, amiable and
desirable, for himself; and is his own infinite delight, and the delight of
angels and saints; and all his laws are holy, just and good.

This discovery made me loathe and abhor myself, because of the shocking
contrariety which still remains in my depraved, perverse nature, to the holy
law of God; and caused me to justify God, though he should forever withhold
that grace he is no way bound to give: But, at the same time encouraged to
plead earnestly for it for the dear Redeemer's sake: And to cast myself at the
foot of a sovereign God, to be disposed of, as shall most consist with his
glory, in life and death: That, if I live, I may live to the Lord; and if I
die, I may die to the Lord; that whether I live or die, I may be the Lord's
forever and ever. Lord, accept the surrender, for Jesus' sake.

Sabbath morning, March 23. -- This is the first time that I have taken my room
for retirement. And now the treachery of my own heart, and the subtilty of
Satan perplex me with fears that I shall abuse the privilege, by misimproving
it. And sure I am, if God leave me to myself, I shall do so! The Lord enable me
strictly to watch over, and be jealous of myself, lest I should deceive myself
and others. -- But, Lord, I beseech thee, let me not again fall to distrusting
thy grace. Truth, Lord, without thee I can do nothing. I am not, of myself,
sufficient for a good thought. But, through Christ strengthening me, I can do
all things. And have not thou, my covenant God, graciously promised, that thou will not turn away from doing me good? Lord, except I have thy presence,
wherefore am I come up hither* Wherefore did thou excite in me such earnest
desires of attaining such a place? For any would do, if I only offer up
lifeless sacrifices; no matter for such great secrecy. But in this, I trust, O
my God, thou will enable me to poor out my whole soul into thy bosom, while no
mortal eye or ear can discern.

Now, Lord, may the set time be come, wherein thou will favor thy poor, sinful
creature with the quickening influences of thy blessed Spirit, and pour out on
me a spirit of prayer and supplication, for Jesus' sake, in whose name I ask
for all my mercies. Whose I am, and, by assisting grace, will be forever.

Monday morning, March 26. -- Yesterday morning my room seemed new and strange.
And, for wise ends, I was shut up, confused and straitened: But in the evening
had access to the throne of grace. And, Lord, I beseech thee, let me at this
time also. And, O may this place be a Bethel. Here let me, with Jacob, wrestle
with thee for the blessings I want, namely, increase of all the graces of thy
blessed Spirit, knowledge, faith, evangelical repentance; yea, and humility,
that dear and lovely grace: And for a spirit of prayer to be poured out on me.
Lord, let me be no longer dumb before thy throne, since prayer is the very
breath and life of the new creature. Lord, all thy works praise thee. And shall
I alone be silent, while the angelic hosts and saints adore! O let me, even me
also bear my part. And Lord accept my feeble attempts, though I cannot praise
as glorified angels and saints do; nor as thou art worthy to be praised and
adored; for thou do infinitely exceed all praise and adoration, thou
altogether lovely One in three glorious persons. O Lord, let me gaze on thy
perfections, till I am transformed into the same image. O blessed be thy name,
I shall be like thee, when in one everlasting day I shall see thee as thou art.
Then, Lord, shall I be satisfied, when I have the open vision, and full
fruition of my God. O ripen me fast, for Jesus' sake, on whom alo^e all my
hopes are grounded.

Tuesday morning, March 27. -- Yesterday morning I was enlarged and refreshed,
and found a sweet calmness and composure upon my spirits till afternoon. But
then the children grew so unruly, and I so weary and discomposed, I knew not
what to do with myself. I hoped to be refreshed by retiring; but my spirits
were so spent, and confused, that I had scarce any sense of any thing, and have
felt empty ever since.

Lord, forbid I should ever rest satisfied with the bare external performance
of duty. No. It is the God of ordinances I want to find. Without him, all means
are empty, and ineffectual to satisfy the cravings of an immortal soul. None
but thee, thou who alone fillest heaven and earth with thy glory, can fill my
precious and immortal soul. Therefore, I beseech thee, condescend to visit thy
worthless worm, by the influences of thy blessed Spirit and grace.

Lord, this were indeed too great a mercy for such a worthless worm to ask,
had not thou, for the sake of a glorious Mediator, encouraged, yea, commanded
me to ask: And have told me, by his own mouth, "How much more thou will give
thy Holy Spirit to them who ask him." Yea, this Spirit Christ has died to
purchase. This is the Comforter. This is he who is come to guide his people
into all necessary truth; to reduce them, when they wander; to quicken them,
when they are dull; to help their infirmities, when they know not what to pray
for as they ought: Yea, to make intercession in them, with groanings which
cannot be uttered; and to fill them with all grace and joy in believing. This
is the Spirit whose presence and continual abode with me I want; and without
whom I can do nothing. O God, grant me this, though of myself I am vile and
unworthy, I shall be purified and made holy. Come, blessed Spirit, take an
everlasting possession of my whole heart, soul and body. I call heaven and
earth to witness, that thou art the only welcome guest, whatever else may usurp
authority there; in thee alone I do rejoice: Therefore abide with me, for
Jesus' sake.

Wednesday morning, March 28. -- The Lord make me thankful! I have both
strength of body, and a will given me to rise early, and redeem time for
retirement. And now, my God, be with me, and subdue those wanderings which have
crept into my closet with me. Lord, I would fain have this place, and every
moment spent in it, dedicated to thee. It was to get clear of the world, its
entanglements and diversions, that I sought it. And, O suffer them not to
follow me here, gracious God! Blessed Savior, scourge every buyer and seller
out of thy temple, even the temple which has been, again, and again, given up
for the Holy Ghost to dwell in.

Sabbath day, April 1. -- I have now enjoyed my room for retirement one week.
And O, has it not been a sweet week to me! Sure it has; for God has
condescended to own me, and afforded me his assistance every day. O what a
mercy this! that I, who have so long been, in a manner, dumb before the throne
of grace, all confusion and wandering, should again have my mouth opened, and
filled with arguments; my soul held up, and strengthened to wrestle with God.
O, go on, gracious God, yet more and more to discover thyself to me, in and
through the dear Mediator. O let me behold the adorable perfections, till I am
swallowed up in admiration, and transformed into the same image. O, fill me as
full as this clay vessel can hold; and when it can hold no more, Lord, let it
break, that my soul may wing away, as a bird let out of its cage; awake in thy
likeness, and be satisfied.

And O, why am I thus rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, to be revealed to
me, in the face of Jesus Christ! Lord, this must be resolved into thy adorable
sovereignty: Even so Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight. For I utterly
disclaim all worth or worthiness in me; yea, I am altogether unworthy of all
the mercy and truth thou have already shown to thine handmaid. It is only
because thou will have mercy on whom thou will have mercy, that, by thy grace,
I am what I am.

And, Lord, since grace is thus absolutely free and sovereign, and increase of
grace is attainable for those who have the principle, who are believers in
Jesus Christ; and perseverance to the end is certain, I fly to thee, in the
name of Jesus, and renew my request for increase of grace, and perseverance
too. For thou have said, For these things thou will be inquired of, to do them
for me. O Lord, I cannot let thee go without this blessing: For never did a
poor worldling more earnestly covet riches, than I do grace to do thy will.
Lord, grant me this, and thyself, and it is enough. Let me have the portion I
have chosen, and I will leave the worldling to his. O Lord, hear for Jesus'
sake. Amen.

Tuesday morning, May 15. -- On Saturday evening, Sabbath morning and evening,
and yesterday morning, I have been much refreshed in writing on death and
judgment. I find, by examination, still good ground to hope, through riches of
grace, that the great Judge of quick and dead is, in very deed, my everlasting
friend; and therefore never will disown me; never will say, I know you not,
depart from me: But, on the contrary, will say, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the world: For I
have paid the ransom for you; I have redeemed you with the price of my precious
blood. I effectually called you in time, and enabled you by faith to embrace
me, on my own terms. I made you sincere, from the day I called you, though you
were then very imperfect.

You was then sanctified but in part. You groaned under a body of sin and
death, which caused you to wander from me, wound your own soul, and grieve my
blessed Spirit. But I kept thee by the bonds of the everlasting covenant, and
by my mighty power, through faith unto salvation. And, for my sake all thy poor
imperfect performances, and sincere endeavors to serve me were accepted. I
pitied and succored thee then. I had a feeling of thy infirmities. I remembered
thy frame, that thou wast but dust. I heard all thy groanings, because of thy
spiritual enemies, thy inbred lusts and corruptions, as well as Satan and the
world, which held thee at a distance from me, when thou wast in that vale of
tears. I beheld all thy thirstings and longings after me and my grace,
universal obedience and perfection in holiness. It was I that excited and
strengthened them. I encouraged and strengthened thy faith, when thou did
cleave to me, and would not let me go. I caused thee to delight in me, above
all other objects. I discovered something of my excellencies to thee then,
which caused thee to be enamored with my beauty; but thou saw only through a
glass darkly.

But now, behold, the vail is rent from top to bottom. I will never any more
hide my face from thee. Come, all thy desires are fulfilled; all thy
imperfections are done away; and, according to thy wish, thou art made perfect
in holiness. Thou shall never find any more weariness in my service. And thou
may now with open face behold me, constantly look on my perfections, see my
glory, and the luster of it shall not confound thee. Come, here is the open
vision, the full fruition thou did long for. Come, drink in as much of God
now, as thy finite capacity can hold; and I will still enlarge thy capacity:
Thou shall pass from glory to glory; and be more and more transformed into the
same image. Come, drink and swim, and drink again of those rivers of pleasure,
which flow from the right hand of God forevermore. Here is the boundless ocean,
in which thou may dive throughout the endless ages of eternity, and thy
delights shall be forever new.

Come, search into the wonders of redeeming love and grace, which has brought
so many of the apostate sons and daughters of Adam to glory: And now, in this
everlasting now, give to God the glory of his sovereign grace. Come, tune thy
harp, and sound upon the highest string. Shout aloud for joy; for he has given
grace and glory too. Here is no danger of ostentation or spiritual pride; or of
grieving any of the inhabitants of this upper world. No, they will all join
with thee, and each for himself, and on thy behalf, give glory to God, in the
highest strains. Did thou long to be thus employed? Well, go on forever to
praise and adore the glorious Three One. Did thou delight to commune with me
in providence, as well as in ordinances? Well, thou may now learn the
mysteries of them: They shall be unfolded. Unbelief shall no more molest thee.
Now thou shall see how by the watchful eye of my providence, I preserved thee
from every danger. How I swayed the scepter in righteousness, and caused all
things to work together for thy good; even when thou said, All these things
are against me! I never took my eye from thee; nor turned away from doing thee
good. Now, thou may adore forever, on this account also; and see what thou
did, when thou did commit all thy concerns to me, for time and eternity.

Did thou delight in the company and communion of my ambassadors, and dear
children? Did they appear the most lovely and agreeable of all the inhabitants
of the lower world? Especially, when thou did discern, through their
imperfections, as the sun through a cloud, my image, drawn in an eminent degree
upon their souls. Did thou love them for my sake, wherever thou saw them?
Were they, in thy esteem, indeed the excellent of the earth? Well, here thou
shall forever enjoy the communion of saints: These shall be thy companions
forever. All their imperfections, as well as thine, are done away. They are now
perfect, and shall never ensnare thee, as even they were wont to do. They shall
never turn off thy eyes from me. No, not the brightest seraph in all the
heavenly regions, shall ever be able to do it: Nor all the glittering robes of
glorified saints and angels. But thou shall enjoy me in all these. I will
forever feast thy soul with communications from myself. And if I, who am God
allsufficient, can make thee happy, thou shall be so; for I will be thy portion
to eternity.

And did thou in time, by faith, commit the keeping of thy soul and body into
my merciful and faithful hands, against this great day? I excited and enabled
thee to do it: And now thou see the effect. Thy expectations from me, shall
never be disappointed; neither shall thou ever be ashamed of thy hope. I kept
thee by my power, while on earth. I kept thee in the hour of death, when Satan
would gladly have hurled thy soul into the infernal regions; but he could not
pluck thee out of my hands. I sent thy guardian angels to conduct thy precious
soul to Abraham's bosom. And I still took care of thy mouldering dust, while in
the grave; not an atom of it is lost. And now, behold! I have raised it a
glorious body, fashioned like my own. And now the union between soul and body
shall never be dissolved; but the dear partner shall forever reap together, as
they sowed together. Behold, according to thy faith and hope, I now present
them spotless and blameless before the throne of God. I have redeemed them by
my blood. By my obedience and death I have satisfied justice, and have
purchased reconciliation with God. Mercy and truth have met together;
righteousness and peace have kissed each other. I have washed away all thy
pollutions. And now, I give thee joy; and all the host of heaven give thee joy;
therefore enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. I gave thee joy in the day of
thy espousals, and in frequent after manifestations, as an earnest of this.
Thou have had a taste of the same in kind, when I revealed myself to thee on
earth; but the degree shall now be greater than thou could then ask or think.

Sabbath evening, May 20. -- In the week past I have had my thoughts much
employed in meditating on death, judgment and eternity. Sometimes I have seemed
so swallowed up in them, that I hardly knew how to descend to earth again. --
Well, my soul, thou have had a rich feast now! Perhaps, a taste to strengthen
thy faith to thy journey's end. Be exceeding thankful for such views of unseen
and eternal things. Keep the eye of faith still fixed upon them, and run with
patience the race set before thee; looking and longing for the glorious
appearance of the great God, even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And now, in
a special manner, watch and pray, lest thou enter into temptation. And
remember, it is by grace thou stand. O, be not high minded, but fear before
a holy and sin hating God; for the glorious things thou have seen, by an eye of
faith, are not yet accomplished. Rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and
steadfastly believe that in his own time, all these things will be revealed; and
therefore march forward in his strength toward the joyful period.

But take heed of boasting, as though thou had already put off the harness;
for perhaps thou may be but girding it on. Thou art yet in thy enemies'
country. Snares await thee on every side. Thou art not out of the reach of
spiritual pride, or vain glory: Nor out of the reach of unbelief, which may yet
raise many black clouds, before thou reach the blissful regions. Nor have thou
yet got clear of sloth and carnal security. Nay, all the lusts of the flesh,
which now seem to be in some good degree conquered, may yet rise up against
thee. There may yet be sore conflicts in this field of battle: And though they
shall not finally overcome, they may sadly wound thee, and dishonor God. Again,
my soul, thou art not yet out of the reach of Satan, who has often desired to
have thee, that he might sift thee as wheat. Many a fiery dart may he yet throw
at thee, many grievous injections: For though the house is built upon the rock
Christ Jesus; and therefore shall not fall: Yet the rain may descend, the
floods come, the winds blow, and beat upon it; and thou have no reason to
expect any other.

Therefore, I say again, watch and pray, lest thou enter into temptation. And
beware lest self confidence should betray thee; or any of the troubles or
amusements of a vain world. O take heed of hewing out any more broken cisterns;
for they can hold no water. Not all the creatures upon earth, nor all created
things, can ever yield thee, my soul, that satisfaction thou have already found
in God, that spring and fountain of all felicity. Therefore turn not to the
creature; but maintain thy resolution to remain comfortless, except he comfort
thee with communications from himself. Let nothing less satisfy thee. Thou wast
made to glorify and enjoy him even here. Thou art not obliged to wait till
death has done its work: No, even now thou may anticipate that joy, if thou
art not wanting to thyself.

And I charge thee, my soul, harbor no distrusts of his grace. Remember this
has been thy prevailing infirmity. Therefore watch against this thy own
iniquity. It is said of Christ; that he did not many mighty works, in his own
country, because of their unbelief. Let this therefore be laid aside; and let
faith be daily upon the scout, sending it forth continually to Christ for fresh
supplies of grace and strength, and all shall be well. For he is the head of
all gracious influences. He has an immense stock to give out, an inexhaustible
fullness for his poor, needy creatures. And who can tell but he may have yet far
greater degrees of grace to bestow on thee? Even strengthening, quickening and
sanctifying grace; for he is thy sanctification as well as redemption. Who can
tell but I shall be much more conformed to his blessed image, even here? Though
perfection in holiness is not to be obtained in this life; yet grace is
absolutely free and sovereign. Some have been made eminent patterns of piety,
though in themselves unworthy, as well as I. Some lights have so shined, that
others seeing their good works, have glorified their Father who is in heaven. O
my God, unworthy wretch as I am, yet glorify thyself in me also. O, fashion me
after my great pattern: Make me holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners.

Friday evening, June 1. -- Blessed be God, I still continue to reap the
sweetness of having a place convenient for retirement. God is a gracious hearer
of prayer; pours out a spirit of prayer; strengthens and encourages my faith,
and importunity for increase of grace; discovers more and more what a good God
he is, the altogether lovely one, full of truth and faithfulness, holiness and
majesty, every way desirable, in himself; and a God greatly to be feared, as
well as praised. Never did I more clearly see the infinite distance between God
and me, a worm of the dust; and his astonishing condescension in suffering me
to approach him, than now: And I never had greater freedom through a Mediator.

Saturday evening, July 28. -- Last evening straitened and confused in prayer.
This morning waked with a sick headache; much out of order every way, and my
spirits sunk exceedingly. A gloomy vail cast over every thing. My school was to
be all confusion, my spirit of government being lost, the children, besure
would not profit by me; and so it would by degrees dwindle away, and come to
nothing. These, and the like things, Satan or unbelief took the advantage of my
indisposition, to suggest. I remark the trial, that I may the more see the hand
of providence providing, and ordering all things well for me, as faith tells me
it will.

O my God, pity me, and help me to break through the entanglements of this
world. Thou see that of myself I cannot do it. Lord, I thought anxious care,
and distrust of thy providential care, had been a conquered enemy. O have I too
confidently believed it to be so! O, forgive me, I pray thee, and for thine own
honor's sake, subdue this hateful sin. Lord, I would fain rely on thee at all
times: For I do believe (help thou my unbelief) that thou will do all things
well for me; for I am thine own. In the margin, of her diary, she inserted the
following note. April 15, 1760. Time has shown me how needless these cares and
fears were; for hitherto the Lord has helped me.


Sabbath morning, July 29. -- This morning I have again been exercised with
despondencies, and seemed to be sinking into deep waters. Lord, save me! O save
me from the prevalence of this sin of distrust! Save me from pulling on me the
evils of a tomorrow, which may never come. O save me from this sin, I beseech
thee, for in me it is attended with a thousand aggravations! For I know it is
in direct contrariety to thy positive command, "Take no thought for the
morrow." It is contrary to all my resolutions, and determinations, by grace
assisting, to commit all my concerns into thy faithful hands; and to cast all
my care upon thee. Besides, my own experience has ever proved to me thou art
the God who have fed me all my life; the God who did never leave me upon the
mount of difficulty; but always appeared and wrought deliverance. Thou have
been my tried friend in six and seven troubles. And thou have said, thou will
never leave me nor forsake me.

Monday morning, July 30. -- O with what a complete uneasiness am I exercised!
How I dread the business of the day! O, how unequal to the work am I! Lord,
help me, and qualify me for the business to which thou in thy providence have
called me. O give me wisdom from on high. --

Monday evening. -- This morning my heart was so exceedingly overwhelmed, that
I could write no more: But betook myself to e^est prayer. And O how does God
condescend to my weakness, and indulge me! While pleading with him for
strength, wisdom, patience and prudence, this cordial was given to encourage
me. Thou shall make thy way prosperous, and thou shall have good success. Have
not I commanded thee? Be strong and of good courage; be not afraid, neither be
thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou go. See
note, page 86.
This has refreshed me all the day, and bore my spirits up. Amen. Blessed God,
be thou with me, and all is well. If thou will strengthen me, I will not be
afraid, however great the work is, in which I am engaged; for thou have called
me to it once and again. O suppress all my unbelieving fears; and help me at
all times to trust and rejoice in thee, who art the God of all my mercies, for
Jesus' sake.

Monday evening, August 6. -- Blessed be God, ever since Monday last, when God
enabled me to pour out my prayers and tears into his bosom, I have been
relieved of those fears which then oppressed me. O what a God hearing prayer
have I to go to! O that every moment of my life may be devoted to him! O my
God, grant me fresh supplies of grace and strength every day. Uphold me by thy
free Spirit; for I am a poor, needy, helpless worm. And now, my God, let me get
near to the throne of grace. Give me the Spirit of adoption. Lord, thou art a
liberal giver, and upbraidest not. Thou have encouraged my hungering and
thirsting after righteousness: Yea, thou do excite it; And thou have said,
They who do so shall be filled. Yea, thou have bid me op^ my mouth wide, and
said thou will fill it; the^fore make me yet more importunate.

Lord, I am not sueing for riches, pleasures, or long life. No, but for
sanctifying grace. O, hold out the golden scepter; let me touch the top, and
grant my petition and my request, that I may glorify thee upon earth, as well
as in heaven; that I may finish the work the have given me to do.

And O revive sinking, dying religion. Let thy kingdom come, and thy will be
done. O hasten the blessed time, when Christ Jesus shall be king of nations, as
he is king of saints. --

A precious season after this. The Lord make me thankful.

Sabbath evening, September 23. -- Alas! Alas! Lord, what shall I do! I am so
ignorant, I am as a beast before thee. Yea, more brutish than any one. O
foolish and unwise! thus to keep grovelling among the corruptions of my own
heart; trying to sound the bottom of that great deep, till I am so overwhelmed,
that I know not how to look up. And as if that was not enough, now I am
mourning over my natural temper, and complaining of that, as if it was the
worst that ever mortal had. Oh, is not here a degree of murmuring against that
God, who in infinite wisdom gave me my constitution, as well as my being; and
knows how to overrule my passions, and make them subservient to his glory? O,
why cannot I watch, and endeavor to quench the fire when it is like to kindle,
or has broke out; without drowning myself with the water? What, my soul, is
become of thy faith and courage? Whither is the great Captain of thy salvation
gone now, that thou have no more eye to him? Must he be forgotten; faith's
mouth be stopped; and all because nothing more has befallen thee, than what
thou have had all thy days? This bad heart, and this bad temper, thou have
always had; and yet Jesus has not despised thee; but has pitied and succored
thee. He has had a feeling of all thine infirmities. And how many thousand
times has he leaped over these mountains of thy sins and infirmities, and come
to thee and embraced thee. These did not keep him out at first. No, he was
gracious, because he would be gracious then. He freely loved thee; and whom he
loves, he loves to the end. Is God deceived in me? Is he a man, that he should
lie; or the son of man, that he should repent? Did he not know, even from
eternity, just what I should be in time? Surely he did. And yet determined to
be gracious to me. And why, my soul, art thou now cast down; and why disquieted
within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God.

Friday morning, October 26. -- Two sudden deaths here this week! The Lord
sanctify these warnings to all the inhabitants of this place. And in special to
the bereaved relations. O may we all watch! Lord, may the unregenerate be
awakened out of their spiritual lethargy; and be brought to see how awful it
will be, if thou should come, and find them sleeping: Sleeping, till they
awake in hell. O awful thought! Lord, be merciful to such poor, stupid
creatures; and rouse them by thy providence, for thy name's sake, to seek and
secure an interest in Christ Jesus, that they may be prepared for a sudden
shock. And oh, let those who have, through sovereign grace, obtained an
interest in him, still watch, and endeavor to be in an actual preparation, that
death may be no surprise to them, notwithstanding he is to nature the king of
terrors. O may he be to such a welcome messenger, to conduct them to their
Father's house. Lord, suffer not thy own children to be in bondage all their
days, through fear of death: But, having committed their everlasting concerns
into the hands of a glorious Mediator, let them be willing to be dissolved, and
to be with him.

But, O my soul, art thou thus actually willing; actually prepared? Suppose the
grim messenger should really approach this moment; would not thou then cry
out, O spare me a little while! If thou should feel the universal shock,
would it not make thee fear and tremble too? O be not high minded, but fear.
Thou know not yet what it is to die, though thou do often endeavor to
realize it. Art not thou in almost all cases exceeding timorous and faint
hearted? I know not of such a coward as thou art. Why then always so
courageous, when thou do meditate on death? Art thou not stupid? Lord God,
thou know. But I cannot be afraid to die: While thou art with me, I will
fear no evil: No, not even though I were passing through the valley of death.
This is the way to my Father's house; and through it I must pass sooner or
later, or I can never be perfectly holy; never see his glorious face without a
vail; never but through a glass darkly. O, adored be thy name! I shall not
always be kept at this painful distance; but d^e I shall, so sure as I am now
alive. Lord, I bless thee that thou have said, Death is yours. I gladly take it
in the inventory, notwithstanding all its ghastly looks, and amazing terrors.
Let flesh and heart fail; yet God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
forever.

What though my eye strings crack, my blood chill, hands, feet and all grow
cold, and all nature is convulsed and distressed, while the soul is breaking
loose: Is this to be compared to the body of sin and death, under which I
groan; but shall then be delivered from, and bid a final adieu to forever! O,
transporting thought! O death, where is thy sting; O grave, where is thy
victory! Thanks be to God, who has given me the victory, through Jesus Christ
my Lord. Thou art surely welcome to me. No fears have I about thee, except my
God should hide his face: But I trust he will not leave me comfortless in that
hour; but will come to me, and his rod and staff shall comfort me. But let him
do with me, even in that, as seems good unto him; he will not cast off my
soul, when turned out of the body by death; but receive it to himself, and all
shall be well, let the time be when it will, or the circumstances be what they
may. Therefore I will still rejoice, because I shall die.

Tuesday morning, November 6. -- Yesterday cumbered with many things of real
necessity for the body, which deprived me of almost all my time for retirement.
Determined to retire last evening, and spend it in solemn thanksgiving to God
for the preservation of his church from the first to that day: But was
prevented. O how many hindrances are there to keep the soul from communing
with its God in this world of snares! But stop, my soul. Proceed no farther in
complaints, lest thou should be found to murmur. Caring for the body, God
has made a duty; and therefore it must be attended, as well as caring for the
soul. True, the one yields thee a more substantial pleasure, a sublimer joy,
than the other: It is good for me to draw near to God in sweet retirement: But
this is not designed, my soul, for thy continual rest. No: God has otherwise
ordered it, in infinite wisdom. Therefore submit with cheerfulness. Be not
selfish always; but let the glory of God, and a conformity to his will, be the
ultimate end of all thy actions; and thou may enjoy him in all things, even
here. And still rejoice, and be comforted, O my soul. It cannot be long, at the
most, before thou shall enter into thine eternal rest: And then thou may
drink and be satisfied at the fountain head, the Spring of all consolation:
Nothing shall ever interrupt forever and ever. O astonishing grace! But why is
such a wretch as I rejoicing in hope of this everlasting enjoyment of the
blessed God! Lord, this must be resolved into thy adorable sovereignty.

Tuesday evening, November 6. -- This has blessed be God, been a good day to
me. A sweet calm has possessed my breast, and a solemn sense of things. And
enabled seriously to talk to, and instruct my children. Some degree of
thoughtfulness appeared in them. The Lord seal instruction, and make me
instrumental of their good, for Jesus' sake. O make me more faithful to them,
both for soul and body!

March 22, 1754.
THE day before yesterday morning refreshed in reading the xvth chapter of
John. Rejoiced in the blessed union between Christ and my soul. Had a lively
sense, that without him I can do nothing; a strong desire of abiding in him,
and bearing much fruit, to the glory of his sovereign grace. Renewed solemnly
the dedication of my whole soul and body to him; to be kept by his mighty
power, and to be his own forever. Thought, if I had ten thousand such precious
jewels as my own immortal soul, I could freely cast them all into his treasury;
therefore my two mites shall be accepted, even my soul and body; since this is
all I have.

Sabbath evening, March 24. -- Tomorrow morning it will be a year since I was
first indulged with the privilege of retiring to this dear place for the
performance of secret duties. And though in this time I have had many
interruptions from within and without; yet, bless the Lord, my soul; for many a
gracious (...) has he condescended to make thee here, when no mortal eye has
seen or ear heard. Here has God poured out a spirit of prayer; held me up to
wrestle with him for spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus; strengthened my
faith, love, repentance, zeal and every grace. Here he has given me views of
himself and eternal things; cleared up my right to him and them; and enabled me
to renew my choice and dedications. O, this has been a good year to me! O my
God, continue thy mercy, and give me grace to improve this, and all my other
privileges for thy glory, and the good of my precious soul, which is thine own
forever, for Jesus' sake.

Thursday morning, April 4. -- This is a day set apart for public fasting and
prayer. O that God may spirit his people and his ministers to cry mightily to
him this day! Is not there a loud call in providence? Are there not some places
already distressed by the blood thirsty enemy? And are we not also in danger?
Surely we are in eminent danger; for our sins expose us to every thing that is
dreadful. Oh, how great are our abominations! Lord, humble us in the dust
before thee this day, and hear the cries of thy people: Lord, spare thy people,
and give not thine heritage to reproach. O preserve thine honor. Magnify thy
name above all the earth. Let not the enemy insultingly say, Where is now your
God!

O Lord, if even thy patience is tired out, and thou will bear no longer, but
desolation must come, as to temporals; O pour out thy Spirit, Lord. If
suffering times are coming, O give suffering grace; or who will be able to
stand up for thee, against Antichrist and his combined legions!

Thursday evening, April 4. -- After I wrote this morning, God condescended to
afford me the humbling influences of his Spirit; enabled me to confess my sins,
and the sins of the nation and land, and to bewail them before him; and to
resolve, by grace assisting, to throw down every weapon of rebellion, and to be
more than ever devoted to him. Cried for strengthening grace; and for suffering
grace, if I should live to see suffering times. Deprecated being ever left to
desert Christ, or his cause. Begged that I might, if it were possible, rather
suffer ten thousand deaths. O that God, for his name's sake, may preserve me!
Solemnly renewed my written covenant, which seventeen years ago was solemnly
owned before God and his holy angels. O blessed be God I lived to see that day!
And that he has not suffered me to make void that covenant. O may it stand
ratified and confirmed in heaven forever and ever, for ^he sake of Christ. For
it is an everlasting covenant, never to be forgotten.

Lord, hear the cries of thy people this day, I beseech thee, and pour out a
spirit of supplication more and more upon thy own children. O may religion
thrive and flourish! May the Redeemer's kingdom prosper and be advanced. O may
all the kingdoms of the earth become the kingdom of my Lord, and of his Christ;
and may he reign forever and ever.

Once this day I was interrupted, I think by a stratagem of Satan, who threw
into my mind, as a dart, some things which I took hard of some neighbors: And
withal some resentment began to rise. But presently this scripture was brought
to my thoughts, "If ye forgive not men their trespasses against you, neither
will your Father, who is in heaven, forgive you your trespasses." Upon which I
soon found not only a disposition to forgive them myself; but was enabled to
cry to God for them, that he also would forgive them all their trespasses
against him, and unite them to Christ by a living faith* Thus God overruled,
and defeated Satan in his designs against me. Blessed be his name forever!

Saturday morning, May 25. -- O my Lord, when shall I get near to thee, and
unbos^ myself to thee! Lord, thou see wants press hard. I want faith, love,
humility, repentance, zeal, knowledge, prudence, patience, and increase of
every grace; and by faith and prayer to draw water out of the well of
salvation, that my weary, thirsty, barren soul may be satisfied, and made fat
and flourishing. Lord, I am a stranger on earth; O hide not thy face from me,
but let me recover spiritual strength, before I go hence, and be here no more.
I am a pilgrim and stranger here, traveling to my eternal home. O when shall I
reach the peaceful regions! where storms and tempests never co^; where I shall
see thy lovely face forever, and be like a holy God!

Saturday morning, September 7. -- Have all this week past labored under bodily
indisposition, and great dullness in spirituals. The Lord pity, forgive and
quicken me according to his word.

Tuesday morning, September 10. -- Still in an unsettled frame. Cannot fix on
any thing. Nothing seems spiritual enough. I daily want; but cannot be
satisfied. Every thing seems to have lost its life and vigor. My own writings
are all insipid; nor can I find any body's else, which seem to favor of heaven
enough: No, not even the seraphic Watts himself. All is flat and dull. The
Bible itself does not reach me! --

O my soul, what a disorder has seized thee now! Surely thou art sick; or thou
would not have lost thy taste at this rate. O that God may restore thee to
appetite and health again speedily, if it be his blessed will. O how nearly art
thou allied to this body! Because that is disordered, thou art also. God be
merciful to me a sinner, and deal with me in covenant love and faithfulness, as
thine own, for Jesus' sake.

Friday morning, September 12. -- I have not yet recovered my spiritual taste,
and my soul is faint and restless. It wants food; and, Lord, it will grow lean
from day to day, if thou do not feed it with the bread of life.

September 15, Sabbath morning. -- As I awoke today I was refreshed by these
words, "This is the day the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it."
And these, "O that I knew where I might find him! That I might come even to his
seat! I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments." --
In reading Romans vii. also, the Spirit of God bore witness with my spirit, that
it is my daily experience that I do delight in the law of God, after the inward
man. Notwithstanding the law in my members, warring against the law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.

Grace was for a few minutes drawn forth into sensible, lively exercise; and I
appeared to myself as a vessel which had been wind bound, and could by no means
get forward, while wind and tide were against it. But, now, as there seemed to
be a favorable gale, determined to weigh anchor, hoist sail, ply my work, and
make all speed toward the desired haven. --

But, alas! ere I could get to my closet, to pour out my soul to God there, I
seemed becalmed again. May I improve every breeze of the Spirit, since, as the
wind he blows when and where he lists. The Lord make me thankful, that I
have not been all the days of my life left destitute of his operations.

This evening refreshed and strengthened by the dear Mediator's prayer, John
xvii. whom the Father hears always; Yea, and he will fulfill his request,
though I cannot pray as I ought. O my soul, believe and be comforted; for he
will keep thee from the evil. He will sanctify thee through the truth. He will
maintain the union between his blessed self, and thee. He will ere long take
thee to himself, to behold his glory. Amen, blessed Jesus; for I am thine own
forever.

December 25. -- Very stormy this morning. Thunder, lightning, wind, rain, and
hail. O blessed be God for Jesus Christ, that sure refuge from every storm. O
may every one, who this day pretends to celebrate his birth, with praise, make
their flight to him by faith, and find shelter under the shadow of his wings,
that they may be secured, not only from temporal troubles, but from the storm
of vengeance, which hangs over a guilty world. Lord, have compassion on poor,
ignorant sinners, and reveal thy Son to them. O let them not perish, since a
glorious Savior is born, and the glad tidings have reached our ears. O let not
this place be as Chorazin and Bethsaida, but Lord have mercy on us, and turn us
to thyself. Turn us from the error of our ways, from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God. Lord, pity us a sinful people, laden with sins.
Truly our iniquities cry aloud for vengeance; but O pour out thy Spirit, and
not thy fury. Lord, what profit is there in our blood? O magnify the riches of
thy sovereign grace, by turning this people to thyself. O, will thou not get to
thyself a great name? Surely thou will. The glory will be all thine own. This
people is noted for vileness. O may thy power appear. True, O Lord, thou
stand in no need of us, nor can our conversion add to thine essential glory;
but to thy declarative glory it will. O, of these hearts of stone raise up
children unto Abraham. O let there be a shaking among these dry bones, if it be
thy blessed wi^* And, O Lord, revive religion in thine own children. Here is
there not a remnant, even in this place, bad as it is, who are indeed thi^ own,
by regeneration and adoption? O, blessed be God, there is, or we had been as
Sod^m and Gomortha. Lord, in mercy pour out o^ these a Spirit of prayer and
supplication. ^ stir up thine own children to greater dilige^ in thy way and
work: O let them be strengthened, edified, yea sanctified throughout, for
Jesus' sake. O Lord, let not thine own children live at so low a rate, that
they cannot be distinguished from the children of the Devil. Lo^d* I lament
this before thee, that thou do receive so many cruel wounds in the house of
thy friends. O let the children of Zion appear so eminent in their lives and
conversations, that all who know them may take knowledge of them, that they
have indeed been with Jesus* are indeed united to him; and do indeed enjoy
secret, intimate communion with him, day by day. Lord, let it be thus, if it be
thy blessed will. Unveil thy glorious face, discover thine adorable perfections
to thy children, and they will be more transformed into thy lovely image: This
will make their faces shine, when they partake more and more of thy holiness. O
let holiness to the Lord be stamped upon all their employments and enjoyments
as christians, easy to be read of every one, that glory may redound to thy
great name. Lord, let it be no longer said of christians, professing thy name,
here is one worldly minded, covetous, cheating* another drunken; another
overcome of his violent passions. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I could weep day and night for the dishonor done to thy
name by this. O my God, put forth thine hand and slay me this moment, rather
than let me live to see that dreadful day, when religion shall suffer and be a
stench in the nostrils of thine enemies, through my means. O my God, preserve
me by thine almighty power, not for my sake, but for thine honor's sake. Lord,
do what thou will with me, as to this world, only make me holy as thou art
holy. Let me walk as Christ, my great pattern walked: Only let my conversation
be as becomes the gospel of Christ!

January 1, 1755.
O BLESSED be God who has brought me to see the close of the last, and the
beginning of this new year in peace. O my soul, how great has the mercy of thy
God been to thee, the year past. How has he fed, clothed, and comforted thee
with his bounty, given thee a good degree of health and strength, and caused
every thing, in his providence, to work for thine advantage. Surely, truth and
faithfulness have been written on all his dealings with thee. He has blessed
thee also in spiritual regards; has granted thee more frequent access to his
throne, than in years past, and has proved himself a God hearing prayer. He has
quickened, and encouraged, and strengthened thee in his way; and though thou
have yet reason to be humbled before a holy God, because thou art no more
conformed to his lovely image, yet thou ha^t reason to rejoice that he is daily
carrying on his own glorious work in thee, in opposition to all thine inbred
lusts and corruptions, the world and the Devil; and he will perfect the same,
for he is a faithful, omnipotent God. O ^y soul, stand amazed at the goodness
that has recovered thee from backslidings. O, wherefore is it, that the
backslider is not filled with her own ways? Why has not God long ago said, Let
her alone? Why am I not, from a backslider in religion, now become an apostate?
O, where is it that my God has again condescended to return to me, and admit me
to draw near to him? yea even took me into his arms, and laid me in his bosom,
there to rest my weary head! O my soul, if there be the least spark of
gratitude in thee, now be faithful to thy God, who has thus remembered the day
of thine espousals, and would not let thee go, notwithstanding all thy
provocations, thine unfaithful dealings with him. O lie in the dust, and adore
the faithfulness of a covenant keeping God, who has said, he will never leave
thee nor forsake thee. O amazing grace! Astonishing love! O Lord, who am I,
that thou art still mindful of me, and that thou have brought me hitherto? O
let my soul be strengthened. Since Omnipotence and Faithfulness have taken me
into his hands he will not let me go. O my God, bind me ten thousand times
faster to thyself than ever. From this day forward, let me be for thee and none
else. O why should any other object have any part of my time, strength,
talents, or thoughts, since all are thine? yea, the whole heart is thine. Lord,
in the presence of thy holy Angels I solemnly renew the dedication of it to
thee. O possessit more than ever. It is thine own. And let me possess my own
God more than ever. Lord, whom have I in heaven but thee? And thou, who know
all things, know that there is nothing on earth I desire in comparison, or
competition with thee. O, therefore, whether I live or die this year, let me
enjoy thee, and all is well. Lord, I ask nothing else: This is all my
salvation, and will be all my joy. If I may but possess and glorify thee, all
shall be well. Keep me upon earth, or take me to Heaven: Do with me as seems
thee good: Only glorify thyself, and let me have my chosen portion. O let
nothing steal my heart from God. O blessed Jesus, let no separating walls be
between us. Break them down: Rend every vail. I depend on thee. O appear daily
on my behalf.

Sabbath evening, January 5. -- O Lord, pity and pardon thy poor child, under
the remains of corruption. Lord, help me to mortify the deeds of the body, yea
to crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts. Let them be crucified: Let
them be crucified. O let them die a sure death: Let them never recover
strength; never separate between my God and me; never break the bond of the
everlasting covenant between thee and me. Lord, pity, Lord, help. O be not
angry with me, but subdue my sins, for Jesus' sake. Lord, espouse the cause of
thy poor defenseless worm. Behold what an host is encompassed against me. Lord,
restrain Satan, or he will be as a roaring lion. Help me to overcome the world,
or that will be too hard for me. O my Savior, thou have bid me be of good
cheer, since thou have overcome the world. Lord, stand by and strengthen me,
and then I will be of good cheer; for I know with thee all things are possible.
Though I am weakness, thou art strength. O let me daily see thee, by an eye of
faith, and clasp thee in the arms of faith, and all shall be well: I will not
fear either earth, or hell. O manifest thyself to me, as thou do not to the
world. O let me enjoy thee, my life, my light, my love* Let me lie on thy
breast, or lie at thy feet continually. O, by thy grace, I have chosen the one
thing needful: That better part: Let it never be taken from me. O thou
omnipotent, faithful Jehovah, hold me up in this life, and take me to thyself
hereafter, for I am ten thousand times thine own; and thine, by thy grace, I
will be to all eternity.

February 20. -- O my God, appear for me, and break and humble this haughty
stony heart. O, thou art, indeed, a holy, just and terrible God; and it is
astonishing condescension that ever thou should admit such an unholy soul as
mine into thy Majesty's presence. O lay me in the dust, for I am vile,
exceedingly vile. Lord, I am nothing but wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores;
a perfect lump of ingratitude, pride, sloth, unbelief, hypocrisy, and all
manner of abomination. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint: I
blush and am ashamed to look up, because of my nonconformity to thee. O thou,
who art of purer eyes than to behold sin, can not but abhor these sins that
thus pollute, and defile my soul. Lord, I bewail them, and long for freedom
from them. But thou see how iniquity prevails over me. O Lord, be not angry
with, but pity thy poor helpless worm. Is there not a fountain set open, in the
blood of thy dear Son, for sin and uncleanness? What though my sins are of a
scarlet and crimson die, what though they have ten thousand aggravations, is
not the blood of Christ sufficient? Surely it is. O apply it, for thy name's
sake, not only to free me from the guilt and punishment of sin, but from its
pollution also. O blessed Jesus thou did die to save thy people from their
sins, not in them. O save me, even me, unworthy as I am, from mine. O let
victorious grace gain a fresh conquest over my corruptions, that I may gladly
hear thy voice, and open my heart to thee. And O come in and sup with me, and I
with thee. O for union, and more intimate communion with thee. Lord, conform me
to thine image. It is easy with thee. O grant me some transforming views, and
bring my soul out of the pit. O Lord, if thou do not uphold me, I shall
dishonor thy great name. O bind me to thyself.

Let Zion prosper, and bless thy ministers, dear Lord, with the richest of thy
blessings. O take them near thyself. Lord, encourage, quicken, and strengthen
them, for Jesus' sake.

February 21. -- This morning the Lord graciously afforded me the humbling
influences of his blessed Spirit. I think my heart was in some measure broken
under a sense of sin. My pride, sloth, ingratitude, hypocrisy, and unbelief,
appeared odious: Had some strength to plead for pardon and victory over them,
for Jesus' sake. The Lord hear and answer. O let me rise by repentance, and
renewed acts of faith in the dear Mediator; and O pour o^ on me a spirit of
prayer and supplication, that I may pray for thy ministers, and for the
prosperity of Zion, as well as for mine own soul. Lord, in mercy pour out thy
spirit now, upon ministers and people. In this trying, distressing time, Lord,
arise for thine honor's sake, and for thy Son's sake.

Sabbath day, March 2. -- Yesterday I was indulged with another opportunity to
join with my dear, dear friend, Susa Anthony, in prayer for ourselves, for
ministers, and private christians, the prosperity of Zion, in all parts of the
world, for direction in the affairs of life, for sinners, for preservation from
our enemies, or grace to be faithful if they prevail, for all in authority, for
our dear relations. The Lord be praised for assistance granted, and hear and
answer for Jesus' sake.

March 20. -- This day being set apart, by our society, for fasting and prayer,
I determined, by grace assisting, to devote the whole day to the exercises of
religion, in secret as well as in public, and if I found I could bear up,
without being unfitted for duty, wholly to ab^ from all food or refreshment.

That text seemed to remove my fears about my strength failing in the morning,
"If ye have faith, as a grain of mustard seed; ye shall say to this mountain,
Be thou removed." These words, also, of Esther, "I and my maids will fast also,
and so will I go in to the King." And blessed be God, he has supported and
strengthened me almost to the close of the day, and I humbly hope has enabled
me to keep such a fast as he has chosen. Surely God has assisted me in
confession of sins, both mine own, and those of our nation, and in my cries for
pardon and strength, to mortify, and finally overcome, both in his house, and
in secret, and in renewing my cries for holiness, even an entire conformity to
his image. God has assisted me, also, in the work of self examination, and
shone in on the evidences of grace in my soul, assisted me in reading, in
renewing solemn covenant engagements. The Lord, He is God. The Lord Jehovah is
my God, and I am his forever. I have not been crying to Baal, or any of the
idol gods, but to the living God, even to that God, who has styled himself a
God hearing prayer: And he will hear and answer, for Jesus' sake.

O my soul, be comforted, for God will carry on his own work in thee. He will
subdue thine iniquities here, and ere long take thee to himself: And then a
dismissal to sin, forever. Amen, Hallelujah. Blessed be God for Jesus Christ,
the foundation of all my hopes and joys, whose I am, and by grace will be
forever.

Saturday afternoon, April 5. -- Blessed ^ God, indulged again with opportunity
to (...) in prayer with my two dear friends. God granted them freedom, held
them up to wre^ with him, for a revival of religion, the prosperity of Zion in
general, and especially for ministers, for ourselves, and all dear to us by the
bonds of nature: Assisted in confession and ^miliation, as well as petition. I
trust I a^ did bear my part, while joining with the^: Was, I think, solemn and
engaged. The L^ hear and answer: Accept of any degree of ^cerity, and
graciously reward it for Jesus' (...) who purchased and bestowed it. The L^
pardon the sins and imperfections cleaving ^ all our performances. O Lord, they
have (...) of washing in the blood of Jesus Christ. And in particular humble me
under thy frown ^ on me, when I attempted to open my mo^ in prayer. O Lord,
show me, if it be thy blessed will, wherefore thou did contend w^ me, by
withholding the influence of thy Spi^ O why was I so shut up, in a moment str^
dumb before thy throne? Did I venture to ^pproach in mine own strength, without
that ^pendence on thy blessed Spirit, which is ^ due? O Holy Spirit, did I thus
grieve thee and cause thee to withdraw? Lord, I lame^ it, and own thou art
just. O forgive me. -- O^ Lord, did thou see, if I were enlarged, t^
spiritual pride would arise and rob thee of t^ due, by ascribing that to self
which belongs alone to thee? O did thou do it, to hide pride from mine eyes?
Lord, let it have this effect, for Jesus' sake, and I will rejoice even in mine
infirmities. If it were owing to bodily indisposition, rather than soul
diseases, Lord, thou ^est: And O if it be thy will teach me to distinguish,
that I may submit to thy sovereign pleasure. God forbid that I should murmur,
for thou art an holy, wise, sovereign, good God, and do all things well. But,
O suffer me to long for that joyful period, when all these hindrances shall be
done away; when sin shall never more cloud thy lovely face, nor shall my soul
be clogged with this crazy body, but always fly swift as a Seraph to execute
thy commands. O Lord, thou know how it longs to soar aloft and fly to thee,
as a bird out of the cage. When, O Lord, when shall the prison walls be broken
down, that I may see thee as thou art, and be holy as thou art holy. O hasten
the time, if it be thine holy will. But pause, my soul, and be awakened! Do
thou, in very deed, expect all this? Then wait God's time with patience. It is
always the best. And be thankful for what thou do enjoy of God here. It is
ten thousand times more than thou deservest; yea, infinitely more. O follow
hard after him. Fill every part of time with duty: If thou can not find him
in one duty, turn to another. He will be found of thee here, in some degree. O
love him more, praise him more, trust him more, rejoice in him more, aim more
at his glory. Be faithful unto death, and he will give thee a crown of life.
Fly to that promise, for he will fu^ it. "All things work together for good, to
the^ who love God, to them who are called according to his purpose." Rejoice,
my soul, for in Christ Jesus all are yea and amen.

Saturday evening, April 19. -- I have been these two days past in very poor,
low fra^ much bodily indisposition, headache, gre^ co^, quite unfit for close
application to preparatory work for the sacrament. The Lord pity and pardon for
Jesus' sake, who has died, the just for the unjust. O may I, by his blood, be
brought ^igh unto God. Lord, deal not with me according to my sins, nor reward
(...) according to mine iniquities, for if thou do, I shall surely profane
thine holy table, and come empty away; yea, expose myself to terrible
judgments. Lord, appear for me, unworthy as I am, and prepare my unprepared
hea^ O stir up suitable desires, hunger and thirst after communion with
thyself. Yea, draw forth every sacramental grace into lively exercise. O melt
this frozen heart. Grant me evangelical repentance, that I may look on him whom
I have pierced, and mourn bitterly as for (...) only son. O humble me to the
dust, and give me a sense of pardon, if it be thy blessed will. Let faith and
love still cling to, and embrace a glorious Christ in all his offices; and O
for his sake, Lord, grant me discoveries of thine adorable perfections, that my
soul may be transformed more into thy lovely image. O for some higher degrees
of grace. Lord, quicke^, strengthen and sanctify me throughout. O say that I
shall grow strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus. Lord, let me not
always remain a dwarf, a babe in Christ; but O cause me to grow as the lily, or
as the tall cedars of Lebanon. May I, by faith and love, mount up, as on
eagle's wings, toward Heaven. O I am weary and heart sick of these low
grovelling frames. I long to arise. Lord, draw me near to thyself by the
influences of thy blessed Spirit. O water me with the dew of heaven. refresh my
soul with a plentiful shower, now in this dry and thirsty land, where no water
is. O may the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and shine
into, and warm this cold heart. O let every property of the blood of Christ be
applied to my poor, necessitous soul. Lord, hear, for his sake, who shed his
precious blood on the accursed tree, even for such as me. O may I, by this
ordinance, be bound ten thousand times faster to thyself than ever. O thou
great Captain of my salvation, go before me, and conquer all my foes: Subdue my
stubborn will; yea, subdue me wholly and forever to thyself. Come, Prince and
Savior, come and reign in me, whose right it is; and, O Lord, hasten the time
when I shall enjoy thee, behold thy glory, see thee as thou art, when all veils
and walls of separation shall be forever broken down, and I shall gaze, adore
and praise, as glorified saints and angels do. Then this crazy load shall
trouble me no more, nor sleep, that devourer of precious time, nor a vain
world, that disturber of my peace and engrosser of my thoughts, nor Satan with
his fiery darts. Sin shall cease, odious sin shall cease forever. O that this
were the happy moment. It was thou that causedst my Lords to bleed and die; it
is thou that have so often grieved his blessed Spirit, and hid his lovely face
from me. God forbid, I should ever be friends with thee, hateful monster! Lord
Jesus, let this enemy be crucified, let it be crucified for thy name's sake,
and all shall be well forever. I will, by thy grace, wait with patience mine
appointed time. Thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven.

April 22. -- Blessed be God, the Sabbath was a sweet day to me. It pleased God
graciously to afford me the influences of his Spirit all the day, and in
special at his table. My whole soul was engaged. I think repentance, faith,
love, desire, and every sacramental grace was in lively exercise. Sin appeared
hateful; its utter destruction was vehemently longed for, and the increase of
grace thirsted for. Renewed solemn covenant, pleaded that I might renew my
strength: That sin might now be nailed to the accursed tree. Longed for the
full enjoyment of God; did believe God would keep me by his mighty power here,
and at last bring me to glory. And he will, my soul, he will. O he is a
faithful God. The snare is broken, and I am escaped; broken by a glorious
Christ. O blessed be God, for Jesus Christ. I longed that every soul there
might be indeed united to him, and enjoy communion with him. I heard that day,
also, that my poor performance was printed. Mrs. Osborn has reference here to a
letter, which she wrote to a christian female friend; which came to the sight
of the Rev. Mr. Prince of Boston; who applied to the author for her consent to
the publication of it. She consented, on condition that her name should not be
inserted. It was accordingly published under the following title: "The nature,
certainty, and evidence, of true Christianity: In a letter from a gentlewoman
in Rhode island, to another, her dear friend, in great darkness, doubt, and
concern of a religious nature."

This letter, containing 14 or 15 pages octavo, has had a second, and third
edition, while she lived; and is now out of p^int.


This gave me a sense of my vileness, and earnest longings that God might be
glorified thereby. It appears another solemn bond and obligation for me to lead
a holy life. My soul rejoiced in every bond, and longed to be bound ten
thousand times faster than ever. New arguments put into my mouth to plead for
holiness in heart and life. In the evening very ill, and so remained all night,
and the day after. Rejoiced that God had enabled me to yield active obedience
before, saw that I was then called to passive obedience, and when God might
give case hoped to return to active again. And blessed be God, he has enabled
me so ^o do with vigor. A precious refreshing season at the throne of grace
today: A sweet calm ever since. The business of the day pleasant. Have enjoyed
God in all. O my soul, be thankful, and press forward. Let nothing discourage
thee, for thou have to do with a compassionate, faithful God, who will secure
his own honor, and order all things well for thee, who art his forever, for
Jesus' sake.

April 30. -- After I wrote yesterday had freedom at the throne of grace: Was,
I trust, really assisted in pleading with God for his ministers, and his
churches, that his own glory might be advanced. Enabled to leave all events
with him, and determined to acquiesce in his will, whatever it might be, by the
assistance of his Spirit and grace. The wisdom of God appeared lovely, which
orders all things well; yea, and it is infinite. O may I ever submit to it, and
to adorable sovereignty. Lord take from me every degree of resistance, all
stubbornness, sourness, all pride and opinion of mine own knowledge. Let me
have no choice in any event or affair but what is first thine. O that my will
were wholly subject, that it might forever harmonize with the divine will. O
that there might never be another jarring note, no discord, but that God might
be forever glorified in and by me, as by the angels in heaven. Father, thy will
be done. Amen: Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

May 1. -- A golden season at the throne of grace, after I wrote yesterday. The
Lord make me thankful. A view by faith of the infinite wisdom, mighty power,
absolute sovereignty, and astonishing condescension of the glorious and
faithful Jehovah. Had some sweet thoughts on the nature of true friendship:
Pleaded that with Abraham of old I might approve myself his faithful friend, by
universally obeying his will; espousing his cause against all that oppose it;
adorning the profession I have made by an holy life. Here faith fixed on the
power of God, to subdue every rebel in me, and rejoicing because he can with
infinite ease speak me into holiness. It is but to say, I will; be thou
cleansed: I will; be thou holy: I will; be thou strong, and very courageous,
and it shall be. I shall hold on my way, renew my strength, and mount up
toward heaven, for Christ will keep the precious soul committed to his charge,
the purchase of his precious blood. Here with joy I again committed it into his
faithful hands, and triumphed in him as my strong refuge, my rock, my high
tower and sure defense, and have ever since had sweet peace. Those words have
been lovely to me, "Great peace have they, who love thy law, and nothing shall
offend them." And these, "Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee."

Enlarged also in request for ministers and christians, that God may be
glorified in them: And I trust God will grant my requests, for he brought me
into his banqueting house, and I trust did hold out the golden scepter, and
enable me to draw nigh, and touch the top: His banner over me was love, and he
will grant me all that consists with his glory, and I want no more. May his
will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Amen and amen.

Monday, May 5. -- When I wrote last evening, I seemed only rationally
convinced that things were well with me, but did not find the lively exercise
of holy joy till I came to pray. Then I had a precious season, a distinct view
of my ignorance of God, his perfections, and of all divine things: I appeared
as a beast before him. A precious view of Christ, in his prophetic office,
renewed my choice of him: In this pleaded my great need of divine teaching;
believed he would teach me by his blessed Spirit, and lead me into all
necessary truth. Rejoiced in him, as the great and only teacher come from
heaven. Had also an humbling sense of the universal depravity of my nature. The
direct contrariety to a holy God, and the stubbornness of my perverse will, my
unbelief, pride, sloth, hypocrisy of my heart, how awfully guilty, how deeply
polluted. This I bewailed, and that I have been a transgressor from the womb;
an ungrateful abuser of divine mercy. But Christ Jesus appeared so glorious and
lovely in his priestly office, that my soul was transported with joy: His
obedience and his blood; his glorious resurrection and session at his Father's
right hand; his being touched with the feeling of my infirmities. My soul flew
to him, and embraced him, as my great High Priest, my great Advocate in the
court of heaven: Pleaded for justification, a free and full pardon, for his
sake alone. A view still of the great power and tyranny of sin, Satan and the
world, to draw off my heart from God. Renewed my choice of Christ, as my
absolute sovereign, my Prince, as well as Savior: Committed my precious soul
again into his merciful and faithful hands. Yea, and he will keep, by his
mighty power, what I have committed to him, for he is a glorious King, and he
is my God and King, and I will, by his grace, be his loyal subject forever.

May 29. -- Since I wrote last have had precious seasons of prayer: I trust
real communion with God, in his glorious attributes; joyful renewals of choice
and surrenders of soul. The Lord make me thankful.

Yesterday morning more confused, and so have been ever since, by a serious
caution given by a christian friend, by which I was convinced I had been
betrayed into too rash a censure of another's failings. O will God forgive me,
and forbid I should ever indulge a censorious spirit. Lord, let me not be
unmerciful to the failings of others, while I have the feeds of every
abomination in me, and it is owing to sovereign grace alone, that I have not
fallen into every thing that is dreadful. O my soul, be humble. Who has made
thee to differ, or what have thou, which thou have not received? -- O that God
would humble me, and conquer this pride and arrogance in me. O hateful sin. I
abhor myself for it. O wash it away in the precious blood of my dear Redeemer.

Blessed be God, after I wrote this morning he poured on me the humbling
influences of his blessed Spirit in prayer, for the pride of my heart. I was
ashamed to look up, because so unholy, so unlike my great Pattern. I loathed
and abhored myself, and have ever since carried self abhorrence about me.
Blessed be God, for the reproof given by his servant, and applied by his
blessed Spirit. The Lord bless his servant, and make him more and more
faithful. O enrich his precious soul daily, with more of the graces of thy
Blessed Spirit, that thou may be glorified in him here and to all eternity.

Monday morning, June 9. -- O this crazy load, this sloth, this sleep. How much
of my precious time does it engross. O when shall it once be, that every moment
shall be devoted to the immediate service of my God. O blessed be God! it will
be so ere long. Wait, my soul, with patience, and mean while be thankful for
the moments thou do enjoy. Do not murmur. God gave thee thy body, thy
constitution, and as it is infirm and wants refreshment by sleep to fit it for
service, do not complain, but be thankful, for it is God who gives his beloved
sleep. How many have this night groaned, and wished for the mercy thou have
enjoyed. The Lord make me thankful. But O, suffer me not to indulge the monster
sloth. O my God, behold how an enemy lies in ambush on every side, and pity me.
If I acknowledge the work of thy grace, and attempt to praise thee, behold
pride and vain glory tyrannizing. If willing to take the refreshment thou
afforde^ me, behold sloth lurks under that cover. O these crawling toads, these
hissing serpents! how contrary to thee and me! Lord, subdue them, for Jesus'
sake, and hold me, by thine almighty power, near thyself. Lord, do but command,
and they shall hide their impious heads. O crush them forever, my King and my
God; for I am thine, and thou art mine.

Thursday morning, August 7. -- While writing, yesterday had a realizing sense
of the stability, of the promises, the security of the saint while surrounded
by them: Could, in the strength of the Lord Jehovah, bid defiance to all the
powers of sin and hell. Had a precious season at the throne of grace in making
over all my vast concerns into the hands of Christ, pleading that he might
fully possess me by his Spirit, in every room and faculty of my soul. O let all
my desires and affections be collected and sent, and all my delights lodged
above in the highest heaven, where Christ Jesus is. Lord, so wean me from
things below that I may in a moment be ready to pass over Jordan to meet thee.

O my God, I have lately seen what the agonies of death mean. A shocking sight,
indeed, while the poor unprepared soul shrinks back and would lodge in its
crazy cottage! But go it must, and appear before God. I had a deep sense of
things, while with my dying neighbor, and God enabled me to send up strong
cries to him for the poor soul. My spirits were overwhelmed, and my whole
framed crushed with the weight. But alas! time is fled and gone, and the state
of the soul is unalterably fixed in boundless eternity. Whether in weal, or
woe, God knows: I determine not. But this I know, that the will of a just and
sovereign God is done, and he is glorified, yea and will be glorified: And may
his will be forever done, whatever becomes of his enemies. In their misery,
strictly speaking, I do not rejoice; but in God's being glorified I do, and
will rejoice. Let every one, who finally loves not the Lord Jesus, be accursed;
yea, let all in me that loves him not, be bitterly accursed. Let all that will
not submit to the scepter of his grace be crushed with his iron rod; yea, let
him dash them in pieces as a potter's vessel. In this, thou, Lord, who know
all things, know that I will rejoice. The thou know I have been seeking
many yea^ with supplications and tears. And O remembe^ them, and answer them,
my God and my King, O brandish thy victorious sword: Make ^ drunk with the
heart's blood of thine enemies* O let not an Agag escape. O let not (...) room,
nor so much as the corner of a room ^ possessed by these traitors. But come,
Lord Jesus, come now and possess a soul that is thi^ Come, Lord, and satisfy it
with thyself. O let the perpetual voice be there, "Christ and (...) Spirit,
Christ and his grace -- none but Christ, none but Christ."

O Thou altogether lovely One, come and abide with me. Lord, either stay with
me, or take me to thyself. O I cannot let thee go. What is all this world to
me? If thou be absent, thou know I cannot be comforted. No, by thy grace, I
never will: Nothing but mine own p^tion shall content me. O let the blessed un^
be more and more complete day by day. Gr^ me sensible communion with thee. O
manifest thyself to me as thou do not to the world, f^ thou have redeemed me
by thy precious blood, and thou have by thy Spirit applied the purchased
redemption. Lord, thou know I am n^ of the world, for thou have called me
out of the world. I have heard thy voice and have followed thee: Yea, and by
the assistance of the grace (for without thee I can do nothing) I ^ determined
to follow thee whithersoever thou go.

Wednesday morning, August 27. -- By the intenseness of my thoughts on God and
divine things, last week, my animal spirits have been much exhausted, and
bodily indisposition increased, so that I have since been interrupted in my
flight heavenward. But still I have cause to be thankful; yea to bless, admire
and adore the astonishing riches of grace; for I do, through it, walk with God
again. O that I could take every backsliding child in the whole world by the
hand, and lead them back to their heavenly Father, since I, who have been a
backslider, an abuser of the richest grace and dearest love, am,
notwithstanding all, restored. O grace! O Truth and Faithfulness! Surely there
is no god like my God, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; yea, crimson
and scarlet sins, big with the greatest ingratitude. O blush and be astonished
ye heavens over my head, thou earth under my feet: For I have sinned against
that light and endearing love, that many thousands now in hell never did: And
yet O how does that precious blood plead for me! O how does it cleanse, pardon
and sanctify. How does it overflow and cover the huge rocks and mountains sin
has raised in my soul, and triumphs over all, and will speak peace and pardon:
Will bring home the guilty runaway to her God and Father, and cause him to be
reconciled and smile again. O precious blood! O precious Christ! O blessed
union between Christ and my soul.

He will do all things well: He will give grace and glory: He will carry on his
own work to the last finishing stroke. Oppose him, world: Oppose him, lusts,
tyrants and traitors: Oppose him, devils! Ye shall not all be able to pluck the
soul out of his hands. O precious, almighty and faithful Savior! O ye angels
who excel in strength, if possible, love him more, praise him more. O all ye
saints on earth, renew your flight to him and love him more. O my soul, who
have of all creatures most reason, love him more and serve him better.

Friday morning, September 19. -- My heart is now full of grief because full of
folly. My unruly tongue dropped many things yesterday which I fear will prove a
disadvantage. O when shall I cease to vindicate myself to man. Lord* when shall
this pride, this ostentatious spirit be suppressed? O pity and pardon me.
Gracious Lord, teach me how, as far as in me lies, to live peaceably with all
men, and to approve myself to God and conscience, and let the world judge of me
what it will. O that I might follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord. O for a meek and quiet spirit! this is to be
Christlike.

Monday morning, October 6. -- O! I have cause to hang my harp upon the willow,
for all the day, yesterday, I was at an awful distance from God: My heart like
a dry, barren wilderness, little in it but wanderings. O my heart was pained
last night, and wanted to express itself by prayer, but could not find freedom
of access, till on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, and obtained a
little relief. But now I am heart sick of myself, and of my poor lifeless
duties. Lord, what are these dead sacrifices to thee, the living God? Are they
not an abomination in thy sight, O thou holy, holy, heartsearching Jehovah? O
thou art infinitely just, if thou leave me thus to myself, for I have daily
forfeited all the assistance of thy blessed Spirit. But, O take not the
forfeiture at my hands. Lord, I am ruined and undone, if thou depart from me. I
cannot let thee go. O strengthen my faith! O may Omnipotence hold me! Let not
sin triumph and vaunt like a Goliath. O let it not separate between my God and
me, much less pluck me out of thine hands. O that mine head were waters, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I could weep day and night, because of my
contrariety to thee.

Tuesday morning, October 7. -- I scarcely know now what to make of myself. I
am dejected, pained at my heart. There seems to be a veil of separation between
God and my soul, but I cannot find in particular what it is. Whether any thing
more than bodily indisposition be in the way, I cannot tell. I know sin I daily
do; but God keeps me watching against temptation, and crying for strength to
stand; and God knows the way I take, though I know not the way he takes. He
knows I want to follow hard after him, and am determined, by his grace, never
to let him go, nor to leave him or his ways. He knows I choose any or all the
afflictions in this world, rather than be at a distance from him, or suffered
to sin against him. He knows I want to serve and love him more, yea with all my
heart and soul and strength. He knows I long to fly swift as a Seraph, to
execute his commands. God knows that, for his glory, I want as high degrees of
grace as can consist with a mortal state: And he knows also, that all my
desires are of his exciting, for I am not sufficient for one of myself. And why
art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my
God. If, for a small moments, he hide his face, he will return. O my soul,
submint. Do not murmur, but trust in God; for he is the faithful and
unchangeable Jehovah: And he will have compassion on thee still, because he
will have compassion. As he always was, so he always will be selfmoved, and
show mercy for Jesus' sake, for thou art accepted in the beloved.

Tuesday noon. -- Blessed be God, after I wrote was enabled to ease my burdened
heart, by pouring out my soul in prayer to God; he heart my cries, and has
assisted me in my business, and since my cares and concerns, as well as soul,
are cast upon him, I have been at rest. And now, Lord, either keep me from
being tempted to sin, or support and deliver me when tempted. O go with me, for
Jesus' sake, and bind me fast to thyself forever.

Thursday morning, October 9. -- Yesterday shut up, and much indisposed in
body. Not enlarged in prayer; but, blessed be God watching and lifting up
ejaculatory petitions to be kept from, or preserved in temptations, and God
preserved me. I was refreshed in the evening by conversation, and in my sleep
in the night thought I besieged the throne of grace, urging that the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, and determining not
to give out, but press forward till I obtain. But, alas! I am destitute of life
and vigor this morning. The Lord revive me, for Jesus' sake.

Evening, October 9. -- Blessed be God, all the forenoon I was kept watching.
At noon, in meditation and prayer, melted down by discoveries of God in his
holiness, goodness, truth, and faithfulness. Was strengthened to plead for
growth and perseverance in grace to the end. Greatly encouraged to hope, that
God, for Jesus' sake, will strengthen me yet more. Solemnly renewed my choice
of God for my God, and gave up myself afresh, with vehement longings to love
and serve him better, since he has forgiven me ten thousand talents. Rejoiced
in my dear Redeemer's promise, "I will not leave you comfortless, I will come
to you." O blessed be God for his gracious visit.

Saturday morning, October 11. -- Blessed be God, I this morning awake with
him, and have been refreshed and delighted in some contemplations on his
adorable perfections. But my elevated souls has only fluttered as a bird from
bough to bough, transported one moment with thoughts on his wisdom, in another,
his holiness, another, his sovereignty, his power, his truth and faithfulness,
and so on. Some sweets from these words, "I know that my Redeemer lives; and
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God."
O transporting thought! O glorious resurrection! Then I shall gaze to eternity.
Then I shall drink my fill. Then I shall be like him, for I shall see him as he
is. Yea, even at death, my soul, thou shall be admitted: Thou shall have the
open vision and full fruition of God, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, while
the body securely sleeps in its dusty bed, free as well as thou from all
discerned evil, free from sin the worst of all. Who knows but the joyful period
is at hand? Who can tell, but the sand is almost run out. Rouse up, my soul,
bestir thyself. Improve every moment here for God, and in special this day.
Perhaps it may be the last. Act as if thou were sure it would be so.

Wednesday morning, November 5. -- I now record, on purpose that I may
hereafter see it more particularly, the good hand of Providence in ordering all
things well for us. For the God who has fed and clothed me all my life long
will not leave me now in any strait, unless by my unbelief I provoke him to it.
At present, our way is much hedged up. We cannot, by our business, obtain
wherewith to pay for our bread, butter, meat, or any necessary. Cannot buy food
for so much as one day: Nor can we see any prospect of procuring wood for
winter. Several debts we have unavoidably contracted lie heavy on my spirits,
because I know they, to whom we owe, want as well as we.

My soul, remember, "He that believes does not make haste." If thou art in the
way of duty, doing what lies in thy power, it is all that God requires of thee.
Leave the rest with God to work out in his own way and time: He does all things
well. Thou can not, by taking thought, add one cubit. Come, thou art mighty
strong and courageous when embarrassments are at a distance. Now, where is thy
faith? Now God, in a gentle manner, puts thee upon trial, do not draw back or
fear, but cast all thy care on him, for he cares for thee. Thou art of more
worth than many sparrows, art better than the ravens, yea the very hairs of thy
head are all numbered. God as always appeared, and he will appear for thee. Has
he not said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee? Remember, he that has
not withheld his Sons from thee, will, with him, freely give thee all things:
All things that he sees needful for thee. Come, my soul, rest securely now on
the wisdom and care of thy heavenly Father. Venture on his power and
faithfulness, for it will never, never fail. Has he not said, "Though the
mountains depart, and the hills be removed, yet his kindness shall not depart
from thee, neither shall the covenant of his peace be removed from thee?" He
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from those who
walk uprightly.

After I wrote, I read part of Matthew ^i. and when I came to that command,
"Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you." God excited a vehement thirst in my soul after
himself, his Christ, and increase of strengthening, quickening, and sanctifying
grace; h^ld up my soul to plead for these as my chief good, and I solemnly
promised, if he would grant me these, and subdue my sins, I would be content
with any thing and every thing his providence shall allot; and casting my care
on him, my soul was at rest, and is so still, blessed be his name. In a quarter
of an hour after, I had tidings of some wood: So soon did God answer my faith
and prayer, as to outward things.

Thursday morning. -- Assisted in prayer, and my faith drawn out into exercise,
both for spiritual and temporal blessings. A temporal favor received presently
after, in which the hand of God appeared plain.

Sabbath evening. -- Blessed be God, notwithstanding all the glooms and
distractions that perplexed me, occasioned, I believe, by bodily disorders, and
a malicious mischief making devil, God gave me some nearness of access to his
throne in the morning, to cry for deliverance, and at his table enabled me to
renew my vows and engagements to be the Lord's. Hold up my soul to wrestle with
him for strengthening, persevering grace, as well as pardon, that the blood of
Jesus Christ may cleanse me from all sin, the pollution as well as
condemnation. God knows I cannot be satisfied with the belief of being
delivered from condemnation; but I want to be saved from my sins. I want them
crucified and slain. I want this accursed enmity, hateful pride, odious
unbelief taken away, and God's image more and more restored, that I may glorify
him on earth, and finish the work he has given me to do.

When pleading again for this after I came home, and solemnly protesting, if
Christ would subdue my sins, and strengthen me, I would live more to him than
ever, I thought the blessed Jesus asked me, Believe thou I am able to do this
for thee? My soul replied with tears, Lord, I believe: Help thou mine unbelief.
I know it is but for thee to speak the word, and I shall be holy, I shall be
strong and very courageous. Then I had strong consolation from those blessed
promises, My grace shall be sufficient for thee: I will strengthen thee, I will
uphold thee by the right hand of my righteousness. I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. Thou shall go from strength to strength, till thou appear before
God in Zion. O my soul, be strong, be courageous. God has done, and still will
do great things for thee. Remember his vows are upon thee. Keep close now to
the great Captain of thy salvation, for all power is in his hands; and if thine
enemies were a million times more and stronger than they are, he would conquer.
He will subdue, he will sanctify thee, he will not let thee go. He will hold
thee fast by his Spirit. O my soul, cling fast to him by faith: Cling
resolutely; for he is thine own glorious Christ, thine own Savior, and he will
fulfill the desires of thy longing soul. S^e hard for more grace, nearer union,
and more intimate communion. He has condescended to call thee his friend, and
he is thine everlasting friend, therefore be not strange; but, with humble
reverence and confidence, lean on his dear delightful breast, and ask him what
is his will, with a fixed resolution, by his grace, to do whatever he commands.

He is thy glorious Prophet, and he will teach thee: Thy glorious Priest
forever, and he has and will satisfy divine justice for thee: He has and he
will clothe thee with his own best robe, even his spotless righteousness. Thy
shame shall never appear. Remember he has told thee thou shall never be
confounded, or put to shame. He is thy sovereign King, and he has made thee
willing in the day of his power to submit to him. Thou art now under his
protection. Thine enemies are his enemies, and he has told thee that no weapon
formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that rises up in judgment
against thee thou shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord* Amen.

Lord Jesus, into thine hands I commit my spirit, whole soul and body, with all
my concerns for time and eternity, for thou art a suitable Savior, suited to
all my wants, just such as one as I need. O accept me for thine own sake, and
keep what I have committed to thy charge. Lord, keep me from the evil, for I am
thine own, and will be thine forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

November 18. -- The night past, God has fulfilled my desire, that if in my day
there should be an earthquake, I might be sensible of it. -- Being awaked this
night, among other thoughts, part of an hymn came into my mind with delight.

Wake now, my soul, and humbly hear,
What thy mild Lord commands;
Each word of his will charm thine ear,
Each word will guide thine hands.
See how his sweet and tender care complies with our weak minds! Presently I
heard a noise and felt a shaking, which I soon perceived to be an earthquake.
My soul darted up to God, in ejaculation, that he would sanctify this shock,
for the awakening and quickening of his people, and also for preservation. In
the height of the shaking, God graciously, by his Spirit, gave me this cordial
from his word, "For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but
my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace
be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee." See note, page 86.
Lord, what a pledge was this! What condescension was this, that even while
thou vast displaying thy majesty and greatness, shaking terribly the earth,
that then thou should ^e mindful of me, and say, "It is I; be not afraid."
And again, "Be not dismayed: I am thy God." -- Thou wast thus mindful of me,
vile, sinful, wretched, ungrateful me, worm of the dust, and did show me
that, amidst it all, thou art my covenant faithful God. O let me lie in the
dust, and abhor myself, while, with trembling and great joy, I behold thee a
great, omnipotent, just, sovereign, terrible, holy, and yet gracious, faithful,
covenant keeping God. A God at peace, even with me, for the great Mediator's
sake. Why, Lord, why was I (...) trembling and dismayed, before thee, because
of my great, my heinous sins, my aggravated, God provoking sins, sins of a
crimson die, sins of which even devils were never guilty!

O precious Christ! O blessed union between thee and my soul. My ark, my hiding
place, my rock and sure defense, my refuge from the storm. Lord Jesus, in thee
I stand complete God can be just, and yet the justifier of her who believes in
Jesus. Lord, let me renew my strength. Now sanctify me throughout, in soul, in
spirit, in body. Now make me like thee, holy as thou art holy. Now subdue me
more than ever to thyself. I will rejoice and praise thee. I will run the way
of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. Draw me* I will run
after thee. I will be for thee and none other all the days of my life.

Friday morning, November 28. -- The Lord make me thankful, and again I say, my
soul, be thankful, for he is an unchangeable God, a glorious portion. O what
has God done for me, in enabling me to choose him for my all, for time and
eternity. O happy choice, happy I, since God the Father is mine, Christ mine,
the Holy Spirit mine, all the promises in the word of a faithful God are mine,
grace mine, glory mine, all things on earth, so far as consists with God's
glory and my good, mine: He has given me all things richly to enjoy; yea,
afflictions and temptations are mine for good -- even the remains of sin drive
me to nay God. O surely none but God could make this worst of evils
serviceable; but, with God all things are possible. And, O my soul, rejoice:
For, ere long, this worst of evils shall be done away. Come, do not sink now,
because this must be dragged about while here; but look forward into eternity
and rejoice, for it shall never follow thee there. It is now doing its worst:
It shall then cease forever. Hallelujah, Hallelujah, then I shall be like him;
for I shall see him as he is.

January 22, 1756.
OF all creatures that live, I think I have the most reason to be thankful. God
is exceedingly gracious; verily his kindness does not depart from me, but
increases day by day. In temporals, he does all things well; smiles on the
work of my hands, gives me wherewith to answer all necessary demands, and it is
enough, if he will but give me a Benjamin's portion in himself, I ask no more,
I desire no more* and adored be his name, I have reason to hope, I am on the
thriving hand in spirituals, yea, and shall grow stronger still, for God has
said it. His bow is set in the clouds as a token of his faithfulness to Noah,
and he has, (blessed be his name) given me such a token, such a pledge in that
awful moment, when the earth was trembling under me, as shall be as my bo^, for
the eye of my faith to fix upon, I tr^, through the assistance of his own
Spirit, to the end of my days; for his kindness shall not depart from me,
though the mountains depart, and the hills be removed. He will, in covenant
love and faithfulness, order all things well. Let what will come, afflictions,
temptations, ^ whatever, God will overrule all for good, all for his own glory,
and I will, by his grace, acquiesce, cling to him, and trust in him, for he is
my own covenant God, in and through my dear Redeemer, and I will be his forever.

February 6. -- I have been perplexed in my mind, and vexed with myself on
account of a strong expression in conversation with a particular friend. We
were both speaking of what we experienced of the goodness of God to us, I trust
with a view to his glory: He said he had a refreshing season that morning, etc.
I answered, so had I, and added, I had a large draught at the fountain. He
modestly replied, I dare not say so, I had a sip, a taste, etc. The Lord in
mercy grant me prudence, and teach me how to speak with proper strength of
expression, that I may neither withhold the truth to his dishonor, nor offend
the ears of any friend, by expressing myself in too high terms. But now, let me
see, my soul, on what did I ground this expression? What did I experience that
morning? Truly it is not easy to tell what, but this I know, God by his Spirit
sweetly applied that gracious invitation, "If any man thirst let him come unto
me and drink," then my thoughts immediately turned upon the object, I was
invited to, and that was Christ; next, what was the drink I should partake of;
here the fountain opened! I should drink of his communicable perfections, he is
a fountain of all grace, I might drink in faith, drink in holiness, drink in
love, drink in humility, patience, yea every grace; drink in conformity to his
image in every part, knowledge, courage, prudence, wisdom, joy, delight, yea
strong consolation.

My thirst increased, and grew more vehement. God did open my mouth wide, and
he did fill it. My soul was held up by the power of God, as the needle by the
loadstone, and I did by faith, with joy draw water out of these wells of
salvation. I drank and was satisfied from the fullness of my unchangeable God,
who has loved me with an everlasting love, and with loving kindness has drawn
me. I hated sin bitterly, and myself for it. I renewedly chose my dear
invaluable portion, my pearl of great price; my soul exulted, gloried,
triumphed in her choice, and determined never to let him go, whom my soul
loved! I gave up my all again, and again, into his merciful and faithful hands,
and I am his own; he will keep what I committed to him, and I will cling to him
and rejoice in him, for he is truth, and faithfulness in the abstract, yea, he
is altogether lovely!

And, although I had but a sip, in comparison with what he is in himself, and
with my wants, yet, I had such a draught, as crowns and kingdoms could neither
purchase for, nor from me.

Had I the world at my command,
And the more boundless sea,
For one blessed hour at thy right hand,
I Would give them both away!
Surely the consolations of God, at this season, were neither small nor few. My
soul was filled as with marrow and fatness, and such a peace lasted all the
day, as the world can neither give, nor take away.

O how good, how gracious is God to me, an unworthy wretch! O, when shall I
awake in his likeness, then I shall be eternally satisfied, then shall I shout
forth the riches of redeeming love and grace, without fear of this hateful
pride! Till then, may God guide me by his unerring Spirit, and prudent counsel,
and ordain to himself praise, out of the mouth of such a babe, for Jesus' sake.

Tuesday morning, March 9. -- By thinking on the experience I had last week,
how deeply I have been sunk under a sense of the intolerable weight and burden
of sin. My soul has been sore broken, vexed, and harassed, by those venomous
beasts of prey, that have interrupted my communion with God, broke in upon me
as a flood, and, like Gehazi, thrust me away, even when, in the bitterness of
my soul, I wanted to lie at the feet of my gracious God, and bewail my
contrariety to him.

O, what wanderings, what distractions, what pride, what sloth, what unbelief;
O, how did my wounds grow corrupt, what an odious, polluted creature in myself
am I! a creature full of leprosy; having an issue of blood, that no one but
Christ alone can stanch; all other physicians fail; a blind, naked soul,
without any covering of my own, all too short, too narrow; bowed down, too,
under a spirit of infirmity, which I cannot loose; none but Christ can make me
straight! But O, what a Christ have I! what a Prophet, what a Priest, what a
glorious King, who holds the reins in his own hand, and although he, in
infinite wisdom, suffers these tyrants, these vile sins, to lift up their heads
and rage, yet he will not let them have dominion; and though Satan shake his
chain, and gnash upon me with his teeth, envying my happiness in communion with
my God; yet this glorious King will hold his chain, and not suffer him to move
one hair's breadth toward me, further than shall be for his own glory, and my
good.

Monday morning, June 28. -- Yesterday morning, some precious moments in
prayer, while pleading that I might glorify God. I had a sense of the self
sufficiency, self happiness and greatness of God; that he stood in no need of
me. An abasing sense of my own vileness, and unworthiness to attempt his
praise; yet was enabled to plead, that, notwithstanding I was so vile, still I
was a part of the work of his hand, and for this very end I was created. And
though I had ruined and undone myself by sin, lost his image, and rendered
myself incapable of answering the end of my creation; yet he had been
graciously pleased to choose, from eternity, this precious soul of mine, and
gave it to Christ as part of his inheritance, and Christ has accepted me, and
has actually manifested the greatest love, in laying down his life for me. And
since my soul is redeemed by precious blood, it is a precious soul. Besides,
God has recovered it from the ruins of the apostasy; by effectual calling he
has made me willing in the day of his power to accept the purchased
redemption; to receive Christ as he is freely offered to me in the gospel, and
theref^re gave me power to become a child of God. He has created me anew in
Christ Jesus, for the end that I might glorify him.

And what should hinder now, since I am thine, forever thine: Thine by
purchase, by creation, preservation, regeneration, and adoption; thine by a
thousand voluntary surrenders; wholly a dedicated thing, soul and body, what
should hinder, why no more holy? Why may not I, after my kind, as every bird,
and spire of grass does, show forth the glory of God? What should hinder? Shall
the remainder of indwelling corruption? Forbid it gracious God! Since with thee
all things are possible, and this is thy will, even my sanctification; and all
power is in the hand of Christ, it is but for him to say, I will, be thou
clean, and it is done. God will be glorified, and this is all my salvation, and
all my joy! O, let me bear much fruit, that God may be glorified. Lord, grant
me speedy sanctification, for Jesus' sake. Thou have said, Whatsoever I ask in
his name thou will grant; this is my petition, and this is my request. O, grant
me this, and it is enough!

July 1. -- I have been reviewing former writings, and find, notwithstanding
many, many deficiencies in every thing, yet God has kept me reaching after
greater degrees of grace, and heart holiness. He has enabled me to go from
ordinance to or^nance, seeking and sowing in tears; and will he not enable me
to go from strength to strength? Will he not cause me to return rejoicing,
bringing my sheaves with me? Shall I not be able to say, For this grace, this
holiness I sought the Lord, and he heard me for Jesus' sake, and has granted
me, this faith, this love, this humility, this patience, prudence, wisdom,
resignation to his will, this zeal for his glory, this victory over my pride,
unbelief, and every traitor in my soul? Surely he will. He will not suffer the
serpent always to hiss in my breast; he will not give me a stone! O! go on my
soul, and still follow hard after God, for he has begun to deliver, and he
will deliver for Christ's sake, though thou art unworthy! O, keep alive thy
hope, thy strongest trust and confidence, for he will not make thee ashamed.
Thou shall not be confounded nor put to shame; for the Lord has spoken it; and
he is not a man that he should ^e, nor the son of man, that he should repent.

Wednesday morning, July 7. -- Yesterday morning, I had not any freedom of
access, and something happened which was uncomfortable; yet I had a thousand
times more comfort (...) I deserved. But oh, what has now overtaken me! Surely
pride is again vaunting, disconte^ arising, and I becoming my own to^ Satan,
also, stirring up the filth of my perverse heart. Lord Jesus, appear for me;
espouse my cause; let not the tyrant prevail; I sha^ dishonor thee, if thou
do not prevent. Oh, what a proud monster am I! O, King Jesus, subdue me to
thyself; reign in, rule over, restrain and conquer all thine, and my enemie^
and grant me a spirit of meekness. O, give me not a stone; but for thy own
glory give me the grace I ask.

Wednesday evening. -- Forever blessed be my gracious God, after I wrote this
morning, I w^ enabled to apply with earnestness to the throne of grace, and
pour out my complaints before him; to fly to him for succor, and cast my care
and burden on him. He sustained and comforted me, and has, I trust, been with
me of a truth all the day! He stilled the tumult ^ my breast, which sin and
Satan had raised, and cheered my soul with his forgiving love. O, who is a God,
like unto mine! Ah, what ^ Christ have I! what a surety, what a friend, what an
advocate with the Father, what a peace maker, a healer of breaches. O, my soul,
(...) in him forever, for he will never make thee (...) shamed of thy highest
confidence. O, love (...) all thy strength; admire, praise, and adore; for he
will not suffer thee to f^ll a prey, to thy ^less, cruel, and bloodthirsty
enemies.

Thou art Christ's and none s^ll be able to pl^k thee out of his hands, though
sin, earth, and devils do their worst. He is God over all, ^ed forever; he will
hold thee by his omnipotent power. I know whom I have believed; rejoice my
soul, though devils rage. Yea, rejoice evermore, and still follow on to know
the Lord; all will be well, bye and bye.

He has glorified his name, and will glorify it again. He has magnified the
riches of his sovereign grace, in snatching thee as a brand out of the burning,
and in preserving thee hitherto every step of thy way. He has done all in
thee, and all for thee; though thou have puffed through the fire, thou have not
been burnt, neither has the flame kindled upon thee to consume thee. O, how
often have sin and Satan strove to rend my soul from thee, my God! B^,
everlasting is thy love, and Jesus seals it with his blood. Come, my soul, set
up thy L^enezer, for hitherto the Lord has helped thee. Come, renew the
dedication of all thy powers to him, for thou shall go from strength to
strength, till thou appear before God in Zion, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Amen, Hallelujah! I am thine, O God, forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Monday evening, July 12. -- Blessed be God, I had access to the throne of
grace again this ^ing, and the Lord only knows how sweet it was to pour out my
whole soul before him, and renew the dedication of all to him, and plead, that
for his own glory I might be sanctified, strengthened, and persevere to the end.

I trust I did really act faith on the po^, allsufficiency, and faithfulness of
a glorious ^vior; and after leaving all my concerns (...) him, had sweet peace
and rest. My soul (...) been satisfied as with marrow and fatness. Bless the
Lord, O my soul, for he is good, for hi^ mercy endures forever.

And will God graciously grant me success this week, in my endeavors to settle
my worldly business, that my mind may be at liberty (...) pursue my eternal
concerns! Will God, in his providence, enable me to pay all their due, and
likewise to do something to relieve the afflicted* If for thy glory, Lord grant
it; but, however, fit me for disappointment, resign me to thy will may that be
done on earth, as it is in heaven, for Jesus' sake.

Thursday morning, July 16. -- We have not had very hot weather for eight days
past, such as I used to dread and faint under; and I cannot but admire the
goodness of God to me in this season; for he has certainly strengthened, and
upheld my spirits, and all has been well, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits! O, remember this season, and encourage thyself in
God; for all seasons are (...) like to him. And will God still be gracious, and
preserve the lives and health of the little ones, and suffer not discontent to
arise among their parents. Blessed be God for all the peace and satisfaction I
do enjoy.

O, for Jesus' sake, and for thine own glory, Lord, give me grace to be
faithful. O let me not be content with the name of being so, but make me so
indeed and in truth, that God may be glorified, and the children profited.
Blessed be God, for so much success as thou have granted in my worldly affairs.

Will God still bless my endeavors, and enable me in all my ways to acknowledge
him, and will he direct my paths. O thou, without whose permission a sparrow
falls not to the ground, still order, in thy providence, that I may accomplish
my designs, pay to all their due, and be at liberty to devote my time,
thoughts, and strength, to the more immediate exercises of religion, my dear
delight. Blessed be God, that I am satisfied, I am in the way of duty, while
thus engaged in worldly matters. O, let thy glory be the ultimate end of all my
actions, whether civil, or religious, and all shall be well forever, for I am
thine, and thou art mine, and this is enough! O let me enjoy thee! I ask no
more!

Friday evening, July 23. -- The Lord make me truly thankful, for this has
been a good day to me. God has carried me comfortably through it. -- My
children have been more diligent and submissive than usual, and I have been
composed and diligent. God has ordered all things well. Surely he is a God
hearing prayer. O my soul, trust in him at all ^^mes, and give the glory of all
that is right, to him, who is the God that performs all things for me.

Friday morning, August 6. -- O, thou whose eyes are as a flame of fire, search
and try me; see if there be any guile, any reservation in my heart. Am I in
league with any one sin? Lord, thou know, if I am I know it not. My heart
does not accuse me; but that is deceitful above all things, and I dare not
trust it. O, I appeal to thee, glorious God! Have I any darling lust? O,
convince me of it. Have I any Agag I want concealed? O, does not my whole soul
consent, when I cry, let all be crucified; O, let them be crucified? O, let me
not be deceived through the deceitfulness of sin. I tremble at the thought. O,
surely if I know there is a God against whom I have sinned, if I know I have a
being, if I know I have a soul, I do know it longs for the utter destruction
of sin, every sin, every degree of sin, because it is contrary to thee! Lord, I
appeal to thee again; thou know, through thy grace, this is the vehement
desire of my soul! O, then grant it for Christ's sake. I ask in his name alone.
I am unworthy; but he is worthy for whose sake I ask. O, deny me not. I fly to
the golden scepter. Have thou not said, Whatsoever I ask in his name, thou will
give? Amen, amen. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief; for I am thine
forever.

Monday evening. -- Blessed be God, he has been with me all the day of a
truth; has enabled me to be diligent, and aim at faithfulness. Be of good
cheer, O my soul, for the God that has brought thee thus far on thy journey
toward thy eternal home, through this dark, this howling wilderness, will still
direct, and protect thee. He will not fail, nor forsake thee, all the days of
thy life; only be thou faithful unto death, and he will give thee a crown of
life. Hold out, faith and patience, a little longer, and the combat will be
over forever! Sin, accursed sin, shall no more separate between thee and thy
God; never hide his glorious face from thee; never cause thee to grieve him,
nor wound thyself. O, astonishing! God shall wipe away all tears from thine
eyes; all sorrow and sighing shall be done away! O, then thou shall be like
him, for thou shall see him as he is! Then thou shall be made perfect in
holiness! Then my transported soul shall gaze to eternity, on the perfections
of the sacred Three in One! O Lord, be not angry with me, that I have a desire
to depart, and be with Christ, who is my life, while I also desire to submit to
thy will, and wait thy time. O sanctify me more, that I may glorify thee upon
earth, and all is well. Thy will be done: I am thine; do with me what seems
thee good!

Friday morning, August 13. -- O Lord my God, grant me some discoveries of thy
glorious perfections, some transforming views, some realizing belief of the
fullness, the sufficiency there is in Christ Jesus, for me, a poor grovelling
mortal. Lord, a deep sense of my own vileness without this, will sink me too
low. I cannot bear it; the sight is too shocking. O, let me now turn and see
what Christ has done. He has fulfilled the law which I have broken; has
brought in an everlasting righteousness, by his perfect obedience, sufferings
and (...) Justice itself is satifised; righteousness ^d peace have met and
embraced each other: Yea, and there is a communicative fullness in him also, and
he has imparted some grace already. Sure I am not all enmity now, though I
have such heartbreaking remains. O, the restore thine image more and more!
Suffer ^e not to sit down discouraged, as if my case was desperate, for thou
have found a remedy. There is balm in Gilead, there is a glorious Physici^
there. O, then, let me be healed, even me!

Saturday evening, August 21. -- Surely I am the strangest creature upon earth.
This morning, God condescended to take me near to himself, held up my soul by
his almighty power to wrestle, and plead for conformity to his glorious image;
that I might get as near to pefection in holiness, as it is possible in a
mortal state. Though I was unworthy of the least spark of grace, yet I pleaded,
for Christ's sake, I might have large draughts from the full, overflowing
fountain; clear evidences of my union to him. I had strong consolation from
gracious promises. Matthew v.vi. Isaiah live. and others. Likewise from God's
eternal decrees. For whom he did foreknow, he did predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his Son. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
These were chosen before the foundation of the world, through sanctification of
the Spirit and belief of the truth. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification. Also the mediatorial prayer of Christ: Sanctify them through
thy truth. From the purchase, Redeemer's blood: He died to purchase to himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works. That hereby God would be glorified,
if I bear much fruit. O, what shall hinder? All power is in his hands! Had an
affecting sense of these things all the former part of the day.

But this afternoon in a restless frame. Could not converse, or fix on any
thing, though with dear christian friends. Discontented and gloomy. Surely,
this is the body. O, blessed ^e God, that Christ Jesus is the same, as at the
beginning! With him there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Though my
frames vary, He is the same, yesterday, today, and forever, and will accomplish
the thing which he pleases. He will conduct me through all these vicissitudes,
and bring me at last to behold his glory, for I am his own forever.

Lord's Day, September 12. -- Last evening died a child, whom I have had in my
school from the cradle. Will God graciously pardon all my deficiencies in the
instruction of this, as well as all my other children, and accept of any
sincerity thou have seen, in my endeavors to save the precious souls. Blessed
be thy name, my gracious God, for the testimony of my conscience, in that I
have labored, and longed for their salvation, though not so much as I ought. O,
humble me, and give grace to be more faithful. If thou ^eest fit to continue me
in this world, and in my calling, Lord sanctify this stroke to me, and to my
little ones.

My bodily disorders have followed me more violently since Thursday, than
before. Was very ill all Friday night, yesterday and last night; but blessed be
God, not comfortless; no, adored be his name, very far from that, especially
last night, when I began to cherish a hope, that this sickness would be unto
death. O joyful prospect of eternity, while well assured that I have reposed my
trust in a glorious all sufficient savior. I know on whom I have believed, and
can gladly venture through the dark valley of the shadow of death, and fear no
evil, for God is with me, Christ with me. I have fled to him for refuge, and he
will keep me.

My affections are very strong toward my dear consort, my honored aged mother,
my dear christian friends, from whom, under God, I have received so much
comfort. My heart was raised in thankfulness to God for all the comfort, and
refreshment he has bestowed, on his poor, weary, unworthy worm, in her
tiresome pilgrimage, and for all the dear privileges, with which he has
indulged me; for ministers, especially my dear pastor; for his written word,
precious promises, sabbaths, sacraments, and all sanctuary enjoyments; these
were all dear, all precious; but I could gladly resign them all, for full
enjoyment of my precious Christ; can cheerfully commit my dear consort, mother,
and dear friends, into the merciful and faithful hands of God, relying on his
care and gracious providence, which has, and will still provide for them: The
God who has fed me all my life!

Having taken my farewell of things dear below, I seemed to be looking and
longing for the joyful period. But, O, if it be the sovereign pleasure of my
gracious God, to say, Return, I submit. His will be done on earth, as it is in
heaven! It is meet such a worm should, with patience, wait his time, if he has
any thing for me to do, or suffer. If he will give me grace, if he will
sanctify me more, give me more holiness, that I may glorify him upon earth, all
is well. But I cannot think of remaining here, so unlike to God. Lord, sanctify
me more, for Jesus' sake alone.

Thursday morning, September 22. -- I have been all this week, and still am,
very weak. My distemper returned, and has brought me lower than before, and
have been attended with more pain; but, through divine goodness, not in
extremity, and God is still raising up friends to supply me with any little
dainty my stomach craves, and with it gives me a sense of his goodness, fills
my heart with thankfulness to him, and to my friends, and this doubles the
sweetness. O, my God, this is a gentle rod, not according to my iniquities; yet
let it serve a valuable purpose. Sanctify every twig, and let my sins be purged
away, and make me more holy, for Christ's sake.

Wednesday evening, November 10. -- Blessed be God, I had a precious season
this morning. God excited vehement desires after holiness; drew forth faith,
love, repentance, resignation to the divine will, into exercise. I renewed my
choice, and dedications. I was comforted. Bless the Lord, O my soul.

Sabbath evening, November 14. -- Blessed, forever blessed be my gracious God,
for he is good, and his mercy endures forever. Yesterday, and Friday evening
also, God took me near to himself in meditation, prayer, and examination; this
morning also; and adored be his name, he keeps me in his fear, all the day
long, habitually so. Blessed be his infinite wisdom, love and faithfulness, for
all the dispensations of his providence; that he by his mercies has led me to
repentance; not only so, but has used the rod, to reduce my wandering soul;
breaking off my dependence on creatures, weaning my affections from things
below, that they may be more steadily fixed on himself, and on his Christ, his
spirit and grace, that these may be all in all to my soul. What wise and
blessed steps has he taken, though once afflictive. When in my young and
tender years, my heart was much set on the husband of my youth, he rent him
from me, and likewise bereaved me of almost all that was dear to me according
to the flesh, whereby he broke off my dependence on those streams for comfort,
and led me to the fountain. O, "happy rod, that brought me nearer to my God."
He has abundantly made up to me, in himself, and in his Christ, the loss of
all these. But, alas, still the world, its pleasures, profits and cares,
threatened to engross and entangle my affections. Infinite wisdom saw this, and
therefore d^shed all my schemes, disappointed all my hopes and expectations,
from friends and means, though, blessed be his name, he did not leave me wholly
destitute. By this, through his grace, he brought me to cast my care on
himself, and rely more immediately on his providence, to provide for me, and
mine, ever since. And here I have lived secure and at rest, amidst many ups and
downs, frowns and flatteries from creatures. The less Reason has had to work
upon, the more freely Faith has cast itself upon the faithfulness of God; and
here my expectations have never been disappointed. God has comforted me, when
creatures failed, and proved vanity and vexation of spirit.

But still my foolish heart must needs seek something below; to go out freely
after, and has been exceedingly attached to Christian friends. And here,
because I hoped I loved for Jesus' sake, I have indulged excess; here have my
affections twined; these have been as the apple of my eye, or even as my own
soul! In these have I rejoiced; from these, my expectations of future comforts
have been raised. I was ready to say, Surely these will not fail; but rather
than my dependence should be placed on these, and they prove rivals in my
heart, God will embitter them, every one, at some time or other, even to the
breaking of my very heart; I shall find a sore thorn under every one of these
sweetest roses upon earth.

And now, blessed be God, I am more than ^ver convinced, that all things under
the sun, are vanity, and nothing but God alone a substantial good. Adored be
thy name, O my God, for every twig of thy rod. Help me now to cease from man,
whose breath is in his nostrils. Now let me be effectually weaned from all the
world, and all my hopes, expectations, desires, love, delight and joys,
terminate in thee. Yea, let me forever be for thee, and for none other! Lord,
thou have won my heart, take it to thyself, fill it with thy grace, and possess
it to eternity. Go on, I beseech thee, to rend away every rival. I stand
divested of all the world; give it to whom thou please; give me my chosen
portion, thyself, thy spirit, and thy grace, and I have enough. Here I am, do
with me what seems thee good.

Friday evening, November 19. -- Blessed be God, an unexpected smile of
providence, today, whereby we have been enabled to pay those debts which lay
with greatest weight upon my mind, and also to purchase an article we wanted.
O, my God, how good, how bountiful art thou to thy poor ungrateful creature! O,
what need have I to perplex myself, for this, or that, since God thus cares
for me. He knows all my wants, both for soul and body, and when it is the
most proper time to supply them. O, may I ever rely on divine wisdom and
faithfulness, casting all my care on him. O, may my conversation be without
covetousness, and I be content with such things as I have, for he has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee!

Blessed be God, he has strengthened me today, in body and mind, and brought
me comfortably through it, and I am nearer home than ever; and when I arrive
there, I shall have done with sin forever, and praise forever, be holy forever,
be full of God forever, behold his glory and be like him, for I shall see him
as he is, and be eternally satisfied. O, precious Christ, the foundation of my
hopes and joys. I am thine, and thou art mine, forever, forever. Amen.
Hallelujah!

Friday evening, December 31. -- Blessed, forever blessed be my gracious God,
who has condescended again to indulge me. a poor sinful worm, in spreading my
complaints and sorrows before him; and for Christ's sake bowed his ear,
supported, encouraged, and comforted me. Yea, and he will be gracious still,
because he will be gracious. I shall still hold on my way; for he, who was the
author, will be the finisher of my faith.

Blessed be his name, that he has brought me to the close of another year,
under such comfortable circumstances. God has ordered all things well; and
though I have reason to be deeply humbled, for my many heart sins, and
imperfections, whereby I have dishonored him, and grieved his blessed Spirit,
yet, adored be his name, he has not left me to fall into any open scandalous
sin. Blessed be God, for all the discoveries of heart sins; for the humbling
influences of the blessed Spirit; for all the discoveries of the divine
perfections, and the fullness of my dear Redeemer; for all the clear and
satisfying evidences of my union to Christ by faith; for every degree of
resignation to the divine will; for every affliction; for every dispensation of
providence; for all the freedom of access to the throne of grace, from time to
time; for all the sweetness I have tasted in the written word; O, has it not
been sweet^ than honey, or the honey comb! for all (...) opportunities I have
had in the house of God, and at his table; for all the refreshments there, and
for all the joyful prospects of eternity! O Lord, how great is thy goodness;
how sweet have been my meditations of thee, in the year past! How sweet the
communion I have (...) with thee in thy providence, and ordinances! I have
sinned, but thou have been kind, beyond expression. Lord, I lament all the
ungrateful returns I have made thee. O wash away all my sins, in the precious
blood of Christ; and although I am an unprofitable servant, still look upon me
with complacency, behold me not in my sins, but accept of me for Christ's sake.
I fly to his righteousness -- I have none of my own -- this will stand the
scrutiny of impartial justice; it is without a spot, without a flaw. O clothe
thy prodigal with this best robe, and (...) me be justified by that alone. I
forever ^nounce every thing of my own.

Saturday evening, January 1, 17^7.
BLESS the Lord, O my soul, and all (...) is within me bless his holy name, and
return unto thy rest; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee! Sweet was
the morning, when God condescended to take his poor, feeble, discouraged, needy
worm, nigh unto himself, humbled me for sin, and bowed his gracious ear to my
groans, sighs, and tears. It was sweet renewing my solemn choice of God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my all, my only portion! Sweet clinging by
faith to him: Sweet casting my precious and immortal soul upon him, for time
and for eternity; relying on his wisdom, power, and faithfulness, to keep what
I have thus committed to him: Sweet pleading for grace to glorify him, in the
ensuing year, or as long as it shall be his will to continue me in this world,
resigning up myself, all I have, am, or can do, solemnly protesting that I
desire nothing, but conformity to his image, to glorify and enjoy him. Let him
do what seems him good.

A sweet peace followed; and this afternoon a precious season, in solemnly
renewing my written covenant. I do, this day, avouch this God, his Christ, his
Spirit and grace, to be all my salvation, and all my joy. Now, Lord, I am
forever thine. O hold me in thine hand, that no evil befall me, no sin defile
me. O, come take up thy abode with me. Lord, through thy grace, the everlasting
doors of my soul stand wide open; O, come in, my king and my God. I cannot, I
will not let thee go. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none on
earth, I desire, beside thee!

Thursday morning, January 27. -- Forever blessed be my gracious God, for he is
good, and his mercy endures forever. This morning, God took me near to
himself. I was much affected with the natural hardness of the heart, and love
of worldly things: That when Christ had wrought so great a miracle as to cast
out a legion of devils, from the possessed man, a whole city should go out and
desire him to depart out of their coasts, because they had lost their filthy
swine. I was enabled to give the blessed Jesus, a solemn and hearty invitation
into my soul, protesting, in his presence, that if he will come and take up his
abode with me, I will gladly give up all this world for this enjoyment. I will
be content, and rejoice in him, though he strip me of every thing dear to me,
here below. I saw my absolute need of him, in all his offices; pleaded that he
would execute them all, and subdue me to himself. Casting my care on him,
willing to wait his time, by prayer, I made known my request to him; asked for
a temporal mercy in subordination to his glory; believed he would grant it,
which he did in less than two hours after! So quick did God answer faith and
prayer, for Christ's sake. Had sweet peace in believing, and am thine, sweet
Jesus, forever!

Tuesday evening, February 1. -- Blessed, and forever adored, be my faithful,
compassionate, and dear Redeemer, for he has not forsaken me, nor left me
comfortless, notwithstanding, all the provocations I have given him; but
permits me still to come and spread my complaints before him, and by faith
touch the hem of his garment: and I shall, before long, find the fountain of my
corruption dried up. He will say, Be whole of thy plague. Surely he has begun
to heal me, and he will perfect the cure. Although with me, with men, or means,
this is impossible; yet with God, all things are possible, and his grace shall
be sufficient for me, and his strength be made perfect in my weakness. Eternal
truth has said it, and eternal wisdom and power will effect it.

O my soul, fear not, though an host encamp against thee. Be thou couragous,
and fight till death. The victory is sure. By little and little, God will drive
out the Canaanites. Though now they are as goads in thy sides, yet thy glorious
Christ will not suffer thee to fall a prey to thy merciless enemies. Thy great
and good Shepherd will not give thee up to these devouring wolves. No, no; he
will defend thee, he will strengthen and relieve thee; he will lead thee in the
way thou should go; he will cause thee to hear his voice, and thou shall
follow him whithersoever he goes. In the path of holiness, he will guide thee
with his counsel, and keep thee as the apple of his eye. Thou art in safe
hands, my poor trembling soul; why art thou so fearful? Wherefore do thou
doubt? O be strong in faith, giving glory to God. Thy glorious High Priest is
thy advocate in the court of heaven, and for his sake, thy God and Father will
be reconciled, though thy sins be as scarlet and as crimson; though thou art a
leper, thou shall be cleansed by his precious blood, and that shall atone for
thee. Thy sovereign king shall reign in and ^ver thee; he will not be dethroned
by sin, or Satan; he will subdue thee to himself. Amen. Lord Jesus, do it more,
and more, for I am thine own forever!

This morning, a precious season at the throne of grace, too great and good for
l^guage to express! God's word was sweeter (...) the honey comb. God inclined
me to ask for a temporal mercy, in faith, and with submission to his will, and
he has this day granted it. Surely I need not care for the things of thi^
life, for God does care for me. O may my care ever be, to please, love, and
obey him forever!

Sabbath evening, February 6. -- Blessed be my great and glorious God, for his
goodness to me is beyond all possible expression. All his ways are mercy, truth
and faithfulness; all his ways are pleasantness, and his paths are peace. O,
how sweet is the calm I have enjoyed ever since I wrote last. Such a degree of
resignation to the divine will, sweet content, yea delight, in all the
dispensations of his providence, as millions of gold could not procure. He
cares for me indeed, provides every thing I really need, and at the moment it
is wanted. He makes me pray, and believe, for all my mercies, before I have
them; takes off my dependence from second causes, lets me see his hand in the
smallest circumstances, and this makes every thing sweet.

Yesterday, it pleased God to un^it me for ^tive obedience, by such a sick
headache, that I could neither rise from my pillow, nor take my food till
night; but it was all welcome from my glorious God, and I heartily cried, Lord,
this, or whatever else thou please, only take away my sin, only make me holy,
only glorify thyself, in me, and strike, or do with me what seems thee good.
It is not bodily pain, that can make me miserable; no, if my God will but grant
me his gracious presence, I will gladly endure all that he will inflict, rather
than dwell at ease, in palaces of plenty, without him.

This day, also, bodily indisposition has unsitted me for vigorous, active
obedience; but blessed be God, not for passive. I could not wait upon God in
his house, but he has not left me comfortless. Good God! is this after the
manner of men! Would men, even the most excellent of all the earth, thus treat
an ungrateful rebel, who had cast so many indignities, and offended him so
often? No! O, how is it, and why is it that thou do bear to take such a
wretch into thy bosom, and indulge her at this rate, who deserves nothing but
to be spurned from thy presence! Lord, I am amazed. O, let me stand and wonder.
Surely it is because thou art God! O, the riches of redeeming love and grace!
It is because thou have clothed thy prodigal with the best robe, even the
righteousness of Christ, that thou can ^t look upon me with complacency. It
is this that has covered my nakedness, that the shame of it may not appear. O,
let me rather die, than ever again grieve thy blessed Spirit, by unbelief, by
sloth, by discontent, by pride, passion, worldliness, or any sin.

Lord Jesus, screen me, be my shield, my rock, and my sure defense. Be thou my
strength, or I shall fall. I shall again dishonor thee, and wound my own soul.
O, keep me under the shadow of thy wing. O let omnipotence hold me, and I shall
be forever safe. Neither sin, or Satan shall hurt or destroy me. Lord Jesus, I
again commit myself into thy merciful, powerful, wise and faithful hands, and
rest secure, for thou will keep what I have committed to thee, and I will, by
thy grace, keep thy word, and do thy will. I will hold thee in the arms of
faith and love, and will not let thee go. O, abide with me, come possess every
room, every faculty of my soul, and every member of my body, and use me for
thyself forever.

Monday evening, February 7. -- Sweet was the morning, when I awoke with God.
His word was sweeter than the honeycomb, to my taste. I prayed over every
sentence. Believed, rejoiced, and begged that God, the Father, (...), and Holy
Ghost, would take up their abode, with me. Saw sin to be a bitter evil; bewa^ed
it as such; flew to Christ for healing; and with Mary Magdalene could wash his
feet with my tears, and wipe them with the hair of my head. Promising, by his
grace assisting, that I will keep his commands, and thereby manifest my love to
him.

Saturday evening, April 2. -- Blessed be God, some sweet moments this morning
in prayer, and have, through divine goodness, been freed from the idle
imaginations, and foolish forehand contrivances, which have so often perplexed
me. Have been refreshed by tracing back the footsteps of divine providence,
seeing how infinite wisdom and goodness have brought about every change in my
circumstances, when most for the glory of God, and my good, without any of my
help or care. He needed it not. When he has seen me oppressed, he has always
appeared for me, and done all things well, and will still care for me. Why need
I be anxious? What need is there of any change of business or circumstance? Now
I have a competency of the comforts of life, food and raiment, convenient.
Friends, yea enemies at peace with me.

And now, with the fool in the gospel, I must needs be for pulling down my
barns and building larger to bestow my goods. Saying, Soul, take thine ease; as
if my happiness consisted in these, when I know, and am assured it cannot be
found in worldly good. Nothing but God alone can satisfy the soul. Oh how have
I committed, two evils, in forsaking the Fountain, and hewing out broken
cisterns, that can hold no water. Surely Satan has stirred up himself now; but
God has, and will make a way for my escape. He will not suffer me to be
tempted above that I am able to bear.

Sabbath evening, April 10. -- Blessed be God, a precious season this morning,
in reading, meditation, and prayer. Vehement thirst for conformity to God, that
he would fill me with himself, come and take up his abode with me. Renewed my
solemn choice and dedications, took hold of the promise of a glorious Christ,
"Ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you; ask, that your joy may be
full." This season too sweet to be expressed. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits* This has been, in general, a good day. God has
made me thankful, and assisted me in instructing my dear little ones. O, that
he would take hold of their souls by his special grace. God has given me a
sense of his goodness, in bestowing on us the warm influences of the sun today,
made me serious in his house, fed me with delicious food, had clear evidences
of a living faith.

I have been this evening to see my dear sick friend, found her under unusual
fears, even fears of death, over which she has for so many years triumphed.
The Lord appear for her; suffer not Satan to distress her. Lord, defeat him,
and glorify thyself; yea thou will do it; for the whole creation cannot produce
an instance of one soul ever being made ashamed, who trusted in thee. Blessed
be thy name, that thou keep thy dear child, hanging on thee, submitting to
thy sovereign pleasure. O, hold her by thy almighty power, that she may not let
go her hold of thee. Into thy hands I commit her; for thou will deal graciously
with her; thou will put underneath the everlasting arms of thy mercy. Having
loved thy own, thou love them unto the end.

Friday evening, April 22. -- O, thou holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, what
a vile, abominable creature am I! who have transgressed every precept of the
divine law, even from the womb, and still do so, notwithstanding all thou have
done for my soul. O, woe, ten thousand woes to me, if I were to stand before thy
awful bar, arrayed in my most filthy and polluted garments, though the purest I
have ever been capable of making: What rags, what dross are they, in thy most
pure and holy eyes! With what detestation and abhorrence would thou cast me
out of thy sight, and bar the door of heaven against me forever: Yea, and I
^rust forever own thy justice in casting all as dung in my face, should I
attempt to plead my own righteousness, for my justification. But, Lord, I
renounce every rag; I fly to my glorious Lord; his righteousness is sufficient
to cover my naked soul. O let me be found in this. And now, Lord, sanctify me
throughout, that I may glorify thee, with my body and spirit, which are thine,
I ask, for Christ's sake.

Lord's Day, April 21. -- Lord, permit me to plead that thou would enlarge
the faculties of my soul, that I may be more capable of entertaining a Glorious
Trinity. Thou have said, We will come and sup and make our abode with him.
Amen. So come, Blessed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a glorious God in three
persons, come and fill me with thyself; and when I can hold no more on earth,
let the earthen vessel break, and my soul mount up to thee, and drink its fill
of the river which flows from thee forevermore.

Wednesday morning, May 25. -- O, truth and faithfulness, that does never,
never fail me! Let me adore, and, with joy and gratitude, look over the mercies
which now surround me; for God has dispersed every cloud that hung over me; he
has provided a horse and money, and every thing necessary, at the moment they
are wanted to prepare for our journey. By extreme weakness of body, the path of
duty is made quite plain about going, since I am not able to attend to my
business. All is well. God will be with us in our journey, guide and protect
us, and, i^ i^ is most for his glory, return us in safety. But if it be his
ble^d will that I come to the end of my long journey, and reach my eternal
home; then all shall be well indeed. If this be his will, a hearty farewell to
my dear Bo^hel, my minister, my Susa, my other christian friends. I hope to see
you all in heaven; bye and bye. O, let me pass over Jordan first, and enjoy my
Christ without sin.

But stop, my soul; what, this moment? O, ma^e not haste; be not impatient; the
will of my sovereign God be done. Lord, I am thine, wholly thine; it is enough.
Hold me in life, or take me to thyself; do with me what thou please, only
glorify thyself, and keep me from the evil. O come, and make thy abode with me;
this will sweeten all enjoyments to me. O, go with me, or let me not stir hence.

Saturday morning, June 11. -- O Lord, how many, and how great are my defects
in every duty. How short do I fall in every prayer I ma^e, of the fervor and
enlargement that wants require; especially for sinners, for saints in general,
for ministers, for magistrates, for our fleets and armies, for those who are
suffering under the rage and power of antichrist. Other christians join in
concerts for prayer, for the outpouring of the spirit; but I lay still, as if I
had neither part or lot in the matter* O, will God keep me, if I live to see
the time, to join with thy dear ministers and people, to plead that the Spirit
may be poured out from on high, and let us all, with our prayers, be accepted
in the beloved. And, O let me every day be mindful of these things, when I come
before thee, to ask mercy for myself. O, let me not forget dear friends, my
mother, companion, and those committed to my charge. Let me not forget the poor
and needy, the fatherless and widow, the afflicted and tempted soul. Lord,
grant me bowels of compassion, let me consider myself, only as a member of the
glorious body of which my precious Christ is head, and let me seek the
prosperity of the whole. O, let thy kingdom come, and thy will be done, on
earth as it is in heaven. Teach me to pray for rains, and sunshines, that the
earth may yield her increase. Thou have bidden me be careful for nothing; yet
thou have added, in every thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving,
let your re^uests be made known unto God. O, let me not be inactive as a
machine; for thou have said, Thou will be inquired of by the house of Israel to
do it for them. O, teach me duty, and enable me to do it. Enter not into
judgment with me, for the sins of holy things. I fly to the perfect obedience,
and precious blood of my dear Redeemer. He obeyed, till justice can ask no
more; yet, let me yield a uniform obedience, that thou may be glorified.

Thursday evening, July 21. -- Sweet freedom at the throne of grace today. The
Lord make me thankful, and, for Christ's sake, grant my request, for my very
heart is broken because of my sin. I have been resolving, this day, that from
this time forward, I never will, God helping me, allow myself in resenting any
thing said of me, or done to me, nor pretend to vindicate myself, unless I am
well satisfied the glory of God calls for it. I will not, God helping me,
indulge my pride or passion, but leave my cause with God, and let him vindicate
it.

Friday evening, August 19. -- The Lord make me thankful. On Wednesday morning,
I had as large discoveries of the perfections of God as perhaps ever in my
life, and humbly hope I really had communion with him in his holiness; rejoiced
and gave thanks at the remembrance of it; and in his sovereignty, justice,
truth and faithfulness, infinite power, wisdom, and omnipresence. My faith,
love, trust and confidence, were drawn forth. I dared to appeal to his
omniscience for my sincerity. I felt vile, and weak as a babe, in myself; but
in Christ, strong as a Goliath; could, in his strength, bid defiance to all the
hosts of hell. Such a rock, such a shield, such a strong tower, did my Christ
appear, that all was well. The first chapter of Joshua exceeding sweet. I
cannot express the sweetness of this feast; but I know, the exercises of my
ravished soul were so strong that it wrecked my body much. -- And when, my God,
shall the clay vessel break, the clog fall off, and interrupt no more? O, in
thy own time, my gracious Sovereign, it will, and I shall drink of those rivers
of pleasure, which flow at thy right hand forever! Mean time, O my Christ, keep
me from the evil if not from suffering. Thou know what thou have determined
to call me to.

Wednesday morning, 24. -- O, my God, help me to remember it is by thy grace I
stand. Suffer me not to be high minded, but fear, not with a fear of distrust
of thee; but, O help me to realize that I am as helpless, and defenseless as
those of my poor brethren, who have lately fallen into the hands of cruel and
bloodthirsty Savages! O my God, if I have come out of late combats with some
small ensigns of honor, behold my enemies yet lurk, they lie in ambush, and one
ready, with more cruelty and violence, to fall upon me, than ever, if thou
permit. O, my glorious Christ, save and defend me.

Wednesday evening. -- Thanks be to God, a pleasant day, since God granted me
some freedom at the throne of grace. Sweet dependence on Christ for strength to
resist, and overcome my spiritual enemies. Rejoiced today, in thinking, that
though God has graciously given me some respite these few days past, yet I have
(...) capitulated with my enemies to lay down my arms; no, I never will, Christ
strengthening me, to my latest breath. If they retreat, I will pursue, and
nothing shall satisfy me, but their utter destruction. I am determined, through
grace, to give no quarter. I will not only stand upon the defensive; but, act
offensively also; and I know the weapons of my warfare are not carnal, but
spiritual, and mighty, through God, to the pulling down strong holds. God will
grant me his whole armor, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the spirit, and through God I shall do valiantly. Rouse up, my soul,
take courage, endure hardness (...) a good soldier; thou will soon finish thy
course. Many sands are already run, and thou art much nearer thy eternal home,
than when thou ^st believed. A few struggles more, and all will be over forever
Thanks be to God for Jesus Christ.

Saturday evening, September 2. -- Blessed b^ God, a sweet calm resting on God,
since he has enabled me to cast all my care for his Church, on the blessed
Jesus. The whole body is dear to me, and the more it is so, with the more quiet
I can commit it into his hands, and rejoice in its safety. He is so wise, so
just, power (...) and unchangeable, his love and ca^ (...), that were they a
thousand times dearer, (...) I could leave all with him, content, Lord, that
thou art Sovereign, and will do what thou please with the whole world; that
none can stay thy hand, or say unto thee, What do thou? Thou art Zion's God
and King, and wilt be glorified in her, and all is well.

Friday, September 30. -- Blessed be God, received a debt today, and with this,
paid two. This mercy God made me believe for, before I received it, and it is
sweet. God knows I have ^ greater joy, relating to earthly things (except
relieving any of his) than to receive wherewith to pay to others, that no one
may ever be hurt by me.

Tuesday morning, October 4. -- O, what a confederacy do Satan, unbelief, and
carnal reason, keep, to drive me out of my strong tower, my hiding place, my
rest in God. But wherefore should I hearken? What iniquity have I ever found in
my faithful God, to whom I have committed all my concerns? Why should I now
take the care of them upon myself, and distrust him? Has he less wisdom, less
power, less love and faithfulness, than he used to have? No, he is the same
yesterday, today, and forever. What if my shallow reason cannot see which way,
God will provide now, as heretofore, is infinite wisdom brought to a plunge?
No, no; he knows what he intends to do for me and mine, and will, still, as he
has ever done, do all things wisely and well. This is not the first time, by
scores, that I, poor shortsighted creature, could see no way; but God saw, and
I have lacked nothing. I will trust the unchangeable Jehovah, and rejoice that
my soul, and body, and all my concerns, for time and eternity, are in his dear
and faithful hands. Go on, my soul, rejoicing. Why should so great a work, as
praising my great Creator, my bountiful Benefactor, and dear Redeemer cease,
while I come down to hearken to these disturbers of my peace, these enemies to
God and me? Lord, help me to stand my ground. In thy strength I can do it, and
my enemies shall be driven back. Yea thou will help me, thou will favor my
righteous cause; it is in defense of thy honor, my God, that I am now engaged
to fight. O defend and save me; give me the victory over them, and do with me
what seems thee good. Only let me not grieve or distrust thee. I cannot bear
this. Deliver me from this bitter evil, and I will fear no other. O, I have the
one thing needful, and it shall never be taken from me: There is then no
occasion of my being careful about many things; let me sit at thy feet, and
hear thy gracious words, and let me wash thy feet with my tears, and wipe them
with the hairs of my head; for thou have forgiven much; O let me love thee
much! Blessed be God, I am in the diligent use of the means he allots me, and
that is all my God requires of me; he wants not my anxious cares, for he cares
for me, and, by his grace, I will trust in him, and joy in the God of my
salvation too.

Tuesday morning, Oct. 18. -- Thanks be to God, a comfortable day yesterday,
just as though I had come out of a thick fog, or gloomy, thorny wilderness,
into clear sunshine, and a plain path. Last evening bent my mind to business,
to settling affairs: Will God grant success, that we may gather wherewith to
pay to others, and provide so far as is necessary the comforts of life. O, my
God, suffer me never to live in the neglect of proper means, but use all
diligence, casting my care on thee. Grant me prudence in every thing; suffer me
never to act the part of a miser or covetous person; nor yet suffer me
needlessly to squander. But thankfully and cheerfully to use what thou, in thy
providence, have provided, and trust thee for future supplies. Lord, grant us
wisdom to direct. O let us not ungratefully hide thy talent in a napkin,
murmur, and complain of poverty, but cheerfully rely on the stores of thy
providence, without coveting stores of our own. Thou did never fail us, when
we were poor, nor were we ever more happy than when we had nothing laid by; and
why must there now be a reserve, why a treasure laid up on earth, where rust
may corrupt, and thieves break through and steal. O may my heart be set on my
treasure that is laid up in heaven; that is worth loving. Could that be
exhausted, I should be poor indeed!

November 20. -- It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
princes. Thanks be to God for all thy past goodness to thy unworthy child. I
adore thy wisdom and goodness, while I review the footsteps of thy providence.
Thou have, for many years past, committed to my charge a great number of
children; and have, by thy grace, enabled me to exert myself to do them good.
Adored be thy name, that I have the testimony of my conscience; that it does
not reproach me with neglecting or wronging either the children or their
parents. Lord, it is by thy grace that I have labored to be faithful. O may
thou have all the glory, while I, worthless I, reap the comfort, for Jesus'
sake.

And now, in the year past, thou have, for wise and holy ends, deprived me of
that bodily strength and vigor, so that I could not exert myself, as before.
And thou have, also, in a peaceable, gracious manner, lessened my business;
proportioned it to my strength; and made me to acquiesce in thy dealings. And
adored be thy name, though strength has failed, and business failed, thou do
not fail me; but art opening another door, by which thou supplieft our wants.
Thou have provided help for me in my family, and art providing wherewith to
maintain her. O Lord, how great is thy goodness to me and mine! How does thy
bounty feed and clothe us! Though we have neither store house, nor barn; yet,
the more difficult the times grow, the more plentifully thou providest for us.
O, for Christ's sake, accept my thankoffering, this night; and let me from this
moment, more than ever, live, as well as speak thy praises. O my God, let my
heart glow with gratitude all my days. Let me spend the remaining few in prayer
and praise. Thou have said, Praise is comely for the upright. And, Who so
offers praise, glorifieth me. O let me glorify thee, and this shall be all my
salvation, and all my joy.

Wednesday morning, December 21. -- I think nothing can more resemble my poor
soul, than a helpless, simple sheep in a field, fiercely pursued by a greedy
wolf, eager to tear in pieces, and swallow up quick: A bear, bereaved of her
whelps, espies and pursues the same prey, and resolves, if possible, to possess
and destroy it. A roaring lion, also, no less greedy, seeks to devour. They all
pursue: And what can the poor creature do! It is helpless. Any one of these,
should they overtake, would destroy in a moment. Would even a silly sheep go to
meet these enemies, or stand still? No, its fears would almost give it wings.
How swift would it run to some shelter, to its shepherd! And would its shepherd
stand and look on, see it in this distress, and not screen it? Would he give it
up to those devourers, when it is his particular business to guard it from
them; it is committed to his care, he is called its keeper? No, no.

Neither will my glorious Shepherd give me up to sin, which like a ravenous
wolf, is ever seeking to tear my soul in pieces. Nor shall the world, greedy as
a bear, swallow me up. My Christ has bid me be of good courage; for he has
overcome the world. Nor will the Lion of the tribe of Judah suffer Satan, that
roaring lion, to devour me.

O my soul, only act the part that a poor, feeble sheep would do, and thou art
safe; thy glorious Shepherd will keep thee. Often has he rescued thee: He has
kept thee hitherto. Many a time have thou feared, because of the fury of these
oppressors, as if they were ready to destroy. But where is the fury of the
oppressors? Hitherto the Lord has helped me; and he will not give me up now to
these hated, dreaded tyrants. He knows I have not chosen this world for my
portion; and he will not put me off with a portion here. He will give me
himself, his Spirit and grace; because he will be faithful. And his kindness
shall not depart from me, though the mountains depart, and the hills be removed.

Saturday evening, January 7, 1758.
I WILL, by grace, wait patiently on the Lord; for my expectations are from
him: And he will give me his holy Spirit; and I will ask, and seek, and knock,
till I do obtain the mercy I need; till my glorious King does appear for my
help, and put to flight my foes. For he will not suffer them to triumph over
me. He will not give up his right in my precious soul, and suffer this world,
sin, and Satan to reign there. O my Christ, my precious Savior, any thing but
this; any discipline thy infinite wisdom sees best. Lord, pity me. Thou alone
know what a dreadful heart I have; and thou alone can make it better. O do
it for thine own name's sake; for thy honor's sake; for the credit of the
profession I make of thy holy religion: Make me holy. All who know me, know
that I am thy professed disciple; then let it appear of a truth, that I have
been with Jesus. O let me bear thy image more and more, day by day, that thou
may be glorified. Lord, make me humble, meek, patient, submissive to thy
will, prudent, discreet, holy, harmless, separate from sinners. O thou know
all I need; and thou have enough to bestow. Thou have a full overflowing
fountain.

And with me, remember all dear to me, and all thy dear children throughout the
world; especially the ministers of thy everlasting gospel. Lord, hold them near
thyself. Let them partake of every blessing purchased by thy blood.

Saturday morning, January 21. -- O my God, when Israel groaned in Egypt, under
hard taskmasters, and cruel bondage, thou did hear their groanings, and did
deliver them with a mighty arm. Nevertheless. Israel murmured against thee. But
if God will indeed look on the affliction of his handmaid, and will deliver me
from the cruel bondage, from sin, Satan, and the world, under which I groan,
and grant me the grace I need, I will have no other God but thee. I will
worship no graven image, nor any likeness of any thing in heaven or earth; but
will worship thee in spirit and in truth. I will not take thy name in vain; but
will adore thy name, and reverence all thy titles, attributes, ordinances, word
and works. I will remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. It shall be ever
my delight: I will spend the whole time in public or private exercises of
religion; except so much as is to be taken up in the works of necessity and
mercy.

And I will cheerfully yield obedience and honor to parents, and all superiors,
according to thy blessed will. I will do nothing that tends to take away
either my own life, or the life of my neighbor; but for thy glory carefully
preserve both. Nor will I break thy seventh command, by unchaste thoughts,
words or actions; but carefully preserve my own and others' chastity, so far as
in me lies. Nor will I steal or defraud in any wise; but render to all their
due. Nor will I bear false witness against my neighbor; but maintain and
promote truth between man and man, and love my neighbor as myself. I will not
covet his house, nor any thing that is his; but will be content with such
things as I have. Never envy or grieve at the good of my neighbor; but promote
it.

Lord, thy commandments are exceeding broad. But O the harmony, the beauty, the
justice and equity of this divine law! Sure I delight in it, after the inward
man. I do esteem it holy, just and good. Ah woe is me, that I daily break it! Oh
when shall I cease!

Friday evening, January 27. -- Reviewing former writings this evening, I find
confident expectations expressed, that God will sanctify me more and more, for
his own glory. O Lord, let me not be ashamed of my hope. Let not my enemies
shout for the victory. Let them not triumph, and say, Where is now your God?
Lord, help me! O, for Christ's sake, more heart holiness; more strength to
combat. O teach my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. Lord, pity me! Thou
know I wrestle not only with flesh and blood; but with principalities and
powers, with spiritual wickedness. O how long, Lord, how long shall iniquity
prevail against me. How long shall I transgress thy holy, thy precious law. O I
cannot bear it! and yet I do it. Lord, permit me passionately to long to be
with thee. O is not my glass almost run out! O, if not, for Christ's sake, more
grace to glorify thee upon earth. But O, if it might be thy will to take me
home! For I shall sin against thee, as long as I live in this world. O killing
thought! O fatal necessity! O wherefore should I grieve thee any longer, my
compassionate, merciful, everlasting friend!

O let me not do it by impatience. I would be impatient with nothing but sin. I
would submit to thy will in all things: May it be done on earth, as it is in
heaven. Thy time is best; and thou will glorify thyself, and that is enough. O
may infinite wisdom, justice, love and faithfulness ever dispose of me, as thou
see meet. Cast my sins behind thee: Blot them out as a cloud, and view me
complete in my glorious head. Lord, view me in him, and thou can delight in
me, pardon and comfort me. O adored be thy name, that thou can be just; and
yet justify her who believes in Jesus!

Wednesday morning, April 12. -- Lord teach me the holy art of living with thee
by the day. O help me to realize it, that thou will give me, day by day my
daily bread. And that is enough. What business have I with months and years
which I may never live to see? Why this puzzling myself about futurities? Why
do I thus slinch and fear at the burden of my school, because weak in body?
Cannot God strengthen me? Will God lay on me more than he will enable me to
bear? O let it suffice that he has said, As thy day is, so shall thy strength
be. And do I not hear him saying, Be not dismayed, I am thy God, I will help
thee, I will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee by the right hand of my
righteousness? Amen! Lord, increase my faith. Blush, my soul, and lie down in
dust, because of my unbelief. O my God, I am no more worthy to be called thine,
because of my unbelief. O was there ever such a monster born! Has the great
Jehovah given me his Son, and with him given me all the promises in the new and
everlasting covenant, both for this life, and that which is to come, for my
support and stay? Has he condescended to apply them by his Spirit, time after
time? Yea, when the earth was trembling at his presence, did he not then pledge
his faithfulness, and tell me, Though the mountains should depart, and the
hills be removed; yet his kindness should not depart from me? And yet, dare I
distrust him? See note, page 86.
O perfidious wretch! Blush, ye heavens, over my head; be astonished thou
earth, under my feet! Blush, O my soul! Lord, pardon, wash away my crimson sins
in the precious blood of Jesus. And O, slay this unbelief, this infidelity. How
long, O Lord, how long ere thou avenge me of this enemy!

Tuesday morning, June 20. -- Ah Lord God! thou see what a child I am, what a
mere babe* O communicate strength to me, that I may be able to say, When I am
weak, then I am strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Lord, thou
have been wont to qualify thy children and servants for the particular calling
which thou have allotted to them. O qualify me also for that calling, thou in
thy providence have chosen for me. I ask not for wisdom to govern states and
kingdoms. Blessed be thy name, thou have not called me to such a heavy charge:
But for wisdom and grace, sufficient for me in the station in which God has set
me: That glory may redound to thy great name by me, unworthy me. O do thou
say it! Let me hear powerfully the charming, soul satisfying words, "My grace
is sufficient for thee, and my strength shall be made perfect in thy weakness."
Amen! Most gladly then will I rejoice even in my infirmities, that the glory of
God may rest upon me. Lord, keep me, thy dependent, needy creature, every
moment; keep me in the right way. Let omnipotence hold me, and lead me in right
paths. O let me be kept by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation. O
nothing but omnipotence can hold me; for I have a cruel devil without, and a
traitor within. Lord Jesus, I again make over my precious jewel into thy
merciful and faithful hands. Keep what I have committed to thee. Do thou ask,
Believe thou that I am able to do this for thee? Yea, Lord, I believe; help
thou my unbelief.

July 14. -- Went out yesterday, though but poorly. Was disappointed by company
there; and my friend from home. A few minutes refreshment, after his return, by
conversation, though not without fear of pride, because I could not join with
them in expressing an unwillingness to leave this world, and fear of death. And
thou, Lord, know, that I know not what this means; and therefore cannot in
conscience say I do. But O let none think of me, above what they ought, on
account of this! It is not because I am so good, that I want to die. Oh no!
Were I better, so that I could glorify God here, I could be more content to
stay. But oh! it is because I am so bad, that I want to die. It is because I am
so unholy, so un^^^^ my God here: And I know I never shall be like him, till
death; nor see him as he is.

O Lord, thy will be done. Keep me in (...) thy own time. But oh! keep me from
the ^vil. Oh make me more holy. Lord, if (...) wilt, thou can make me clean.

Tuesday morning, July 25. -- I have wounded myself so, by my foolish boasting,
detracting tongue, that I do not know how to bear with myself! What need of all
this exposing the failings of others, and blowing the trumpet ^ proclaim my own
industry and good deeds!^ How completely do I act the hypocrite! seek the
praise of man, instead of aiming at the glory of God, and adoring his goodness.
O the hateful self! This abominable pride! How does it taint every thing I do!
O Lord, forgive and wash away these filthy stains by the cleansing blood of
Christ, and be reconciled to me. O be not angry with me! I hate and abhor
myself. And, I pray thee, enable me by thy grace to let a watch and guard over
the door of my life. O help me to keep my tongue as with a b^le, that I speak
evil of no one; for in this, so sure as I do it, so sure I violate the golden
rule the precious, beautiful rule; for I can never say, I would others should
expose my failings, Alas! What a pitiful figure should I make, should my
friends do thus by me! How many defects in my practice -- may they espy! And
yet they cover them all, and love me still. O let me do likewise! Lord Jesus,
be thou my guard; keep me from this evil, or I shall fall again by the first
temptation; yea, without any temptation but my own vile lusts. O could my
friends but see the brood, the litter of filthy lusts in my heart, how must
they abhor me! And yet thou, God see me. All is naked and open to the eyes of
thy spotless purity. O thou holy, holy Lord God, were it not for the complete
righteousness of Christ, which thou have imputed to me, I could not look up:
Thy purity must be my terror. But, adored be thy name, on account of this, I
may still rejoice at the remembrance of thy holiness. I know there is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.

But, O why should I remain so unlike to thee, my God! Why so little of a
Godlike, Christ like temper in me! O Lord, speedy sanctification, for Christ's
sake! Lord, increase my faith love, humility and every grace; and let me see
thy reconciled face. O hide not thy face from me; but humble and comfort me;
for I am thine own in Christ Jesus.

August 2. -- Thanks be to God! A fresh supply yesterday. And my debts are, or
can be, paid out of it. And I have all I ever earnestly asked of God: Namely,
to be kept free from involvements. O God, I thank thee that thou art still
enabling me to render to all their d^s. In this thou give me the desire of my
heart. I thank thee, Lord, that I am not forced to keep the laborers out of
their wages; but can pay as soon as earned. In this thou indulgest me: In this
I delight.

And thou have taken away two of my children, in thy own gracious way; and I
acquiesce; and beg, if it may be thy sovereign pleasure, that thou will provide
for me in the way wherein I can be faithful: For, Lord, thou know my
infirmity. It is thou who have deprived me of strength; and thou know I am
not able to take the care of such a number, as heretofore. Will God mercifully
proportion my business, to my strength and circumstances. Lord, infinite wisdom
knows how, though I do not. O help me to do all thou requirest of me; but no
more. Lord, as my day is, so let my strength be. I entreat, not for my sake;
but for Christ's sake, enable me to do my duty in every branch of it. And for
his sake accept me, and forgive my ignorance, infirmities, follies, thousands
of short comings, and grosser sins. Wash them all away in the precious blood of
Jesus: And behold the complete obedience of my dear Lord, and in him let me be
esteemed complete. After all my desires and endeavors to yield universal
obedience, I am an unprofitable servant. I fall infinitely short: But he has
fulfilled all thy will. Thy law is fulfilled, and made honorable too, by him.
Behold the union between this glorious Christ, and my precious soul; and view
me, even me, with approbation, because he has laid down his precious life for
me, and I am his. O delight in me, then, because I am his, and he is mine. O
grace from the foundation to the top stone! Amazing grace! Even so, Father, for
so it seemed good in thy sight.

August 19. -- O thou, before whom angels ^ow, and vail their faces, who am I,
and what am I, that thou art mindful of me, a worm of the dust! And permittest
me to run to thee with all my complaints and distresses! Lord, I am utterly
unworthy of this gracious privilege. But oh, for Christ's sake, still enable me
so to do; and indulge me, Lord, with thy gracious ear to the voice of my
supplications. To whom else shall or can I go? Human help fails. Sense fails.
God alone is steadfast and unmovable; God alone unchangeable. And O let my faith
be fixed on this unchangeable, able, faithful God. At what time I am afraid, O
help me to trust in thee.

O my glorious Advocate, pray that my faith fail not. O give me not a stone, a
serpent. O give me not up to the power of unbelief, anxious cares, and
murmuring against thee; murmuring in my tent! Oh I cannot bear it! Lord, thou
only know how far I am influenced by selflove to dread this sin, because it
is a tormenting sin. But surely love to thee also makes me dread it. I cannot
bear to distrust thy faithfulness, to dispute thy wisdom, and limit thy power:
It is odious to me. Lord, thou know I would do otherwise at all times. Lord,
help me! Adored be thy name, that my duty and my happiness are connected. Oh be
with me through all changes; yea, choose my changes for me, and hasten my great
and last change, if it be thy holy will; and then I shall distrust thee no more
forever. Oh this body of sin and death! When, Lord, when shall I be free from
it! O succor and support me all the way. Help me to cast my burdens on thee;
and do thou sustain me, because Christ has redeemed me; and I am his and thine
forever. And I will be thine forever.

August 20. -- Sabbath intermission season. -- They who come to God must
believe that he i^, and that he is a rewarder of them who diligently seek him.
Adored be thy name, my gracious God, for freedom of access to thy throne this
day. And now, Lord, the seed is sown in tears; let me reap in joy, for Jesus
sake, in whose worthy name I come. Lord, hear and answer the prayer I have
prayed before thee: And, if it may be thy sovereign pleasure, answer me
speedily, since thou know it is for grace and strength to glorify thee; to
enable me to cast all my cares on thee, and to acquiesce in all thy will. Lord,
hear. It is not for this or that circumstance in life, nor for life itself, I
beg: But for grace, for conformity to thy image and will. Oh do with me what
seems good to thee. Strip me of all dependence on any creature and thing on
earth, if it be thy pleasure: But oh, do not let me murmur against thee, and
grieve thee. I cannot bear it. It pierces me to the very soul! Thou requirest
full contentment with my own condition. And, Lord, if thou will, thou can
give me sweet content and delight in thee, let my condition be what it will.
Let devils rage; and ungodly men, who have no own God to delight in, complain
and murmur under outward losses and disappointments: But oh forbid that I
should do so too. I have a glorious God for my portion; a precious Christ for
my inheritance. How can I bear discontent! Lord, by thy grace prevent, or, thou
know, through the depravity of my nature, and subtilty of Satan, I shall do
it, unjust, ungrateful and unreasonable as it is. Ah woeful apostasy, and
contrariety to God! I bewail it. O that I were entirely recovered from it; that
I were wholly devoted to God in every faculty of my soul!

Sabbath evening, August 20. -- Thanks be to God for the refreshments of this
day; that I still dwell in thy house; oh may I be still praising thee! May I
dwell in the house of the Lord forever! And, O gracious God, since I have left
my requests with thee, and all my destres are before thee; let me, with Hannah,
^e at rest, and my countenance be no more sad. Let me not fear always because
of the oppression of the enemy; but comfort me, my God? Speak peace, pardon and
cleansing to me. Thou have mercifully promised, that they who wait on thee,
shall renew their strength; they shall mount up as eagles; they shall run, and
not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint. Lord, strengthen me, according to
thy word.

Let me carry much of this Sabbath into the week with me. And as thou have
enabled me, by thy Spirit, and grace, to be in some degree fervent in spirit
this day; so enable me to be faithful and diligent in business, this week, and
all my days. And, Lord, grant me success, if it be thy blessed will. Let me not
always labor in vain, and spend my strength for naught. Be with thy feeble
child, though no more worthy to be called thine, because of my sin; because of
my pride, my unbelief, my hypocrisy, my discontents and murmurings against God;
and the sins of holy things. For all these I blush, and am ashamed to look up.
For these I judge and condemn myself. But O condemn me not! Blot them all out.
Wash them all away in the precious blood of Christ.

Thursday morning, August 31. -- O, blessed be God, who has provided such help
for me, that both my family, and school are attended to my satisfaction. Lord
keep me diligent both for soul and body, I beseech thee. Suffer me not to waste
the precious moments I may now redeem from family cares in idleness; but may I
improve them to valuable purposes. Lord, thou do all things well. I cried to
thee, and committed this case to thee; and thou have provided suitable help for
me. O, help me to rejoice in thy goodness, while I do enjoy; but preserve me
from placing happiness on this, or any enjoyment; or depending on any thing
below thyself, my only chosen, happy portion. O, make me rejoice in thee for
what thou art in thyself, thou God of infinite perfections, thou God of love,
sovereignty, justice, truth and faithfulness. Yea, I will rejoice in thy
goodness to me too; for thou suppliest all my wants for soul and body; and art
bestowing a degree of sweet content. O Lord, this is thy doing; for this I will
bless thee; or had I all the world without this, I should be miserable. And
this I can no more attain in myself, than I can make all the good things I
want. No: It is my God who bestows it. To him be all the glory.

I remark a singular instance wherein God indulged me yesterday. A glazier came
to mend our windows; and as he was taking them down, I thought, What shall I do
for money to pay for mending them? And, immediately, before he had done taking
them down, a child came in, and brought me money more than enough to pay him
for his work. I received it as coming from the hand of God, who always enables
me to pay the laborer; and rejoiced in it. Yea, and he does all things well.

Saturday morning, September 2. -- For two days past the pain in my head and
eyes has been such that I could not attend to reading, writing, or work, with
any comfort. My eyes fail exceedingly. O, if it be God's sovereign pleasure,
strengthen my sight again, that I may be able to read, and write, and work. And
grant me grace to improve so great a mercy as sight to the glory of God, and
the good of my generation But if it be thy will that it should fail, not my
will, but thine be done. Lord, thou know how to enlighten my soul, resign my
will, and make me happy. Do with me what thou will, only make me holy, that
thou may be glorified, and delight to make thine abode with me, and it is
enough. This, above all other mercies, I beg, for the sake of Christ. And he is
worthy, in whose name I come. And the fountain is full, and grace is free. O,
let not my unworthiness be any bar in the way of my receiving grace upon grace,
and strength upon strength, since Christ has died; yea rather is risen again
for my justification.

Wednesday evening, November 15. -- My glorious, gracious God, I would praise
thee with my whole heart. O how do thou indulge me, enable me to provide the
comforts of life for myself, and also to render to all their due; to do
something still for the support of thy gospel. I thank thee for this privilege.
Thou know I delight in it. And thou art still enabling me to feed the
hungry, and clothe the naked, blessed be thy name. Go on, merciful Father, and
for thine own honor's sake, add the mercy of a truly humble, grateful soul.
Lord, thou can make mine such an one. Thou can preserve me from discontents
and murmurings, when new straits come on. Oh, never leave me more to such
ingratitude! I dread it, I hate it, I deprecate it. Lord, help me at all times
to trust in thee; prospect, or no prospect. Thou art worthy to be trusted in
the dark, as well as in the light. How often have thou made me ashamed of my
vile unbelieveing fears. And I am no more worthy to be called thine, because of
them. I blush and am ashamed, and yet, my God, I am so vile that I shall surely
do it again, unless thou by thy grace prevent. I fly to thee for protection. O
save me from this bitter evil, and do with me, what seems thee good: For I am
thine own forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Sabbath morning, November 19. -- Blessed be God! Yesterday morning a precious
season at the throne of grace. Sweet freedom for myself, family, dear consort,
christian friends, ministers; yea, for all the world; for the outpouring of the
Spirit upon all flesh; that Christ might be King of nations, as he is King of
saints. Some sweet relish remained the former part of the day. In the afternoon
gratitude obliged me to visit a friend who was unwell. The conversation turned
too much upon things not to edification; and it was chiefly my fault. Oh, when
shall my words be all with grace, seasoned with salt! When shall all my
conversation be as becomes the gospel of Christ! I lament every word that runs
to waste. Blessed be God, some serious turns. And in the evening refreshed
again, by perceiving a young woman with me to be somewhat thoughtful, and
concerned about her soul. The Lord awaken her yet more, if it be thy blessed
will. O Lord, convince her of her undone state by nature, and her absolute need
of a Christ, and reveal him to her. Oh, make up to her, in thyself and in thy
Christ, what thou have taken from her in the creature. Father and mother have
forsaken her. They are dead and gone* Lord, take her up, and adopt her into the
number of thy children. Oh, give her a heart to receive Christ, power to become
a child of God. Lord, pity her and glorify thyself in her.

Monday morning, March 5, 1759.
BLESSED be God for the return of another birth day in peace. But oh! may the
springs of godly sorrow be opened. For, alas! how much of this forty five years
has run to waste! How little have I done for God. True, God stands in no need
of me: But for his glory ^ was created. And oh, that the time past may suffice
for all the pride, unbelief and murmurings of my whole life. Lord, let them all
cease from this moment. And let the remaining part of life be all devoted to
God. O blessed Jesus, I would now make a renewed flight to thee, and embrace
thee in all thy offices of Prophet, Priest and King. Oh teach me, save me, rule
and protect me from the only bitter evil. My only request is, that thou will
conform me to thy image, and resign me to thy will in all things that thou
may be glorified. And do with me, and all I have, what seems good to thee;
only make me holy. Entreat me not to leave thee. I cannot let thee go without
this blessing. I stand in infinite need. Thou know the power, malignity and
subtilty of my inbred lusts. And thou know I cannot stand against these, and
the world, and my invisible enemies, without thy special grace and help. Lord,
help me!

Friday, May 4. -- Once more the house up the hill is offered, if at liberty,
as expected. The Lord overrule for good. Give me wisdom, for Christ's sake, so
to conduct that there may be no room for reflection on myself hereafter,
whether I stay here, or go there. Gracious God, I am thine. Help me to cast all
my cares on thee. Direct all my doubtful ways. Order every step. Shall I raise
my price for schooling? Do the rules of justice demand it? Lord, determine me
by thy word and Spirit. Guide me with thine eye, and with thy prudent counsel.
Make me wise as a serpent, and innocent as a dove. Determine me by thy word, my
only chosen rule, that rule of righteousness which infinite wisdom and goodness
has put into my hands. May the precious, golden rule be ever mine. And oh
enlighten and teach me by thy Spirit; for thou know I am a poor, dark,
ignorant, shortsighted creature. Oh endue me with wisdom from above. Make me
wise to know and to do thy will, for Jesus' sake.

And oh, draw me to Jesus more and more. Lord, I acknowledge I cannot come,
except thou draw me. Adored be thy name, that this doctrine does not offend me.
I will not go away, and walk no more with thee, because of this; but gladly be
beholden to thee for thy grace. Lord, bestow it freely for Christ's sake alone;
for without thee, without him, without the blessed Spirit, I can do nothing:
But a glorious Trinity strengthening me, I can do all things. Yea, I can be
content with all things thy wisdom allots.

Wednesday morning, May 9. -- How gracious is God to me! A sweet sense he gave
me yesterday all the day, of his wisdom and goodness in bringing me to such a
plunge, such darkness; and then bringing me first to rely on my faithful God
for supplies; and then causing the day to break, and the shadows to flee away.
And the Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. O, let my heart now be lift up
in the ways of the Lord. Lord, bring me nearer to thee by every step thou
take, for Jesus' sake. And ^ thou do increase my business, increase my
strength, I pray thee, that I may be faithful ^ the trust reposed in me. Lord,
help me. They are precious, immortal soul, whom thou ha^ committed to my
charge. O God, make me faithful. O, may I train them up for Christ. Make me
steady and exemplary. Endue me with wisdom from above, a spirit of government,
my gracious God. And still preserve peace, good order and harmony in my family,
among my little ones. I bless thee for assistance granted hitherto, that amidst
all, I can so quietly enjoy my precious morning moments. And if they must in
any degree be abridged, Lord, meet me in the happy few. Draw forth every grace
into exercise; and enable me to embrace and cleave to my covenant God, my
precious Christ. O blessed Spirit, be in me a spirit of prayer and
supplication. Let me fall prostrate and adore before the throne of grace. And O
my glorious Mediator, my Advocate ^ve, perfume every petition, every lisp of
praise, with thy own merits, and they will as^nd as incense, and be a sweet
savor before ^ holy God: And they shall be answered in mercy. O my glorious
Shepherd, keep to thyself thy poor, needy, wandering, weak and timorous sheep.
I am, through grace, of thy own fold. Let me hear thy voice; for I will follow
thee. O lead me and keep me in right paths; for I am thine forever.

Sabbath evening, May 20. -- O, thanks be to God! Sweet was this morning, when
God took ^e near himself, and granted me communion with him in his
faithfulness. Lord God Almighty, I fly to thee for grace, wisdom and strength
to go through the business to which thou art now calling me. I have now ten in
family, and more than sixty in my day school. O, how many precious souls have
thou committed to my charge! Lord, make me thankful and faithful. Bless the
little ones, and let them all be trained up for Christ. Forgive all my sins,
and still triumph, because thou art a faithful God, and I am forever thine.
Strengthen me in body and soul, and I will be for thee, and none other, all the
days of my life.

Monday morning, May 28. -- Last week my dear husband went to Berkley, in hopes
of recovering his health. The Lord in his mercy bless the means, if it be his
blessed will; and return him in his own time; and yet spare him to me. And oh,
may we glorify God together here, and to all eternity. And now, in his absence,
while thou art calling me to take the sole charge of the family, Lord, assist
me. Preserve me from pride, self seeking, ostentation, formality and hypocrisy.
And O, make me lively and fervent in my prayers. Blessed Jesus, without thee I
can do nothing but mock thee. O, send thy holy Spirit to warm my heart from
time to time, to indite my petitions, and enable me to adapt my language to the
capacities of the children. Make this path of duty plain before me. Preserve me
from the zeal of a Jehu. And preserve me from being ashamed of thee and thy
ways, in this crooked and perverse generation, in this time of lukewarmness,
and awful declensions and backsliding. O my Sun and Shield, enlighten, warm and
defend me from every chilling damp, and blow up the spark of divine love in my
soul to a most vehement flame. O, let me grow stronger and stronger in the
grace that is in Christ Jesus.

Adored be thy name! thou did yesterday again hold out the golden scepter,
and said, Ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you: For, adored be thy
name, I do abide in thee, and thy words abide in me: I have hid them in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee. And thou know my most vehement
petitions are, that God may be glorified by my bearing much fruit. Thou know
my longings and heart breakings for this. Ah, thou have said, If ye love me,
keep my commandments; and fain would I keep them all: But I break them all. And
yet, Lord, thou who know all things, know I love thee. O then, grant my
request, and enable me better to keep thy commandments. O, how beautiful are
they! They are holy, just and good. O, how love I thy law! It is my delight. I
love thy precepts, as well as thy benefits: And yet I break them all. Oh
wretched one that I am! Who shall deliver me from this body of sin! When shall
death bring me a release! Lord, give me patience to wait thy time. But oh keep
me then from the evil here. Lord Jesus, keep my soul in thy own gracious hands;
for it is thy own forever, and I am thine.

Wednesday morning, August 15. -- A sweet and solemn sense of what I wrote
yesterday. Precious season! When the perfections of my glorious God appeared so
lovely; sin so odious; I so weak; and yet my soul so precious for Christ's
sake, because he has redeemed it; God all sufficient to keep it from the evil,
and make it holy, that he may be glorified, the top of all my desires.

O thou who have said, Ask what ye will in my name, and it shall be granted,
give me my petition and my request. Let me not grieve thee any longer; but as
thou know I love thee, grant me grace to keep thy sweet commandments. O let
me more and more have this genuine evidence. O make me every thing that will
please thee. O, as ever thou did mould a soul into thine own image, mould
mine into it. As thou did ever subdue a stubborn, rebellious will, and make
it all submission; Lord, bow mine, and resign mine, and do with me what seems
good unto thee: Only subdue me to thyself, my King, my Prince and Savior. O, do
this, rather than bestow on me health, wealth, crowns and kingdoms. O, grant me
my petition now, for thine own sake; for I am thine forrver.

SARAH OSBORN.

Wednesday morning, December 26. -- I had a sweet, cheerful day yesterday,
bless the Lord, O my soul. O my God, with how much comfort art thou bringing me
to the close of this year! Lord, thou have heard the cries I put up in the
beginning of it, in choosing my changes, change of help, and change of
habitation, all quiet and peaceable. Thanks be to God for this. O Lord, how
great is thy goodness! I am utterly unworthy of all this goodness and mercy
thou art showing to me, for I have murmured, and distrusted thee; and am no
more worthy to be called thine. But since thy mercy has triumphed over all my
unworthiness, I fly to thee now, in the name and for the sake of precious
Christ, for protection from this hated, hateful, dreaded sin. Lord, screen me
for the future, or else, unreasonable as it is, I shall fall into it again, the
first cloud that passes over me. I cannot stand against myself. I am as a
feather in the wind of temptation. Lord, for Jesus' sake increase my faith,
that thou may be glorified in and by me, even by me, though less than the
least of all saints; yet thine own forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Tuesday evening, February 5, 1760.
THE Lord grant I may from this time reap the sweetness of having this dear
closet. O God, meet and bless me in it, or it will be but as a dungeon to me:
But let it be a Bethel. Here let me wrestle with God for all the mercies I want
for myself, for sinners, dear friends, relatives, and the whole Israel of God.
Here may the arms of faith stretch to embarce an infinite God, and hold thee
fast, by the assistance of thy own Spirit. Here may God condescend to bow his
ear to the voice of my supplications. O, here may every grace be drawn forth
into lively exercise, and strengthened. O, let it be in mercy thou have given
me this dear closet. O, never let me once play the hypocrite in it; but may I
be ever sincere and upright in it. And, Lord, hold out the golden scepter:
Suffer me to touch the top. Grant me my petitions and my requests, so far as
consists with thy glory. May they all be in^ited by thy own Spirit, and
perfumed by the merits of Jesus, and then thou will delight to answer.

Lord, bless me, and thy other dear handmaids, who devote one evening in a week
to thee to be spent in religious exercises. Lord, make us upright. Preserve us
from self seeking; from pride in every shape and form. Suffer us neither to be
too proud to pray, lest we should appear weak to others, nor yet proud of the
assistance thou grantest us. Lord, protect, and screen us from this subtle
enemy. And may our united cries reach the heavens. Bless our conversation, and
every duty, for our mutual edification. And O, may a little leaven, leaven the
whole lump. O that there may be a general revival of religion.

Tuesday evening, March 4. -- The last day of my forty sixth year is now run
out, a little more than twenty three of which I have openly professed Christ.
But oh! how little have I lived to his glory. I would be humbled that I have
made no greater proficiency in the school of Christ in twenty three years; and
also that the half of my life was, as it were, without God in the world. I
would also lament before God all my backslidings from him; and that to this day
there are such bitter remains of contrariety to him: So much of pride, passion,
unbelief, sloth, worldly mindedness, and what not!

But, O my soul, let not thy lamentations end in ingratitude; but bless God for
all recoveries from declensions; for all the victories thy glorious King has
given thee over the world, the flesh and the devil. That amidst such an ocean
of corruptions, such a flood of temptations, the spark of grace is yet alive.
That God has, notwithstanding all my fears, preserved me from all open
violations of his law, which would have been to the dishonor of his dear name.
God knows my fears and dread of this. Adored be his name, that for his own sake
he has hitherto delivered me from all my fears. Where is the fury of the
oppressor, who has often appeared as if ready to destroy? But hitherto the Lord
has helped me. And I will rejoice and bless him, that by his grace I am what I
am; though I am not what I long to be; yet I will hope in his mercy, that his
grace shall be sufficient for me; and he will complete his begun work in my
soul. He will not leave it unfinished: Neither earth, sin, nor hell shall
prevail against me. My jewel, my all, is in safe hands, even in the faithful
hands of a glorious Christ. And though my sins of heart, and all my sins, are
against him; yet his precious blood cleanses from all sin. To that I fly this
night for pardon and cleansing.

Lord, my days are now far advanced. Forty six years passed and gone, never to
be recalled. O let the remaining be devoted to thee. Blessed be thy name, it
cannot be long before I reach my eternal home. O, help me to work while the day
lasts, to fulfill as an hireling my day. All thy works praise thee, and thy
saints bless thee. Let me also, who am the work of thy hands, bear my part in
this lower world. Thy saints may profit by it. O, let me not be an idle
spectator, but an active doer of thy will: And cheerfully suffer and submit to
all thy will; and cleave to thee, and speak honorably of thee to all around me,
under every dispensation of thy providence, whether merciful or afflictive. I
would renew my thanks to God this night, for the mercies of the year past,
spiritual and temporal. Thou have by thy almighty power bowed my will, and
brought me to cast my care on thee for daily bread: And thou have provided it
continually; I have lacked nothing. Lord, still help me to trust in thee, and
confide in thy faithfulness for all supplies of grace as well as of food; for
thou will not give me a stone in this respect, any more than in the other. Thou
know I have cried more for grace, than for daily bread; and thou will
answer, because I am Christ's, and Christ is thine, and I am thine forever.

Friday morning, March 28. -- For wise and holy ends, God permitted me to be
disappointed: I did not receive that which I expected. And which way to get
wood I know not. But God knows we want it, and that is enough. In the use of
those means he allots me, I would leave it entirely with him.

I have other cares at present, of more importance, viz. how I shall get my
heart more engaged for God, and stripped of pride, and self, and hypocrisy.
Lord, pity me in this regard. O my God, supply all my need of greater degrees
of grace and strength. I do stand in infinite need. O for thy presence and
grace! Work all my works in me and for me, and the work of faith with power.
Ah, blessed Jesus, without thee I can do nothing. But am I not united to thee?
Lord, thou know what thou have done for my soul. Surely I am not among those
branches which shall be taken away. O no! thou know thou have espoused me to
thyself. Thou have ingrafted me into thyself, by regeneration and adoption. O
then, let me not be a fruitless branch; nor suffer me to bring forth sour,
bitter, or tasteless fruit. O, if the tree has been made good, let the fruit be
good also. Oh, I bewail before thee that it is so unsavory, so little generous
and genuine: That it is so tainted with mixtures of sin. O thou glorious
husbandman, purge me by what means thy infinite wisdom sees best, so I may but
glorify thee in deed and in truth, and not seek hateful self. Lord, I hate
myself, when I stand in competition with thee, and thy glory. Oh, take me out
of self, in every shape and form. O ye glorious angels, and perfected spirits,
who can glorify your God without any of these sinful mixtures; if possible,
exert yourselves yet more. O, adore and bow yet lower: And in God's time I will
come and bear a part with you. -- Refreshing thought! Lord keep me every step
of the way; for I am forever thine.

Monday evening, April 21. -- Thanks be to God, who has this day assisted me,
and brought me through the day with courage and cheerfulness. Has added to my
family another boarder. Lord, adopt her into thine own family. Give me grace
and prudence to instruct her and all the rest; and open their understandings to
receive instruction. O let there be a foundation of knowledge laid in their
tender hearts, which may never be rased out. O, help me to travail in birth
till Christ be found in them.

And while thou art calling me to be so much engaged for the good of my
generation, enrich my own soul with the gifts and graces of thy blessed Spirit;
and, for Jesus' sake, indulge me with near and intimate communion with thyself
in the few precious moments I can redeem, that thou may be glorified in me.
Lord, help me, and I will offer praise. And though thou stand in no need of
me; yet thou have condescended to declare thyself glorified by the praises of
poor worms of the dust, even here upon thy footstool. O let me bear my part:
This shall be my greatest joy, to adore and praise thee. Am I not akin to the
worshipping and adoring hosts above? Then let me resemble them; and not the
murmuring crew beneath. O let me behave like those with whom I hope I shall
forever dwell; and not like thine enemies, like those who hate thee, and wish
in their hearts there were no God. Thou have called me by the endearing name of
friend, let me prove I am so of a truth, by keeping all thy commandments. O let
me rejoice in thee, and give thanks at the remembrance of thy holiliness.

Friday morning, April 25. -- O Lord, thou see my weakness in body as well as
mind; and how my vital strength fails; and I am sinking under the weight of
business: And yet the necessities of my family oblige me to covet it. Lord,
help, and lay no more on me, than thou will enable me with grace and patience
to bear, to thy glory. O grant me so much business -- so much sickness -- so
much health -- so much poverty, and so much prosperity, as will bring me
nearest to thyself, and most advance thy declarative glory; and no more of
either; Lord, no more of any thing, than thou will sanctify, I beg for Jesus'
sake: For, except thou sanctify, business will hurry, fatigue, fret, and carry
off my heart from God. -- Sickness will clog, and utterly unfit for duty,
secret and social; and nothing will be attended to but an impatient complaining
of aches, and weakness; an impatient, Jonah like spirit, wishing rather to die
than live. -- Health will be wantonly spent in the delights of sense: I shall
sacrilegiously waste that precious enjoyment, and rove from God among the
creatures. Ah woeful depravity! Ah bitter remains of enmity and contrariety to
God, that will abuse every mercy! -- Poverty, unsanctified, will make me murmur
and complain, and care, and cark, and quarrel with the dispensations of thy
allwise providence. Oh, cutting thought! Thou know I shall murmur in my
tent, and distrust thee in every thing, and impudently charge God foolishly;
and hang down my hands, and unbelievingly cry, It will never be better than
now! I shall bury all my mercies. They will be all lost in vile ingratitude;
and I shall dishonor God all the day long. Oh, can I bear it! Lord, can thou,
will thou bear it! For Jesus' sake forbid. -- Prosperity will puff me up. Pride
will rear up its venomous head; and I shall be glued to this world, and take up
contentment in it, instead of laying up all my good in God.

But, Lord, sanctify, and all these shall work together for good, and bring me
nearer thyself. For business, I will rejoice and bless thee; diligently attend,
and rely on thee for a blessing, strength and success. -- In sickness, I will
submit, and kiss the dear hand which strikes the blow. I will lie down and
adore and praise, and cry, Thy will be done, when I cannot kneel and wrestle.
-- In health, I will arise, and with joy run the ways of thy commandments. I
can do all things, Christ strengthening me. -- In poverty, I will trust thee,
and cling to thee, and rejoice in thee as my only portion. Yea, though thou
slay me, I will trust in thee. I will acknowledge the least morsel of good to
be more than I deserve. -- And in prosperity, my heart shall be lifted up in
the way of the Lord.

Therefore, O my covenant God, sanctify all to me, and do with me what pleases
thee. I have no choice to make but that by which thou will be most glorified.
Lord, any thing, only possess my whole soul, suffer no rivals, and it is
enough. O keep me from the evil; for I am thine, forever thine. My strong
tower, I fly to thee for protection this day, and all my days. O let me be safe.

Sabbath morning, April 27. -- Now, my God, bring me again to stand still, and
see the salvation of God. Thou know better than I can tell thee, how my way
is again hedged up, and I know not which way to turn. We are deeply in debt
already, and are obliged daily to plunge deeper, for the support of our family.
But with thee all things are possible. All thy treasures are full, both in
providence and grace. None of thy stores are exhausted. How dark did every
thing appear a year ago! And yet thou did to astonishment overrule, and bring
me to rejoice in thy goodness. Thou have chosen my changes; change of help, and
change of habitation. Delivered me from the unreasonable, in a quiet way; and
thereby taken off many burdens which then pressed my spirits. And thou did to
my surprise provide for the winter, and brought me through it triumphing in thy
goodness. And now help me to remember, that if my stores are empty, thine are
not. What have I to do, but to cast my care on thee? Lord, help me, and take me
near thyself this day. Strengthen my faith, and resign my will to thine,
whatever it is; and then do with me whatever seems good to thee.

Tuesday morning, May 13. -- Thanks be to God, I had my hands filled with
business yesterday, and was brought through it with a degree of comfort and
courage. More than sixty children now under my care, in this place, where I and
others feared I should not have business. Lord, I bless thee. Thou art with me
whithersoever I go. O, for Christ's sake, qualify me, and make me faithful. And
as thou know my poor, weary body will require more rest, I pray thee let not
the few moments for secret devotion be squandered away; but grant me speedy
access. O, meet me immediately. Grant me sweet communion, transforming views of
thy adorable perfections.

O let me renew my choice and dedications; for thou art forever mine; and I am,
and will be forever thine. O make me, as I delight to be, wholly devoted to
thee in soul and body, and it is enough. Grant me this, and I ask for myself no
more. O grant it for Christ's sake. Grant it, because he has said, Whatever I
ask in his name, thou will give. Amen. Amen. It is enough, I am thine.

SARAH OSBORN.

Tuesday morning, November 25. -- In casting up accounts last night I find we
are in debt to several persons; and now we are contracting more debts for wood
and provision. O Lord, help, and in thy allwise providence overrule that these
just debts may be honestly and timely paid. It is not to consume on our lusts;
but for the comfortable subsistence of our family, that we are thus involving.
Lord, help. And enable others to render to us our due; and yet send us
business: And make us thankful for it, and faithful in it. Business is now
failing every day. Grant me a Habakkuk's faith, that though all should be cut
off, yet I may trust and rejoice in thee. O still glorify thyself, and grant
that all may have their just due. Thou know how to bring all things to pass
for thine own glory. O help me to believe thou will do so in all things
concerning me: And let my heart be at rest in God, as to carking cares; and
yet, my God, preserve me from a careless indolent frame of spirit. Lord keep me
awake, I beseech thee. O my God, preserve me from a carnally secure, slothful
frame. O, pour out a spirit of prayer; and help me to pray and watch, and watch
and pray, left I enter into temptations on the right hand or the left. Dear
Jesus, keep me. O keep me by almighty power. My soul is committed to thy
keeping. Lord, I humbly expect preservation from thee. I fly to thee, O my
Shield. Defend me; ward off every blow that sin will strike, and every fiery
dart that Satan will throw. Thou can defeat the world in all its snares,
whether to elevate and puff up, or to frown and cast down. Lord, all is alike
to thee; nothing is too hard for thee, though all too hard for me alone. I can
overcome all, through Christ strengthening me. O, thou art my sun to enlighten
me, my shield to defend me. Help me to rest in thy faithful word, and suck at
this full breast of consolation. For the Lord is a ^un, and a shield. The Lord
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them who
walk uprightly. In this blessed text all is comprehended my heart can wish. O,
thanks be to God for the promise of grace, as well as glory: Grace to enable to
walk uprightly; and that no good thing shall be withheld. O, let me seize the
promise of grace now, and cheerfully trust for the rest. Lord, give me this
part now, and I can trust for glory, and all good things. Faith can cheerfully
wait thy time. Have thou not said, Thou will withhold no good thing? Then
withhold not grace. Give me this in hand now, Lord, this moment, greater
degrees, for Jesus' sake. Communicate from the full fountain, the head of all
gracious influences. It will never be exhausted: Fill me to the brim. There is
an infinite fullness for needy creatures. Am I not a needy creature? Lord, thou
know I am. Indeed I am. O, withhold not grace. Let me bear away the blessing
now, if it may be thy holy will. O, let me have no will but thine. And is not
this thy will, even my sanctification. O then, let me be lean no longer; but
fat and flourishing, for Christ's sake. Then thou shall be glorified in and by
me. Glory shall be ascribed to Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and I will be thine
now and forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Wednesday morning, November 26. -- The Lord make me thankful; for I felt what
I wrote yesterday morning. And God will be gracious still; he will not be
strict to mark iniquity against me; he will forgive for Jesus' sake, and give
grace and glory too: Neither will he withhold any good thing from me, since he
has not withheld his Son, his only Son. Can I suspect his love and care of me,
when he has not withheld his Son from me? How can I think that he who spared
not his own Son; but delivered him up for me, will not now with him, freely
give me all things, spiritual and temporal? How can I think that God, who
looked on me when I was weltering in my blood, altogether a lump of pollution
and enmity, and redeemed me; brought me out of the house of bondage; took away
my filthy garments, and clothed me with the best robe, even the righteousness
of Christ; gave me his Spirit to sanctify me; and adopted me into his family;
gave me a right and title to all the blessings of the new and everlasting
covenant; became my covenant God; and has now freely bound himself by solemn
promises to uphold and strengthen me; will now, on account of the bitterly
lamented, bewailed, hated remains of enmity, contrariety and sinful
infirmities, cut me off from the dear blessings he has promised, and let me
wander from him? No; he will subdue mine iniquities, and my transgressions, he
will purge them away. He will be gracious, because he will be gracious. He will
not be strict to mark iniquity against me. O my soul, with filial and humble
reverence, view God as a gracious Father, and faithful friend, who has said his
kindness shall not depart from thee; and not as a severe judge, standing ready
to take all advantages of thy failings and shortcomings in duty. Had God acted
this part, I had long ago been consumed. Should God be thus strict to mark
iniquity, who could stand!

O Lord, strengthen my faith; for thou will forgive, for Christ's sake.
Therefore let me fear to offend or grieve thee all my days. Thou will not
withhold any good thing from me; therefore let me walk uprightly all my days.
O, from this moment let me have no will but thine; nothing in view, but how to
please and glorify thee here, and in heaven to all eternity.

Thursday morning, November 27. -- Blessed be God! A precious morning again
yesterday. A deep sense of what I wrote. And God helped me to wrestle for the
blessings. A comfortable day and evening. God smiled in his providence. We
received from several who owed. Thanks be to God, we have good success in
gathering in our harvest. And God will supply all our wants. Does the
husbandman expect another crop in Winter? No more can I. Thanks be to God, who
enabled me, with the ant, to improve the summer. And as to the use of means, as
to the world, I have done, and do all I can; what remains but that I now wholly
depend on God, and believe he will withhold no good thing from me? O God,
enable me to keep up high and honorable thoughts of thee, believing thou will
be kind and gracious; believing thou will give grace; also, believing as far as
the heavens are above the earth, so far are thy thoughts above my thoughts, and
thy ways above my ways. Lord, preserve me from low, mean and unworthy thoughts
of thee. Suffer me not to limit thee in any wise, for soul or body; for thy
compassion has no bounds.

Friday morning, November 28. -- Thanks be to God for a cheerful day yesterday.
Some exercises of faith and trust. Thanks be to God for refreshment in my
waking moments this morning, before cares took place, from these words, "For
your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye
first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Take therefore no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of itself: Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof." -- Lord help me, and I will obey, and bless thee that thou know I
stand in need of these things, and that is enough. Lord help me, and I will
cheerfully cast all my cares on thee, and care for nothing but how I shall best
please and serve thee, and my generation, according to thy will. Lord help me,
and I will cheerfully rely on thy grace for this too, to make me faithful unto
death, as well as to give me a crown of life. O, thou will be my sun and
shield, thou will give grace and glory; and no good thing will thou withhold
from those who walk uprightly: And thou will give grace to walk uprightly too.
Lord, do all, and all shall be well. I can do and be every thing God would have
me, if God will make me so. With God all things are possible: It is possible
that my heart should be made more holy; more conformed to the image and laws of
a holy God. It is possible that my stubborn, refractory will should be made all
submission, reverence and thankfulness. It is possible it should continually
bow to the will of Jehovah in all things without exception; to adverse as well
as prosperous dispensations. It is possible for it to bow forever to the
scepter of King Jesus. O, so much of this as I may attain here, so much of
heaven below: For this is heaven to submit to, adore, and please and enjoy God.
This is the heaven I want; and as much of it, Lord, upon earth as may be
attained by a poor mortal. Ah, Lord, forgive! Self indeed creeps in. Happy,
happy indeed shall I be, so far as I attain. And wilt not thou also be
glorified in this. Lord, then glorify thyself. I ask not happiness,
inconsistent with thy glory. Nay: I cannot be happy, except thou art glorified;
for in this does my happiness consist. O I adore thee that they are inseparably
connected, and I shall yet glorify thee, and be happy too, because thou art a
faithful, covenant keeping God. I shall yet praise thee, who art the health of
my countenance, and my God; and I am thine forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Tuesday morning, December 3. -- Lord, help now, for Christ's sake, and prevent
my placing my expectations on the creature, to dishonor and provoke thee. Lord,
let all my expectations be from thee; and then they cannot be too high. I
cannot promise myself too much from a bountiful, faithful God. But if I promise
myself from the creature, all will surely fail. Glorious God, I fly to thee,
and depend on thee to strengthen my faith, and to keep it fixed on thee alone,
my sun to enlighten my shield to defend. Lord, give grace, while thou art
withholding no good thing. Thou know my treacherous heart; but hold it fast;
suffer it to turn to the creature no more; to distrust thee no more, since thou
art dealing thus graciously with me. O now set me apart for thyself. Now let me
serve thee and my generation, according to thy will, with the greatest
cheerfulness, diligence and faithfulness. Lord, spirit me, and teach me what I
shall teach my dear little ones. Suffer me in no wise to neglect them. While I
and my family are fed and warmed, let me be strengthened, and be more and more
diligent in business, as well as fervent in spirit serving the Lord. And now I
come to thee, Holy Father, in the name of Christ, for success. Lord not only
teach me how to instruct; but seal instruction. Take hold of the heart of every
one thou committest to my charge, if it may be thy holy will. In the arms of
faith I bring them every one to thee. Dear Jesus, as thou would not suffer
thy disciples to forbid or rebuke those who brought little children to thee;
but did say, Suffer them to come, and forbid them not; and did take them in
thy arms, and bless them: So, Lord, rebuke me not; but take, mine in thy arms,
and bless them all that ever have, or now do belong to me, whether to board or
school. Let it be for thy glory I beseech, that this is the calling thou art
choosing for me. I would herein abide with God; spend and be spent for thy
glory, and the good of the children. O, let gratitude be as oil to the wheels,
that they may fly swifter round than ever. Yea, and thou will help me: And I
will run the ways of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart; for I
am, and will be thine forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Sabbath morning, December 7. -- Lord, will thou not draw out my whole heart
and soul, and enable me to offer it up to thee this day, as a thank offering
for all the mercies of the year past, and all my years. Glorious God, this is
all I have to give; and this I would fain give up wholly and entirely, so as
never more to be my own. Lord take my heart, soul, spirit, understanding, will,
affections, memory, desires, and every faculty, every gift or talent committed
to me. Let all be devoted to thee. Of thy own would I give thee. Take
possession of every member of my body also. Lord, it is all thy own. And now
say, with the power of a God, "I will that this whole soul and body be set
apart for myself. I will be glorified in this creature." Amen! I ask no more.
This is the utmost of my wishes. Will thou defend and keep me as the apple of
thine eye. Keep me wholly to thyself. Lord, I am thine, forever thine: Why
should I be for any other? Why should either sin, Satan or the world engross? I
am none of theirs. Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. O behold what
thou have given for my ransom, and thou will not withhold any good thing from
me. Thou will give grace; and so sure as thou do, so sure it shall be
improved for thee; and I will be for thee wholly and forever. I dare not
promise thee any thing, on any other condition. But, Lord, give grace, and it
will strengthen me; and I will, I can do all things, through Christ
strengthening me. I can live humbly and thankfully, resigned to all the will of
God. And wherefore did thou redeem me, if not to be for thee, and none other?
Lord, grant it; from this moment grant it! View me as a dear purchased thing;
purchased at no lower price, than the precious blood of thy own Son, thy dearly
beloved Son, the very darling of heaven; thy joy and delight; and the joy of
angels too. View me as a dedicated thing, and seize me wholly for thyself.
Suffer not sin, Satan, or the world, ever to share with thee. Lord, why should
they, when I am wholly thine, forever thine.

SARAH OSBORN.

Saturday morning, December 13. -- I was yesterday very poorly all day. But,
blessed be God, have had a comfortable night. God has blessed means for my
relief; pains are abated. I thank God, I was disposed to acquiesce in the will
of my heavenly Father, as to my indisposition. Some pleasing May bes, or Who
can tell, but this may be the beginning of my last sickness? O, how sweet would
it be to realize it: God only knows, while I am earnestly looking out for the
first intimations of a dissolution. And yet would by no means neglect any thing
God has appointed for the preservation of life, or health. Let God be glorified
in his own way and time, and it is enough. Dear Jesus, keep my frame of mind,
as well as my soul, in thine own hands. I commit this to thy charge. I can no
more keep my frame good myself, than I can keep my soul eternally secure
myself. I look to thee for a Godlike, Christlike temper of mind. Keep me
humble; keep me holy; keep me watchful, prayerful, submissive, thankful,
adoring, praising, believing, trusting, hoping in, loving and longing after
thee, and thy ways, and the glory shall be thine forever. O keep me in such a
frame as much and as constantly here below, as is consistent with a mortal
state. Sure this is becoming a christian: Sure thou will be glorified by this.
O glorious, incomprehensible Trinity, glorify thyself in me, for thy own name's
sake; because the world believes thou art my God; and therefore expects I will
behave accordingly. O help me in all respects, that glory may redound to thy
great name by me, for Jesus' sake.

And let all thy dear children share with me in this happy, this glorious
privilege of glorifying God. O let us join heart and hand. O unite us in the
sacred work. Let a sacred glow of love and gratitude to God and each other ever
inspire our breasts. Let the world know the difference between those who have
been with Jesus, and those who have not, by our love and delight in each other,
as well as love and delight in God. O let Zion prosper. Let the Redeemer's
kingdom thrive and flourish through all the world. My heart shall rejoice, even
mine. Amen. Halelujah; it shall in those latter days. Truth has said it. The
crown shall flourish on his royal head, and his saints shall shout aloud for
joy. Amen.

January 11, 1761.
O LORD, who can stand before thy cold! O pity the poor and needy: Provide for
them out of thine infinite stores. Spirit those on whom thou have bestowed this
world's good to relieve their wants; as thou do spirit such to relieve the
wants of thy poor, unworthy creature; for which I bless thee; and pray thee to
reward my benefactors. I trust they do indeed give for Jesus' sake. O let them
not lose a reward of grace. Of thy free, rich grace, Lord, reward them. And as
it is thy sovereign pleasure, that my circumstances call me rather to receive
than give, I would cheerfully submit, and believe it is best of all. Lord, any
thing, any circumstance in life thou see best; so thou will but make me
strong in faith, lead me to, and hold me near thyself, and all is well. If my
hands may not relieve the poor, pour out on me a Spirit of prayer for them. O
permit me to bring them to thee in the arms of faith and prayer, to thy full
stores, day by day, that these their wants may be supplied.

And yet, as opportunities offer, and God gives leave, let me cheerfully cast
in my mites for their support. O never let me be unmindful of the poor, the
sick and languishing, the prisoner and captive, the aged, and the tempted soul.
O my God, since thou have done so great things for me, I pray thee, fill me
with bowels of compassion, and let the widow and fatherless still be the
objects of my tender concern and care. And may my zeal for the support of thy
gospel never die. Let me still cheerfully do all I can: And when I can do no
more, Lord, help me to pray continually that thy gospel may be supported, and
for the prosperity of Zion; and, O God, hear and answer for Jesus' sake.

Let God glorify himself; and let him do as seems good to him. I have no
other choice to make this new year, but that God may be glorified in me and
mine, and all affairs and things. And yet, while I am thus anxiously careful
for nothing, I would daily, in every thing, by prayer and thanksgiving make
known my requests to God. I would pray more than ever, from the exalted views,
and earnest longings that God may be glorified. O, are not these motives as
strong to make me thirst and long and wrestle, as anxious, distressing cares? O
God, let me not be freed from them in vain; but now may I get up and run with
more vigor and cheerfulness than ever the ways of thy commandments, rejoicing
in God, and in all the great and glorious events of his providence.

Saturday morning, January 17. -- Forever blessed be God, for all that sweet
content and acquiescence in the divine disposals which I feel from day to day.
This is the Lord's doing. I am sure it is. It is God who has heard prayer for
Jesus' sake, and has commanded deliverance from the tormenting sins of
unbelief, distrusts, anxious cares, and murmurings. O, for this, glory shall
redound to Father, Son and Holy Ghost; for I could no more attain this frame,
than I could get a kingdom by my own strength. Blessed be God, I had rather
have the victory over my inbred lusts, and be wholly subdued to the royal
scepter and will of King Jesus, than possess crowns and kingdoms.

O, dear, precious Jesus, do thou but rule me and defend me, restrain and
conquer all thine and my enemies -- fill me with grace, that I may love, adore
and proclaim thy glorious name to all around me, that thou may be glorified;
let me but have the presence of my glorious King; I ask no more. I wish no more
but to be near and like unto thee.

Thursday morning, January 29. -- Blessed be God, who did mercifully assist me
yesterday morning, and humbled and strengthened me by many gracious promises;
and helped me all the day. And in the evening did, I trust, meet with us in the
dear society; assisted his dear child to wrestle as a Jacob; and, I trust,
engaged all our hearts. And will not God answer our united requests, for Jesus'
sake? Dear Lord, we would plead and rely upon thy own gracious promise, That
where two or three are met in thy name, there thou will be in the midst of
them: And if two or three are agreed to ask any thing in thy name, it shall be
granted. O Lord, were not more of us than that number engaged in begging the
destruction of sin and increase of grace, that thou may be glorified --
pardon, cleansing and strength for time to come? Did we not anew commit our
precious souls to thy keeping, dear Jesus? And will thou not keep us from the
evil, and communicate of thy all glorious, imitable perfections to us, that we
may grow more like thee? O God, grant it for thine own name's sake. Lord, grant
it, and we shall glorify thee; if thou will transform us into thine own image,
by giving us lively views of thy perfections. The more we see thee as thou art,
the more we shall be like thee. O, let discoveries of thyself to us grow
clearer and clearer, till we are perfectly conformed to thine image. Then shall
we be satisfied, when we awake in thy likeness.

Thursday morning, February 12. -- O Lord, suffer me to come, and in the arms
of faith and prayer to bring the sick man, if he be yet a subject of prayer. O
Lord, have mercy on him, and glorify the riches of thy sovereign grace. Lord,
get to thyself a great name; make this man a monument of thy mercy. I am
unworthy to ask, or he to receive: But Christ is worthy. He shed his precious
blood for great sinners. O, give him but faith in Christ, to lay hold on him,
and God shall be glorified in his salvation. Lord Jesus, give him a new heart.
O make him holy, and fit to be a partaker of the inheritance of the saints in
light. -- Lord, enable him to commit himself, as I would commit him, into thy
merciful and faithful hands. O let not death separate betwixt soul and body,
till thou have separated betwixt his soul and his sins.

Friday morning, February 13. -- I was called by providence yesterday to see
this sick man, who in all probability is at the point of death, and in most
terrible agonies, bemoaning his past life, and crying for mercy. I, said he,
was conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity. I have been inclined to
sin from a child. I have feared neither God, nor man, nor any thing else. -- I,
who have been brought up in a christian land, am ignorant of the way of
salvation. -- I have had Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, sounded in my ears; but
I put far away the evil day. And now I am launching into a boundless Eternity,
and know not where I am going! Mercy, Mercy, Lord. -- Oh, this would make the
stoutest heart to shudder, said he. Oh, could I but have seen all this before,
as I have just now had a glimpse of my eternal damnation! Wringing his hands,
he cried, Oh, how shall I appear before a holy, sin hating God, who will search
me to the quick, even all the secrets of my soul! -- One speaking to him of
Jesus. O Jesus! said he, how sweet is that word Jesus! But my sins are of a
scarlet die. Mercy, Lord; mercy in and through Jesus Christ. I have not one
word to plead in my own behalf; but Mercy, Lord! A relation coming in, he said
to him, O -- I am gasping for breath, can but just catch it. O, do not let
sinners laugh you out of your religion. If you do, you will repent of it, when
it is too late, etc. He earnestly asked the prayers of all around him, and
thanked all for any advice, or pains they had taken with him.

Saturday morning, February 14. -- I went again, as soon as I was up yesterday
morning, wanting still to know more of the dealings of God with the precious
soul of this sick, distressed man. After some conversation with him, he said to
me, I think I do loath sin. I do abhor it, because contrary to a holy God. I
said -- And do you not then see a beauty in holiness, and love it for its own
sake? Ah! said he, That I have to look for yet; I cannot answer you there. He
was much weaker, and could talk but very little all the day and evening.

Thursday morning, February 19. -- Yesterday I was comfortable some part of the
day, and came through the whole as well as usual. -- In the evening serious and
engaged when telling my friends of the society, when met, of the dealings of
God with the soul of Mr. --. And when I came to pray for him, my whole soul was
engaged! He appeared to me, as indeed he was, hovering just on the brink of
Eternity, and ready to launch into it in a moment. And God gave me a deep sense
of the worth of his precious soul; of his utter inability to help himself. --
Of his utter unworthiness to receive mercy, and mine, or ours, earnestly to
apply to the throne of grace in his behalf: But pleaded encouragements from our
being jointly engaged for mercy for him, and I trust we really were so
throughout the room. I bless God, who gave such a number of us opportunity to
unite, and implore mercy for him, and commit him into the hands of a glorious
Christ, to be clothed with the all glorious and spotless robe of his
righteousness; in which he might lift up his head before strict and impartial
justice, before the bar of a holy God. I could heartily plead the glory of God
in the salvation of this soul; and had a lively view of the joy in heaven in
the presence of the blessed angels over this sinner repenting and arriving
there. And I humbly trust my sensible view both of the worth of his soul -- his
undone state without Christ -- his unworthiness to receive, or mine to implore
mercy -- the fullness and sufficiency of Christ for him, as well as for
Jerusalem sinners who had imbrued their hands in his own precious blood -- and
the glory that would redound to God, both in heaven and on earth, in the
salvation of this soul -- was from God; that those discoveries were from him,
and the desires were excited by his own Spirit. It was he who emboldened me,
who am but dust and ashes, thus to draw near, and plead with a righteous God.
And I will hope he has answered the desires of his own exciting.

It was between seven and eight o'clock when we were thus united at the throne
of grace, more than ten in number. And a little before nine dear Susa (Miss
Anthony) was our mouth, and spread his case again before God with earnestness
and importunity. -- And before we broke up we heard the bell toll for his
death. And I believe it was Satan who suggested to me, that my desires were not
excited by the Spirit of God; for he was not then the subject of prayer; and
therefore my prayer was lost; for God never assisted any to pray for the dead.
-- It gave my spirits a considerable damp: For I verily thought that God by his
Spirit had held me up to wrestle with him, and given me such boldness and
freedom of access; and even strong confidence that God would hear and answer
for Christ's sake. And if he was dead at that very time, I knew not what to
make of it! Still I could not help thinking God was with me of a truth in that
prayer. I therefore went down to the house, and inquired, at what time he died?
And his sister told me, Just at nine. -- And God did help me: And he shall have
all the glory, while I rejoice in hope that he is glorified in heaven, for the
salvation of that soul. -- And now, my God, lay me in the dust. -- And comfort
the near and dear relations, and all to whom he was dear. And sanctify it to
all this town, and to all who may hear of it.

Thursday morning, April 2. -- Thanks be to God for increasing the number of
our dear society. We are now thirty five in number. Twenty here last evening. O
that God will for Christ's sake, increase our graces. Dear Lord, quicken thy
dear children and strengthen them; encourage and comfort them. O build us up.
Smile upon us. Lord, we meet together to speak to one another of the Lord.
Hearken and hear; and let us be thine in the day when thou make up thy
jewels. O, let this society be a nursery for piety.

Friday morning, April 17. -- Eleven of our society spent the afternoon here
yesterday. I, made a short attempt to pray. And for a few minutes had freedom,
while breathing after perfection of holiness, and a freedom from every clog and
interruption to my communion with, and enjoyment of my God. Some longings that
the body might be laid to rest, and sleep it out in the grave, while I, free
from all sin, sickness or weariness, shall worship, enjoy and adore, as
glorified saints and angels do. However, here I submitted to the divine will,
and turned my plea for greater degrees of grace and strength for us all, that
God might be glorified by us. These desires, I trust, were excited by God's own
Spirit, and shall be heard and answered, though I was not able to persist.
"Think not that ye shall be heard for your much speaking," said my dearest
Lord. O, let me not limit God, and confine the blessing to long prayers; nor
yet form excuses for short formal prayers.

Thanks be to God who did assist -- to plead and wrestle with importunity. She,
as the importunate widow, followed God with plea upon plea, in the Mediator's
name. She asked in faith and hope. Her petitions and confessions and pleadings,
as well as thanksgivings, were, I trust, all excited by the blessed Spirit. And
God will delight to answer. I often think of what I heard Mr. Byram say of Mr.
Brainerd, when he was telling of his wrestling in prayer in the wilderness for
the conversion of the Indians. "I verily thought," said he, "that the dear man
would have died upon the spot." -- So it often seems as if she would breathe
out her soul in prayer. The Lord be praised! O, assist her still more and more.
Would to God all his children were such wrestling Jacobs. -- And now, my God,
into thy merciful and faithful hands I commit my soul, my body and all my
concerns this day. Pardon my sin, and assist me for Jesus' sake; for I am thy
own forever.

Monday morning, October 12. -- Lord, make me truly thankful. Yesterday was a
good day. God did solemnize my spirit when in public worship, in prayer and in
preaching, and singing too. An excellent sermon was delivered from Matthew
xxviii. 18. "And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth." Blessed Jesus, what a sweet discovery was this to
thy poor disciples, when they were worshipping thee; but some doubting; a
discovery of thy glorious power to forgive all manner of sin and blasphemies;
to vanquish Satan; subdue our lusts, though ever so numerous and strong; to
strengthen the believer though ever so weak; to enable to overcome the world,
in all its cares, pleasures, vanities and frowns; to resist Satan in all his
wiles and stratagems; yea, and overcome him too; yea, to overcome every evil
that can beset us in our way. O Lord Jesus, then fear flees before us, however
weak in ourselves, and of ourselves can do nothing, yet then are we strong. --
O for greater discoveries of this glorious attribute to both saints and
sinners. Saints shall stand up and rejoice, grow strong and adore, because
greater is he who is for them, than all who are against them; and none can
pluck them out of his hand, or overthrow his work in their souls. O discover
more and more of thy glorious power, blessed Jesus, to me. And let every dear
child of thine share with me. O, rejoice the whole body of thy militant church,
since thy power is not limited. No; all power is given unto thee, in heaven and
in earth. O let our souls exult and triumph in our almighty Redeemer; and in
all our future straits, let the eye of our faith be unto thee. When we know not
what to do, nor how to go forth against this great multitude. O then discover
to us that all power is given unto thee both in heaven, and in earth.

O reviving truth! Christ will accomplish all that concerns us, since all power
is in his hands. O what a dear Redeemer is this! How mighty to save! Who is
this! who comes traveling in the greatness of his strength! Who is this! who
for a little time was made lower than the angels for us; but is now exalted far
above all principalities and powers. O let christians rejoice in, and sinners
tremble before, this exalted Redeemer, this King of glory; and all bow to the
scepter of his grace; and not provoke him to crush with his iron rod. Lord,
take hold of sinner's hearts. Now show forth, and make thy power known, now
they are grown stark mad in sin. Now, Lord, speak with the power of a God, and
stop them in their mad career. Thou shall have all the glory. Thy name shall be
magnified and adored. Angels shall rejoice; yes, there shall be joy in heaven,
if thou will take to thyself thy great power and reign.

Wednesday morning, October 14. -- O Lord, overrule in the affairs of this day,
I pray thee. Give me wisdom to direct. O my God, suffer me not to cut any
duties short, through inclination to, or delight in the things of this world,
rather than in closet duties. Neither suffer me for a pretense to make long
prayers, or think I shall be heard for much speaking, when the necessities of
my family, and affairs for its support call me for the present to attend. Dear
Jesus, thou who have all power given to thee both in heaven and on earth, guard
me against the deceit of my heart, the wiles of Satan, and the world. And if I
have but a moment, help me to give thee my heart; to commit my soul afresh into
thy glorious and faithful hands; to trust in thee for the supply of all my
wants, if I cannot stay to spread them all before thee; for thou know what I
want, before I ask thee. -- O, let me stay to tell thee, thou know I want,
above all, increase of grace of every kind; strong faith, a resigned will,
great humility, and the enjoyment of thy blessed self. Let me but glorify thee,
and enjoy thee; and let thy dear children share with me, and it is enough. --
Only, let sinners be brought home, that thy kingdom may spread far and wide;
and my heart shall rejoice, even mine.

Sabbath morning, October 18. -- Several christian friends visited me yesterday
afternoon. And I was engaged in talking about the vices of the times, and the
need there is of wise virgins awaking, trimming their lamps, girding up their
loins, now it is midnight, and preparing to meet our glorious Lord. And in
hopes of refreshing my friends, I read some of my own writings. -- But I am
since perplexed. O my everlasting safeguard, I fly to thee for pardon of every
degree of self love, pride, vain glory, ostentation, or self seeking. O my
glorious God, thou know how secretly these sins will twist and wind in, when
I most desire to glorify thee. Lord, save me! I hate these sins. O let them not
prevail against me, now I would be all for thee, and none other. O for humility
now. Glorious Lord, give me such a sight of my own vileness, as shall keep me
low in my own eyes. O let me not become all a censurer abroad; crying out, of
the vices of the times; calling to all to see my zeal for the Lord of hosts:
And neglect that corrupt, that bitter fountain that is within me, which is
perpetually turning me aside. O humility, Lord; humility, for Christ's sake.
Not only a crying out against sin; but an inward, utter abhorrence and loathing
of it, and myself for it. -- But oh, not discouragement. Lord, guard me here.
This will weaken my hands. There is forgiveness with thee; that thou may be
feared. Dear Jesus, since all power is given to thee, in heaven and in earth,
keep me in the strait path. Let me not turn to the right hand, or left. Keep me
by thy almighty power, through faith unto salvation. And let me not grieve thy
holy Spirit. My soul is committed to thy care: Lord, keep it from the evil. I
cannot, O, I cannot. Sin will be too hard for me. If I turn not after Absalom,
I shall after Adonijah, except thy grace prevent: It is by that alone I shall
stand; let me not be high minded, but fear. Lord, I fly to thee. Behold thy
babe, thy weakling, and defend me from all the assaults of sin and Satan; and
glorify thyself in me. Dear Lord, do use me in thy own way; in my proper
station, in the place where God has set me, let me glorify thee. Let me never
move above my sphere, nor yet slothfully hide my Lord's talent in a napkin; but
occupy till thou come. O let me gain more, be faithful in a little. O let me be
found a trusty, faithful servant, working faithfully, in my Lord's absence,
always ready to meet my glorious Lord and Master; lift up my head at his first
approach, and bid him ten thousand welcomes.

Wednesday morning, October 21. -- On the 21st of October, thirty years ago, I
first entered the married state. O that I could be sure I had then been
espoused to Jesus Christ! But I cannot, though I have sometimes hoped I was.
The Lord infallibly knows. O, adored be his name, I trust he knows I am now
his. The foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his. And if
I am his now, let me evidence it to all who know me, by keeping his dear
commandments, doing justice, loving mercy, and walking humbly with God.

Now let me frequently appear among the Lord's people. Now others are crowding
together, running all risques to attend the devil's entertainments, let love to
Jesus Christ and each other, excite us to meet and visit each other. Let us who
fear the Lord, speak often one to another; and in all humility give him the
glory of his sovereign graces; declare what he has done and is doing for our
souls. Let us show forth his faithfulness, and encourage each other to put our
trust in him; for he is a faithful God, and none ever trusted in him, and was
put to shame. O may the whole of our conversation be to speak honorably of God,
exalt God and Christ, and the operations of his blessed Spirit, and grace; and
lay self in the dust. O let self be debased. O let us never forget a Not I --
Not unto me, Not unto me; but to God be glory. Thus let us communicate to each
other, and provoke to emulation. Thus let us scatter, and yet increase. Thus
let us blow up the coals, till we are all a flame of love to Jesus Christ and
each other.

Lord, thus bless our dear Society. Thus let us love as christians; yes, as
primitive christians, who were dear to each other, as their own lives. Let us
begin to live and love, as they do in heaven. Let us, while here on earth, a
bound in piety toward God, and charity to men; especially the household of
faith -- Christ's dear sick and poor -- Christ's precious ambassadors. O let us
build upon the dear, the sure foundation, Christ Jesus, all the good works we
can do. Let the words of Christ, "In as much as ye did it unto them, ye did it
unto me," be as oil to our wheels, to make them run swiftly.

O may God reward every kind benefactor he has raised to me in every time of
distress. May they never lose their reward, though they did it to one of the
least of thine. Let them hear thee say, dear Lord, to their precious souls,
even here, "Inasmuch as ye did it, ye did it unto me." O reward them a thousand
fold into their own bosoms. And may gratitude ever glow in my breast to God and
to them. And as I have freely received, in times of my distress, so let me
freely give, as God enables, and occasion offers. Lord, ever open my hand and
heart to the sick, poor and needy; and make me a blessing in my day. O, make me
extensively useful, in my family, in my school, in the dear, dear society, and
to all around me. O, let the Lord God Almighty delight to own me, to use me, to
set me apart for himself, in secret, in private, and in every way my proper
station admits. Why do I still live below? If I may not glorify God upon earth?
Why not permitted to glorify him in heaven? O God, glorify thyself in me
somewhere, I beseech thee.

Saturday morning, October 24. -- I have thoughts of drawing two bows, at a
venture. If it is thy holy will that I do it, Lord, direct and assist me, for
Christ's sake, that I may bear my testimony against this temple of wickedness,
the play house, and be instrumental of breaking off thy young servant and
handmaid from going there; and also from pursuing the vanities of this world. O
Lord, determine me, as will be most for thy glory. If I draw, for Christ's
sake, direct the arrows, cause them so to stick, that the wounds may never be
skinned over till they are cleansed and healed by the application of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ. O let me never be influenced by pride to do
what does not become me. But enable me to take the advantage of all the favor
thou have given me, in the eyes of the great ones here. How know I but it was
for this very end thou have done it? Perhaps it was for such a day as this; and
can I altogether hold my peace, and be guiltless! O God, direct and succeed my
attempts to glorify thee, and do good to precious souls. For thine own honor's
sake appear for me; be on my side, while I am attempting to show myself on thy
side. Let me fear the face of none, if I may approve myself to thee. And do
thou, Lord, bless me, even me, and pardon all my sin, and strengthen me yet
more in my soul for the sake of Christ alone.

Thursday morning, November 12. -- I have had some sweet communion with God in
his providence, admiring his wisdom in timing every thing, and supplying all
my wants to a minute; enabling me to make timely and honorable payments to
those with whom we deal; and to provide comfortably for all my dear family. O,
how should I be delighted with my lot, since God enables me to do justice and
love mercy! O that I could walk more humbly with my God; more worthy a child of
God, who is so indulged! O my gracious God, forbid that I should offend and
grieve thee, now thou art so dandling me upon the knee of thy kind providence;
freeing me from all pinching wants, and from all carking cares. Now, if ever,
let me get up and run cheerfully; study what I shall render to the Lord for all
his benefits; and how I shall refresh any of his dear ambassadors, or any of
his poor, or the poor widow and fatherless, whether they are his by special
grace, or not.

Saturday morning, November 14. -- Thanks be to God, all things go well with me
now, as to temporals. I have no anxious cares or fears. And now, Lord, help;
that whatsoever my hand finds to do, I may do it with all my might. Let me not
abuse my freedom, from carking cares and unbelieving fears, by being indolent
and slothful. O no! now let me get up and run, and lay myself out every way for
the glory of my faithful, gracious God, and the good of my generation. Now let
me prepare, as God allows me, free will and thank offerings, to refresh his
ministers, and relieve his poor. O that self may be entirely laid aside; and
wi^ a single eye to the glory of God, O may ^ in the mites he allows me, be it
more o^ with cheerfulness and delight. Dearest Lord, I cannot be profitable to
thee. But as I am, through boundless grace, thine own, use me in thy service
for the good of others. And by thy grace, I will rejoice and praise thee. And
the glory shall be thine forever.

Thursday, December 3. -- Thanksgiving day. -- I have been reviewing the
particular difficulties I recorded last year in the Fall, which seemed then to
lie before me: And now would record, with a heart glowing with gratitude, that
God has brought me cheerfully through them all. -- Perhaps I never knew a year
of fewer straits, or carking cares. Is not God, a God hearing prayer? He is: I
am sure he is. Is he not a God of infinite faithfulness, love, tender
compassion, truth, kindness, benevolence, and absolute sovereignty? He is. Have
I deserved any of this kindness at his gracious and holy hands? No, I have not.
I am sure I have not. He is self moved, and his kindness does not depart from
me. And in spite of all my foes, he is spreading my table, and carrying on his
own work in my soul. O, let my soul triumph in my glorious Redeemer today, for
his redeeming love to me, and all his; for his covenant faithfulness, in all
the dispensations of his providence to me, and his church, our nation and land,
and God's church in Germany.

Lord, fill the hearts of all thy children with humble praise this day; and
smell a sweet savor for Christ's sake. And let us gather strength today to
glorify thee all our days. O, let us begin the work of heaven this day; and be
made more like the inhabitants there.

Thursday morning, December 31. -- Now God has graciously brought me to the
last day of the year. And how great has been his mercy to me this year! I am
still, through his grace, a living monument of his mercy, and a witness of his
truth and faithfulness. He by his grace enabled me in the beginning of this
year to commit all my affairs into his wise and faithful hands. And he has,
blessed be his name, kept me almost throughout the year cheerfully leaving my
affairs with him. I have lived securely on the wisdom and care of my heavenly
Father. And he has done all things well. He has fed me and mine to the full;
and comfortably clothed us too. I have not known either pinching wants, or
carking cares. I have been enabled to make satisfactory payments to those with
whom I have had dealings; and to do something toward the support of the
gospel, and relief of the necessitous: And in this God has given me the desires
of my heart. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

O my God, accept my thanksgivings for Jesus' sake: And for his sake alone
freely pardon all my sins, whereby I have abused all these mercies. O send not
leanness into my soul, I beseech thee; nor suffer unbelief to arise, and
suspect thee. Draw forth faith into exercise, Lord, and help me to believe now
for grace to walk uprightly, as well as for temporals. O, may my firm trust and
confidence be fixed on God the ensuing year; yea, all of it, if I may live to
see it. O God, let my will be swallowed up in thine all my remaining days. Thou
good and gracious God, thou kind benefactor, thou dear Savior, and thou blessed
comforter, let the time past suffice that I have grieved thee: Yea, more than
suffice; let it break my very heart, that I have done so. Oh, I would bewail it
before God, with deep humility and tears of contrition. And now, O Lord,
sanctify me throughout. Now conform me to thine image. Now let me be for thee,
and none other, all my remaining days.

And may I, in the diligent use of all appointed means, in the path of
universal obedience to all thy dear commands, confidently rely, wholly and
alone, on my dear, dear Redeemer's perfect righteousness for all acceptance
with God. O, in this let me rejoice, having no confidence in the flesh: In this
let me lift up my head. And do thou, my God, smile upon me; yea, delight in
base, vile, unworthy, ungrateful me. And I will run the ways of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart; for I am thine forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

New Year's day. -- January 1, 1762.
THE first duty I seem to be called to this year, is resignation to the divine
will; for the pain and confusion of my head is such, that I seem altogether
unfit for active obedience. Well, it is the Lord; let him do with me, what
seems him good. I am sure I had better submit, and take all well from his
hands, than to struggle. He stands in no need of me: And when active obedience
is most pleasing to him, he will spirit me to yield it. I would humbly beg for
myself, this new year's day, a stronger faith and a resigned will; that I may
acquiesce in all the will of God, without exception in the ensuing year.
Methinks I have no choice of circumstances to make, let them be what they will,
merciful, or afflictive; only that God will glorify himself in all, resign me
to his will in all. Lord, it is not a careless insensibility I am asking; but
real strong faith and a childlike submission, and rejoicing in the will of my
heavenly Father. Nor would I choose even this (though the most delightful,
happy frame on this side heaven) merely from selfish views; but that God may be
glorified hereby. I would not ask it, if inconsistent with the glory of God.
But O my God, will not this be for thy glory? Then for Christ's sake grant it,
this new year's day. Give me this new year's gift, that shall last all the
year, if I live; even a strong faith, working by love, and influencing to
universal obedience, and entire submission to all the will of God. Let it be
what it will, I would object against nothing at all, neither life, nor death,
sickness, or poverty, or reproach. I would have no name, or any interest, or
comfort this year, but what is most for the glory of God. I would, this day,
give up myself, my whole interest, my all, to be disposed of as he pleases.

Saturday morning, January 2. -- Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all
his benefits! God graciously indulged our endeavors, and favored our designs of
setting apart yesterday for solemn fasting; and spirited all that could attend
to come. Twenty of the society were together. God mercifully assisted in
prayer. We prayed together seven times. Thanks be to God, we were not left to
be dull, dry, confused, and wandering. No. God did pour out a spirit of
humiliation, and a spirit of supplication, and helped our infirmities. And now,
my glorious God, give us faith to look out for answers of peace for Jesus
Christ's sake alone, and not for any thing we ever have done, or can do. O, be
with us this year! Now, my God, accept my sincere desires to be devoted to thy
service. Now, Lord, take a full and free possession; and accept an entire
surrender of my whole self, soul and body, to thee this year; for I am thine
forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Wednesday morning, January 13. -- Thanks be to God for his quickening
influences yesterday. After I began to write, the blessed Spirit helped my
infirmities, and taught me what to pray for. And methinks this one petition,
Let thy grace be sufficient, comprehends all I want for myself -- for my
relatives -- for my dearest friends -- for the dear Society -- for my
benefactors -- for my dear children in the family and school -- for those who
resort hither for instruction -- for the poor and needy, the sick and dying,
the sorrowful and bereaved, the prisoners and captives, and those persecuted
for righteousness sake -- the poor deserted, afflicted and tempted soul. Lord,
for all these, let thy grace be sufficient to bear them up, and enable them to
glorify thee in their particular circumstances, be they what they will. O grant
this request, for Christ's sake, and do with me, and all who can be called dear
to me by the bonds of friendship, gratitude, nature or grace, as seems good
to thee. At present I have no other choice to make for any in all this world.

Now, having made this my solemn choice, my this be my earnest plea to my dying
day. And may I never attempt to order or govern the world; or to object against
the allwise Disposer of all events; but acquiesce in his dispensations, be they
what they will, to me, or to the world. Ah, Lord, let thy grace be sufficient
for me, and I will behave as becomes a child of God; but otherwise I cannot.
Lord, thou know I cannot, but shall act in direct contrariety to thee, and
inconsistent with my own choice and surrenders. O, let thy grace be sufficient
for me, that I may stand, that I may be steadfast and immovable, always
abounding in the work of thee Lord; that I may be established, strengthened,
settled.

Let thy grace be sufficient for me, to speak to thy glory; to hold my peace to
thy glory; to pray to thy glory; or put it upon others to thy glory. Suffer
neither selfish pride to prompt me, nor floth and want of love and zeal to
hinder me. Lord, pity me. And whilst thou see me beset behind and before, and
on every side, let thy grace be sufficient for me, and then I will be for thee,
and none other, all the days of my life; for I am thine forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Friday morning, January 15. -- My Lord and my God, I renew my request, that
thy grace may be sufficient for me, to guard me from every temptation. Let me
neither be stopped from dealing out my morsel to any, as I think God in his
providence calls, or gives me leave to refresh any of thine, any of the
household of faith. May I, with Job, ever be able to say, "I have not eat my
morsel alone." Let thy grace be sufficient to guard me from sounding a trumpet
before me. My God, still indulge me with the dear privilege of doing with my
right hand, without letting my left hand know.

Wednesday morning, January 27. -- It is with peculiar pleasure I now reflect
on the exercises of my soul in the beginning of the year 1760. when almost all
my plea was, that God would choose all my changes. O, what have I got by
referring my choice to God! How wisely has he chose every thing for me! How
worthy is he to be trusted! And when, in the beginning of last year, he enabled
me to give up all that was dear to me, what advantage has he taken of my solemn
surrenders? Verily, though he has a right to all my comforts, to take them all
away just when he pleases, whether I resign or not, yet he has spared them all,
and added to the number; and given me the sweet of them, as he daily gives me
to see all flowing from his bountiful hand; that dear, that faithful hand, that
will give me nothing to hurt me; from that infinite wisdom that knows
infallibly what is best for me; from that love, truth and faithfulness that has
said, All things shall work together for the good of those who love God, of
whom I trust I am one.

And now, my soul, in time of prosperity rejoice in God. Now let him have all
thy love, all thy warm affections. Set them not on the creature comforts he has
preserved and bestowed. No, no! Now may God be all in all. And since he has so
graciously answered my choice and resignation, and thus filled faith's mouth
with blessings; now, my soul, open thy mouth wide, and cling to thy faithful
God, that his grace may be sufficient for thee, for the present day, and for
every day, and for every change God shall see best for me; and for my great and
last change.

My soul, think not to build thy nest in the lap of prosperity. This is not thy
rest. Sit not down so content, as to make this thy home. Bless God for these
refreshments in the inn; but remember thou art a pilgrim and a stranger. O,
hasten home. Sin and Satan are here still. Thou will not long be at rest, if
they can prevent it.

Thanks be to God, there is a rest for his people, where they can never, never
come. Ah! gladly would I leave all my enjoyments below, to be freed from these.
-- But I resign. -- Thy time is the best. My God, still choose all my changes.
Infinite wisdom cannot err. Only grace sufficient for me during my abode here,
Lord, and it is enough. And thou will give grace as well as glory. It is
enough! Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. I believe thou art able,
blessed Jesus, to do this for me. And since thou have said, My grace is
sufficient for thee, I will humbly hope. Though I am perfect weakness, yet in
thee I shall wax stronger and stronger.

Wednesday morning, February 3. -- I have been laid aside almost ever since the
Sabbath, with a great cold and pain in my head. But, blessed be God, not
dissatisfied. God has been with me in the night watches, in my waking hours;
and I have contentedly lain by, when he would not have me work. And I will as
cheerfully get up and work and run, when he shall restore bodily strength, and
enlarge my heart.

"Take my yoke upon you, said Christ, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my
burden light. -- Ye shall have rest in sickness, as well as in health. My yoke
is easy. I require no hard things of you. Nothing more than I will give
strength of body, and grace sufficient to perform. My burden is light. I do not
bind heavy burdens upon you. No; I bear your burdens, I feel your griefs and
infirmities. Only rely on me, submit to my will, and all shall be well. Wait in
a way of believing patiently for me, and I will return and help thee. I will
strengthen thee. I will uphold thee. Make no impatient complaints, as though I
were cruel, and expect to reap where I have not sown. Do not represent me, as
expecting ten talents in return, if I commit but two. No; be diligent when
able, be submissive when disabled, depending on me alone for all assistance and
acceptance; and my yoke shall never gall thee, nor my burden press thee down.
Thou shall ever find me a kind master in life to the end of it. My grace shall
be sufficient for thee. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life." Amen, Lord, Amen. --

Thursday morning, February 11. -- Last evening I heard of the death of my
Reverend uncle, Doctor John Guise. The Lord sanctify it to my aged mother, and
to me; and enable us to follow him, who, through faith and patience, is gone to
inherit the promises. Thanks be to God, for his distinguishing grace to him;
and that thou did make him so rich a blessing to thy church, and continue him
so long a faithful laborer in thy vineyard. Thanks be to God for the success
thou did grant him; for the seals of his ministry; that thou did not suffer
him to toil all the night, and catch nothing. Or if he did, yet when at thy
command he let down the gospel net again, he caught many, both in Hereford, and
at London too.

Thanks be to God for that patience and resignation to thy divine will, thou
did grant to thy servant, under all the afflictive dispensations of thy all
wise providence; when thou did take away the desire of his eyes with a
stroke; and when thou wast pleased to take away the light of his eyes, that he
could no more behold the light of this world, or objects of sense. That then
thou did resign his will, cause him cheerfully to acquiesce in it: That then
thou did strengthen the eye of faith to behold invisibles, to behold its
glorious object. Now faith is swallowed up in open vision and full fruition, as
I suppose.

Hail, happy soul, all hail! I congratulate thee on thy safe arrival to the
blissful regions. O, let me by faith peep in a little, and view thee now thou
have dropped thy clog of mortality. Now thou beholdest with open face the glory
of Jehovah in the dear, the lovely face of Jesus Christ, that God-Man-Mediator,
who died for thee, and said, Father, I will that those whom thou have given me,
be with me to behold my glory. -- Ah, have thou dropped the whole body of sin
and death. All hail again! What! Can thou now worship in the most humble, and
yet exalted strains, without the least degree of taint of that abominable thing
which God's soul hates? What! Made perfect in holiness! No danger of one wrong
principle; no pride; no self to rise and rob God of his glory? O happy, happy
soul!

O, when shall I arrive to this perfection of holiness: Thou will not fear for
me there. I shall never damp thee more. My odious pride shall have no being
there. Let me leap for joy, or shout as loud as I will the riches of
distinguishing, free, rich, sovereign grace, thou will join me. I shall never
unstring thy harp, nor thou mine. O thanks be to God, that I am rejoicing in
hope of coming to thee, to be with thee, and to be with Christ, which is far
better.

O for grace to make haste, and finish the work God has given me to do. I would
fulfill as a diligent hireling my day. But, my God, permit me to long for the
shadows of the evening. O, to me to live, is Christ; but to die, unspeakable
gain. Let not the Lord be angry. Indulge me a little here, while, through thy
grace, my soul breaks for the longing it has for a freedom from sin. Oh
monster! -- And the full enjoyment of thyself. Thou know I am not groaning
under worldly cares. Blessed be thy name, thou have taken them away. --

And now, O my God, grant me strong patience, and profound submission to the
divine will in all things; that I may wait all the days of my appointed time,
till my great change come. I bless thee, that my bounds are set, and I cannot
pass them. I shall not stay, when my work is done. Lord, it is enough! Thy time
is best. Only grace sufficient for every moment, and it is enough. I am forever
thine. Do with me, and all dear to me, as seems good to thee, and all is
well. --

April 15. -- Ah, my Lord and my God, though I mourn for sin less than I ought,
yet, blessed be thy name, there is such a rooted aversion in my soul, to it,
that the thought of my being freed from condemnation, without the hope of being
freed from the pollution of sin, seems not to satisfy me at all. Oh, were it
possible I could carry the monster to heaven with me, it would abate my joy at
the prospect of heaven itself. It would be no heaven to me, if there I must
still sin against, and grieve my Lord. But, thanks be to God, there I shall be
free indeed. O, I bless thee from my inmost soul for this prospect of a freedom
from sin. --

April 18. -- Lord, be with me this Sabbath. Call off Satan, if it be thy holy
will. Suffer him not to suggest a thousand trifles to my foolish heart. Nor
things of a serious nature neither, which are foreign to the present duty.
Lord, whence is it, unless from him, that I am so much more beset to keep my
heart fixed on the business of the present moment, on thy day, than on any
other? Lord, preserve me. I want to say, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is
fixed. Oh, let not Satan cast in rubbish, to smother the spark of love, as soon
as it begins to kindle. Oh, let not my foolish heart start aside, like a
deceitful bow, today. O God, engage our hearts in prayer, in singing,
meditation, examination, in ejaculations in thy house, and out of it. Lord,
discoveries of thyself will do it effectually. This will soon attract the
hearts of thine. There is no one perfection of thy nature, if thou will unveil,
and show thyself, which will not engage the whole heart in a moment. It cannot
start aside under discoveries of thyself. If thou will show thy majesty and
greatness, the eye of faith will gaze there, till the soul and all things else
in its view, will shrink into nothing, and it will lie in the dust and adore.

Sabbath morning, May 23. -- Lord, how long shall Satan and my own heart
conspire, on the Lord's day in particular, to break, confuse and disturb my
thoughts. Lord, appear for me; and let Satan lose his aim this time, I pray
thee. He is trying to stir up resentment, because of another's ingratitude. Now
is the time, my soul, if I am a christian indeed, to do more than others; now
to apply the rule my glorious Savior has set before me. I have solemnly
declared, that I have taken his word for my rule. I am, then, to bless them who
curse me; do good to them who hate me; and pray for them who despitefully use
me, and persecute me. My soul, my trials do not rise so high as this. All I am
now called to, is to be kind to the unthankful, that I may be the child of my
Father who is in heaven, who makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good,
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. If I love them who love me,
what reward have I? Do not even the publicans the same? And If I salute my
brethren only, what do I more than others? Do not even the publicans so?

Lord, now, in my degree, let me be perfect as my Father who is in heaven is
perfect, and triumph over the ingratitude of any, and all. Now let me cover
these infirmities with the mantle of love, and leap over them all, to do good
to the poor and needy, whether they will think it any thing, or no. Thus may I
be accepted of my God. He will not throw back my mites as dung in my face, let
who will do it. Thus let me be avenged of Satan, and my own corrupt heart, and
become their conqueror, through thy grace; and I will rejoice and praise thee.

And now, let me, in defiance of Satan, and my own vile heart, enjoy a Sabbath
of rest today. Rejoice over me to do me good this day, my God. Let me see the
goings of God in his sanctuary this day. Assist thy ministers; Lord, assist
them, and set home thy word with power, upon saints and sinners. O for a
refreshing shower of thy Spirit this day! --

July 2. -- Yesterday God permitted twenty one of us to meet together, and to
keep our solemn fast. I was, before it came on, and at the beginning, all gloom
and discouragement: Yet God triumphed over my unbelief, and gave me kind
access, and graciously assisted every one. And now, Lord, for Christ's sake,
help us to believe that thou art, and that thou art a rewarder of all those who
diligently seek thee. O, help us to look, and long, and wait; for thou have
said, those who wait on the Lord shall renew their strength. O, for Christ's
sake, answer those petitions put up in his name for heart holiness, stronger
faith, thankfulness of heart, a resigned will in all things without reserve. O
hear in heaven thy dwelling place, forgive and do; for we are thine. Lord,
still encourage our waiting upon thee. O, encourage us to hope in thy mercy.
Thou have never said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. Let us find, by
kind and gracious answers, as well as in the present moment, it is good for us
to draw near to God. O, let us with Hannah, have cause to rejoice and say, For
this humility, this thankfulness of soul, for this strong faith, this love,
this heart holiness and risignation we prayed, and the Lord heard us; not, This
is the child; but, This is the grace. And now we will give back to the Lord;
yea, we will give back ourselves, and all God bestows, and abide in the house
of the Lord, and minister before him forever.

Monday morning, July 12. -- I was engaged last week in reading and thinking on
Mr. Bellamy's Thereon, Paulinus, and Aspasio. An answer to Mr. Harvey's
Dialogues. And heartily do I wish that all who are setting their face toward
Zion, could and would, divested of all prejudice, for or against either of
these authors, weigh Paulinus' strong, clear and beautiful arguments. O that I
may ever love the glorious God for what he is in himself, because he is a
perfect, glorious Being; just and holy, as well as merciful. O God, I beseech
thee, show me thy glory. Let me with open face behold, as in a glass, the glory
of the Lord, till I be transformed into the same image. O God, let me ever
reach above the publican's standard. O, may I love thee for thyself, as well as
what thou art to me. Lord, inspire me with a generous love, I beseech thee, to
thee, and thy righteous law, which is holy, just, and good, though the whole
human race had been condemned, and eternally banished from thy glorious
presence for transgressing it. Shall that beautiful transcript of the divine
image be esteemed a tyrant! Severe, hard and cruel, because it requires me to
love the Lord my God with all my heart and soul and strength and mind; and my
neighbor as myself? O God, forbid. Slay every degree of enmity that rises up
against this righteous law, and calls it cruel. O may I ever lie in the dust
for my continual deviations from and violations of thy holy law, and
acknowledge I deserve eternal damnation for every breach of it: While I adore
the infinite wisdom which has magnified the law and made it honorable in the
death of the Son of God; while I adore the grace which has said, There is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit. O, may my evidences be ever clear. Let me never build upon a
persuasion that Christ, grace and pardon are mine, without knowing that I have
received him, and do rest upon him alone; am conformed to his image, in the
temper of my mind, and tenor of my life. Amidst all my deficiencies, yet I do
love righteousness and hate iniquity. Yea, I do delight in the law of God after
the inner man. I do esteem it beautiful, holy, just, and good; yea, good for
me. I do hate myself for my nonconformity. I do loath, judge, and condemn
myself for this. O thanks be to God, that I can, notwithstanding, be cleared in
an honorable way from the curse of the law; that God can be just, and yet the
justifier of her who believes in Jesus.

Tuesday morning, November 9. -- On Friday, October 15, I was taken with an
ague fit, and extremity of pain, and so put to bed. -- For some days I thought
it nothing different from what I had been used to for many years, only in
degree; as ague fits, hot fevers, and sweats. But at length I was convinced it
was of a different kind. This presently gave a spring to my hope that this
might prove my last sickness. That God was going, in mercy, to set his weary
pilgrim free from the intolerable burden of sin, and take me to himself, to
behold his glory. And as my disorders increased, my hope arose to a strong
persuasion that I should die. And O how did my eager soul press forward, and
bid death ten thousand welcomes! My God, my covenant, faithful God, shone in
upon his own work in my soul; gave me clear and substantial evidences of my
union to Christ by faith. All was calm within. I had enough to do to admire the
astonishing goodness of God to me, inwardly and outwardly. Mercies flowed in
upon me from every quarter. All that could be thought of that was suitable for
me was sent me in plenty; so that I had to spare to relieve other sick ones.

Twelve days I kept my bed, except being just taken up to have it made. My dear
friends were tender of me, and tended me night and day. Perhaps not less than
fifty offered to watch. My dear Susa tended me every day. The Lord reward her,
and all the rest of my dear friends!

And since this sickness has not been unto death, I beseech thee, Lord, for
Jesus Christ's sake alone, let it be for the glory of God. And as sure as
Lazarus was raised from the dead, so sure let me be raised by the power of God
to newness of life. O now let my faith be raised above the fears of sin and
Satan and the world, as it has been raised above the fears of death. Now, Lord,
help me to rely on the same almighty, faithful, covenant God, with whom I could
gladly have ventured through the dark valley of the shadow of death; and feared
no evil, because thou wast with me. O now make me strong in faith, giving glory
to God. Now let me come up through this wilderness leaning upon my beloved;
depending on his love, his care, his faithfulness, his allsufficient grace to
uphold and keep me, and suffer me neither to stinch nor fear, though I am
perfect weakness; but, in thy strength, let me be as a giant; gird up my loins,
and run with patience the race set before me. Now let me endure hardness as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ; and not, as a timorous hare, shrink back. O let
vehement love be as oil to the wheels; and let my soul be ever as the chariots
of Aminadab, swiftly moving in the paths of universal obedience. O now glorify
thyself in me. Dear Lord, wherefore have thou said to me, Live, if not to thee.
O make me more humble than ever. Do all for Christ's sake, who has said,
"Because I live, ye shall live also."

Sabbath morning, December 20. -- O Lord, let integrity and uprightness
preserve me this day. Let me not act the hypocrite in showing a concern to get
to thy house, without a real, hearty desire to seek thee there, and to worship
thee in spirit and in truth. O God, an honor is due to thy public worship. O
let not a carelessness and indifference seize me, under pretense of resignation
to thy will. O blessed Savior, take care of me, and make me just what thou
would have me to be. Lord, thou see how many snares await me on every
side. O be my perpetual guard, or I shall some way or other dishonor thee: Yea,
I shall do every thing in contrariety to thee. O let a sense of these bitter
remains of indwelling sin keep me humble. Suffer not Satan to teaze me
perpetually. Lord, restrain him, and let me have the comfort of that sincerity
thou have put in my heart. And let me be indeed refigned to thee in all things,
without reserve. If it be thy holy will to recover my strength before I go
hence, and be no more here; that I may go up and down in my family, and with
cheerfulness put my hand to help, when its necessities call for it, without
being overthrown by it; if it be thy pleasure to give me more vital strength,
and to strengthen the organs of sight, that I may attend to reading,
meditation, and other secret duties, as well as the duties of my calling,
without being outdone; and if it will please thee to restore my hearing, and
strengthen me to walk to thy house as formerly; Lord, by grace, I will bless
thee, and, by grace, improve all these to thy glory. O let me not despise or
set so light by such mercies as these, as to neglect to ask with submission for
them. O God, preserve me from a presumptuous cove^ing of symptoms of a
dissolution. Let me not provoke thee to lay thy hand heavy on me, and then
leave me to see how I can sustain such distressing disorders, and linger along
without the light of thy countenance. Lord, this thou may justly do, if I go
to choosing for myself. And then, Oh! what fears, what doubts, what dishonoring
God may follow; even till I pass through the dark valley of the shadow of
death! O Lord, suffer me not, by presumption or unbelief, to tempt thee to
leave me to myself. Nor let me from this moment have any choice but to improve
every moment of life to thy glory; and leave all with thee as to time and
circumstances. Lord, I am forever thine. Let me have no will but thine, no
choice but thine. O for a humble resignation of a truth! This becomes a child
of God at all times; and nothing can come amiss to a resigned will. O, this is
right, it is fit, it is just, it is beautiful! Lord, for Christ's sake, grant
it.

Thursday evening, January 13, 1763.
O LORD, look down upon me in mercy, and for Christ's sake freely pardon all my
sins. O let me not with Moses provoke thee by speaking unadvisedly with my
lips. O make me holy in heart, lip, and life: And suffer not Satan to distress
and worry me with his lies; nor let me imitate him by accusing myself falsely.
True, Lord, I do fall inconceivably short of perfection in holiness. But thou,
who know all things, do know this is my grief and burden. Could it be, I
had rather be perfectly holy, than to have all the world. I do hate sin, and
myself for it. I do hate the remains of hypocrisy, as well as all my other
sins. I do not want to be deceived, nor to deceive. O never let me have a name
to live, and be dead. O that I could never deviate from thy holy law any more.
O when shall it once be, that I shall be perfectly conformed to thy image and
will! My heart is in thy hand: The work is thine. It is begun, let Satan say
what he will: O carry it on to perfection. Sure thou will not leave it
unfinished. O when will thou make me perfect! I am weary of sinning against
thee, and yet persist. Oh when shall death set me free! When shall I cease to
dishonor thee, and see thee dishonored by others! How long shall my heart be
broken! How long shall Judas betray with a kiss! How often shall I see thee,
blessed Jesus, crucified afresh and put to open shame? Wounded in the house of
thy professed friends! How long shall my sins be as cruel spears, to pierce
thee to the heart!

Oh while I grieve for others sins, let me abhor my own: For they who have not
known thee cannot sin at so high a rate, as I who have. For I have known thee,
and known that thou came forth from God, and art the very Christ. Flesh and
blood has not revealed this to me; but thy heavenly Father. I have not picked
this up from the experiences of others. It is not from the saying of the woman;
but I have heard thee myself, and know thou art the Christ, in whom I have
believed, and to whom I have committed my precious soul. O let me never go
away; never be confounded; never be put to shame. O keep me; hold me fast by
thy almighty power; by thy word, by thy Spirit, and grace; by the bonds of the
everlasting covenant. Remember thou have said, They shall not depart from me.
Amen, Amen. Then I shall not depart. Thy grace shall be sufficient for me,
amidst all the thorns in the flesh, and messengers of Satan. I am thine forever.

SARAH OSBORN.

Sabbath Day, March 6. -- I am thy poor, weary pilgrim, Lord. O if it may
consist with thy glory, give me a speedy release. But I would not ask it, if
inconsistent with thy glory. Oh no. -- I would not desire to enter into heaven
itself, inconsistent with thy glory, I would not desire to enter into heaven
itself, inconsistent with thy glory. This is as strong an expression of
disinterested affection, subordinating every interest, in time and eternity,
without any condition or reserve, to the glory of God, as can be made. The same
disposition is expressed by her in a number of passages in her diary;
especially under the date of April 24, 1767. She there has said that this
disposition to desire and seek the glory of God, above every thing else,
commenced with her first devoting herself to God (which are, indeed one and the
same thing) and had been ever since the first and chief desire of her heart.

This serves to show, that her great attention to her own case and interest,
spiritual and temporal; her earnest desires of holiness, and of the favor and
everlasting enjoyment of God, and rejoicing in his goodness and love to her,
etc. so frequently expressed in her writings, were not selfish exercises; but
really proceeded from disinterested love to God, and placing her happiness in
his being glorified: And therefore desiring nothing, inconsistent with that, or
that might not promote it, thus subordinating every thing to the glory of God.

See the note in page 29 of her life.


any more than I would ask any enjoyment upon earth, inconsistent with it. Help
me then, from this moment, to leave all to thy consummate, infinite wisdom,
power, love, care, and faithfulness, and have no will but thine. Here I am, do
with me what seems good unto thee, and all is well; for I am thine in Christ
Jesus, and thou art mine. Amen. Hallelujah! --

Sabbath, March 13. -- My glorious God, raise me this day above the temptations
and trifling difficulties of time, which are but for a moment. Thou have said,
They who wait on thee shall renew their strength. O let me this day mount up on
the wings of faith to Pisgah's top, and take a view of my glorious, risen,
ascended Savior. He who was crucified for my offenses, and raised again for my
justification. --

Thanks be to God! Here my thoughts grew too big to get vent by writing, and
were vented by tears. -- I trust God has granted me some sweet communion with a
once crucified, but now risen and ascended Savior. My soul has rejoiced in him,
and that as my forerunner, he has entered there, at the Father's right hand. He
is my advocate there. He is gone to prepare a place for me; and will come
again, and receive me to himself, that where he is, there I may be also. O
glorious hope! More glorious enjoyment! Lord ripen me fast! And let many souls
be raised from sin this day, this First day, on which thou did arise. Say to
thousands, if it be thy will, this day, "Because I live, ye shall live also." O
breathe into dead souls spiritual life this day, and they shall live. Breathe
on them, Lord, and they shall receive the Holy Ghost in all his quickening,
renewing, sanctifying influences. Blessed Spirit, do thou apply the purchased
redemption this day in all the worshipping assemblies of thy people. Be with
thy ministers. O teach them what arrows to choose; and do thou point them to
the hearts of all.

Wednesday morning, March 30. -- I awoke refreshed in the night with that part
of the gracious covenant betwixt God and his people. "I will put my fear into
their hearts; and they shall not depart from me." Was enabled to say, Amen! To
rejoice in it, and plead it for my security against departing from God. O thus
put thy fear into my heart. I fly to thy shall not, as a greater security than
ten thousand thousand of my resolves never to depart. I am all weakness; but if
thou say I shall not, I shall not. O so put thy fear into my heart, and I
shall not. O blessed security! Cheer up, my poor soul! It is the word of
Jehovah which is gone forth for thy stay and support, under the strong
propensities of thy vile nature to depart from God. O my rock, my strong tower,
my sun, my shield, defend and save me. I am forever thine. Lord, save me from
the worst of evils, even a departing from thee by sin. O save me for Christ's
sake, and for thine honor's sake. --

Tuesday morning, May 17. -- My Lord and my God, permit me for Christ's sake,
to draw near at this time, and renew my request for a sufficiency of grace to
make me just such an one as thou would have me to be. Make me diligent and
faithful in my calling, I pray thee; and in every thing glorify thyself by me.
Methinks, in the various dispensations of providence, my repeated dreams of
being sunk in water, in tempests, earthquakes, thunder, etc. realizing sudden
death, being bowed to the will of God, and then restored, are interpreted: For
thus God frequently plunges me; and no sooner do things come to an extremity in
prospect, but God then appears, and so resigns my will, that I can choose
nothing but what he wills. I choose his honor and justice should be vindicated
and glorified. I can then rely on his wisdom in choosing the best time, and
doing all things well. -- Then the streams of his mercy, flowing from his
everlasting covenant, love, truth, and faithfulness in Christ Jesus, are doubly
sweet, infinitely more than I deserve; and all is well. And when God has
brought me to this temper of mind he speedily removes the threatened stroke. He
strikes me not a blow in the way I expected.

This day two months ago, I seemed to be going forth without purse or scrip.
Poverty stared me in the face, and I knew not which way to turn. But we have
lacked nothing. God has supplied all our wants in unexpected ways. And I do not
know that we are more reduced now, than we were then. O that I could ever rely
on infinite wisdom and goodness! O that I could always stay till God gives the
finishing stroke to any affair, before I pretend to draw up any conclusions;
for I know not now, what he is about to do; but I shall know hereafter. Let it
suffice that he does all things well. Infinite wisdom cannot err. Love, truth,
and faithfulness will never leave nor forsake me. Amen.

Sabbath evening, June 12. -- Blessed be God for permitting me to wait on thee
in thy house and at thy table; and that thou did engage my whole soul. O now
let my strength be renewed. Now help me to get up and run, and press forward in
the paths of faith and holiness; since there I bemoaned my unkindness to my
everlasting friend; there I bewailed my pride, my hypocrisy and my unbelief;
that I had crucified my Lord; there I pleaded that sin might die; that I might
there derive strength from Christ to overcome sin, Satan, and the world. There
I solemnly renewed my choice of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for my God,
my portion in time and eternity. There I again chose the word of God for my
only rule; and cried for strength to obey, that I might henceforth evidence my
love by universal obedience.

The perfections of Jehovah, the perfection of the divine law, once more
appeared lovely, I could once more cry, See ye him whom my soul loves? Tell
him, I am sick of love. Blessed be God, that I have once more felt love to the
brethren: Once more known, in a degree, what communion with saints means: And
now, my Lord and my God, fulfill the desires of thy own unworthy child, which
thou did excite at thy table, while I was at thy feet with penitential tears;
yea, with Peter, wept bitterly for my unkindness to thee, while I rested my
weary head on thy dear, delightful breast: For thou did, O astonishing grace!
Thou did once more take me near, and hold out the golden scepter. O fulfill
the desires of those who fear thee: Now let me go on my way rejoicing. Low let
my countenance, with Hannah's, be no more sad. Now let me again sing restoring
grace, and adore thee for what thou art in thyself, and for what thou art to
me. O now let me know, and do thou make Satan know, I have an almighty friend,
who will not leave me in his hand, nor suffer me to be led captive by him at
his will. O may all his evil insinuations, blasphemies and slanders, whereby he
has reproached the living God, and vexed my weary soul, from day to day, light
on his own head, for his malice against thee, while I escape as a bird out of
the hand of the fowler. O thou faithful God, make a way for my escape, that I
may perform my vows, and run the way of thy commandments with delight. For I am
a dedicated thing. Now use me, Lord, for thyself, and glorify thyself in me.

Sabbath evening, October 2. -- Yesterday God permitted a number of his
handmaids to meet here, and unite in prayer. It was our solemn fast day; and,
blessed be God, he is still encouraging us to seek him; did graciously assist
us: And has this day, beyond all expectation, suddenly and remarkably
strengthened me to go up to his house; and permitted me to sit down at his
table. -- And now the vows of God are upon me; now, Lord God Almighty, enable
me to wait upon thee; and let all my expectations be from thee.

Thursday, October 27. -- The last Thursday in the month is come. And now will
God graciously bring his handmaids here this afternoon, and meet with us, and
excite in us vehement longings and strong cries for thy holy Spirit. O let us
so ask, that we may receive for ourselves and others. Give the holy Spirit to
those who ask him this day. This comprehends all other blessings. O come,
blessed Spirit; come, and make thy abode with us, and it is enough: We shall be
holy then. Then we shall pray and praise; we shall run and strive; we shall
submit and love; we shall believe and rejoice, acquiesce and adore. Thy will
shall be our will; thy cause and interest, ours: And we shall grow strong in
all the grace there is in Christ Jesus. Blessed Spirit, O come. It is by thy
help alone, we can ask. O come this day, and make intercession within us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered. O come, and revive our dear society. Lord,
come in the midst today, and revive our drooping souls. O let us find it is
good for u^ to be here, and let us receive lasting benefits, even the abode of
the blessed Spirit with us. O come as on the day of Pentecost; and fill this
room with thy glory, and our hearts with thy praise.

Wednesday morning, March 21, 1764.
LORD, what a barren figtree am I become! Sure thou come seeking fruit, and
find none: And should thou give the commanding word, "Cut it down, why
cumbereth it the ground?' my dying breath shall, by grace, pronounce thee just:
For thou have waited year after year; but still no good fruit to be found on
me! If any is materially so, thou know it is all so corrupted by sin, it is
not worthy the name of fruit; not worthy the notice of a holy, holy, Lord God.
I am ashamed of all that ever I did. I hate my corrupted, rotten trash. It is
sour, it is bitter, it is filthy. I dare not present it, I dare not plead it,
that I have brought forth such fruit, however fair to the eye of man, since
thou know all is tainted by sin. Lord, will thy infinite patience and long
suffering yet be lengthened out. Will thou yet cause thy servants to dig about
the tree; and will thou bless divine cultivations? If not; if it be thy will,
rather cut it down, than curse it. O say not, "Let no fruit grow on thee
henceforward forever." Lord, I deprecate standing a withered monument of thy
indignation!

For Christ's sake, and for thy honor's sake, cause me to bring forth the
peaceable fruits of righteousness; or let me die, and my name perish, and be
forgotten among men. Why should I live to be a reproach to thy name and ways;
or live to deceive the world? God forbid! O God, have thou not long ago made
this tree good by regeneration? How then comes so much bad fruit to grow on it?
Is not this branch grafted into the true vine? Sure it is not to this day
growing on its old stock. O then, purge it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
O may the sap and nourishment derived from Christ, cause it yet to bring forth
full ripe clusters. I fly to the general, gracious promise, that every branch
in Christ shall be purged, and shall bring forth more fruit. Yea, thou have
said, They shall bring forth fruit even to old age, for the manifestation of
thy faithfulness, to show that the Lord is upright. I have boasted of this
word; yea, triumphed, that thus it should be, because thou art my rock, and
there is no unrighteousness in thee. Lord, let me never be ashamed of my hope;
but take away my corruption; turn away from my sin and behold it not. Let the
sin be condemned, and the sinner escape, by the blood and righteousness of
Jesus Christ, whose righteousness alone I plead.

Tuesday morning, March 27. -- Lord, in mercy strengthen my resolutions, as to
self examination, and the putting every neglected duty into practice. Assist
me, Lord, in communing on my bed, and offering up my morning sacrifice. This I
endeavor to do; but O engage my heart more when I approach thee. O God, take
away formality and hypocrisy, and make me all devotion; and hear and answer,
for Christ's sake.

Lord, strengthen my memory to retain thy word, read or preached. I have taken
it for my rule, let me never swerve from thy precepts. Let no command of thine
be grievous. Set home thy threatenings and promises with power. O humble and
encourage my poor soul, under all the damps from Satan and unbelief. Pardon and
cleanse my soul by the blood of Jesus, and make Satan yet to know I have an
almighty friend. O make me more than ever to walk within my house with a
perfect heart. Thanks be to God for any assistance that way. -- Thanks be to
God for any assistance in self denial. O God, for Christ's sake, go on to
strengthen me more and more to this duty, till I have no self, and no will but
thine.

Thanks be to God, that I do take care of my company. I have no intimates, but
such as fear thee. O join us, when we are together, and when apart. Be our
constant guest, till we get to the full enjoyment of thyself in glory. Lord, I
bemoan that I am so far from being perfect in relative duties. Forgive, O
forgive my short comings; and accept of praises for assistance in that way: For
I do aim at discharging these duties. Accept my endeavors, for Christ's sake.

Ah, my God, here I find cause of bitter lamentation, that my heart is no more
ascending up to thee by ejaculation! My affections no more set on Jesus Christ,
and things above, where Christ sits, at the Father's right hand O blessed
Jesus, if I be risen with thee, O then raise my cold affections, and set them
on thyself. Thou have bid me do it; but the work must be all thy own. O breathe
love into my soul day by day; yea every moment, that I may be able to say, and
appeal to thy omniscience too, Lord thou know all things, thou know I
love thee. Ah, Lord! thou may well put this question thrice, Love thou me?
Since I have been so cold toward thee. O forgive, according to the riches of
thy boundless mercy and sovereign grace, forgive mine iniquities; for they are
very great.

And now show me clearly, Lord, from day to day, what thou will have me to do,
for the honor and glory of thy name. Lord, though thou need me not, yet let
me be fruitful in every good word and work; keeping my heart with all
diligence, hating vain thoughts, and loving thy law. O preserve me from the
workings of pride and passion. O God, humble me for these. Grant me the shield
of faith, that resisting the devil, he may flee from me.

O help me to watch and guard my tongue. May I avoid all evil speaking, and
glorify God with my tongue every day, and hour in the day; endeavoring to be
profitable to all companies, into which God shall bring me.

Lord, rectify the disorders of my appetite, and my views in refreshing my
body. I bemoan before God, that I so often eat and drink with no higher view
than merely to refresh my body. Lord, recover me by thy grace from these
contracted selfish views; and let me only aim thankfully to refresh a servant
of Jesus Christ, that God may be glorified thereby. O cure my ingratitude,
respecting my food and sleep; and now go with me into my calling.

March 29. -- O let divine love once more take place in my soul, Lord God
Almighty. O breathe love into my heart, thou Dove of heaven, that I may love
the Lord my God with all my heart, with all my soul, strength and mind. And
teach me how in all respects to love my neighbor as myself. I bemoan before God
my want of love. O for conformity to this perfection of the divine nature!
Lord, I am guilty of want of love to thee, and thine; so guilty, I dare not
lift up my head. O preserve me from defrauding in any wise. Keep me close to
the rules of strict justice. -- Let me never swerve from truth, ^n any dealings
with others. O God, preserve me, that hypocrisy may never be found in my heart.

March 31. -- Lord, I would with sorrow bemoan all my short comings and
imperfections, respecting those to whom thou have called me to act a mother's
part. Blessed be thy name, thou have put some bowels of compassion in me, and
have enabled me, according to, yea, beyond my ability, to relieve them; yet,
thou know how even all I have done in this is tainted with faintings, with
pride at one time, and unbelief at others -- Murmuring at second causes --
Angry resentments -- Want of cheerfulness and delight, at times: Though,
blessed be thy name, not always destitute of all that. But all these mixtures
of sin render even these duties matter of shame and blushing. These deeds of
charity, I dare not plead as good works. No; these, even these, though they may
be specious in the eyes of man, need washing and cleansing in the blood of
Jesus. I fly to it, O Lord, for pardon and cleansing. I fly to the
righteousness of Christ. I fly from these defiled rags, in point of
justification, as from a serpent. I will have nothing to do with them. But O
for Christ's sake take away these pollutions. Make me more holy and upright.

Am I a redeemer of precious time? -- As to the redemption of time, blessed be
God, conscience in some degree acquits. Every part seems to be some way filled
up with duty. And one duty seems to crowd so fast upon another, that it is
hardly possible to prevent one interfering with another. And yet, even here
again I am a guilty creature. In the evening, worn out with exercises, it is
but little I redeem for secret prayer and examination; so little, that it is
even trifling sometimes. Lord, help me in this regard. Thou know my straits,
and infirmities of body, as well as barrenness of soul, which so unfit me for
these duties. Lord, thou see that except thou do appear for my help, and
quicken me, how utterly incapable I am to perform them. I dare not quarrel, as
formerly, with that time devouring sleep, since by this my poor, crazy body, is
in any measure fitted for duty. Blessed be God for so much quiet rest in sleep.
May I sleep to the glory of God I think I allow myself no more than that for
which necessity calls. But O help me to fill up every moment, when awake, with
duty. Thou art preserving me from needless visits. Lord, preserve me from idle
discourse also with visitants. Lord, help us to improve those moments to thy
glory, or what business have we to be together? Or why is the company of each
other desired? Lord, help us who call ourselves christians to detest the very
thought of visiting without a view to the glory of God, and the good of each
other's souls. Lord, revive christian conference, and let our souls be revived
by holy conversation. O blessed Jesus, join us, and then our hearts will burn.
Meet thy dear handmaids this day, Lord. Meet and bless them. Help them to keep
such a fast as God requires. O strengthen them to pray, and do thou hear and
answer their requests, for Christ's sake.

Tuesday morning, April 3. -- What is my end in practicing the duties of
religion? O Lord, thou know. I am so dark now that I cannot tell. As to
fears of hell, thou know I am almost if not wholly without them, whether
from faith or stupidity, I cannot tell: But it is certain I am not actuated by
slavish fears of hell. But I bemoan it before God, that a legal spirit is so
interwoven with every thing I do, so that I act rather from fears than delight.
And yet, if I do not delight in these exercises of religion, I am sure I have
no delight at all. Sure here is the greatest satisfaction I do take. And, upon
the whole, my soul, What are my fears, when I omit or carelessly perform
duties? Answer. They are fears of provoking God to withdraw yet more from my
soul; fears of his leaving me to hardness of heart, blindness of mind,
barrenness of soul; and to fall so far as to wound his glorious, precious name.
Sure it is precious to me, let Satan say what he will, or why these fears?

But why do I not rejoice in going to God's house, and to his table, as I used
to do, esteeming it and other duties the choicest privileges of my life?
Answer. Because I do not meet with God in them. Could I find him whom my soul
loves, I should soon run to draw water out of these wells of salvation. O God,
never suffer me to slight the means, for they are precious means appointed by
Christ himself. Help me then, in the diligent use of all, to follow on till I
do find my Lord again, to my unspeakable joy and consolation. Blessed Lord,
thou have said, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. O come,
leap over the mountains of my sins, and come away, and my heart shall rejoice,
even mine: And I shall practice examination and every other duty, with zeal and
fervor, not with mercenary, selfish views. Only unveil thy beauties, my Lord
and my God, I shall receive and rest upon thee alone for salvation, as thou art
offered in the gospel. I shall more and more renounce, not only in words, and
my judgment; but from my inmost soul, all my own filthy rags, and rest upon,
delight in, and plead thy precious, perfect, spotless righteousness: Yes, I
shall again rejoice to be nothing, that Christ may be all. O, come, my Lord,
and I shall again adore electing love, free, distinguishing grace and mercy.
This sullen, ungrateful pride shall subside; these murmurings in my tent; this
unbelief; this atheism; this hypocrisy; this formality; this lukewarm frame. O
come, and my whole soul shall be engaged for God, and the honor of thy name. O
come and make thy abode with me.

Wednesday, April 4. -- How do I behave now, with respect to death and
judgment? Alas, in a stupid manner! It is but seldom I can bring it near, as in
times past. Death and eternity seemed always almost, at the door. Now death
seems to fly from me: And being weary of toiling, of temptation, sinning and
sorrowing, I cast, as it were, a languishing look after it; but despond,
expecting yet long and wearisome days and years. As to fears of death, blessed
be God, I am not terrified with them. I, somehow, look on the day of death, as
the day of Jubilee. But I cannot stretch into eternity, as heretofore. A
negative happiness, a not sinning, not conflicting, etc. is all I can attain
to. I cannot reach to a Pisgah's view of the full enjoyment of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. I cannot conceive any thing about either the enjoyments, or
employments of the inhabitants above. The eye of faith is so dim, it cannot
pierce within the veil. I cannot converse with glorified saints and angels, as
once I could. I cannot fall prostrate at the feet of Jehovah, cast down my
crown, and adore free, distinguishing grace; I cannot gaze on the perfections
of a holy, holy, Lord God, as once I could; nor conceive how I ever shall. I
have not a lively sense how it will be far better to depart, and be with
Christ. I cannot get near him; a veil covers his lovely face; and therefore my
soul is not enamored with his beauty, as once it was. O, if he could graciously
draw aside the veil, before I was aware, my soul would be like the chariots of
Aminadab. One glimpse of my Lord and my God, and it is done in a moment.

April 5. -- Am I prepared for death and judgment? A great question this! -- My
soul, do not trifle in answering. There will be no trifling before the judgment
seat. Art thou ready to appear there, and give an account of all the deeds done
in the body? Of all the idle words that I have spoken, and of all the vain,
vile, unbelieving, proud, hypocritical, murmuring, atheistical thoughts, which
have lodged in my heart? My soul, art thou ready? Nay; but art thou this moment
ready? Say, Will thou go to the judgment seat, and there be tried by impartial
justice? I know thou will. But art thou willing, cheerfully willing to go? Art
thou ready? Say, art thou ready? Is the glorious judge thy friend, or is he
not? If not; remember thou must answer for all thy sins, in thy own person. Oh
I cannot do that; for then I am sure I must roar in hell forever! No other
sentence awaits me, but, Depart, ye accursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels! I am sure then I must be bound hand and foot, and
cast into outer darkness, where shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of
teeth: For I am an unprofitable servant. All my rags must fall off, and I shall
be both naked and speechless before the judgment seat; a forlorn, odious
spectacie to men and angels. Well, how know thou this will not be the case?

Friday morning, April 6. -- My soul, to the work of examination again. How
know thou, that thou shall not stand at the left hand of Christ, at the
great day? Where is the foundation of thy hope of lifting up thy head with joy,
before the bar of God? How will thou look him in the face, whom thou have so
much abused? Since in every thing I have offended, and in all come short of the
glory of God; justice must and will be satisfied. Now thou can trifle with
justice, as well as every other attribute, as though God was altogether such as
thyself. But how will thou do then?

Saturday, April 7. -- My soul, be serious. What is the foundation of thy
confidence, now so many of the evidences of grace are lost, or dim; so much
pollution, yet tainting every thing I do?

Answer. This is all that emboldens me to look up. -- Sure God has enabled me
to fly out of self, into the ark Christ Jesus. When I saw the flood of divine
vengeance ready to drown my soul in eternal perdition: When I found no rest for
the sole of my foot, I flew to Jesus, and he put forth his hand and took me in;
took me into union with himself; became my surety; appeased the wrath of an
angry God. The flood abated, and he frowned no longer; but spoke peace and
pardon; entered into covenant with me, and I became his own. And now, though he
make not my house to grow; yet, I know he has made with me an everlasting
covenant, ordered in all things and sure. And in this is all my hope and
confidence; for in that day God did clothe his returning prodigal with the best
robe; even the white and beautiful robe of the righteousness of Christ. And
though, in myself, I am all deformity, all loathsome, more so than the most
offensive carrion; yet in that I am lovely, beautiful and complete. Yes, in
Christ I am complete. I have the word of God for it, that I am so. In that, I
can face death in all its terrors, and lift up my head even at the judgment
seat. -- Blessed be God, that he has accepted a vicarious satisfaction. O
blessed be God, for that perfect righteousness, wrought out by Christ, and
imputed to me, being received by faith alone!

Thursday morning, June 7. -- Lord, overrule for thy own glory, both as to
servants and children. This has reference to the proposal and desire of Blacks
and white children meeting at her house, for religious exercises and
instruction; of which some account has been given in the history of her life.
(...) she records some of her own exercises respecting it.
Let me not take one step, but what shall indeed be for thy glory, and their
good. Incline still farther, or disincline, open a door, or shut it, as to the
means, as thou see best. As to the heart, it is thou who openest, and no man
can shut it. Lord, suffer not Satan to shut it by his insinuations, that I am
about to train up a company of pharisaical hypocrites, like myself. O make the
path of duty plain because of my enemies. Let me not take one wrong step. O
guide me by thine unerring Spirit, and enable me to devote all the strength
thou will give me to thy service; come forth and show myself on the Lord's
side; neither afraid of man, nor ashamed to own Christ and his ways, before the
world. O God, be with me. I know I am unworthy to be employed for thee;
unworthy to be owned and blessed. And if thou dealest with me according to my
deserts, thou will fling back all my endeavors, as dung in my face, with a Who
has required these things at thy hands? But I ask not acceptance or success,
in my own name, or for my own sake; but for thy glory, and for Christ's sake
revive thy work here. Rhodeisland sinners are capable of salvation.

Lord's day morning. June 10. -- Integrity and uprightness, faith, love, zeal
and humility, O God, for Christ's sake, bestow on me. And if thou will not
permit me to build thee ^n house, or to build up thy cause, as I had thought; I
pray thee strengthen and spirit me to the work, to which thou do call me.
Make me faithful: O God, make me faithful. And, if thou will, prosper me any
way, and enable me to give thee the glory too, I will bless thee from the
inmost soul. O, if thou will but strip me of pride, and enable me to renounce
hateful self, and set the crown on thy glorious head; then I will rejoice
indeed. O Lord, grant me humility, and never suffer me either to be slack in
the Lord's work, or to run before I am sent.

Thursday morning, July 19. -- What a very fool I am! I can tell servants, they
are free from cares, because it is their masters part to provide, and theirs
only to do their duty. -- And is not this the very case with me? Am I not a
servant to a better master than any earthly one? A child to a better Father
than the world affords, let them be as indulgent as they will? And yet I am
caring and fearing. Poor, silly mortal! Lord, forgive, and give me more grace,
for Christ's sake.

December 9. -- God is dealing very graciously with me, with respect to
temporals. We have an ample supply from day to day; a prospect of closing the
year, with rejoicing in the goodness of God. With God all things are not only
possible, but infinitely easy. His grace is sufficient for me, to make me take
deep root downward in humility, and grow upward, to the honor and glory of his
great name. He can yet glorify himself in me. He can yet clothe me with
humility, that dear, that beautiful garment, which of all others, best becomes
a christian. Lord, I find I am laid in the balance, and found wanting every
where. I have not yet attained in one point. I thank thee, Lord, that thou have
one only begotten and dearly beloved Son, in whom thou art ever well pleased. I
thank thee that he is my surety. I thank thee that thou have accepted of a
vicarious satisfaction. O thanks be to God for an imputed righteousness, and
that in it I may yet lift up my head and hope for pardon and acceptance with
God. O thou holy God, make me holy too; in my measure, perfect, as God is
perfect. God, be merciful to me a sinner! Turn thou me, and I shall be turned;
for thou art the Lord my God, though I am no more worthy to be called thine.

December 21. -- Lord, make me in every respect as a little child, in thy
lovely eye, and modest before men. And teach me to show all due respect to
those who are without, as well as to thy saints. And O, may my affections to
Jesus Christ, be as Mary's precious ointment poured out on his glorious head,
which filled the whole house with its sweet odor. O when shall I be humble in
deed and in truth! O may my affections ever flow from a truly broken heart, as
out of Mary's alabaster broken box. And may penitential tears wash my dear
Redeemer's feet; and love divine, love to his holy person, and because much is
forgiven me, constrain me to universal obedience. O for this best, this
clearest evidence of the sincerity of my love. "If ye love me, keep my
commandments." O Lord, help. For thine honor's sake, help me to overcome all
that obstructs, let it be from within, or without. O deliver me from sin and
Satan, and the world; and make me every thing thou would have me to be. And
let me be accepted in the beloved alone. Yes, for his sake alone.

Lord's Day, December 23. -- O my precious Christ, make me as a little child,
every way thou would have me to be so. O make my heart tender, as one who is
new born. O may I be easily bowed in spiritual things. May I be filled with
sympathy, when I see others in distress; weep with those who weep. -- And may I
ever be easily won with kindness. O make and keep my heart always tender, with
regard to the evil of sin; apt to be alarmed at the appearance of moral evil. O
preserve me from self confidence in engaging spiritual enemies. But as a little
child flies to its parents for help, so may I fly to Christ. -- Make me as a
little child, afraid in the dark, and when far from home; so make me sensible
of spiritual dangers, jealous of myself, full of fear, when I cannot see my way
plain before me; afraid to be left alone, to be at a distance from God.
(Proverbs xxviii.14.) As a little child is afraid of superiors, apt to dread
their anger, to tremble at their frowns, and threatenings, so let me with
respect to God. As a little child approaches his superiors with awe, so may I
ever approach to God with holy awe and reverence. O God, for Christ's sake,
preserve me from a presumptuous boldness. Let thine excellency make me afraid,
and thy dread fall upon me. Let no pretense to childlike freedom and boldness
prompt me, a poor, sinful worm of the dust, to approach God with less fear and
reverence than the spotless and glorious angels do in heaven, who cover their
faces before thy throne: Nor with less reverence than Elijah, that great
prophet, who had so much holy familiarity with God. At a time of special
nearness, even when he conversed with him in the mount, he wrapped his face in
a mantle. May I ever, with the publican, see my own vileness, smite upon my
breast and cry, God be merciful to me a sinner! Surely it becomes me, so sinful
a creature as I am, to approach a holy God (although with faith, and without
terror) yet with contrition and penitent shame and confusion of face. O God,
deliver me from such a temper as is described below. For I do believe, as Mr.
Edwards says, "That nothing can be invented, that is a greater absurdity, than
a morose, hard, close, high spirited, spiteful, true christian." Mrs. Osborn
notes in the margin, that her thoughts and exercises, recorded from December 9,
to this place, were chiefly excited, she trusts by the Spirit of God, while
reading President Edwards on Religious Affections, with which she was much
pleased, and calls "A lovely piece."


January 4, 1765.
THANKS be to God, who did appear for our help on New Year's day. Thirteen or
fourteen of us met, though one of the severest days for cold, I ever knew. Five
of us prayed. God assisted; we found access to the throne of grace. Blessed be
God, who has not yet rejected us. O let this society be still regarded for
Christ's sake alone; because we profess to be set apart for his honor and
glory. Let us stand witnesses to the truth and faithfulness of that God, whom
we profess to own and love, admire and adore, obey and submit to, as our only
Lord and righteous sovereign. Gracious God, bestow on us every day, grace
sufficient for the day, to our latest breath, that we may in the end be more
than conquerors, through him who has loved us, and given himself for us who
believe on him. And O, let there not be one unbeliever among us; not one
withered monument of thy displeasure: But may we stand here as monuments of thy
distinguishing, free, sovereign grace; and to eternity, monumental pillars in
thy temple. Even so Father.

[N. B. From this last date, January 4, 1765. to October 2, 1766, which is one
year and nine months, Mrs. Osborn's diary, consisting of a number of volumes,
is lost. These were not to be found some time before she died, of which she
spoke to her friends; but could not tell where, or by what means they were gone.

The Editor.]



Thursday morning, October 2, 1766.
GOD has again brought us to one of our appointed seasons of prayer. O God, say
not, Your new moons and appointed seasons, my soul hates: But for Christ's
sake, condescend, this day, to impress upon our souls a deep sense of our sins.
O that we may this day lie in the dust and bewail before God all our hypocrisy,
all our formality and covetousness, which is idolatry. Lord, humble us all this
day, and make us upright before thee, and grant us that wisdom which is from
above. O help us not only to confess, but to forsake sin this day. Lord God,
pour out thy Spirit upon us, a spirit of humiliation, prayer and supplication.
O that thou would rend the heavens, and come down, and cause all mountains
that rise in our way of access and conformity to thee, to flow down at thy
presence. O excite our cries for thy church universal; for all the world of
sinners; for thy ministers every where; for our minister and church in
particular. Lord, have mercy upon us, and yet revive us, for Jesus Christ's
sake. And let us, thy poor, unworthy handmaids, yet rejoice in thy salvation.

And still permit me to feed thy lambs, and devote my whole life to the service
of my God. In the Beloved let me be accepted: And thus let all thine be
accepted. O be in the midst of us this day! Say me not nay; but come and
sanctify us throughout. O make us holy, as God is holy.

Saturday morning, November 8. -- Lord, I beseech thee, show me yet more and
more of my own vileness, for the suppression of my vile pride. Show me thy
purity, and how far I am from being pure in thy sight. Show me, Lord, how every
thing I do is tainted with sin, all polluted, all deficiency; and imperfections
mixed every where. Turn to what duty I will, and I find it there, whether
secret duties, public private, social or relative. I have nothing to plead
before God: I cannot be clean in his fight. I fly from all, to the blood and
righteousness of Christ; and there I will stand and lift up my head, not only
at the throne of grace; but even at the bar of God. There I can look death,
judgment and long eternity in the face without amazement; yea, with joy and
transport.

O blessed be God for the great, the glorious atonement, made by the precious
blood of Jesus Christ for all the sins that have attended my holy things! And
for the sake of the great atonement alone, they shall be accepted, yea, meet
with reward of grace, notwithstanding all that Satan can say. The Lord rebuke
thee, Satan. I adore the grace which has enabled me, vile as I am, to feed the
hungry and clothe the naked, destitute, fatherless ones -- to labor to support
the gospel of Jesus Christ; and to refresh occasionally his dear ministers and
children. And I will plead for acceptance for his own name's sake: For he has
told me, A cup of cold water shall be accepted; and those who give it in the
name of a disciple or a prophet, shall not lose their reward. And I will hope
in the mercy and free grace of God for acceptance of my poor labors of love, in
educating the poor, from year to year; that I have been able to say, Silver and
gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee. And the Lord seal
instruction, and make those I have instructed a godly seed to serve the Lord,
and instruments in his hand to pull down Satan's kingdom; when I can speak no
more.

The Lord rebuke thee, Satan; for by the grace of God I am what I am; not such
a useless creature as thou do insinuate, though defiled. Blessed be God for
the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity I have
had my conversation in this world renouncing evil, hating covetousness, pride
and unbelief; hating murmurings, discontents, distrusts of providence and
grace; hating deceit, guile, sloth and hypocrisy; yea, hating and groaning
under the whole body of sin, and contrariety to God and his holy, precious law:
And I do delight in it, after the inward man, and long for conformity to it;
yea, perfect conformity. And in the righteousness of Christ I am complete;
though not in my own; I own it to be imperfect and defiled; yet in the Beloved
I am accepted: And, God helping me, I will cling there, and with Job I will
hold my integrity, till I die. I am not wholly a hypocrite, though tainted with
hypocrisy. The Lord rebuke thee, Satan, and in his own time deliver me from
thee. And he will do it: For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. And he never will. O now let me boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I
will not fear. O my God, help me! All my sufficiency is of thee. Make me humble
and make me thankful; for I am thine forever.

Thursday morning, January 29, 1767.
MY God, for Christ's sake, pardon my iniquity, my tenaciousness of my own
opinion, the stubbornness of my will, when crossed, my pride. O my pride! O my
God, make me indeed willing to be nothing that Christ may be all; and to become
all things to all, that I may win some. I pray thee, seal a pardon to me.

The Lord rebuke thee, Satan! My God will forgive me. It is not worth your
while to aggravate this sin; for it is not beyond the reach of the blood and
righteousness of Christ. I am but among the chief of sinners, make the worst of
me you can; and for such Christ died. In the name of Christ, avoid! And leave
me to his mercy and boundless grace; for where sin abounds, grace much more
abounds: And he will crush thy venomous head, though thou bruise his heel, in
afflicting his child. Blessed be God, I shall soon be made perfect in holiness,
and immediately pass into glory. My body, being still united to Christ, shall
rest in its grave until the resurrection. Blessed be God, death is near, Satan;
and then I shall be out of thy reach forever. Thou shall not make me sin; and
then afflict me for sinning, any more. Thou come down in great wrath now, and
art the perpetual disturber of my peace, because thou know thy time is
short. But rejoice not against me, O my enemy; for though I fall, I shall arise
and obtain the victory forever, through Jesus Christ, my Lord.

If thou have foiled me, and caused my feet to slip, thou have not beaten me
out of the field. I have not thrown down my arms against thee. My great Captain
is general and commander of all the hosts in heaven and hell. He can command
you all; and he will defend me, let me be feeble as I will. In the armor he has
provided, I shall stand and fight, till I die. I make no capitulation with
thee; for I determine, by his grace, to fight till I die; taking the whole
armor of God, and putting it on, that I may be able to stand against the wiles
of the devil. -- How will I put it on? -- Why, by faith I will put it on, that
I may be able to stand in the evil day: And having done all, to stand; stand in
the strength of Christ, and see his salvation; his victories an^ triumphs over
all his enemies. And my soul shall rejoice, even mine; having my loins girt
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness, and my feet
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace: Above all, taking the shield
of faith, whereby I shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.
I will, God helping me, take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God. And by the help of his Spirit and grace, will
pray always with all prayer, and supplication in the Spirit; watching thereunto
with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints, that they also may
stand, and with me overcome at the last. And through God, we shall do
valiantly, notwithstanding all thy vaunting; for he it is who shall tread down
all our enemies, and to him shall be all the glory and praise forever. Yes, at
the Redeemer's feet we will cast down our crowns and palms of victory, and sing
eternal hallelujahs. Salvation to God and the lamb, shall be all our song.

Wednesday morning, April 1. -- O most glorious God, thou see my
discouragements now. And sure I am, all my hopes will be dashed and come to
nothing at all, and every soul of those who meet at my house, will be yet more
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, except thou do in infinite mercy
take hold of their hearts by thy Spirit; I am but adding to their condemnation
by all that I am doing, making hard hearts harder, and blind eyes blinder. O
Lord, thou know they will, through the malice of Satan, dishonor thee more
than ever; be more averse to the ways and people of God than ever, except thou
do turn them about by almighty power. Lord, is thy hand shortened that it
cannot save? Are even the children of Rhodeisland out of the reach of sovereign
grace? Shall goodly appearances all wear off and come to naught? O that thou
would rend the heavens, and come down, and cause all mountains to slow down
at thy presence! Thou can stop these poor young creatures, in their mad
career. Thou can rescue them out of the paw of the lion of hell. O my Lord, O
thou selfsufficient Being, I know thou stand in need of none of us. Thou
can be forever happy, and thy throne forever spotless, though all Rhodeisland
sinners should perish. And I will, by grace, justify thee till I die, though no
one soul should ever be profited by me.

But O my God, if it may consist with thy sovereign pleasure, triumph over all
my unworthiness, and make me an instrument for good to these precious souls. O
my God, will not glory redound to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, if they shall be
created anew in Christ Jesus? If thine image is restored, will they not be
precious in thy sight? O thou who wast ever self moved to pity man, pity
Rhodeisland now. I have nothing to plead but our misery, our poverty, and
undone state, without thy sovereign grace and mercy. O thou, who spared not
thine own Son, but freely delivered him up for sinners, yea the chief of
sinners, have mercy on us, for the sake of Christ alone: For, it is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus died to save sinners,
of whom we are chief. -- Hardened sinners, gospel impenitents, gospel
despisers, old and young, rich and poor, bond and free; Sabbath breakers, and
what not. Lord, what not* O let pure mercy plead on our behalf. Justice is
satisfied in the death of thy only, beloved Son, for the chief of sinners: Now
let mercy plead, because of the full atonement. Oh, because of the full
atonement, let me lift up my guilty head, and plead for sovereign mercy, and
boundless grace. O why should we go on hardened, impenitent and unreclaimed? O
my God, I would humbly bless thee that some, I trust, are brought home. O let
it be as an earnest of a plentiful harvest. O get to thyself a great name here.
Angels will rejoice and adore, and saints will bless thee. And thou have said,
Whosoever offers praise glorifieth thee.

Thursday, April 23. -- It has pleased a righteous, holy, and good God, to lay
his hand on me from Saturday afternoon; so that I have been unable to attend on
either the black people, young women, lads, or school. Have kept my chamber
from Lord's day; attended with an ague in my face, much swollen, a fever, etc.
And, blessed be God, a sweet content, a resigned will; some little glimpse of
hope that I might possibly go home. A sweet satisfaction in a settled belief,
that, however poor, shortsighted, ignorant mortals may, through frailty, have
set their eyes too much on a worthless worm, God stands in no need of me.
Whatever infinite love and wisdom has devised, infinite power will effect. I
cannot cause a single word to do good to any one; but God can do his own work
by whom he will. Blessed be his name, that does not depend on so slender a
thing as my poor, feeble frame. Though that were dissolved, the Lord yet lives.
Let this comfort me, and all my dear friends; and resign us all to thy holy
will.

But, Lord, if it be thy pleasure to continue me in life, thy will be done.
Then, even here do what thou will with me: Only glorify thyself in me; only
make the path of duty plain to me, and I will, by grace, go in it. Whether thou
do call me to active or passive obedience, thy will be done. If the Lord has
no more for me to do, who am I, that I should contend! If it be his pleasure, I
should yet serve him, and my generation according to his will, he will bring me
back, restore health of body, and fortitude of mind, against Satan's wiles. He
will kindle my love to him and his cause afresh. He will of his own sovereign
grace, grant me warmer zeal to run the heavenly road: For he is a faithful God.
And he will clothe me with that humility, which shall, of his infinite grace,
prevent his work being marred in my worthless hands. And glory shall redound to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, through the thanksgivings of many, on my behalf.

And now I determine, by grace, cheerfully to go forth to the work, to which
God shall call me this day and evening, so far as God, with strength of body,
and assistance of his Spirit, permit. Thou know that without thee I can do
nothing. Only help me, Lord, and I will neither flinch nor fear; but work till
I die.

Tuesday morning, May 5. -- Will God overrule for me on the morrow, Election
day.
if I live, and clear my way, and make the path of duty plain before me, as to
staying at home, or going abroad. I would not be set upon gratifying my
appetite, nor upon the pleasure in visiting friends. I would take pleasure only
in glorifying thee, at home or abroad; in being resigned to thy glorious will,
and honoring all thy name. O let me but do this, and this shall be my darling
pleasure. Here I will solace my soul, whether sick or well, at home or abroad.
Only still secure my darling, thy honor and glory, and it is enough. I have no
other choice to make. Indulge me then, my God and Father in Christ Jesus. Look
upon the face of thine anointed, and grant me my petition and my request.
Consider what it is. It is only that thou may be glorified in me, in every
the most minute circumstances in life, as well as the greatest.

Permit me now humbly to adore thee wherein thou have done it, thou glorious,
victorious, triumphant King of Zion, from the day of my espousals, amidst ten
thousand inbred lusts, traitors, serpents, vipers, which have lift up their
heads and heels against thee, and sought my overthrow. Yet thou have preserved
me, and my darling too, thine own honor and glory; and have not suffered me to
wound that name, which thou have from the first, made dearer to me than life.
Yea, though, through weakness and folly, and a thousand stratagems of Satan, I
have risked it, yet thou have preserved it. Ten thousand times ten thousand
praises, my God, that thy glory is what it is to thee; that the cause is one,
and the interest one. O I humbly bless thee, that thou did from the first
moment in which I became thine, lay thy glory so near my heart, that it has
ever since indeed been my darling, my delight and joy, amidst ten thousand
imperfections, and foiling by Satan and the world; yet here thou have kept me
steadfastly determined, through grace, through Christ strengthening me, That I
will leave, lofe and deny all that is dear to me in life; yea, and life itself
too, if ever they stand in competion with thy glory. And here I am, after more
than thirty years, still determined, by grace, to be for thee, and no other to
my latest breath, and to all eternity. O grant me strength from heaven to
perform my vows. This is what I want. O strengthen me with strength in my soul
now, in the day I cry to thee. Behold thy worm, thy babe, thy weakling, and
uphold me by thine almighty arm.

May 7. -- O my Lord and my God, preserve me from being a censurer abroad, from
prying into the secret failings of others, till my heart gets so wounded, that
I know not what to do. O that God will convince all his dear children, what is
right, and what is wrong; and rectify all that is contrary to thy will in them.
O root out the monster sin. Lord, root it out, for Christ's sake, of my heart,
as well as theirs. O could any one see the secret iniquity, the secret
covetousness, after all my watchings and strivings against it, which thou, God,
know, how would they be stumbled, and puzzled to reconcile this with all my
renunciations of the world, and all that is dear in life. And yet this I desire
to do, thou, God, see me. And I do hate all that opposes it. Thou know my
secret groanings under the oppression of the enemy, which none but thou can
fully know. And thou art acquainted with all the secret groans of thy other
children, which we cannot know.

O then, let us make no other use of the knowledge of the imperfections of our
dear christian friends, but to bring them, with our own souls, to the cleansing
blood of Jesus Christ, and plead for them, as well as ourselves, the atonement
Christ has made; bring them with our own ignorant souls, to him who teaches as
man never taught, that every path of duty may be made straight and plain before
them, as well as us, because of our enemies, our infernal enemies, who daily
watch for our halting, and glory in our dishonoring God.

O defeat them. Make them know we have an almighty Friend, who will uphold us,
who will not leave us to be the sport of devils, and slaves to lust; that we
have a glorious King and Captain of our salvation, who will in his own time,
set his victorious foot on the hateful necks of our lusts and corruptions; and
will break the serpent's head; and, after all, glorify himself in us. O do it,
dear Redeemer, for all thine, without exception, as for my own soul. And bring
us all out from under the clouds, which hang over our guilty heads: And let our
righteousness yet appear as the noon day, to the confusion of earth and hell,
and to the honor and glory of thy great name. O what will thou do for thy great
name, if thy own children go on wounding it; and the more they are known, the
more they are scrupled, whether they do indeed belong to thee or not. Lord,
help! Thou have said, "The path of the just is as the shining light, which
shines more and more to the perfect day." Amen! O let integrity and
uprightness preserve us all our days; for we have trusted in thee. Let us never
be ashamed.

July 17. -- Blessed be God for refreshing showers upon the dry and thirsty
earth. And now the artillery of heaven is displaying, suppose the arrows of the
Almighty should drink up my spirits in an instant; say, my sluggish soul, art
thou ready to appear before Jehovah's awful bar? Lord God, thou know; and I
pray thee, let me not be deceived, if I answer in the affirmative. Let me with
joy lift up my head, if my redemption from sin is so near; if this poor, mean
clog, my feeble body, will interrupt communion with God no more. Adieu, my dear
companion! If it be the Lord's will, I bid thee a cheerful adieu, till the
morning of a glorious resurrection. I ask not a moment's reprive, if it be my
Lord's will to take me. O, if it might be his will to take me, and grant me the
open vision and full fruition of himself in glory!

But, my hasty soul, art thou ready? Thou polluted, thou imperfect one, Do
thou know what a holy, sin hating God he is, into whose presence thou would
hasten? Whence this confidence of seeing his face with joy? Art thou ready?
Say, Art thou indeed ready? Do not want to rush as a horse into the battle. Art
thou ready? -- Alas! all my works are imperfect, and unfinished; and will
remain so, if I should live to the age of Methuselah: Yea, and I shall add sin
to sin, against my gracious God, till death does stop me. Not till then will my
sanctification be complete. But Christ has finished all the work his Father
gave him to do. He said, It is finished! The righteousness he has wrought out
is complete, and in him I stand complete. I have fled to it, I have laid hold
on it; God has imputed it, and clothed me with it; and in it, I will cherfully
venture through death, and to the judgment seat: For there Christ will openly
acknowledge me. I have confessed him before men, and he will confess me before
his Father, and his holy angels. The law and justice of God will acquit me; for
it is magnified, and fully satisfied; and there is no condemnation to them who
are in Christ Jesus. He is able to keep me from falling, should God yet
preserve me in this life, and to present me faultless before the throne of God.

My soul, rest secure in him, whether in life, or in death. Reach after as
great degrees of conformity to the divine image, and resignation to his will,
as can be attained below; and bye and bye God will take thee. Wait his time,
that is the best of all.

Saturday morning, July 18. -- Thanks be to God for the refreshment of
yesterday morning; and last evening, while dear friends were here. Thanks be to
God for the continuance of rain upon the thirsty earth. So water me this
morning, I pray thee, by thy blessed Spirit. O Lord, since it is thy sovereign
pleasure yet to hold me in life, I would delight to live, because it is thy
will: And renew my petition for grace to live to thy glory here. And, by grace,
I will wait all the days of my appointed time, till my great change come. It is
with submission I ask to depart; but encourage my importunity for grace
sufficient for my day. I will withdraw the other request. Though I long to
depart and to be with Christ; yet this I would leave with infinite wisdom; if
it be expedient for any that I abide in the body. But to what end should I
live, if I live a cold, careless, sinful life. Lord, how shall I glorify thee
in life, if I remain so extreme unholy, so unlike to thee! If I backslide yet
more; play the harlot yet more: And my love to thee, and zeal for thy glory,
and the good of precious immortals grow cold. O my God, shall I not thus
dishonor thee, and harden others hearts against thee! O, as sure as God is in
heaven, and I upon earth; so sure I shall act this treacherous part, if thou
do not stand by me, strengthen and uphold me. O my God, leave me not a
moment; for in that moment I fall. O help me to lay hold of thy strength, and
never let thee go, till I do derive from that infinite fullness there is in
Christ Jesus, grace sufficient for every moment of life.

Monday morning, July 25, 1768.
THE Lord look in mercy upon me now, every way broken by infirmities. None of
my powers are whole. And I think the imperfections of every mortal, that I have
seen, disliked, and bemoaned before God, now all meet in me. And my greatest
refreshment seems to arise from the benefits which believers receive from
Christ at their death. I trust my eternal All is secure in him. My hopes of a
speedy dissolution are, in some degree, increased. And in the full atonement
and perfect righteousness of Christ alone, I lift up my guilty head. And if I
escape out of time into eternity without wounding or fullying the declarative
glory of God, I beg my friends will rather set apart a day of thanksgiving,
than of mourning. Tune your harps, my dear souls, and rejoice with me.

Wednesday morning, July 27. -- I have been very poorly, and unfit for every
duty. The disorder by which I first lost my strength, followed me closely
yesterday; and I begin to be cheered with hopes of taking my farewell to life.
But may the will of God be done. If I cannot be active, then let me be passive.
Passive obedience will be accepted, through Jesus Christ my Lord. And if I
cannot do his will, let me suffer it patiently; and all the days of my
appointed time, wait till my great change come. Only, my Lord and my God, keep
me from the evil, and sanctify me through the truth: Thy word is truth. This
petition is and has been upon file. It is put up in the name of Jesus. It is
before thee. It is put in, and was put in when kind access was granted; when
the golden scepter was held out: I drew nigh, and touched the top: And thou
did tell me, Whatsoever I ask in Jesus' name shall be granted. I cannot
withdraw this petition, Lord, encourage me to renew it, and believe that as
sure as the enemies of Esther and her people, were slain and caused to perish;
so sure will Jesus yet triumph over my cruel foes; over my pride, which, as
Haman, would ^e^r down all before it; over my unbelief, sloth, sullen ill
nature, ingratitude, covetousness; and all that now press me down and vaunt
over me, as a poor, despicable outcast, for whom, against the prevalency of
these daring lusts, there is no help in God, while I live in this world. O God,
confound their rage; turn Satan back by the way he came: Put a bridle in his
nose. Thou know his blasphemy and rage against thee. Let him not prevail
against me. I have trusted in thee; and thou have said, I shall never be
confounded. Overrule for thine own glory all that concerns me and mine, and all
thine. Make sin and Satan know we have an Almighty friend, who will not deliver
us up to the will of our enemies; but as he has glorified his name in us, he
will yet glorify it.

[N. B. Mrs. Osborn wrote several volumes on the scriptures; not as a critical
commentator; but in a devotional way, improving the passage upon which she
meditated in application to herself, and so as to excite devout thoughts and
exercises in addressing God, and hearing him speak to her in his word. In this
way she wrote on the book of Genesis, and on the gospels of Matthew, Mark, and
Luke. The following are copied as specimens of her writings of this kind, to
give an idea of the manner in which she meditated and wrote on the scriptures,
which she found entertaining and profitable to her: Which may, perhaps, excite
some others to improve the Bible in the same manner, to their own advantage.]



Wednesday morning, October 7, 1767. Matthew xvi. 13, etc.
MY glorious Lord, do thou inquire, Whom do men say that I,

Let me hear thee pronounce the blessing on me;

And on thee, as an eternal rock, are all my hopes of safety forever built:

I humbly bless thee for assurance from thy word,





is to be had as an equivalent; nor will God accept of any thing in exchange
for the redemption of the soul, when the only Savior he has provided for its
redemption is denied and rejected:

O Lord, set home by thine almighty power, these alarming considerations upon
my own soul, for quickening, I pray thee; that I may give all diligence in
making my calling and election sure here; and at last have a reward of pure
free grace, according to my works; though not for them.

November 5, 1767. The xxvth Chapter of Matthew.
Contents. -- The parable of the ten virgins, 1 -- 13. The parable of the
talents, 14 -- 31. A description of the day of judgment.

O THOU great Searcher of hearts, I fly to thee to search and try me now. I am
one of these virgins who have taken a lamp, and am come forth to thy
ordinances, now. O let me not live at the least uncertainty.



now. I know not how soon the cry will come, Go ye forth to meet him; and then
it will be too late forever. Lord, pity me, and with me all who profess thee. I
beg for others, as for my own soul, that we may not be found foolish virgins at
last;

O will it be thus with me? Tell me certainly by thy word and Spirit, Is it
possible I shall come at last, unto me!



True, hateful pride is ready to rise and rob God of his glory, in every
attempt to improve my talent. But shall I, to prevent that, run to the other
extreme, and hide my Lord's money? Is not his grace sufficient for me? O my
God, guide, direct and protect me, even me. He who had five talents, did
improve; he who had two, did improve. It was by thy grace they did so. Say to
me, even to me, My grace is sufficient for thee, and I will endeavor to improve
also. O make me wise to know in what way I may best improve to thy honor and
glory; wise to know times and seasons, and in what way God does call me to
improve. Art thou in thy providence lessening my opportunities in a social way?
Will God now guide and direct my pen. Let that be improved to the glory of him
who has committed that talent to me. My pen is thine, guide it for thy own
glory. And guide me in the business of instructing little ones. O Lord, make me
faithful there, to improve the talent thou have committed to my charge; and
bear me up against all discouragements. And make me to improve my talent for
the good of my poor family. O let me some way; yea, every way improve so, by
thy grace, that at last I may be able to lift up my head with joy, and say,
Lord, thou deliveredst to me -- and, behold, I have gained! O, of thine
infinite grace, assisting me all the while, et me hear at last, a Well done,
good and faithful servant; and free grace shall forever be my song.



friendship. I would beg for all, as for my own soul. Go forth with me this
day, and let my petitions be answered for the great Intercessor's sake alone.
Thanks be to God for the assistance of his Spirit with his word, which is
indeed of use to direct us in prayer.

Prepare me, Lord, for that grand and awful moment, when thou who have taken on
thee the human nature,



And, Lord, have mercy on those who will not own thee, or thine, or do as thou
have commanded. Bring them into subjection to thyself now, Lest they hear the
dire anathema, Depart from me,

PART IV. The Conclusion of her Life.
THE bodily infirmities of Mrs. Osborn increased so much; and her eyesight
failed to such a degree for above twenty years of the last part of her life,
and her whole bodily frame was so weakened and worn out, that she was obliged
to give up her school, and was not able to do any thing to support herself. And
as she had nothing laid up to live upon, she was wholly dependent on Divine
Providence and her friends for daily supplies, during the whole of this time;
and was, the greatest part of it, confined to her room. This was in many
respects the happiest part of her life. She was free from worldly anxiety and
care. She enjoyed a calmness and serenity of mind, the attendant of resignation
to God, and humble trust and confidence in him, contented with the allotments
of Divine Providence, seeing the hand of God in every thing which took place --
constantly thankful to him for the mercies she was daily and every hour
receiving -- full of gratitude to those whom God inclined to show kindness to
her -- spending the chief of her time and strength in devotion, in
contemplating the divine perfections manifested in his works of creation and
providence, and in his word -- adoring and praising the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, praying to him for the church and the world; for her acquaintance,
relations, friends, benefactors, and for herself; with constant, humble
confession of unworthiness, aggravated sins, and depravity of heart, making the
daily occurrences respecting herself, and others, the matter of prayer and
praise.

She enjoyed an almost uninterrupted assurance of her interest in the divine
favor through Jesus Christ, and longed to be perfectly holy. The thought of
dying was pleasing to her: And when any particular disorder, or pain of body,
came upon her, which seemed to indicate a speedy dissolution, it would commonly
give a spring to her mind and excite pleasure and joy. Thus she appeared in
this last part of her life in a measure to enjoy the happy consequence and
reward, of the sore trials, labors and conflicts, through which she had passed
in former years. Something of which the reader has seen in that part of her
diary which has been transcribed.

Mrs. Osborn often said to her friends in this time, that she considered her
situation and circumstances in life, to be the best for her; and that she knew
of none, with whom she could wish to exchange outward circumstances, were it
left to her option. She expressed a particular satisfaction in living sensibly
dependent on the providence of God, for daily supplies for the body, living
with God by the day, as she used to express it, having no store of her own, and
not able to do any thing to supply her returning wants, and not knowing how and
by whom they would be supplied, till it was sent in to her, commonly in ways,
and by persons not thought of by her. This was suited to excite a constant
sense of her dependence on God for daily and hourly supplies, and the exercise
of trust in him, and constant application to him, and acknowledgement and
admiration of his goodness in supplying her wants, in a way and at times suited
to discover his hand and particular care of her; and to excite her gratitude to
her friends, and prayers for them, who sent or brought to her the things she
wanted.

In this manner she lived more than twenty years, and often declared to her
friends that her daily wants were fully supplied, and that she was never
destitute of the necessaries of life, and commonly had a fullness, and often
abounded. Her wants were not great. She stood in need of daily food, washing,
candle light, fire wood, and some clothing, and money to pay the rent of her
house, which was five dollars every three months. All these wants were
constantly supplied, while no particular person was engaged to do it; so that
she had none to depend upon but God. While the British had possession of
Rhodeisland in the time of the war, which was near three years, the inhabitants
of Newport were driven to great straights, by the scarcity of provision, fuel,
etc. and many suffered to a great degree. Mrs. Osborn lived in a great degree
of quiet, and had a constant supply of the necessaries of life; and received no
abuse from the British officers or soldiers, as most others did. Though a
number of soldiers were quartered near the house in which she lived, none were
obtruded on her, as they were on others. And as to those who were quartered
near her; it was remarked by her and others, that they made less disturbance
and noise, than they did elsewhere; and were particularly careful not to do any
thing on the Sabbath to disturb that good woman, as they called her. And they
took care to avoid all profa^e words when near her. Which she used to mention
afterward to her friends, as a remarkable instance of the tender care and
protection of heaven.

In the year 1778, while the British soldiers had possession of Newport, Mr.
Osborn, her husband, died; and a grand daughter of his, with her husband, who
lived in her house, on whom she had some dependence for protection and
assistance, moved into the country, by which she appeared more destitute and
exposed, than before, being left alone.

In this time of particular danger and trial, Mrs. MASON, a person who gave
good evidence that she was a real friend to Christ, and to his followers,
manifested peculiar friendship and generosity toward her, by her constant
attention to her, and supplying many of her wants; and continued her special
kindness in ministering to her as long as she (Mrs. Mason) lived, which she did
till March, 1792. Mrs. Orsborn often said, that Mrs. Mason never failed her in
one instance, as a peculiar friend and constant benefactor, to the day of her
death. We have no reason to doubt that they, both the giver and the receiver,
are peculiarly happy together now; and that the former is rewarded a thousand
fold for all her kindness to the latter, as a dear disciple of Jesus Christ.
Others have distinguished themselves in their kindness to Mrs. Osborn in
ministering to her, whom it is improper to mention, as they are yet alive. We
have the pleasure of being assured that they, and all who have ministered to
her, because she belonged to Christ, will have an ample reward at the
resurrection of the just.

There was something peculiar and extraordinary in her being able punctually to
pay the rent of her house in this time, which is worthy of particular mention.
She depended wholly upon the unsolicited benefactions of her friends for this,
as she did for her daily support. And no one was engaged to assist her in doing
this, or to take any care about it. She had therefore no particular person to
look to for it, or to make up any deficiency by which she should be unable to
pay what was due at the end of each quarter. It was therefore a very precarious
matter, to human appearance, whether, when she had paid the rent of one
quarter, she should ever be able to pay another. She could not conjecture from
whence it would come, as she had no^e to look to for it, but that God, whose is
the world, and the fullness thereof. Her intimate friends were sometimes
concerned for her, when her quarter was near at an end, and she had received
but part of the five dollars which would be soon due, and there was a great
scarc^ty of money, and all appearances that she would not be able to pay. When
this was suggested to her, she would reply nearly in the following words. "I
desire to be thankful to God, I do not feel in the least anxious about it. I do
not doubt of my having the whole of the money at the time in which it will be
due, or near it. God has given me a constant and earnest desire to do justice,
and pay when any thing is due. This is a just debt, and God has been pleased
hitherto to gratify me by enabling me to pay, when it is due; and I believe he
will still continue to do it. Perhaps I shall not live to the end of the
quarter. I shall then leave enough to pay this debt. I desire to leave it with
God." She generally had the money in her hand by the time it was due, and never
failed being able to pay with punctuality. She frequently did not receive much,
if any part of the money, till just before the quarter was ended, and knew not
from whom, or from whence it would come; yet before the time to pay came, as
much as was necessary to answer her end at that time, would be brought or sent
to her, by persons who knew nothing of her present strait. And it was often
sent by persons who lived at a distance, which would come to her just at the
time in which it was wanted. She had money sent her from Quebec, from the West
Indies, and from various parts of the United States.

This is related as a remarkable instance of humble trust in God, and
resignation and acquiescence in his will; and of the tender care and
faithfulness of God, and loving kindness toward one devoted to his service,
and trusting in his promises: And that it may serve as an example and
encouragement to all, to "trust in the Lord, at all times, and pour out their
hearts before him."

Mrs. Orsborn was, in the last twenty years of her life, stripped, by degrees,
and deprived of many privileges and enjoyments, which to her had been very
great and precious. She had esteemed public worship, attending on the preaching
of the gospel and public institutions, as far more desirable and important than
all worldly good, in attending on which she had great enjoyment. But her bodily
infirmities were so great and increasing, that for near twenty years she was
unable to attend public worship. Her eyes failed her to such a degree, that she
was obliged to lay by her pen, not being able to write any thing considerable,
which she had done before this with great pleasure and profit to herself,
having written more than fifty volumes, the least containing near 100 pages,
the bigger part above 200, and a number 300, and more, besides letters to her
friends, and other occasional writing. The failing of her sight also deprived
her of the pleasure and profit of reading; especially of reading the Bible,
which she had before daily perused with great pleasure and advantage. She had
the Bible, indeed, read to her daily; which she considered as an unspeakable
favor. But this did not equal the privilege of being able to have access to it,
at all times, and on every particular occasion. But she paid such attention to
the Bible, read it so much, and so treasured it up in her memory, while she
could read, that she found great pleasure and benefit in being able to
recollect so much of it, when she was not able to read; which she frequently
mentioned to her friends, as matter of thankfulness.

The religious meetings in the room where she lived, which have been mentioned,
of the church, of the female society, and occasional meetings for prayer of a
number of professors of religion, which she considered as a great privilege,
were continued as long as she was able to bear them, partly for her sake. But
at length her infirmities were so great that she was obliged to relinquish this
enjoyment. And she became so weak that she could not bear lengthy visits of her
friends, in which she used to take a peculiar pleasure. Her most intimate
friends could only have short interviews with her at different times. But while
she found herself thus deprived of these privileges and her precious
enjoyments, one after another, she remained calm and resigned in a sense of her
unworthiness of them, and desert of infinitely greater evils; and constantly
expressed her thankfulness for the privileges and favors she yet enjoyed;
particularly that God had not taken himself from her; but indulged her with
such a degree of free access to him, and such enjoyment of him in views of his
glorious perfections and works, especially his love and grace in the glorious
work of redemption, which more than made up for all that was taken from her.
She enjoyed the almost uninterrupted light of God's countenance, and spent most
of her time and strength in devotion, in prayer and praise, in which she had
unspeakable delight, and a rich foretaste of heaven. She used to say, she had
learned to consider and hold her nearest friends, as well as all worldly
enjoyments, as a cloak or loose garment, which she was ready to have taken off
and laid aside, whenever there was occasion for it.

Some years before her death, she said to her friends, she thought the time was
now come for them, and all who knew her, to be quite willing that she should
leave the world; for she was become useless in all respects, and was only a
charge and burden to those by whom her bodily wants were supplied. She was
told, that all her friends desired that her life might be yet continued, if
consistent with the divine will, as she was far from being useless, as we had
her prayers for her friends; for the church and congregation to which she
belonged; for all the people and churches of Christ, and his interest and
kingdom in the world, etc. And when her acquaintance, and, particularly, the
congregation of which she was a member, thought of her, as being alive in her
room, which probably most of them often did, it was attended with an idea and
feeling, which tended to their good, and which they could not have, if she were
not in the world. And as to those who ministered to her support and comfort,
they enjoyed a privilege and satisfaction in it, instead of its being an
undesirable burden, which they could not have, if she were not here in just
such circumstances. And they who did this to her, because she belonged to
Christ, had opportunity hereby to exercise christian charity, and express their
love to Christ, for all which they would be abundantly rewarded in his eternal
kingdom. Her reply was to this purpose. "If this be so, and I can be in any
respect and degree useful in my situation and circumstances, I am willing to
continue in the body; but to depart and be with Christ is far better. I desire
to leave it all with God, and am willing to live or die, just as he pleases."

Some months before her decease her disorders of body appeared to increase; her
strength failed her more and more, and she became dropsical, and was at times
in great distress for want of breath. She considered herself as now soon going
home, as she expressed it, and wished for patience to wait till the appointed
time of her departure should come, and to bear whatever bodily distress God was
pleased to lay upon her. She desired her friends to pray for her, that she
might have faith and patience to the end of life, and, in no respect, conduct
so as to be a disgrace to the religion which she professed, and put her
christian friends to shame on her account: But that she might glorify God, and
speak, and conduct worthy of her high and holy calling, to her last breath.

In a sketch of Mrs. Osborn's character, inserted in the Theological Magazine,
No. 1. Vol. II, is the following paragraph, written by one who visited her
often in her last sickness.

"As she drew near the close of life, she was a proof of the strength and hope
of the righteous; was an instance of the mysterious example of flourishing
virtue, with the decays of nature: Of satisfaction in the prospect of future
good, when from the world she could derive no pleasure. My physician," she
said, "has seriously intimated, that I cannot live ^ng; but I am not alarmed.
Unless my heart deceive me, and the heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked; but unless mine greatly deceive me, I have no reason to be
apprehensive for the future state. It appears to be the will of God that I
should go hence. I ought to submit to his will, and I do, with cheerfulness.
May his will be done." In another season, she said, "The trials of my situation
are great; to be in want of breath, is very distressing; pray for me, that I
may have patience and resignation: I desire them above all things. O pray for
me that, in these last hours of my life, I may not cause you all to blush that
I have professed christianity." It being remarked, that God was faithful, and
would never forsake those who had loved and served him. "Yes," she replied, "I
know, by experience, that he is a faithful covenant keeping God, and he will
never leave those who love and serve him; though without his grace I should
immediately sink, and my mind be filled with darkness and repining." In this
temper of humility and reliance on God, she continued, and gave no sign of
impatience, more than saying, a day or two before her death, when she heard the
bell toll, that somebody had got the start of her."

She continued to sink by degrees, till after a distressing turn, she appeared
more comfortable, and they who attended her, helped her to lie down, at her
desire, hoping she might get some rest and sleep. They left her for a few
minutes, and when they returned, they found her breath was gone, and she a
lifeless corpse! Thus she left the world, and passed that death which (...) had
so often and so long desired, calm and serene, without the least perceivable
struggle or groan, and, we doubt not, entered into that rest to which the
righteous go, on the 2d day of August, 1796, in the 83d year of her age. Her
funeral was attended on the 4th day of August, by an uncommon concourse of
people. The corpse was carried into the meeting house, and a funeral sermon was
preached, from Ephesians iv.1. I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech
you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.

THESE Memoirs will be concluded by mentioning a number of particulars of her
christian character, in which Mrs. Orsborn was eminent, and worthy of
imitation, which have been in some measure brought into view in the foregoing
narrative, and the extracts from her diary; and appear in a more clear and
striking light to those who have perused the whole of her writings, or had a
particular and intimate acquaintance with her.

She was sensibly and strongly devoted to the glory of God, and conscientiously
sought to honor him in all her ways. She was tenderly concerned, and careful to
do and say nothing which had the least perceivable tendency to ^onor him, and
constantly watched against every thing of that kind. She desired nothing for
herself or others, and that nothing might take place, but what was consistent
with the highest display of the divine glory; and it was matter of constant joy
to her, that God was able and would secure his own honor, and make the
brightest manifestation of his own glorious perfections; and would suffer
nothing to take place but that which should be for his glory; and therefore
would cause even those things and events, which, in themselves appeared to have
a tendency to the contrary, to be the occasion of a more clear discovery of his
most amiable and glorious character. She had an affecting and strong abhorrence
of every thing which she saw in herself, even all moral depravity; and which
appeared in others, as having a tendency to dishonor God. This was a constant
source of grief and trouble to her. By this she manifested a high degree of
disinterested, benevolent love to God, and was more conformed than most
professing christians appear to be, to that apostolic injunction, "Whether
therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God."

Her love to God, and benevolence to mankind led her greatly to desire the
prosperity and advancement of the interest and kingdom of Christ in the world,
and the salvation of men. For this she prayed, and rejoiced when she found
others engaged and united in this, and when there was any appearance of the
revival of religion, and of the conversion of sinners, or heard of any thing of
this kind in distant places. She earnestly sought the salvation and temporal
good of all whom she knew, and with whom she had any connection; and their
circumstances, and the events respecting them, whether prosperous or adverse,
affected her, which constantly afforded her matter of prayer and praise, while
she endeavored to conduct toward all, and treat them so in all respects as to
recommend religion to them, and persuade them to embrace and practice it.

She practiced secret devotions at stated times, unless prevented by some
unavoidable interruption; in which she spent considerable time every day, in
reading the Bible, serious meditation and prayer, in which she had, especially
at times, great enlargement and delight. And when she had no sensible access to
God, she could have but little comfort and enjoyment in any thing. Her mind was
frequently and almost constantly exercised in devotion by pious ejaculations,
when in company, or attending to her daily business.

She was a great friend to family religion, to have some portion of the Bible
read, and prayer attended in the family, in the morning and evening; and took
care to have all her family present, and that they should behave with decency.
And when no man was present, she thought it her duty to pray with her family
herself.

She had a great veneration and love for the christian Sabbath, and public
worship. This was a high day with her; and she commonly had great enjoyment in
attending public prayers, singing, and hearing the word preached; and
especially in attending the Lord's Supper; for which she was careful and solemn
in preparations, and self examination. She used to recollect the particular
heads of the public discourses for her own improvement in her retirement, and
often committed them to writing, with her reflections on them. She was careful
to prepare for the Sabbath, by ordering her family affairs so as not to be led
by them to intrude upon the Sabbath, or be any disturbance to her devotions.
And after she was confined, and could not attend public worship, she took
special care not to attend to any thing on the day before the Sabbath, which
might in any respect unfit her for the private duties of the Sabbath, wishing
to reserve all her strength of body and mind for the exercises of that high
day. And though she could not enjoy bodily attendance on public worship; yet in
her spirit she was present with the worshipping assemblies of christians;
especially with that to which she had a more particular relation, so as to have
a peculiar enjoyment in her attending to them, and joining with them in her
mental exercises. In this respect she received great benefit by public worship,
and doubtless had more benefit and enjoyment from it, than many, if not the
most, received, who were allowed to attend constantly. She was so inquisitive
to know what were the subjects of the public discourses, that she would be
informed what they were to be, before they were delivered, or soon after, and
she would attend to them, and so feast upon the truths contained in them, that
her entertainment and profit by them appeared far to exceed that which most who
heard them in public obtained.

The following extract of a letter which she wrote to a friend, is inserted
here, as an illustration of the above. Speaking of her being deprived of the
enjoyment of public worship, by bodily infirmity, she said, "My Lord's days'
enjoyments, since my confinement, have been better felt than expressed. Perhaps
my exercises never were higher, when worshipping in God's own house, nor even
at the Redeemer's table: Never felt a dearer union with the people of God; that
oneness which cannot be expressed. Nor had stronger desires excited by the
Spirit of God for Zion's prosperity; and the destruction of sin and Satan, and
advancement of Christ's cause and kingdom: Nor stronger desires to help my dear
minister while he was engaged in the Lord's work; to be permitted to hold up
his hands, that Amalek may not prevail, but the work of the Lord prosper in his
hands. The sweet delight I have in realizing that the dear sheep and lambs of
Christ's fold are feeding on the gospel dainties, is not easily described. I am
indeed a partaker with them, though absent in body. And God so blesses
something repeated to me from the sermons, that I retain and feed more on the
precious truths all the week, than I have been able to retain, when I have
heard the whole. Thus, because akin to the glorious Jesus, I dwell in Goshen,
though not in the King's court, or at his table. And dare I be restless and
complain, because I cannot go out? No, no! The will of the Lord be done. I
stand amazed at his gentle dealings with such a monster of iniquity!"

She was not talkative; yet affable and pleasant in conversation, and when in
company with her friends and acquaintance, she had an aversion to vain,
trifling conversation. And if at any time it took place, she would generally
attempt to divert it to something serious and profitable. If in any instance
she neglected this, and in any degree joined with them, and spoke any thing
which on reflection she thought to be too light and unprofitable, she would
with sorrow condemn and humble herself before God. Her chief enjoyment in
company was with her christian friends; and when she was with them and little
or no religious conversation took place, it would be matter of grief, shame and
lamentation to her. Few have their tongues so much under a bridle, as she had;
yet she often lamented that it was not more so.

She had a deep, abiding, and increasing conviction and sense of the evil of
sin, as being enmity against God, and all that is truly good; and of the
exceeding depravity and wickedness of her own heart, and felt herself wholly
undone and lost, if left to herself; that she deserved to be cast off and made
miserable forever, and that God would be most just in casting her into endless
destruction; that she depended wholly for salvation on the sovereign mercy of
Him, who has mercy on whom he will have mercy; that a heart to embrace the
gospel, and every degree of right exercise of heart was the gift of God, of
which she was infinitely unworthy; and that she depended on the same sovereign
grace for the continuance in the exercise of grace; ^o be kept from falling,
and to be made perfect in holiness. She therefore trusted in Christ alone as
her redeemer and sanctifier. He was infinitely honorable, excellent and
precious in her sight, on whose atonement, merit, righteousness, wisdom and
power she relied, as every way sufficient for her pardon and complete
salvation. This is abundantly expressed in her diary. She felt the power of
these truths to form her to a willing obedience to Christ, and earnestly to
desire perfect conformity to the holy law of God, and his moral image and
character, knowing that she could not be completely happy till she awaked in
the likeness of Christ.

She highly esteemed those who appeared the true ministers of the gospel, for
their work's sake, and was liberal in her contributions for the support of
public worship and the preaching of the gospel, knowing it was ordained by
Christ, that they who preach the gospel, should live of the gospel. It is known
that in this matter she was willing to her power, and even beyond it; and that
she often gave more to this end, than many wealthy persons of the same
congregation. And she used her influence to excite others ^o contribute. And
when she was wholly dependent on her friends for a support, and unable to
attend public worship, if she had more given to her than she wanted for her
present supply and comfort, she would give a part of it for the support of the
gospel; and would say, she presumed her friends who kindly ministered for the
supply of her wants would be willing that she should have the satisfaction of
contributing her two mites for the support of the gospel ministry, when she had
any thing to spare.

Mrs. Osborn had an uncommon concern to do justice to all with whom she had any
dealings, in all respects, both in the sight of men, and before God. In this
she was conscientious, and constantly exercised herself with great care and
circumspection to have a conscience void of offense toward men, always keeping
what she called the golden rule in her view, desiring to do to others, as she
would they should do to her. This appears in a clear and striking light in her
diary.

And she not only did justice, but loved mercy. She gladly embraced every
opportunity to relieve the wants and distresses of others, when in her power,
and would often run ventures, and strip herself of what she really wanted, to
relieve others who appeared to her to be in greater want. When she was
dependent on others for support, and she had any thing in her hand which she
could spare, she took delight in relieving the poor in distress, knowing that
her benefactors were willing she should enjoy this pleasure, which was much
greater to her, than to use it for herself. In this way she was always laying
up a treasure in heaven, and became rich toward God.

Mrs. Osborn was a kind and faithful friend. She was a true friend to all, even
to those who acted an unfriendly part to her, and injured her. But her heart
was united in a peculiar manner and degree to those who appeared to be friends
to Christ. These were her chosen associates and companions, in whom she had
great delight. And all her christian friends might place the greatest
confidence in her, and use the utmost freedom without giving offense; and trust
any secret with her, with the greatest safety, without the least fear of being
betrayed, or that it would be communicated to any one. She had a number of
intimate friends, with whom she conversed with great openness, freedom and
pleasure, finding, on acquaintance, that she could safely rely on their candor,
friendship, prudence and fidelity. Among these Miss Susa Anthony, whose life
has lately been published, was the first, and her greatest intimate, whom she
highly esteemed and loved, as an eminent christian, of uncommon discerning and
judgment; and whom she found to be a most faithful, prudent friend, at all
times. There was a distinguished and eminently christian and happy friendship
enjoyed and cultivated between them, for about fifty years, without any
interruption, and to their great mutual comfort and helpfulness. -- They were
truly, and in a distinguished degree, of one heart and one soul, and during the
whole time loved each other with a pure heart, fervently. It is not known or
believed that there is to be found, or has been in this century such a union
and happy christian friendship between two such eminent christians, for so long
a time, as took place in this instance. What fervent prayers and praises did
they pour out before God for each other, when separate! What hearty and sweet
counsel did they take together, giving mutual advice and assistance, under
their various trials, burdens, difficulties and doubts, while they opened their
hearts and feelings, in full confidence in each other! With what fervor,
freedom and pleasure, did they two join in devotion, by pouring out their
hearts before God, when they had opportunities! With what high delight and
rapture have they met among the spirits of the just made perfect, where, free
from all sin and sorrow, their long continued friendship in this world, is made
perfect with an assurance that it will increase in happiness and last forever,
in the favor and presence of Him, whom they love with all their hearts, and is
their everlasting portion! Here we are lost, and must wait till the curtain of
mortality be dropped, to have a perfect knowledge and enjoyment of that
felicity and glory of which we have now ideas so dark and very imperfect.
Blessed are they who are not slothful, but followers of them, who, through
faith and patience, now inherit the promises!

AFTER Mrs. Osborn had laid by her pen for a number of years, through the
defect of her eye sight, and debility of body and mind, her thoughts
unaccountably turned upon meditating on divine subjects, in verse or rhyme.
This increased upon her, so that she made verses on a number of subjects; and
her memory retained them, while they were not written, so that she could
rehearse them distinctly, when she pleased; which she did to some of her
intimate friends. They were pleased with them, not for their elegance and
poetry; for to this she made no pretension; but for the sentiments, as
expressed by her, and flowing from her heart, without any speculative study:
And some of them were written from her mouth.

Her mind became more and more engaged in this way, which she found to be
entertaining and profitable to herself. At length she thought of attempting to
resume her pen, and write her verses on several subjects, though she knew she
was not a poet, and had never before attempted any thing of the kind. She found
herself able to write, beyond any thing she, or her friends, had ever expected,
and wrote so much on a number of subjects, many of which she had before
composed in her mind, and retained in her memory, that, if collected together,
they would make a considerable volume.

As this was, in several respects, an extraordinary event, and these writings
express the devout exercises of her heart, in a manner different from her
diary, the following is here inserted as a specimen of the whole.

The Employment and Society of Heaven.
WHAT goodness this, which God extends
To us, who once were not his friends!
Compassion had on whom he would,
Though we did evil as we could.
Infinite love! It Is all divine;
God's wisdom formed the vast design;
His power has kept and brought us in,
Through all the assaults of hell and sin.
And now we shall forever gaze
On God, and his perfections praise;
We shall be like him more and more;
The Incomprehensible adore.
No hateful sin, or weariness,
Shall cause us any more distress.
To do God's will with Seraph's joy,
Shall ever be our sweet employ.
Ye dear companions here at rest,
With love sincere in every breast,
We now will cordially embrace,
Without a blush in any face.
No more misunderstandings here;
No misconstruction now we fear;
No censures hard, those bitter roots,
Which cast out love and blast its fruits.
No envy now, or selfishness,
Will ever again our souls possess;
Benevolence shall sweetly flow:
We felt too little when below.
No prejudice shall make us stand
Aloof, as in that foreign land;
Because when there we could not see,
We in essentials did agree.
We surely did, since we are here,
Where none but friends to Christ appear;
And now our God has brought us home,
We ever will rejoice as one.
O here is no trace of discontent;
Not one who murmurs in his tent:
Nor are there any fiery darts,
Ever to break or vex our hearts.
O precious blood, that once was spilt,
To cleanse our souls from all their guilt;
By which we are indeed made free,
Our souls from sin at liberty.
O this gives joy its fullest tide,
That out Redeemer's glorified;
With satisfaction views the whole,
The fruitful travail of his soul.
Ye who are now before our eyes,
Who were on earth our enemies,
We bless the Lord that you 're forgiven,
And are arrived safe in heaven.
For this we gave the Lord no rest,
And he has answered our request;
For which we magnify his grace,
And join with you to sing his praise.
Ye worthy friends, who did relieve
Our pinching wants, ye now receive
The great reward Christ promised you;
Ten thousand thanks to God most true.
Now grateful love our souls does cheer,
That we enjoy your presence here:
You did it for King Jesus' sake,
And of his joy you do partake.
Ye sweet acquaintance, christian friends,
Partakers of our joys and pains,
How often by you did God afford
Relief to us from his own word!
Your tender sympathy and love
Did often to us as cordials prove;
By sweet reproofs, and fervent prayer,
Ye kindly did our burdens bear.
In sore temptations, sharp and long,
You faithful held the Lord, and strong:
The great atonement all complete,
The promises most sure and sweet.
Ten thousand welcomes to this state,
Each other we congratulate,
And now our work shall all be praise
Through an eternity of days.
Though bonds of nature now do cease,
Our happiness it does increase,
To see our godly parents here,
And relatives to Christ most dear.
Can we review God's providence,
And yet retain no grateful sense
Of all your love and tender care,
Us for this heaven to prepare?
Do we not know you? Yes, we do,
No ignorance hides you from our view:
The leaks in memory are all stopped
Since we our imperfections dropped.
What multitudes are there which rise
To fill our souls with sweet surprise?
It is the charming infant race,
Brought here through rich and sovereign grace.
These little ones were born again,
And did believe in Christ, it is plain:
God's Spirit wrought the work; but how
On earth we could not fully know.
Glory to God, that now we see
Nothing's too hard for Deity:
These were the lambs, whom Christ caressed,
Took in his holy arms and blessed.
Thanks be to him his word was given
"Of such the kingdom is of heaven,"
Now they behold his glory too:
Sweet babes we do rejoice with you.
New wonders still! Lo, here are they,
Unjustly brought from Africa!
They Have heard the gospel's joyful sound,
Though lost indeed they now are found.
Those we see here who once have been
Made slaves to man by horrid sin.
Now through rich grace in Christ are free,
Forever set at liberty.
Thanks be to God, though not to man,
'Twas he who laid this glorious plan
From evil great, this good to bring
All glory to our God and King.
Hail Ministers of Jesus' name,
Who this salvation did proclaim;
Our very souls do live anew
That we in heaven do meet with you.
You have received the sweet, "Well done:"
And your eternal joy's begun;
Rich and complete is your reward,
And we forever bless the Lord.
What saints are these with crowns we see,
Of joy and immortality?
Gladly we find they are the same
Who out of tribulation came.
The holy prophets who did die
Because they truth did prophesy.
Apostles blessed, and Martyrs, slain
Because Christ's truth they did maintain.
We know that these the world did hate;
But Christ has made them rich and great
He promised them this great reward,
And we adore the faithful Lord.
New scenes arise. Let us attend:
Here Is Abr'am's seed, God's ancient friend.
We see God's covenant was sure,
And did from age to age endure.
All these have had repentance given,
The true Messiah owned from heaven.
His promises they did embrace,
And now behold his glorious face.
That very blood by them was spilt,
Which truly washed away their guilt;
Glory to God! we see the Jew:
We, Gentiles, do rejoice with you.
Transporting scene! All is delight!
Throngs numberless are in our sight,
Of every kindred, tongue and size,
To overwhelm us with surprise.
When Christ a thousand years did reign,
Ten thousands then were born again;
Who now, through rich and sovereign grace,
Are here to fill this holy place.
Language is pure and all refined;
Quickly we know each other's mind.
All here is concord; all at peace;
And happiness does still increase.
These holy angels all have skill
To know and do Jehovah's will:
They joy'd at our Redeemer's birth,
And minister'd to him on earth.
The Angels, who excel in strength;
Who were our guardians all the length,
Of the afflictive, tiresome road,
And bare us safe to this abode.
Is this the heaven of which we heard!
Are these the mansions Christ prepared!
How low have our conceptions been,
In a blind world of night and sin.
O come, yet lower let us fall,
Before our God, our all in all.
Sing praises to the worthy Lamb:
Ever adore the great I AM.
Amen, Hallelujah.
FINIS.

