THE HORRORS OF OAKENDALE ABBEY. A ROMANCE.

NEW YORK PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN HARRISSON, YORICK'S HEAD, NO. 3 (...)-SLIP.
1799.

THE HORRORS OF OAKENDALE ABBEY.
IN the gloomy month of November, when the mountains in Cumberland were almost
concealed by the heavy black clouds which hung below their tops, and a thick
drippling rain scarcely left the few scattered cottages of Oakendale
discernable, the peasants were all retired to their habitations; and through
this thick atmosphere the stately ruins of the ancient Abbey appeared like a
black mass of immense length, and could only be distinguished as a building, by
the glimmering twinkling of the small panes of glass from some of the many
windows which were dispersed, without uniformity, in this gloomy structure.

The church clock had struck five, when a loud knocking at the cottage of Aaron
Giles (who was entrusted with the keys of the Abbey) roused him from a slumber
to which the labors of the day, and the stillness of the evening, had composed
him, and caused a strange alarm to the rest of his family, consisting of a
notable Dame, now seated at the spinning-wheel, a beautiful girl about fourteen
years of age, and two stout boys, who were quietly eating a piece of brown
bread. -- "Lord," cried the wife and daughter, both in the same breath, "what
can that be! -- Don't open the door, father," said the girl, "for fear it
should be one of the spirits from the Abbey."

The repeated knocking sufficiently awakened Aaron, terrified the rest of the
family, and a voice demanded instant admittance.

Aaron, half bold, and half afraid, regardless of the entreaties of those about
him, ventured to undraw the bolt, and ask "Who was there?"

"You must open the door," replied a quick voice, "and deliver to me the keys
of the Abbey."

Aaron, who had by this time opened the door sufficiently to distinguish a
servant well mounted with a livery great coat on, entirely lost all fear and
replied, "The keys of the Abbey! why, nobody would venture there at this time
of night what can they be wanted for?"

"For a lady," replied the servant, "who will be here within two hours, and you
must go with me; and your wife must come also, to make a fire, and get things
in a little order and comfort for my Lady."

"Order and comfort for my Lady!" said Aaron, (holding the door fast in his
hand) "I am sure there is no order or comfort to be had there."

"No, no," said his wife, advancing fearfully; nobody don't like to go there in
daytime, much more when it is dark; and master must not deliver the keys to
any but my Lord himself, or to Muster Acre, the steward."

"Prithee, give me the keys," said the servant "and keep me here no longer; for
I have orders, both from my Lord and Mr. Acre, to ^^^^ive them; so do not
trifle for no time is to be lost."

Aaron, (...) his head, know not what to do; but told the man "he had better
come in a bit; as for going to the Abbey, it was sooner said than done. --
Why," said he, "you do not know what you ask; we might be carried away, and
never heard on any more. I never ventures in there without two or three as
stout as myself with me, and then we be just frightened out of our lives."

"Never fear," replied the footman, who had by this time dismounted, and was
advancing into the house; at the same time taking a pistol from his pocket,
which he held in a menacing manner, saying, "What the devil are you afraid of?
Why, I will engage to blow up all the ghosts in the country, if you will give
me a draught of something to drink, for I am devilish dry."

The good woman, tremblingly replied, "She would give him some cider, provided
he would put up the pistol, and not be blasphemous; and the poor little girl,
who with her brothers had fled to the further corner of the room, on seeing the
pistol which he still held in his hand, advanced, fell upon her knees, and
begged him not to kill them, for none of them had done any harm.

The beauty and innocence of this girl softened the valiant boastings of the
footman; and he instantly returned the pistol to his pocket, saying. "No, my
pretty dear, I have no intention to hurt you."

During this time, Aaron was reading a letter the servant had given him, which
contained an order from Lord Oakendale, for his instantly preparing the Abbey
for the reception of a Lady, who would be there on that very evening. Aaron,
terrified at the idea of the undertaking, and yet seeing the necessity of his
obedience, instantly summoned two of his neighbors, who, together with the
footman and himself, prepared with lanterns to venture into that Abbey, which,
even in the daytime, none of the inhabitants ever dared to enter, and which
had been the terror of many generations. Some of the rooms were habitable, and
it occupied in length many hundred feet of ground. A great part of it consisted
of low crumbling walls, long passages, or cloisters, and it had a communication
with the village church. It was likewise supposed that there were vaults and
subterraneous passages under the whole building. The thickness of the walls
bespoke the antiquity of its date, and the strength of the workmanship defied
the ravages of time; indeed no person in these parts pretended to trace its
origin. For the last hundred years it had descended with the Earldom of
Oakendale; but was never remembered to have been inhabited for more than a few
days.

The tradition of the country recorded a dreadful murder that had been
perpetrated in one of the rooms, which was evidently stained with blood; and
various tales were handed down to posterity, with additional wonders according
to the prolific fancy of the relater.

One circumstance had lately impressed the minds, of the villagers with an
assurance of its being under the dominion of supernatural powers, which was,
that of a young man (about three months before the present period) having
arrived at the village, demanded the keys, and determined to explore the Abbey
alone, and no trace or vestige having ever since been discovered concerning
him. The keys were found in the doors; nor was the horse he came upon ever
enquired after! To this place then, and at this season, sallied forth the (...)
mentioned four men followed by (...) Giles, with bed-clothes and other
necessaries, In order to prepare for the expected Lady. The children followed
with trembling steps, equally afraid to be left at home as to proceed with
their mother.

Upon entering the great door, which was placed in a porch like that of a
church, its ponderous weight creeked upon its massy hinges, the echoes of which
sounded with a tremendous noise. A small narrow passage led to a large hall,
with high grated windows; at the four corners of which were narrow passages
leading to different apartments. In the center of the hall were two folding
doors, which opened into a spacious room, the top of which terminated into a
dome of great height; a staircase on the right led to various rooms, long
galleries, narrow passages and closets; long ranges of building extended on
each side of the part they had entered, which appeared to be the only habitable
place in this immense pile of building; and in these the walls were so damp,
and even of those that were covered, the hangings were so ragged, and the whole
so destitute of furniture, that not the most distant idea of comfort could be
imagined for the poor Lady. who was the expected inhabitant of this gloomy
mansion.

After having swept away the cobwebs, and cleared some of the dirt, the good
woman began to consider where the poor Lady was to sleep, for as yet they had
not ventured up stairs; nor did they know if there was such a thing as a
bed-lodging to the Abbey. Not one of them would stir a foot without the rest
attended; even the valiant footman would not proceed alone, although he pretended
to bluster and throw open the doors one after another, swearing at, and defying
all the ghosts in Christendom; whilst the more timid inhabitants of the village
stared with fear and astonishment at his temerity.

Beds there were, but scarcely in a condition to accommodate any one; and, when
Dame Giles surveyed the tattered velvet of the curtains, and beheld the nodding
tester of immense height, she derived a secret comfort from the comparison
between this, and much in favor of her own humble chamber at the cottage.

Having arranged every thing in as much order as the time and place would
admit, and having met with nothing to alarm or terrify them, they sat down in
expectation of the arrival of the Lady. They had not waited long before a
chaise and four horses (with some difficulty, on account of the weeds and
briars which impeded their way to the porch) drew up. When the chaise door was
opened by the footman a very beautiful young Lady appeared, eager to jump out.
She was followed by another, who seemed older, and, as an attendant, every way
inferior to the Lady herself; the attractions of whose person at once inspired
the hearts of the beholders with equal wonder, pity and astonishment, that so
charming a young creature should be consigned to so dreary and wretched a
solitude.

If they were lost in wonder and surprise at her beauty, how infinitely more
was their admiration excited when, in the most melodious accents and engaging
manner, she addressed the woman and the gazing peasants, by asking them "If
they resided there, and if they could assure her there were no other persons in
the Abbey?

"Lack-a-day!" said Dame Giles, "we be none on us to stay here; we only comed
to make a fire, and get a little ready for your Ladyship and I Am (...) as how
you will find it very lonesome being in this dismal place by yourselves."

"Not at all," returned the Lady, "provided I am unmolested."

Dame Giles looked grave, and thought within herself that was not certain; but
she would not say any thing that might occasion fears of evil spirits to this
young Lady, who seemed entirely free from any such apprehensions, and for whom
she conceived the highest veneration, mixed with the tenderest pity, for being
destined to an abode in her opinion, so dangerous.

When she attended her to the apartment where the bed was, and apologized for
the coarseness of the sheets and bed clothes, which had been furnished from her
cottage, the Lady gave a look of surprise at the antiquity of the bed, and the
gloomy magnificence of the room, which was large, with an immense fireplace; a
long gothic window on the right, on the small pains of which were painted
serpents, dragons, and such unmeaning and hideous monsters; a smaller window
was placed in a corner on the left, and the ragged tapestry represented still
more horrible figures, all of which waved in life-like movements as the air
(admitted by the door) fanned the loose hanging on which they were represented.
-- She surveyed in silence the dismal appearance of the whole; and then said
(with a sigh) "I shall find no fault I believe; but shall probably sleep
quieter than I have done for many nights past, in pleasanter rooms, and beds
that seemed better calculated for repose."

The person who had come with her seemed to survey every thing with a
countenance of horror, and an expression of fear; and, turning to the young
Lady, said, "My dear Madam, is it possible that we can stay in this melancholy
place alone? Why, I never saw any thing half so dismal; I shall not, I am sure,
close my eyes in that frightful bed. Cannot you," addressing Dame Giles, "stay
with us to night?"

"No," replied the other; "I cannot, at the same time thinking she would not,
for all the world."

The young Lady, whose name was Laura, said to her companion, "Why, surely you
are not afraid of ghosts! and at present: I see nothing else to fear here; but,
addressing herself to the daughter of Dame Giles, who was close to her mother,
she said, "Perhaps you will stay with us, my little maid; and when there are
three of us we cannot be afraid."

"No," said Peggy, "I woe nut stay."

"Well, as you please," said Laura; "and as I am much fatigued, I will not
detain you any longer."

Dame Giles replenished the fire, left them a sufficient number of lights, and
departed, promising to come there early in the morning to prepare their
breakfasts. Meantime the footman had been giving orders to Aaron to go to the
next market town, and provide them with every necessary for their
accommodation. He then delivered a letter into the hands of Laura, and then
respectfully withdrew. He returned to the cottage with Aaron, and the other two
men; where, mounting his horse, he rode away. The cottagers spent some time
wondering at the strangeness of the adventure, and expressing their fears, lest
the Ladies might be carried away by the evil spirits which were said to haunt
the Abbey.

Having left Laura and her companion in the Abbey, and the inhabitants of
Oakendale quietly taking their repose, it may be necessary to give the reader
some account of the family to whom the Abbey belonged, and how Laura came to be
its present inhabitant.

The present Lord Oakendale had succeeded in a lenial descent to the Earldom
and estates of Oakendale. His great-grandfather was the only one that the
oldest inhabitant of the village could remember, and that memory was impressed
by wicked and atrocious deeds, said to have been committed by this old Earl,
since which time it had never been inhabited more than for a few days, when the
present Lord's father brought down a beautiful woman, who was his wife, and
mother to the present Earl; her picture was said to be still in one of the
rooms.

It was currently reported, that various figures had been seen flitting about
after twilight; ghastly visions had appeared, smeared with blood; and the ghost
of a lady, who was supposed to have been murdered in one of the rooms, was
usually seen after it was dark looking through the windows, with streams of
blood running from her throat. Tales of this nature had filled the minds of the
simple villagers with dreadful apprehensions; but what had given more
reasonable color and strength to these fears were, two circumstances, which
had happened within only a twelvemonth of each other; one was, that of a young
gentleman's never being heard of after going to explore the Abbey; the other,
of another gentleman's endeavoring to sleep there, who was so extremely
terrified by noises, howlings and phantoms, that, although a determined and
resolute man, he was obliged to relinquish the design, and to pass the
remainder of the night with one of the villagers in a cottage.

Lord Oakendale, the present Earl, had never seen the Abbey; he had no doubt
heard the reports, but, being a very dissipated man, he gave no heed to them,
much less had any desire to have them investigated. He was the eldest of two
brothers, who were the only surviving sons of a numerous progeny. Their
dispositions, manners, persons and sentiments, were, from their earliest
childhood, so totally opposite, that not the most distant similarity could ever
be discovered. Robert, the elder, who was the present Earl, was haughty,
imperious, vindictive, vain and artful, and, if any spring of latent virtue
arose in his heart, it was suppressed and overpowered by these vices. His
person was far superior to his mind; for there, indeed, the graces shone forth
with conspicuous luster. He was tall, well proportioned, and of a bold and
manly countenance. His brother William, though less in stature, was equally
well made, and had the most engaging and attractive features. An expressive
countenance displayed a mind fraught with every manly virtue that could adorn a
christian and a soldier. At a very early age he entered the army, and
distinguished himself in the service of his country by more than one noble and
gallant action; during which time his brother was leading a life, not only of
inactivity, but of unlimited debauchery of every kind. Two years after the
death of the late Earl, he found himself so embarrassed and his fortune so
little equal to his expenses, that he was under the necessity of repairing it
by a marriage, in which love formed no part of the contract.

Miss. Rainsford, the only child of Lord W^^^haven, was the exact counterpart
of her lover, if the appellation of lover could be given to one whose motives
were guided by the desire of wealth or ambition; an union, founded upon such a
basis, could be productive of nothing but satiety and discord; her fortune was
perfectly convenient to him, and having secured that, he conceived a determined
hatred to her. She followed her inclinations entirely; and, as they entertained
a mutual indifference for each other, contempt and aversion soon followed.

Meantime William returned from the field of battle crowned with laurels and
universal esteem. His many virtues called forth the envy and hatred of his
brother, who could by no means bear to see himself so far eclipsed; and as this
jealousy rankled in his heart, under the specious cover of love and regard he
continued to undermine his advancement, and prevent his gaining that rank to
which his merits so justly entitled him. -- Unsuspicious, and judging of every
heart by his own, William could not see through the hypocrisy of Lord
Oakendale; and with a contented mind he patiently waited the dispensations of
fortune. Thus looking forward with hope, with tender adieus to his brother, to
whom he looked as his only relation and best friend, he embarked with his
regiment for the East Indies. In the mean time Lord Oakendale continued his
dissipated life, and, having no children, he had formed no cement of conjugal
felicity. He had met with Laura in a very obscure part of South Wales, where he
had been bathing the preceding autumn. He was wonderfully struck with her
beauty, and altogether pleased with her manners. From the first moment he
beheld her, he was determined to possess her person; and finding, upon
acquaintance, that an uncommon, delicacy and virtuous principle governed all
her actions, he carefully concealed from her that he was a married man till he
had learned her situation, and had, as he thought, made an interest in her
affections, and secured every bar which might oppose his happiness. But, as her
history will make a principle part of this work, we shall only at present
inform our readers, that he had sent her to this dismal abode, under the idea
that the horrors of the place, and the obscurity of the village, would sooner
dispose a mind, like hers, to coincide with his wishes, (...).

The letter the footman had left with her was from his Lordship, containing an
apology for his having consigned her to so melancholy and rude a situation;
assuring her that he should not intrude upon her retirement without her
permission, and concluding with his unalterable love and respect.

After Dame Giles and the other villagers had left Laura and she heard the gate
of the Abbey locked upon her, a sound which terrified her more fearful
companion, she opened and perused Lord Oakendale's letter, which having
carelessly read, and gathering satisfaction from his promise of not coming
there, she proposed going to bed, with the idea of enjoying a better night's
rest than she had experienced for many of the past: but her companion wished to
sit up, being, as she declared, afraid to consign herself to sleep in so dismal
a room, and still more dismal looking bed. Laura, who entertained no fears of
this nature, determined to undress herself, and seek that repose of which she
stood in need; and Mary, her companion, being equally afraid to sit up, if
Laura should go to sleep; therefore, however reluctantly, prepared to do the
same. Laura, whose body was fatigued, and her mind totally divested of fear,
soon fell into a profound sleep; but Mary, without ever having heard any tales
concerning the Abbey gave way to the fancies she formed from its appearance;
and a thousand apprehensions, of she knew not what, made her afraid to open her
eyes, or to shut them, and by that means destroyed every idea of rest. She
several times attempted to awake Laura, but found it impossible; she was
therefore obliged to attend to the various noises which assailed her ear,
without being able either to communicate her fears, or receive any comfort from
her companion. The account she gave in the morning, was, that soon after she
had been in bed, she plainly heard the sound of doors opening and shutting, and
upon listening more attentively, she heard voices whispering, and footsteps at,
or very near, the chamber door. All these relations, when repeated in the
morning to Laura, she treated as idle chimeras of a fearful apprehension;
declaring she had never in her life slept better, and that it was her fixed
resolution to explore every part of the Abbey before the ensuing night.

Dame Giles, attended by her daughter, arrived at the Abbey with their
breakfasts; and pleased at finding them safe where she had left them, began
making the fire, and moving about with more alacrity than she had done the
preceding night; but gave little or no answer to the interrogatories of Mary
concerning the Abbey, and who or what beings besides themselves were supposed
to be the inhabitants of it.

Dame Giles said, "She knew of nobody being in it but themselves;" and, not
willing to increase her fears, added, "That the passages were long and narrow,
and the wind might whistle and draw through them like voices."

Laura, whose beautiful countenance, refreshed by sleep was animated with
uncommon luster, laughed at their conversation; again declaring her intention
of taking a survey of the Abbey, as well as walking round the hills which
seemed to surround it; the beauty of which she admired as she viewed them
through the small casements of the windows.

The sun shone upon the tops of the hills, and its silver rays, which reflected
upon the frosty turf with a dazzling whiteness, gave it a cheerful appearance.
-- "Tell me not, said she, of voices and noises, here is nothing to create
fear; hark, how the robin twitters his gentle note; and see how the frost
glitters upon the verdure! The winds only bespeak the wintry season, but
nothing to inspire notions either of fear or dread. Ah! would fortune but smile
upon me with the same benign aspect that the face of nature does, how little I
should have to regret; and how well should I be pleased to remain all my days
in this sequestered retirement? But, alas! no such happiness awaits me -- a
poor unprotected orphan, without a claim upon any human being, nothing but my
own courage and virtue to guard me from the power of a villain! Ah me! my own
reflections are the bitterest accompaniments of my solitude." During this
soliloquy, which burst involuntarily from the oppressed heart of Laura, her two
companions stood in mute attention, the one knowing or partly guessing, that
she had just reason for her complaints, and the other staring at her without
well understanding the meaning of her speech; which, being uttered in a
pathetic voice, and in sentiments rather above her comprehension, induced her
to entertain the idea of her being mad, and brought there for confinement; but
when Laura turned her lovely face toward them, and the pearly tears chased
each other down the fairest cheeks that nature ever formed, whilst her
expressive eyes seemed to ask for pity's soothing voice, the gentler passions
stole upon the heart of Dame Giles; she felt the most tender pity for the fair
object before her, and, in a melting strain, she replied, "God help you, my
poor young lady; sure no body would go to hurt so sweet a creature!" and
looking at Mary, as if to gather some information from her concerning who and
what they were, she continued, "Ah, ye must comfort one another, seeing, as I
suppose, ye be sent here by our Lord's orders; and to be sure it is a
melancholy place, and some how I never thought as I could a been in it so long
at a time; but use makes perfect, and I bent so feared now as I was last night;
and when I comes again to get your dinners, I thinks I shant be afeard at all."

"No," said Laura, "here is nothing to be afraid of; and I must desire you will
give me the keys of all the rooms in the Abbey, that I may have the
satisfaction of going over them."

"Why," said Dame Giles, "then here they be (at the same time giving her a
bunch of rusty keys); but I think as how you had better be contented with this
here room, and them that ye see below, for I believe the others be but dismal
places, by all account; for I never seed them since I was a little un, and then
went but a little way, and we was a good many on us."

"And what did you see?" said Mary, impatiently.

"Laws, Madam!" said Dame Giles, "I cant remember;" and so saying she hastened
to leave them to make the search by themselves, lest they should have requested
her to accompany them.

She was no sooner gone, and their breakfast over, than Laura, taking up the
keys, said, "Come Mary, let us begin our survey. I promise myself great
amusement from the employment, and I desire you will have no fears."

Mary looked as if she had rather have been excused; but casting her eyes round
the room with a fearful kind of observation, the sun, which glimmering through
the narrow panes of glass, diffused a cheering light, and rendered every object
less gloomy than it had appeared the night before by only the light of the
candles; she therefore consented to attend Laura, who led the way; and having
left their chamber, she proceeded to her right along a low dark gallery, on the
sides of which some doors opened into small rooms, most of them dark, and
others admitting but small portion of light, entirely without furniture except
an old high backed chair, or the remain of an old stuffed couch.

The end of the gallery terminated in a narrow stone stair case, down which
Laura, followed (...) her trembling companion, descended. When (...) came to
the bottom, a door presented itself, to the lock of which she applied one of
the keys, (...) then another, until she found one that opened (...) and,
although the key was exceedingly rusty, (...) lock turned with great ease.

The room, into which they now entered, (...) one of the most dismal they had
yet seen. It (...) paved with stone, was long and narrow, with gothic window in
a recess on the right side. (...) dim light which it admitted was almost (...)
(...) the ivy on the outside; and the dark and over^rown boughs of a yew tree
hanging close to it, ^ave a most melancholy appearance to the whole. ^ndeed
Laura, for the first time, felt a shuddering (...) the idea of she knew not
what; and Mary beg^ed her to leave the room, and proceed no further; (...) a
dark passage, or cloister, without a door, presented itself at the end of the
room, and was either floored or paved, but seemed to lead to ^ome subterraneous
abode.

Laura endeavored to summon all her courage, and, regardless of her companion's
entreaties, was venturing to explore the cloister, when a rustling noise made
her start, and retreat from the low arch which led to its entrance.

Mary screamed with affright, and stood with her hands held before her eyes,
left they should encounter some sight too terrific for her to support. Laura
likewise trembled; the boughs of the yew tree waved their dark branches against
the window, and the whole appearance of the place augmented her fears. She took
her companion's arm, and was hastily preparing to return, when a large trunk,
or coffer, which stood in one corner of the room, attracted her notice, and she
instantly accounted for the rustling, by supposing that a rat or mouse might be
withinside of it; and, as this idea dispelled her fears, and renewed her
courage, she advanced to the place where it stood, determined to lift up the
lid, and see what it contained. She did so; but how was she struck with horror
and astonishment, when the skeleton of a human body presented itself to her
affrighted view! She gave an involuntary scream, and dropping the lid from her
trembling hand, the sound, echoing through the hollow roofs, vibrated with
terror upon her palpitating heart; and she had just sufficient power to say to
Mary, in a tremulous voice, "Let us be gone."

Mary, who had not seen what the trunk contained, but remained some paces
behind, with her hands covering her eyes, on perceiving that Laura had
discovered something frightful, was still more alarmed, and hastily advanced to
make an escape from a room, which, from the first moment she beheld it, had
filled her with apprehensions.

Laura had just strength enough to lock the door, and then proceeded back again
to their own apartment, which, in comparison with those they had been viewing,
appeared light and pleasant.

Mary congratulated herself on her return, and told Laura she hoped she had now
enough of exploring the Abbey, which presented nothing but dismal places and
frightful objects; and she had no doubt was haunted by some of the people who
had, she was sure, been murdered there; nor had she any doubt but their ghosts
would appear at night, and inform them who were their murderers.

Laura begged she would not give way to such idle fancies. "That I have been
frightened," says she, "I confess; and I also confess, that I am ashamed of
myself for being so. A little reason and recollection will conquer my fears,
and enable me, at some future day, to put my design in execution, and survey
every part of the Abbey. What was there to fear in seeing the bones of a
fellow creature, whose peaceful ashes were as quietly deposited there as in the
mouldering earth? As to ghosts, she believed in no such thing; it was not the
dead from whom she had any apprehensions, and she would never believe that the
righteous Judge of all the earth, and on whom alone she placed her confidence,
would suffer her to be visited and terrified for the sins of former ages. If
any necessary discoveries were to be made through her means, she might, and ought
to be thankful for being considered as an instrument worthy to bring good out
of evil. That we should be alarmed at the sight of our fellow creatures, when
they had no longer any power to hurt us, was a sad proof of the weakness and
depravity of our nature, and she owned she felt the force of that depravity in
having been so much frightened at what she had seen; and although she could not
boast of any superior courage, yet it showed her the necessity of making the
utmost of that reason which had been so liberally diffused in our compositions
for the best and wisest purposes." Thus she reasoned, and having no one to
oppose her arguments (for Mary sat in silent admiration of her judgment and
eloquence), she had worked herself up to a kind of enthusiastic courage, and
said she would again venture to complete her design, and would not even ask
Mary to accompany her, if she had any fears; for her own part she felt equal to
the attempt, and was rising in order to put her design in execution, when Mary
besought her to desist: "Pray," says she, "defer it till Dame Giles comes at
dinner time, and perhaps she will go with you; for, as to myself, I cannot
accompany you; and I should be as much afraid to stay here alone."

Laura allowed herself to be persuaded, and had less difficulty in getting Mary
to take a walk with her on the outside of the Abbey before the sun went down,
for she had no sort of objection to turning her back upon so dismal an abode,
and would have been heartily glad never to have set her foot in the inside any
more. They accordingly proceeded down the staircase, and out of the door
through which they had entered the preceding night.

Laura had now an opportunity of observing, that the Abbey was situated in a
deep valley, surrounded by hills of an enormous and stupendous height, whose
craggy tops seemed to bend over the space that contained a few scattered
cottages, which, with a small old church and the Abbey, formed the whole of the
village. She proceeded to a rising ground to the right of the building, from
whence she had a more perfect view of the Abbey, the length of which appeared
to be some hundred feet, though it seemed much longer than it really was from
the lowness of the structure. The church was a building of the same date; duty
was sometimes performed in it by a neighboring clergyman, but it appeared, as
well as the Abbey, in a very decayed state. A low arch, or cloister, seemed to
run from the right wing of the Abbey, and joined the churchyard.

Upon examining the situation of the windows, and particularly the yew-tree
near one of them, Laura was convinced that this arch was the same that enclosed
the passage, or cloister, which led from the dismal room wherein she had seen
the skeleton; and she again reprobated her fears when she considered that, as
the cloister communicated with the churchyard, it was easy to suppose a
skeleton might well be conveyed to a place so near it, for want of room, or for
some other reason; and vexed that this idea had not occurred to her sooner, she
again condemned her fearfulness, and determined to make a second attempt as
soon as another day presented itself.

The hour now approaching when the day began to got dreary, and observing Dame
Giles coming to prepare their dinner, she proposed to Mary to return to the
Abbey, who followed her companion, although with reluctance; for she had much
rather have encountered the inclemency of the weather, or any other
inconvenience, than again venture into the gloomy Abbey; the whole of which
Laura was so desirous of exploring, that she was with difficulty persuaded from
making the attempt, even though the day was shutting in.

The night passed like the preceding one, except that Laura, when awakened by
Mary, almost fancied she heard a faint whisper at the chamber door; but she was
unwilling to give credit to such improbable alarms, and was resolved to place
them to those impositions of fancy, which the stillness of the night, and the
situation of the place might naturally inspire.

Her courage completely returned with the light of the morning, and she arose
pleased with the scheme she had projected of examining every corner, as well as
every room in the Abbey, feeling herself superior to any fears the enterprise
might occasion. For this purpose she requested Dame Giles would stay with Mary
during the time she should be gone; and she really felt so courageous that she
preferred going alone, lest Mary's fears, by suggesting foolish fancies, might
create something like them in herself.

She first proceeded down the great stair case, and examined the rooms below,
of which she had not taken sufficient notice either on her entrance, or when
she went to walk. The hall was large, dark, and the paving decayed; a rusty
helmet, and a large sword of an immense length, hung against a wall half
covered with green damp, a folding door, with a top panel broke, opened to a
large room, in the form of a rotundo, with a high arched window, on which were
emblazoned many coats of arms on painted glass. Heraldry was Laura's favorite
study, but she could not give up the present time to investigate the arms of
the house of Oakendale, so much was she bent upon making discoveries more
gratifying to her curiosity. On the left of this room, a door, which appeared
in better preservation, and more modern form than any of the others, attracted
her notice. She instantly opened it, and a full length picture of a Lady, in a
Vandyke dress, arrested her attention. The frame had been gilt, and was of
heavy carved work; but seemed falling to decay, and the canvass in some places
was loosened from it. The portrait exhibited a countenance of the most
attractive kind; the complexion was beautiful, and the features regular.
Laura's eyes were rivetted to it. She could not account for the fascinating
expression which allured her attentive observation; she stood contemplating the
soft features till she almost fancied the sweet mouth smiled upon her, and she
was reluctantly withdrawing herself from so pleasing a portrait, in the
countenance of which she felt, she knew not how, interested; when a faint
expression of surprise burst from her lips, at observing upon the floor near
the picture, a satin letter-case of her own work! Ah! well did she recognize
the parting gift she had presented to Eugene -- her earliest lover -- her first
friend -- her long lamented Eugene! What sensations did the sight produce!
"Ah!" says she, "he must have been here; what could have brought him to this
sequestered place, and where is he now?"

The last idea rested with a fearful pause upon her terrified imagination,
which instantly ran through a train of melancholy and sad reflections. She
stood lost in wonder and amaze, and her thoughts bewildered in a labyrinth of
strange perplexity! The idea of the skeleton in the trunk rushed upon her
recollection with a terrible presentiment that it might be Eugene's and she
felt her blood curdle with horror at the thought. She lo^^ all fear of her own
situation in the surprise the above circumstance had occasioned. She stood
fixed with the letter-case in her hand, the identity of which she could not
doubt, having the name of Laura worked, not only by her own hand, but in her
hair in the inside, upon which her eyes rested in a kind of stupor; and in this
situation she would have remained had not the sound of footsteps down the great
staircase roused her from her reverie, and made her turn her head not with
fear, but in expectation of seeing some new wonder; it was, however, only Mary
and Dame Giles, who, having thought every moment an hour since her departure,
and dreading lest something had happened to her, their impatience and curiosity
for once conquered their fears, and by an effort of courage they ventured down
the great stairs in search of her. Laura could have excused the intrusion, and,
upon finding her pale and trembling, they concluded she had been fearfully
alarmed, and besought her to return with them up stairs. Her incoherent answers
to their questions confirmed their belief that fright had affected her senses,
and they offered her all the consolation they could. When she returned to the
chamber she recovered in some degree, but still remained low and lost in
recollection.

The next day she told Mary she had met with a surprise, but no fright; and
added that she had so little fear, she should again walk over the Abbey, and
begged she might not be interrupted. Thus some time passed, and, although she
made several attempts to visit the room, which contained the skeleton, she
never found her courage quite equal to the enterprise; and, though she reasoned
upon the absurdity of her fears, and determined to go there, yet her steps
generally led to the room where she had found the letter-case, and where the
beautiful picture always attracted her admiration, and engaged her stay.

Meantime Lord Oakendale grew impatient that he heard nothing from her. The
footman had several times been dispatched to the village in order to enquire
how she bore her solitude, and if she made no complaints; for Lord Oakendale
was in hopes that, by placing her in this dreary Abbey, with no companion but
Mary, (whose education and manner of life had not been such as could render her
mind congenial with Laura's) as she could have no resources from books, or any
other amusement, her spirits would become so depressed, and her mind so
enervated, that she would gladly fly to him for succor and friendship, rather
than be condemned to a hateful solitude, like that of Oakendale Abbey.

Laura's character he had quite mistaken, or rather he had no idea of so noble
a mind inhabiting a form which he considered only as a voluptuary. Finding,
therefore that the footman always returned with accounts of her being
contented, and making no complaints, he determined, as soon as the spring
should be a little advanced, to make her a visit at the Abbey; and not without
the diabolical idea, that, if he could not prevail upon her to be favorable to
his wishes, the Abbey was a place well calculated for the very worst designs.

These intentions, however, were confined to his own breast, as the fittest
receptacle for them. Not the most distant hint was given of his intention,
least Laura, upon hearing it, might meditate an escape, although that was a
circumstance next to impossible to be effected, from the situation of the place.

Meantime as the days grew longer, she frequently walked with Mary to the
distance of a mile or two; the views were picturesque, wild, and romantic; and
when she climbed to the top of the hills she had a prospect of a beautiful
lake, which sometimes afforded her a distant hope of escape, as she had heard
that these lakes were visited in the summer by the admirers of picturesque
landscape. The Abbey lost much of its horrors by being inhabited by so fair a
form, and the peasants of the village would now venture as far as the gate, and
even peep in at the windows, divested of their former fears. When the weather
was rainy, Laura made a long gallery in the Abbey her walk, and Mary grew so
fearless that she would remain in the chamber by herself, although she still
persisted in saying she heard noises and whispering in the night.

Laura had never yet been in the room which contained the skeleton, she often
designed it, and had once or twice made the attempt; but the idea that it might
be Eugene's always threw a fearful gloom upon her heart; and having questioned
Dame Giles concerning the visitors to the Abbey since her remembrance, she once
told her of a gentleman's never having been heard of after having the keys to
let himself into the Abbey. This account filled Laura's heart with cruel
apprehensions, and confirmed conjectures which at times her imagination would
raise up. In those moments she supposed a gang of banditti concealed in a
subterraneous vault, who rushing upon Eugene at the moment he was exploring
their secret haunts, having robbed and murdered him, had put his body in the
trunk, had carelessly dropped the letter-case in the room where she found it.

These sad reflections sometimes deterred her from making the attempt, and
other times raised her resentment and her courage at the same time; and when
the thoughts of her situation occurred to her, it gave her a contempt for life;
she would say, "Yes, I will brave the ruffians, and gladly share the fate of my
dear Eugene. Perhaps my bones may then be deposited in the same trunk with his,
and in death at least we shall not be divided." But such wild imaginations were
generally suppressed, and deemed improper by her better judgment; and she would
then be thankful to Providence, who had given her strength of mind to resist
such idle delusions, and submit, with resignation and gratitude, to him, whose
dispensations had, in many instances, been so manifested in her favor.

She was ruminating upon subjects of this nature one evening, when she was
walking alone in the gallery by moonlight. The brightness of that luminary
shone full upon the apartment, and she was amusing herself with observing its
reflecting the narrow casements to almost the breadth of the gallery. She next
contemplated her own shadow as she walked; but, how was she astonished, and how
did she stand aghast, when she saw another shadow besides her own, which
appeared larger, and to be that of a man! Her fortitude at once forsook her;
she flew to the door of the gallery, and in a faint voice called Mary. Mary was
in the chamber; she stood motionless with surprise and terror; but having a
little recovered she proceeded to the chamber, where she found Mary almost as
much frightened as herself, at being left alone at that time in the evening.

Laura, as soon as her trembling breath would allow her to articulate, related
the cause of her fright, and begged Mary would return with her to the gallery,
in order to investigate this phenomenon; but no persuasion could prevail on
Mary to accompany her; on the contrary, she was for fastening up the door of
the chamber, as soon as possible, to prevent either the shadow or the real
substance from visiting them.

Laura ruminated upon the circumstance till (as usual) her fears became less;
she considered that, by some oblique reflection of the moon, two figures might
be reflected from one; and she determined to go to the gallery again, and try,
in every direction, how her own shadow might be reflected, and lead her to the
mistake; and she easily fancied that her fears had magnified the figure, and
likewise given it the resemblance of a man.

Vexed at the idea of being appalled at her own shadow, and resolving instantly
to be cconvined she again set forward to the gallery, which she found still and
quiet as she had left it. This encouraged her boldly to advance to the end of
it, and to try, in every direction she could place herself, in what manner her
shadow might be reflected, so as to give it the representation of two figures;
but, after walking, standing still, both toward the windows, and at a
distance, crossing the gallery in every different part, and placing herself in
every light, yet still she could perceive nothing but her own single shadow!
Having tired herself with conjectures, and vexed that she could make no
discovery, she hastened back to her appartment, where she passed the night,
restless and uneasy, vainly endeavoring to account for the appearance she had
seen, without the most distant clue to lead her to it.

The unaccountable appearance of this shadow occupied her thoughts for several
days, and she at last persuaded herself that it must have been the deception of
her own sight, which, although pretty good, might for once have deceived her,
especially as she made the same experiment the succeeding night at the same
hour; but it led to no discovery, for she could see but one shadow; and having,
by degrees, and by reasoning upon the impossibility, conquered every idea of
fear it had at first occasioned, she again resumed her intention of looking at
the room which contained the skeleton.

One day, that had been uncommonly rainy, which had prevented her taking her
favorite walk upon the hill, and her mind was unsettled, from having no
employment to fill up the time, or to chase away the melancholy which her
situation inspired, after much consideration, she determined to bend her steps
down the stone staircase. For this purpose she summoned all her resolution,
and having, with fervent devotion, recommended herself to that Power, who
always protects the innocent, and whose mercy is infinite, she proceeded to the
room, the lock of which turned easily as before; she surveyed it with composed
attention. The trunk stood exactly in the same place; she lifted up the lid,
and the same ghastly skeleton presented itself to her view. She contemplated it
with a mixture of horror and pity. "Ah!" says she, "would I could know what
body-enveloped these bones; perhaps thou art entitled to my tenderest regards."
The idea that it might be the remains of the murdered, loved, Eugene, occurred
to her sad memory, and the tears fell from her eyes in large drops upon the
object which excited them.

From this melancholy spectacle she turned to the dark cloister which, as she
supposed, led to the churchyard. The gloomy appearance of the entrance for a
moment intimidated her, and she was almost inclined to go back, when a ray of
courage enlivening her spirits, she grew resolute* and determined to proceed.
She stooped her head as she entered the arch, and found it quite dark; but as
she advanced it grew lighter, and she perceived that she descended, and the
roof then admitted of her standing upright. She likewise found that the light
proceeded from some opening at the end, which she conjectured was the open air,
and that the end of the cloister would bring her to the churchyard; she
therefore boldly advanced, when, upon a nearer approach, she perceived that the
light glimmered through some loose boards in the form of a partition, without a
door, or any apparent opening. She looked through the cracks, and perceived it
was a room, and that the light proceeded from a casement at the end of it. She
pushed hard against it, in order to get in; but it seemed beyond her strength.
She felt disappointed, and was turning back the way she had come, when an
impulse of curiosity impelled her once more to look through the cracks of the
boards, in order to take a more accurate survey of a place which seemed fenced
off for some particular purpose. She then fancied she saw something like white
linen hang up on the opposite side; but she could not distinguish it perfectly,
as the confined place through which she looked prevented her. She likewise
fancied that she heard a slight noise; but she was determined not to let any
trifling sound, occasioned, perhaps by the wind, or a thousand other causes,
alarm and divert her from her purpose; so keeping her eye fixed, and close to
the disjointed boards, whilst her body was perfectly still, her eye endeavored
to scrutinize and investigate every object it could collect through a space so
narrow; when, after a slight noise, and a shade of something rather darkening
the view, a large rolling eye-ball met her own, and she instantly sunk down; at
the same time giving a faint inward scream: the shock was more than she could
bear. For a few moments all her faculties were suspended, and her limbs, which
had refused to support her, seemed stiffened with fright and astonishment. She
attempted to rise several times before she could accomplish it; and when she
stood up, she made several efforts before her trembling legs could support her
sufficiently to walk. Her mind was a chaos of horror and confusion; she
involuntarily bent her steps to return; and, having feebly tottered (...) sit
down upon the trunk which contained the skeleton, in order to rest, and prevent
her falling a second time.

Her heart throbbed as if it was bursting, and a violent flood of tears
afforded her some relief. She sat for some minutes looking steadfastly at the
entrance of the cloister, expecting every moment something to arrest her
affrighted senses. All continued still; nothing more horrible could appear than
she had already seen, and she found herself quite unequal to the task she had
undertaken. After finding herself a little recovered, she hastened back as fast
as her trembling limbs could carry her, determined never more to endeavor at an
investigation which she found had too serious an effect upon her spirits.

When she returned to the chamber, her pale and terrified countenance, with her
eyes red, and almost starting from their orbits, convinced Mary that she had
encountered something extremely horrid, and she was as much afraid to enquire
as the other was incapable of answering, left she should hear more than her
weak mind could support.

Laura threw herself upon the bed in an agony of grief and terror; her mind was
too much discomposed by what she had seen, to let reason bear any influence.
She found her spirits had received a shock, which they could not well bear; she
now blamed herself for having attempted to make an investigation which had led
her to encounter so much terror.

Mary could get but few answers to her questions, and therefore gave up asking
her.

Laura continued many days in a motionless kind of apathy, and a slow fever
preyed upon her spirits. She made many melancholy reflections upon her cruel
situation, which only added to her depression. From this, however, she was
roused by the daughter of Dame Giles, who, as she was one day setting the room
in order, and seeing Laura look grave and low, assumed a delighted countenance,
and said, "This old place will be quite another thing soon."

"Why," replied Laura, "what should make it another thing?"

"Oh!" said the girl, "but I believe I should not tell you."

"Yes," said Laura, "You may tell me any thing; I shall not betray you."

"Why, then," says the girl, "but it is a great secret, and mother would kill me
if she knowed as how I talked about it; but my Lord is a coming, and some of the
rooms are here to be made so foin!"

"And who told you so?" replied Laura. "And when does he come? and are you
certain of it?"

All these questions she asked Peggy in a breath, and with a wild surprise; but
Peggy could not, or would not, divulge more information than she had already
communicated; and Laura was left to meditate upon the intelligence with as
many, or, perhaps, more cruel reflections than her recent fright had occasioned.

Various apprehensions assailed her imagination, and not a ray of comfort shone
upon her recollection; all was dreary in the perspective. Her mind was now as
active as it had been before passive. Her fears of supernatural spirits, and
supposed murderers, gave way to those of more certainty; and she fearlessly
traversed many parts of the Abbey, although she did not venture to the part of
it where she had been so much terrified. Indeed she never could persuade
herself to believe in ghosts. That there were beings in the Abbey besides
themselves she had received ocular demonstrati^^s; but of what nature they
were, she was totally ignorant; and her mind had been too much confused and
oppressed to form the most distant conjecture. Now that her fears had, by
Peggy's intelligence, been rendered alive to reason, the retrospection
furnished her with some inferences not altogether impossible; and, upon
reasoning with herself upon the subject, she thought it more than probable,
that Lord Oakendale had caused and ordered these appearances, in order to
intimidate her, that she might fly to his arms for refuge against alarms which
seemed so incomprehensible. She knew the whole village was his property, and
all the inhabitants were his vassals. From such a combination it were easy to
place people in unfrequented parts of the Abbey to whisper and make noises to
occasion terror. The skeleton, the shadow, and the eye-ball, might be managed
by his Lordship's contrivance; consequently they lost their terror, and she
looked upon all that was past as an artful delusion, pre-concerted to further
and complete his purpose; she, therefore, as heretofore, condemned herself for
being so easily imposed upon, and determined henceforward to disregard all
appearances, and, if possible to think of making her escape.

With respect to Mary she did not think her sufficiently in her interest to
trust her with any scheme she might project; neither did she possess courage,
or strength of mind, to be of service to her in any dangerous enterprise; she
therefore thought it most prudent to rely upon her own management, and entirely
trust to her own contrivance for the furthering of any plan, by which she might
hope to escape from a situation so perilous.

She had, by these suggestions, worked up her mind to a degree of boldness,
bordering upon desperation; and, in a rhapsody of distressed courage, she
exclaimed, "Would some airy spirits did indeed inhabit this Abbey, who would
protect innocence, and shield me from the snares of villainy and terror!"

As she finished the last words, she was startled by a noise like the shutting
of a door, and a distant footstep; but, as she had made up her mind as to
disregarding the noises, and indeed fear of that nature seemed to be entirely
banished from her breast, she only turned about with a contemptuous expression
of countenance, and fell into a meditation on her escape. As she had never been
prohibited walking round the Abbey, up the hills and in the vicinity of the
village, she formed the resolution of extending her walk so as to get quite
away, taking the first path that offered, after she had got from the village.

The idea charmed her, and but one difficulty arose to prevent her design; and
that was, the walking out by herself, as Mary had always been her companion in
the walks she had hitherto taken, and indeed would be afraid to be left alone
in the Abbey.

The idea of leaving one, whose fears she knew would nearly overpower her
senses, was not only matter of difficulty, but of regret; and she truly felt
for the distress Mary would experience when night approached, and she found
herself alone, deserted by her companion.

The tender and affectionate heart of Laura could not endure the idea of acting
so cruel a part to one, who in no instance had ever shown her the least
unkindness. To be sure her virtues where of that negative kind, that she could
form no reliance upon her friendship, but then, on the other hand, she had been
in some degree, the chosen companion of her solitude, and to leave her a prey
to sufferings her mind was not able to support, was a cruelty of which Laura
was incapable, and could not put inpractice, even if her escape had depended
upon those terms; she therefore, after much consideration, told Mary, "Not to
be alarmed if some of the specter, which haunted the Abbey, should entirely
carry her off, as they had done the gentleman concerning whom Dame Giles had
told them, for that she was determined to venture over every part of it, and it
might be she might never return; for she had already seen and heard enough to
know that something besides themselves resided there, and she therefore advised
her to be prepared for her absence."

Mary, terrified at hearing her talk in this manner, begged her to desist from
any such design representing, and recalling to her recollection, how much she
had been alarmed at her last attempt, as well as by the circumstance of the
shadow.

Laura, however, was not to be persuaded, and told Mary she was prepared for
any alarm, and only advised her, in case she should not return before night,
not to stay in the Abbey by herself; but, before the evening was far advanced,
to go down to the cottage of Aaron Giles, and beg his protection.

Mary did not hesitate to promise she would not stay there by herself; for
nothing, indeed, would have induced her to be there alone.

Laura, having arranged the plan so far as concerned Mary, whose comfort was by
no means her least object, left the Abbey in order to reconnoitre, and, at the
same time, use Mary to the custom of her going out without her; and, had any
thing encouraging offered, to pursue her plan. But the evening being remarkable
fine, the peasants were all out of their houses, and she did not think this a
time favorable for facilitating her design; she therefore gave up the attempt,
and returned to the Abbey, waiting impatiently for a more favorable
opportunity.

Meantime some of the rooms were cleaning out, and evident preparations were
making for his Lordship's arrival.

Some days had now elapsed since Laura had spoken to Mary on the subject of her
being carried away. She had formed various plans, but as yet had put none in
execution; time wore away, and she was in continual fear of being surprised by
a visit from Lord Oakendale. This kept her mind in a constant perturbation, and
hastened her determination. On a fine afternoon, therefore, she strolled out by
herself, and Mary impatiently awaited her return.

The evening began to close, when Mary's fears for Laura, and still greater
apprehensions for herself, arose to a pitch of misery and uneasiness she could
by no means support! She flew down the stairs, and, opening the great door, she
threw her eyes about with a wild stare of amazement; and, being afraid either
to return, or to follow any of the paths she had sometimes frequented with
Laura, she ran as fast as her legs could carry her to the cottage of Aaron
Giles, and terrified and surprised the whole family, by saying, with wild
affright, "That the ghosts had carried away Laura, and she would not for the
world continue in the Abbey by herself, for she was sure they would take her
next."

They knew not what to make of her story, and, partly believing, and partly
incredulous, they sallied out to the Abbey, where, vainly waiting, wondering,
and calling to no purpose for near two hours, they concluded poor Laura had met
with some cruel disaster, and they returned disconsolate to the cottage. They
lamented the fate of the unfortunate Lady, and still more their own, when his
Lordship should not find her at his arrival, which was now hourly expected; in
which expectation we shall, for the present, leave them, to give some account
of Laura, for whom our readers may probably be more interested.

The evening, on which she left the Abbey, was uncommonly fine, and invited her
to descend the other side of that hill, from which she had more than once taken
a view of the lake and the adjacent country. She would round the hill, and
followed the first path to her left* it turned in several directions, and she
was puzzled which to pursue. After ascending and descending amidst a woody
covert of brambles and high bushes, she found herself in a thick wood at the
bottom of the hill, which she still thought looked very near her. She was now
in a close dell, and looking about to see the way she thought best to follow,
she perceived an arch overgrown with ivy, and thinking it might lead her into a
more open and extended tract, she fearlessly entered it. The arch narrowed upon
her; she nearly touched the roof, and it grew dark, yet she proceeded; -- it
was a hiding place from her pursuers, if it was nothing more. Fear seemed to
make no part of her composition, and, having walked a considerable way, she
perceived some broken steps; and, having ascended them, a small door half open,
seemed to invite her to enter; and a room, extremely resembling those she had
seen in the Abbey, led her to suppose that the winding of the wood had only
brought her back again to the same place from which she had taken so much pains
to escape. She felt vexed and disappointed; but curiosity compelled her to
prove the certainty of her conjecture.

The room afforded but little light, and that only admitted by chasms in the
wall; yet she thought she perceived a door at the end; and, as she was now
almost certain it was the Abbey, she was in hopes of returning to the
apartments they occupied before Mary should have quitted them; for, although
her fears were pretty well subsided, yet the idea of being alone all night in
the Abbey was not altogether so comfortable; and she thought, if Mary was gone,
she would follow her to the cottage of Aaron Giles. She was not deceived as to
the door at the other end of the room; it was fastened on the side next to her,
and she undrew (as she thought) a rusty bolt, and was advancing into another
appartment, when a sight, more horrible than imagination can form, presented
itself to her. The dead body of a woman hung against the wall opposite to the
door she had entered, with a coarse cloth pinned over all but the face; the
ghastly and putrified appearance of which bespoke her to have been some time
dead.

Laura gave a fearful shriek, when a tall figure, dressed only in a checked
shirt, staggered toward her. The face was almost black; the eyes seemed
starting from the head; the mouth was widely extended, and made a kind of
hallow gutteral sound in attempting to articulate.

Laura stood motionless; the figure passed her, and went through the door-way
by which she had entered, and the sound of the footsteps dwelt upon her ear
till they seemed lost by distance. She trembled exceedingly; she was afraid to
follow and she was equally afraid to stay. After some moments of dreadful
suspense, she turned her eyes to the shocking figure of the dead body; nature
shrunk from the sight, and recoiled at the idea; she moved slowly to the door,
thinking, if she could once morce regain the wood, she should be more safe than
where she was. Alas! how were her fears increased, and her situation rendered
still more dreadful, when she found (upon attempting to open the door) a spring
lock on the other side had been mistaken for a bolt; that it was now close
shut, and she had no possible means of getting it open. The horrid creature
that had passed her had gone through with so much violence that the door
clapped after him, whilst she was contemplating the other dreadful figure with
which she was now shut up; nothing could be conceived more full of terror! The
room was damp, and a small grated window only served to show her the ghastly
appearance of the body, rendered still more terrific by the faint light which
reflected on the face, and served to show Laura that night was approaching. Her
fears increased; she crept about the room as far as possible from the
melancholy object, and kept her eyes turned to the door of this dismal place,
from whence she had not the most distant hope of making her escape.

With a mind tortured by the most cruel apprehensions, she could think of no
expedient whereby to relieve her distress. She made several attempts to open
the door, but all were ineffectual. The little strength she had was become
still less by trembling, and a faint sickness occasioned by terror. She shut
her eyes to avoid the painful object before her. She fancied she heard groans.
The idea of perishing for want was the least of her fears. About midnight she
heard footsteps gently approaching the door; a glimmering light shone under it,
and displayed more fully the horror of her situation, all her courage was
summoned to her aid, and all her courage could scarce support her in this
extremity of danger. She had turned her back upon the dead body, as an object
too shocking to look at; and she now crept up in a corner of the room, on the
same side with the door, where she stood close, still hoping to escape from she
knew not what; but the love of life is so strongly implanted in our nature,
that when the ^larm of death comes, under whatsoever circumstances, we make the
last attempts to preserve it, however feeble they may be.

Thus she stood trembling, awaiting a fate which she every moment expected
would be decided, when the door gently opened, and two men entered; the one
carried a lantern, and the other a large board; and, as with astonished looks,
they advanced toward her; her heart died within her, she sunk down, and saw
and heard no more!

On recovering she found herself laid on a coarse bed, with an old woman
standing by her, whose looks testified satisfaction when she opened her eyes.
As soon as she could speak, she inquired "if she was still in Oakendale Abbey?"

"No," said the woman; "you are in my cottage, and I have been fearfully
frightened lest you were dead."

"Thank God," said Laura, "I am once more with a human being; and pray tell me
by what, or whose means I came here?"

"Lawkaday!" said the woman; "I knows no more than you do: Christian charity
made me take you in, when two men brought you here to be recovered. They
assured me you was not dead, and would be better in a short time; I was loath to
trust them, and now I Am afraid I shall get into trouble; for I thinks you be
the same Lady that has lived so long with the spirits in the Abbey."

"Whatever I am," said Laura, "I entreat you to tell me how far I am from that
hateful Abbey, and if there is a road leads to it from the little wood?"

"Aye, sure there is," said the woman, "and it is hard by. Laws! I don't wonder
you have been almost frightened to death, if you have been in that shocking
place; why, nobody before ever ventured to stay there."

Laura felt herself extremely weak, and begged the woman to give her some
water. She brought her other refreshments; and, after she was a little revived,
her thanks were most devoutly and abundantly offered to Providence, not only
for her preservation from danger, but also for enabling her to preserve her
senses under circumstances so truly frightful, and sufficiently calculated to
deprive her of them. She enjoined secrecy to the woman on the subject of her
having been in the Abbey, as well as of her having been now under her roof. She
felt her mind more easy on the woman's assuring her, she herself should be
afraid to have it known that she was there, because my Lord was a powerful rich
man; and yet she should never forgive herself to be the cause of sending a
fellow creature to the Abbey, which was not fit for christian folks to live in.

The morning was now far advanced, and Laura thought it would be best to wait
the return of the evening before she again attempted her escape. She likewise
found herself too much enfeebled, and too low, from the sufferings of her
spirits, to begin another enterprise till they were, in some degree, recruited;
she therefore composed herself, as well as her situation would admit of, till
the evening; although she by no means thought herself safe so near the Abbey,
and nothing but her inability would have prevented her from quitting the
cottage immediately. In the evening she found herself tolerably refreshed, and
her desire to escape, aiding her resolution, she rewarded the old woman; at the
same time entreating her to be secret, and, with amazing fortitude (considering
what she had suffered) set forward on her second expedition.

She saw the Abbey at a small distance on her left; and she was determined to
take such a direction, as to steer clear of again encountering so frightful an
abode.

Behold her then once more endeavoring to gain an asylum from tyrannic power
and supernatural terror. Truth and innocence guided her steps, and conscious
virtue shielded her from cowardice. The rays of the evening sun, shone upon her
beauty, and she followed the first path to her right, which led her along a
fine valley. The air revived her spirits; she walked very fast, without seeing
either village or house of any sort. The evening began to close in, and every
moment seemed to thicken the atmosphere. She feared she should be obliged to
some tree or hedge to shelter her from the approaching dews of the night; yet
she did not repent her enterprise; on the contrary, she was thankful that
fortune had thus favored her escape, and that she was in a country where she
had nothing to fear from wild beasts, and she could meet with nothing more
terrific than she had encountered the preceding night. With reflections like
these she continued her walk, and casting her eyes round to find some spreading
tree, or sheltering bush, under which to rest, she spied a few scattered
cottages almost concealed under the side of a hill; her speed redoubled, and
she soon found herself within sight of the hamlet. A girl, about twelve years
old, dressed in a coarse blue woollen jacket, without either shoes or
stockings, who walked at some distance before her, and a parcel of geese, which
came stretching their necks and hissing at her, were the only objects she saw.

The girl turned into a cottage, and Laura courageously followed her; an
elderly woman sat near the chimney carding some wool, and the cottage, though
clean, had every appearance of extreme poverty. The woman started at the
appearance of Laura, whose dress and deportment were superior to what she was
generally accustomed to see; and throwing aside her work, and dropping a
courtesy, she asked her "if she was come from the Grove, and what she was
pleased to want."

Laura, with a sweetness peculiar to herself, replied, "that she wanted nothing
but shelter for the night; and if she would have the goodness to allow her to
sit in that room till the next morning dawned, she would in no way incommode
her."

"Lawkaday!" said the woman, "you might sleep with our Mary-Ann for the matter
o'that; but if so be, as you have lost your friends, or missed your way you would
better go up to the Grove; old Madam has a power of money, and is main good to
strangers. When John comes home from work he will go and show you the way."

Laura thanked her, but said, "she had rather stay where she was, at least for
this night, and perhaps she might get them to show her the way to the Grove in
the morning."

During this time Mary-Ann had given the alarm to the little republic, and
several ragged children were gathered round the door. The good woman soon
dispersed them, and telling her daughter to bring in some firewood, she set
about making a cheerful blaze, which gave her cottage such an appearance of
comfort, as a more splendid apartment seldom exhibits: The cricket chirrups in
the hearth;
The crackling faggot flies.


Laura felt herself pleased, and safe, which brightened every object before
her; and she was contemplating the simplicity of the whole, when a
rough-looking, hard-featured man, who was the owner of the cottage, made his
appearance. His wife said to him, "Master, here is a gentlewoman comed to stay
all night with us; but I Would fain persuade her to go up to Madams."

John stared at Laura, but said nothing; when she ventured to ask him, how far
they were from Oakendale?

"Nine miles," said John; "and I would no go there at this time o'night for all
you could give me."

"Nor I neither," thought Laura to herself, surprised that she had walked so
far.

"No," said the wife, "that is a fearful place by all account; such frightful
sights ha been seen there, as makes a body shake but to think on; and bloody
murders ha been committed there formerly no doubt!"

If Laura was satisfied and pleased with her host and hostess, they were not
less so with her gentle manners and obliging behavior; and entertained no
suspicion to the disadvantage of their guest, whom they pressed to partake of
the best they had to produce; and she joyfully shared the coarse, but clean,
bed of Mary Ann.

The next morning, not knowing where to bend her course, and thinking she
should be more secure from Lord Oakendale's search, should he be disposed to
make any after her, under some safe protection, she listened to the advice of
the cottagers, and begged they would conduct her to the Grove, where resided
the good lady of whom they had spoken so highly, and whose name was Greville.
The Grove was situated about a mile from the cottage, and the towers of an
ancient structure peeped from between the lofty elms and oaks that encompassed
its structure, and gave it its name.

As they approached the mansion, Laura ruminated on the mode of introducing
herself to the lady of the house, and could devise no better than by declaring
the truth, and entreating her protection, which from the cottager's reports she
was encouraged to hope would not be denied her.

When they arrived at the house they were received by the housekeeper, a
comely looking woman, about fifty years of age, dressed in a plain old fashion
style, with a bunch of keys by her side. When Laura requested to be introduced
to Mrs. Greville, the housekeeper (...) who she was to name?

Laura blushed, and a tear started into her eyes upon the recollection that she
knew no name to which she had any just claim; and, with a sigh returned. "I
have been taught to believe that the name of Unfortunate will introduce me to
your lady, and secure me a favorable reception."

The housekeeper, glancing an eye of pity on her, led the way, and introduced
her to Mrs Greville, a venerable old lady, who, taking off her spectacles,
politely said, "I have not the honor of knowing you, young lady; but that, I
dare say, is owing to the defect of my sight and memory."

"Alas! no," replied Laura; but here her forlorn situation recurring to her
mind too forcibly to be suppressed, she again burst into tears. Perhaps this
was the best introduction she could have chosen, as a passport to the tender
heart of Mrs. Greville. She looked at Laura with the eyes of pity, and taking
her by the hand, said, in the kindest accents, "Sit down, young lady, and
compose yourself; you seem fatigued, and shall take some refreshment before you
gratify a curiosity, which is, I own, strongly excited, and be assured,
prejudiced in your favor.'

Saying this, she dismissed the housekeeper for some chocolate; and, in the
mean time, Laura so far recovered herself as to say, "Dear Madam, you see
before you a forlorn creature thrown upon the world, without country, friends,
or fortune, to protect me; not even a relation from whom I can claim either
name or affinity!"

"Then," said Mrs. Greville, "surely you are the more entitled to the
protection of strangers."

Laura thanked her by the most grateful acknowledgements; and, having drank her
chocolate, began the following history of herself:

"My infant remembrance," said she, "furnishes me with ideas of a country
different from this. A gentleman, caressing me, in scarlet clothes, with a sash
and gorget, and other glittering appendages, dazzled my young sight, and made
an impression on my memory like a distant dream. I can recollect a beautiful
woman snatching me to her arms when the gentleman was gone; and, as she kissed
me, the tears fell from her eyes in drops upon my frock. I remember too that I
was called Laura. The next circumstance that dwelt upon my recollection, was
that of sitting upon the lap of a black woman, who told me I should see my papa
and mama no more; that I must be very good, and she would love me. She taught
me my prayers, and the meaning of words; but she omited to tell me my name. She
treated me with great tenderness, and I conceived an affection for her. Soon
after she put me on board a ship with several people of my own color; and,
after hugging and embracing me with great affection, she left me. I cried after
her as the only being of whom I had any knowledge, and I could not easily be
reconciled to any other. The motion of the vessel first made me sick, and then
lolled me to sleep. When I awoke I cried again; but was soothed by some women
on board, and told that I was going to see my relations. I soon grew accustomed
to the ship, and to the people about me, although I was too young to understand
any of their conversation, or know whither we were going. As far as my early
age, and distance of time, would allow me to judge, we were some months at sea;
when one morning I was frightened by a confused noise, which was followed by a
continued firing of cannon. The whole ship's crew seemed in alarm, and I was
huddled with the rest of the women, into a dark part of the vessel, which I had
never seen before. Every one seemed terrified, and felt the contagion of fear,
though I knew not what we had to dread. In a short time a number of men, who
spoke in a different language to that I had been used to, and were almost
without clothes, rushed into the place where we were confined and began to drag
the women about, in whose screams and cries I joined: All appeared in
confusion, when two or three better dressed men came, and, speaking in a
commanding tone, there seemed to be more reregulation observed; but they did
not trouble themselves with me, except to shut me in with the rest.

"Previous to this ceremony, and upon hearing a shout, in what I afterward
knew to be the French language, one of the women took a sealed packet from a
trunk, which she said belonged to me, and with a string fastened it round my
body, telling me (for I shall remember her words) that was the only testimony
of my name and parentage; adding, that I must never let any body take it from
me. Her intention was no doubt good; but she would no doubt have done better to
have taught me my name, and so impressed it on my memory, that I might not now
have been the destitute and forlorn creature I feel myself; but I was then too
young to observe the omission.

"Soon after this we arrived, as I supposed, at our destined port, where we
were dragged out of the vessel, and put into wagons; when, after a tedious
journey of several days, during which I suffered cold and hunger to the
extreme; we were at length brought to a large city, which I heard was Paris. If
I was before wretched, though at that time I felt the sensation without knowing
by what name to describe it, how much was my misery increased when we were all
crammed into a French prison!

"On my first being taken out of the wagon, a tall frightful man, with a wide
mouth, held me in his arms, and made a motion as if he would eat me! I was
terrified, and cried; but no cries were regarded, and we were hurried into the
prison, which contained some hundreds of wretches like ourselves. My clothes
and linen were of a finer texture than those of my companions; I was therefore,
regardless of my cries, stripped, and clad in a very coarse and filthy garb. I
held the paper, which was tied round me, fast with my little hands; but I was
brutally forced to relinquish my hold, and it was wantonly torn from me. After
this I remembered nothing for many days; I turned my head this way, and that
way, to avoid the stench of the prison; but could in no direction find a
wholesome air. When I recovered, from what I suppose was a fever and delirium,
I found myself stretched upon a wretched bed with several others, and some of
the dead bodies were removing to their last abode. I understood none of the
language, and my first wish was for fresh air. As I was lying in this miserable
condition, a gentleman entered the room, whose countenance and appearance was
different from any I had seen before. He felt the pulse of some of them, and
spoke the language I understood. I wished to attract his notice, and my eyes
followed his countenance whithersoever it turned. At last he approached the bed
on which I was laid, and coming to the side of it, examined my features with
attention.

"I longed to speak to him; but I had scarce strength, and still less courage
to make such an effort; but when he took my burning emaciated hand in his I
ventured to clasp his fingers whilst the tears streamed from my eyes.

"He tenderly returned the pressure, saying, "Poor child, to whom do thou
belong? and what is thy name?"

"I faintly answered, Laura; and I am very sick. He gave me something which he
poured out of a bottle, and which seemed of a reviving quality; and when the
person, who attended the room three or four times a day, and locked us up, came
in, he conferred with him several minutes in the French language, frequently
pointing to me as he spoke.

"The next morning an old woman, whom I had before seen busy about the bodies
of those that died in the room, came and took me from the bed, washed me, and
put upon me some coarse but clean linen, led me out into the air, and gave me
some better refreshment than I had lately tasted. I was then put into a coach
in which sat the gentleman I had seen the day before. He spoke to me in the
kindest accents, and I endeavored to show my gratitude by a thousand childish
endeavors.

"When the coach stopped, I was led by my benefactor into a handsome room,
where sat a lady of a most benign countenance: "This my dear," said the
gentleman, leading me to her, "is the poor child of whom I spoke yesterday, and
whom you have so kindly consented to receive; she has been very ill and is weak
at present; but I am sure she has a greatful heart."

"I paid my respects to the lady in the best manner I was able; and she said,
"Poor thing, she shall be taken care of; and I think she looks like a
gentleman's child." I felt my heart glow with pleasure at this observation; and
I will confess, that it gave me more delight than all the caresses they
bestowed.

"In a few days I was still better habited; and I told my benefactors, whose
names were du Frene, all that I knew and could remember of my history. They had
no children, and they conceived a parental regard for me, which I returned by
the most filial affection. They were French; but he was of English extraction,
and both were Protestants. He had resided many years in Paris, where he
practiced surgery, and had been in high repute in that profession, and which he
now followed from motives of humanity rather than from lucrative ones, as he
was in very good circumstances.

"My dear Madame du Frene was the only mother I had ever known. She grew every
day more fond of me. She had me taught every necessary accomplishment, as well
as every useful employment; and the principles of religion and virtue, which
she practiced in their fullest extent, she instilled into my mind as the
brightest ornaments I could possess. -- Indeed, they appeared with such luster,
from her bright example, that I wanted no incitements to be at least an humble
imitator of her many virtues. Were I to dwell upon all her excellencies, my
story would not soon come to a conclusion. Nor had Mons. du Frene less merit; I
know not which of them showed me most fondness; and when I grew up, their
tender care of me, as a child, was changed into unremitting anxiety and
solicitude. When I was addressed by the appellation of Mademoiselle du Frene,
their eyes sparkled with pleasure; and this was often the case, for I knew no
other name; and after all the enquiries M. du Frene could make, concerning the
parcel which was fastened to my breast on my entrance into the prison, no
discovery could possibly be made relating to it; for which reason it was
natural to suppose that it contained something valuable -- besides the identy
of my birth and name, which alone we should have no difficulty in recovering.
-- Whenever I expressed uneasiness at the circumstances of not knowing to whom
I owed my being, with what enraptured fondness would these dear parents call me
their adopted child, and assure me that I should never feel the want of such
endearing ties! I hope I returned their affection by the most filial love and
duty; but youth is giddy, and we never know the value of a blessing till it is
no longer in our power to set a just estimate upon it. Ten years endeared me to
this kind protection, upon which I look back with delight. I learned to speak
the language fluently, though English was as much spoken in M. du Frene's
family as French. No expense was spared on my education, dress, or amusement,
and I moved in a circle far above the sphere of life in which M. du Frene was
placed; but it was their pride to have me introduced, and see me caressed by
people of rank; and M. du Frene was well received by these persons on account
of his extraordinary merit.

"It was in the midst of these happy days, when M. du Frene received letters
from his brother in England, who was in the same profession, apprising him of
the arrival of a young gentleman, of the name of Rayneer, who was sent to be
under his care, in order to be made a proficient in the language, and to
complete his education.

"I was in the habit of hearing fine things from the beaux who fluttered round
me in public places, and sometimes distinguished a man of sense and good
breeding from the empty coxcomb and the licentious rake; but none had made an
impression beyond the moment in which they addressed me, and my heart had never
as yet palpitated in favor of one man more than another; but the time was now
approaching when I could no longer make this boast. Eugene Rayneer arrived; his
figure, his voice, his manner, all were captivating in the extreme. He did not
live under the same roof with me; but he had lodgings near us, and there were
but few hours out of the twenty-four in which we were not together. Ah! how
dangerous it is to throw into each other's company two young people nearly of
an age, and between whose dispositions a similarity of sentiments cannot fail
to form attachment! -- What pleasant hours did we pass together! But I will
not, dear Madam, tire you with a repetition of our love, the remembrance of
which is painful because it is past. Suffice it to say, that we exchanged
mutual vows without considering the improbability there was of our ever being
united. He seemed to know but little of his family, and still less of his
fortune: but nature had been abundantly lavish of her favors, and his own
endeavors had not been wanting to render him a most accomplished young man. His
temper was generous and good, but rather inclined to be impetuous. My dear M.
du Frene used frequently to lament that he had not sufficient authority over
him to keep him from errors occasioned by this disposition.

"One day that we were at dinner M. du Frene was suddenly, and with an air of
mystery, called out. He instantly obeyed the summons, and did not return for
some time. I knew not what passed in the mind of Madame; but my own heart
foreboded a thousand fearful images during an hour's absence of M. du Frene, At
his return we both expressed curiosity at the face of anxiety* with which he
appeared: and, after a few moment's silence, he said, "That foolish boy Eugene,
has engaged in a disagreeable adventure, and has got an ugly wound in the
recontre."

"At the mention of a wound I felt my blood rush into my face, and a violent
beating of my heart succeeded. He went on by saying, "He hoped there was no
danger in the wound; but he understood it was the consequence of a challenge
given by Eugene to a person of consequence, who was likewise wounded, and whose
friends he feared would not easily be appeased." What terror did these words
convey to my already oppressed mind! Several days passed in this cruel
uncertainty. Madame du Frene frequently visited Eugene; but she always returned
with a melancholy countenance, and I had scarce ever courage to ask her any
questions.

"One day she returned with cheerful looks, and mine caught the pleasing
sympathy. She put out her hand to me, and said, "My dear Laura, I can now
congratulate you on the complete recovery of Eugene. At the same time I will
inform you, that you have been the cause of a wound which had nearly been fatal.

"How, my dear Madame," I replied, "can I have been the cause of such an
accident? and, if I have, how ought I to rejoice that the danger is over?"

"Sit down, my love," said Madame; "be composed, and I will tell you the whole.
Eugene was playing at billiards with the young marquis of --, only son of the
Duke de St. --. They had played several games, and the marquis, having been
successful, was very desirous that Eugene should win some of the games back
again; but Eugene wanted to be with you, he grew impatient, and uttering some
hasty words, the marquis replied, "Oh! you want to be with that little
Bourjeoise, the surgeon's daughter; ah! she is a tempting little creature; but
she may wait till our games are more evenly decided."

"Eugene heard no more. He instantly gave the challenge, and they as instantly
ran each other through the body. Both fell at the same moment, and would have
both died from loss of blood, had not one of the waiters fortunately discovered
them. It would be impossible to say which of their wounds was most dangerous.
The symptoms of the marquis were most favorable, because his mind was not so
agitated as Eugene's; nevertheless they were both extremely dangerous, and the
Duke of -- would have shown no favor to his son's antagonist had he lost him.
Thank God they are now in a fair way of recovery, and both have exchanged
forgiveness; and till this favorable event, M. du Frene and myself have
preserved a strange and unpleasant silence toward you; but, unless we could
give you more favorable accounts, we were determined to keep you in ignorance.
But now, that every thing is in so prosperous a train, we would have you
partake in the general joy."

"I thanked my dear Madame, by the most grateful acknowledgements, for all her
kindness; and my heart overflowed with praise and thaksgiving for my Eugene's
recovery. I longed to see him, but I had not courage to make the request.
Madame du Frene anticipated my wishes, and said, "There can, I think, be no
impropriety in your going with me to see Eugene; I know the sight of you will
complete his cure."

"I wanted no entreaty to pay a visit in which my heart was so much interested;
and I had the pleasure of finding Eugene perfectly well, except weakness. To me
he never looked or spoke in a more captivating manner. In a few days he walked
out; our interviews were more frequent than ever, and I foolishly thought that
all misfortune was comprehended in the illness of Eugene; and now, that he was
well and again restored to me, I had nothing but happiness before me. Alas! how
little do we know how fortune varies her favors, and dispenses a chequered
scene to most mortals. -- I could not divest myself of extreme partiality for
Eugene, and found a pleasure in his company, which I had never experienced from
the frivolity of a Frenchman; and when the most sensible remarks, and the
tenderest attentions, were received from a man whose external appearance
bespoke the nobler qualities of his mind, my heart gave the truest testimony to
his merits; nor did I affect to disown them to my dear Madame du Frene; to her
I had confided all my grief, and all my joy. She would allow me to expatiate on
the merits of my beloved Eugene with all the glow of affection which warmed my
breast; she loved me too tenderly to check the fond effusions which afforded me
so much delight; and when I fancied that I was possessed of his affections,
nothing I thought, could interrupt my happiness, or reverse my fortune: -- She
would only insinuate in the gentlest accents, and with the most persuasive
arguments, that I must not expect complete happiness; that all our lives were
liable to the caprice of fortune, and whose changes human nature was born to
encounter, and must submit. -- Perfect bliss was the lot of none, nor was even
a large portion of happiness possessed by many; she would therefore wish to
prepare my mind, and make it equal to meet the dispensations of all human
events, that so I might secure that peace, which the world can neither give nor
take away.

"Thus was I, by her dear precepts, in some degree fitted for those many
difficulties and dangers I have already encountered; and to her, next to God
Almighty, I am indebted for this fortitude which has hitherto sustained me."
But to return to my story.

"One morning Eugene showed me a letter he had received, which recalled him to
England. He said it came from a gentleman who was his guardian, and whom he was
bound to obey. There were some sentences in the letter, which were couched in
such terms as led us both to think, that when the writer talked of forming
improper connexions, by remaining too long in one place, he alluded to our
intimacy.

"Eugene at first declared he would not obey the mandate, and that he had long
enough submitted to the control and caprice of those whom he really believed
had no right to direct, or take any part in his conduct. As to myself, I was
totally incapable of giving advice; but there was no occasion; M. du Frene
decided for us. He also had received a letter on the same subject, and Eugene's
fate was determined. If ever there was a moment in which my love for M. du
Frene was abated, it was when he peremptorily told him he must not delay his
departure. I felt as if I had received a blow, which deprived me of all my
faculties; nor could all the assurances of Eugene's faith and everlasting love
reconcile me to the idea of losing him. I considered his departure as the
deprivation of all my happiness; nor could all the admonitions of Madame calm
my feelings. Indeed those dear parents lamented his loss almost as much as
myself; and when the day arrived on which he was to take his leave, I scarce
knew which of us were most concerned.

"M. du Frene pressed him to his heart, and conjured him never to forget
friends to whom he was so dear; and Madame said a thousand kind and
affectionate things to him. As to myself, I stood like the picture of despair;
and when Eugene pressed me to his bosom, I felt as if my whole existence was at
an end, and I could not articulate a sentence. Ah! too just was my presentiment
that we should never meet again. He promised to write, and (if possible) to
return; but never, from that sad hour, did we hear or see any more of him; and
from that time happiness seemed to have fled with my lost Eugene.

"M. du Frene was a politician. What grief did that circumstance occasion to
Madame! We used all our persuasions to keep him at home, and to take no part in
the broils which began to be very general; but it was to no purpose that we
urged him to be neuter; He was too much attached to his king to bear quietly
the disaffection which prevailed, and every where began to spread itself. All
our entreaties were used in vain; a whole year passed in this unpleasant state,
and no intelligence of Eugene arrived to sooth the tedious hours, rendered
still more irksome by M. du Frene's frequent quarrels and uneasiness, by the
melancholy which always pervaded his countenance, and the continual dread we
were under of some new calamity happening to the state.

"In this distressed condition we continued till the fatal tenth of August,
1792; that era of everlasting disgrace to the French nation, when Paris was
deluged in human gore. On that sad day M. du Frene had gone from home early in
the morning, and I had been vainly endeavoring to persuade Madame du Frene that
her fears were needless, when a loud knocking at the door, and a tumult, made
me venture to look through the window; when ah! how does my soul sicken at the
remembrance! I saw my ever dear, my more than parent's head, stuck upon a pike,
reeking and clotted with blood! I uttered a scream, and hid my eyes with my
hands; when Madame du Frene coming to my assistance, discovered the dreadful
object which had occasioned my terror! She gave a piercing scream, which,
methinks, now vibrates on my ear, and dropped senseless on the floor.

"Greatly as I was affected, I exerted myself to assist and recall her to life,
which it was some time before she showed any signs of. When she, in some
degree, recovered, she observed a profound silence upon the subject of the
horrible sight we had both of us but too plainly seen. Her sighs, indeed, were
deep and bitter; but it seemed as if she could not bear to name the shocking
circumstance which occasioned them, and to which she must have been witness. We
had scarce time to recollect ourselves, and my dear Madame du Frene showed but
little signs of animation, when some of our friends assembled at our house, and
earnestly entreated we would lose no time in making our escape, if we wished to
avoid the cruel fate which some of those dearest to us had experienced. We
neither of us seemed sufficiently interested to prolong our wretchedness, or
attend to their remonstrances, and we appeared rather to wish for death than to
avoid it; but our friends used such pressing solicitations, and begged so
earnestly, that we would leave Paris with them, that we began (though
reluctantly) to put up our valuables, and to prepare for our departure. Little
as I cared for life, or had any prospect to invite its continuance, yet the
name of England sounded with a sweet sensation. A thousand tender ideas were
associated with that country; and the fond remembrance of Eugene played round
my heart amidst the sorrows that encompassed me. I joined my endeavors to rouse
Madame du Frene from her lethargy of woe, and to fly whilst it was yet in our
power; and having succeeded, we left Paris that night, and traveled with as
much expedition as the French carriages could make, till we got to Boulogne,
where we found the town crowded with emigrants, waiting to cross the water.

"When the wind was fair, and the vessels were ready, we were hurried down to
the quay in such numbers, and put on board in so much confusion, that I was
unfortunately separated from my dear Madame du Frene, and put on board of a
merchantman.

"As soon as I found myself separated from her, I entreated, and offered
largely to the captain if he would set me on shore again; but he was deaf to
all my cries, and said he would not lose a moment. My misery was not to be
described! I found myself encompassed by strangers; and what was worse, I
understood we were to be set on shore on the Welsh coast.

"As to the fate of Madame du Frene, from that hour to this, I have remained in
total ignorance about it; and it has been an everlasting cause of sorrow to me!

"We landed in Milford Haven, at a place which appeared almost uninhabited; and
consisted only of an inn and a few houses. It might be considered as a bathing
place, but of little resort. I fixed my residence in a small lodging near the
sea, to which my eyes were incessantly turned, in the hope of seeing some
vessel which might bring Madame du Frene to the same spot.

"Most of the people who landed with me, dispersed to different parts of
England; but as I could think of no place to prefer to this, I thought it best,
for the present, to remain where I was. I was attended by a young woman of the
village, named Mary Morgan; she was neat, and well behaved; and I passed most
of my time in wandering with her on the beach. I wished to go to London, as the
most likely place to hear of Madame du Frene; but I was afraid to go there
alone, there not being in that vast metropolis one person with whom I could
claim acquaintance.

"It happened one evening that, as I was walking upon the beach with Mary, I
perceived myself observed by a good looking man, who appeared to be about forty
years of age, and who seemed to eye me with uncommon attention. There was
something in his person and manners, which not only attracted my notice, but
also my partiality. Our eyes met; and, as I was standing still on the beach, I
was not displeased at being accosted by him with some general observations upon
the place we were in, and the sea prospect, etc.

"The next day we met upon the same spot, when our conversation was again
renewed. We talked on various subjects, and he told me his name was Thoranby;
that he lived in London, and generally came every summer to some place of this
kind for the benefit of sea-bathing, and to be retired.

"Upon his saying that he lived in London, I imprudently replied, "That of all
places I wished to go there;" at the same time telling him that part of my
history which had separated me from my more than mother, and my ardent wish to
find her again.

"He seemed pleased with the affectionate duty I expressed; and, after paying
me some compliments on my extreme sensibility, he said, "He had a sister in
London, who would, he was sure, be happy to receive me; and would unite her
endeavors to mine in order to discover Madame du Frene." How did my heart
overflow with gratitude at this unexpected invitation! Young and unacquainted
as I was with the arts of men, I hastily accepted his offer; and, indeed, my
joy and impatience to begin my journey was too conspicuous to be concealed.
Accordingly it was agreed, that he should set out on the next day, in order to
prepare his sister for my arrival; and that in three days after I should follow
with Mary, who had agreed to accompany me to London.

"Nothing could exceed my eagerness and impatience for the arrival of the day
on which I was to set out; and I scarce gave myself time for proper rest, and
none at all for reflection. The hope of meeting my dear Madame du Frene,
together with that secret wish which still glowed in my bosom of hearing
something of Eugene, was cherished with such fond imagination, that I had
almost realized my wishes to a certainty; and when we entered London, my fancy
had formed so many fair ideas, by which I was wholly engrossed, that I hardly
attended to the astonished exclamations of poor Mary, at the sight of the
streets, number of people, carriages, etc. etc. which to me, who had lived so
long in Paris, was nothing extraordinary; but when the carriage drove up to a
very magnificent house in Portland Place, my heart felt an unusual oppression;
and, for the first time, suggested to me the impropriety of following to London
a person of whom I knew so little; however, reflections of this kind were now
too late. The chaise stopped; the bell was rung, and two footmen, in splendid
liveries, ushered me through the hall, up a stone staircase.

"My astonishment increased as I ascended the steps. Mr Thoranby had told me he
lived in a handsome house in London; but I had no idea it was so superb, still
less that his sister lived in this elegant style. I fancied there must have
been some mistake, and a variety of reflections rushed with rapidity upon my
mind, and a thousand forebodings, of I knew not what, agitated me so much, that
I fancied I did not hear distinctly whom the servant addressed.

"Mr Thoranby (who then made his appearance) by the appellation of "my Lord;"
but when he approached to receive me, with a malignant smile of exultation, my
heart died within me, and I faintly exclaimed, "I am betrayed."

"It was in vain that his lordship endeavored to sooth me, after having
acknowledged that he had deceived me respecting his having a sister, as well as
his name and rank. I at once saw my ruined situation; and I exclaimed on the
cruelty of his conduct, demanding immediate release. He pleaded the most ardent
love, protesting that he could not live without me. Finding me deaf to his
vows, and resolute in my determination, this wretched Lord Oakendale confessed
to me that he was a married man!

"Yes, my dear Laura," says he, "you should pity rather than condemn a man who
is united to a woman for whom he can conceive nothing but aversion, and who is
in no respect calculated for domestic happiness, whilst his heart is enraptured
by your virtues, and absolutely devoted to your service; nothing but this prior
(...) should prevent me from instantly offering (...) at the altar. Let me,
therefore, lovliest of women! secure to you any other contract which shall be
equally binding, and a most sacred promise to marry you the very moment it is
in my power."

"I had scarce patience to hear him to the end -- "Marry me! (I replied) is it
possible that your vanity can suggest such an idea? Did you bring me here to
dazzle me with your splendour, as a means to gain me to your purpose? When I
first became acquainted with you, it was your age which secured my confidence;
and now that I find you are such a depraved character -- " I was proceeding;
but I found I had touched a string the most discordant to his ear, that of his
age.

"Peace, madam," said he; "nor dare to insult me thus. Age, indeed! know, silly
girl, that you are in my power; and if you provoke that power; I warn you to
take the consequence." With these words he hastily quitted the room, leaving me
to reflect upon my distressed situation, with the additional torment of
self-accusation for having brought myself into his power.

"During two whole days I saw nothing of his lordship, though I learned from
Mary (who was still allowed to attend me) that he was in the house, and that
all the servants had orders to obey me in every thing, except assisting me to
leave it. She likewise informed me, that lady Oakendale was no further from
London than Hampstead. Various were my conjectures upon his conduct. Sometimes
I thought he would relent, and give me my liberty; at others, that he was only
meditating further mischief. I had no hope of making my escape; for the rooms I
was allowed to occupy were not in the front of the house, and only looked into
a close paved court, from whence I could not possibly get out, were I to
attempt the windows. My mind was harrassed by sleepless nights and continual
fatigue.

"On the third morning Lord Oakendale entered the apartment; he showed some
degree of compassion at my pale and altered looks; and then said, "You have
foolishly rejected all my offers; but surely that must proceed from a hasty
judgment, and because you have not well considered them. However as I cannot
bring myself to part with you entirely, I have thought of a plan which will
give you an opportunity of considering my offers more deliberately; and let me
add, with lose haughtiness. I mean to send you down to an old Abbey in
Cumberland, with Mary to accompany you, or any other of my domestics whom you
may prefer. It is true, you will be but ill accommodated; but for that you may
thank your own obstinacy, and you will there have leisure to consider my
proposals with the attention they deserve."

"The idea of an Abbey made me shudder; but when I considered I should be
released from my present prison, and that he said not a word of going with me,
I thought it most prudent to dissemble; I therefore told him, in a milder tone
than I had spoken before, that I was ready to follow whithersoever my destiny
should lead me; that I chose Mary for my companion, and that I would consider
of what he had said with more moderation. A smile of approbation sat upon his
countenance as I uttered the last sentence. He took me tenderly by the hand,
and said, "Then I will instantly order the carriage to be got ready:" and
having assured him it should not wait for me, he quitted me to give the
necessary orders.

"The moment he was gone, a gleam of satisfaction overspread my mind at the
idea of leaving that detested house. At the same moment a transitory regret
occurred at the thoughts of leaving London; that London, to which I had
hastened with such rapidity, and which probably contained all that was most
dear to me; yet, to gain, in some degree, my liberty, and to leave Lord
Oakendale was my first object; and I resolved to make no more hasty
determinations; nor even attempt to make my escape without a great deal of
deliberation and circumspection. Mary consented to accompany me; but it was
evidently with reluctance. The splendour of Lord Oakendale's establishment had
attracted her admiration, and she wished to stay longer and see more; but she
was a foolish uninformed creature, and on that score I excused her; and
thinking she was a more trusty companion than any Lord Oakendale could furnish
me with, I pressed her to accompany me; at the same time giving her some money
for the services she had already done me, and in order to secure her future
fidelity; we therefore stepped into the carriage, which I found was loaded with
provisions, that we might have no occasion to stop, except for change of
horses. We were attended by two servants on horseback, and such precautions
taken, that it would have been in vain to have meditated an escape. How
ardently did I wish to be attacked by robbers, as the only means I could
foresee of gaining my liberty; but no such good fortune happening, we, after a
fatiguing journey, arrived at Oakendale Abbey." -- And here Laura continued to
relate all the terrors she had experienced in that place, as well as the manner
of her escaping; not omitting to inform Mrs. Greville the circumstance of her
finding the letter case she had given to Eugene.

When she had finished her story, Mrs Greville said, "Indeed, my dear young
lady, your story is replete with uncommon circumstances of distress; and I am
as much interested by it, as I am surprised and entertained. If your appearance
prejudiced me in your favor, your uncommon sufferings and merit entitle you to
my regard and protection, which you may be assured of possessing as long as you
are disposed to continue under my roof.

"I have (continued the good lady) a nephew, who is married to a very amiable
woman; his name is Sir George Orland, and they pass great part of the year with
me; you will, I am sure, like each other, and if you pay them a visit in
London, they will protect you from the attempts of Lord Oakendale as well as
assist your inquiries concerning those so deservedly dear to you."

Laura could not find words sufficient to thank Mrs. Greville for her extreme
kindness; and, having exhausted the effusions of her grateful heart, she began
asking Mrs. Greville some questions as to what she knew, or had ever heard,
relating to Oakendale-Abbey.

"Why," returned Mrs. Greville, "when you named Oakendale-Abbey, as having
resided there, I confess I shuddered at the idea; nevertheless I would not have
you suppose that I believe in any of the idle reports current in the
neighborhood; for they are carried to a degree of absurdity and superstition
beyond all credit. When they tell you of men and women being seen carrying
their heads in their hands, and of monstrous eyes looking through the windows
flaming with fire, one is more inclined to laugh at such idle tales than to be
alarmed by them. But I must own I have long suspected there was some mystery to
be unfolded at the Abbey; but of what nature I cannot even guess. The
surprising things you witnessed there confirms this belief, and I wish it were
seriously investigated.

"It is now many years since I saw the inside of the Abbey; and it was by no
means a fit residence for the fair inhabitant whom I went to visit; it must be
now infinitely worse, and a frightful place to send a young person to! I only
wonder how you could support yourself under such circumstances; and it is like
the rest of Lord Oakendale's conduct."

"My dear Madam," said Laura, "I understand the Abbey had not been inhabited
since the memory of any person now living; who then could you go there to
visit?"

"Indeed," replied Mrs. Greville, "I ought to explain myself; for what I said
must seem as mysterious as any of the stories which are related. I went to see
a picture of the present Lord's mother, which, upon some family feuds, was sent
down to this Abbey as a punishment, or rather mortification, to the person it
represented. He was allowed to be an uncommonly and well finished picture, and
was done by an Italian master; and the sweetness of the countenance exceeded
any I ever saw, except that I am now beholding!"

Laura bowed her thanks for the compliment, and asked Mrs. Greville "if the
picture did not hand in a room which she described; and if it was not in the
Vandyke taste?"

Mrs. Greville replied, "that it was, and was a beautiful full length portrait."

"Yes," said Laura, "it was in that room that I discovered the letter-case; and
I can never be persuaded but Eugene must have been in that apartment; for I
think (she added, with a sigh) he would not have parted with it to any one
else."

"That is, indeed," said Mrs. Greville, "a very extraordinary circumstance, and
which time only can discover, and will, I have no doubt; for depend upon it, my
dear, you will live to see the clouds disperse, which at present seem to hang
over you; and you will one day meet with the reward your merit deserves. -- In
the meanwhile make yourself easy under my protection; and wait with patience
the will of that all wise disposer of events, who never deserted the innocent,
and who is a Father to the fatherless."

Laura said she had every reason to be grateful to Providence, who had, in so
many instances, shown a manifest interposition in her favor, and never more
than by placing her under the protection where she now felt herself so happily
situated; and in which secure asylum we will, for the present, leave her, and
return to give some account of Lord Oakendale, who on arriving at the Abbey,
and finding Laura had escaped, became outrageous, and almost frantic with
disappointment.

Mary was interrogated with violence and suspicion, as an accomplice in the
plan; but she declared her innocence with so much simplicity, that his
lordship's anger at length gave way to belief, and he consented to her
entreaties of being sent back again into Wales.

His disappointment added fresh fuel to his passion and his resentment; for he
vowed vengeance on the poor devoted Laura, should he ever get her again into
his hands, of which he entertained but little doubt; knowing that without
either horse or carriage, or any one to assist her, she could not have escaped
far from the village; and that, by bribes and promises, he should very soon
have her again in his power. He determined to sleep that night at the Abbey, in
the same bed which had been occupied by Laura and Mary. Another was fitted up
in an adjoining room for his servant.

It was the first time in his life he had ever been in the Abbey. He thought it
horrible and gloomy; and he would have felt some compassion for Laura, for
having been consigned to such a place, had not her recent flight steeled his
heart with resentment, and shut every avenue to pity.

The idea of supernatural appearances had never, since he was a child,
disturbed his imagination; he therefore, divested of all fear, composed himself
to take a refreshing portion of sleep, in order to be the better enabled to
make a more vigilant pursuit after Laura the next day. He had not, however,
been in bed two hours before he was very much surprised by a foot-step, and a
low murmuring voice, which apeared to be not far distant. He called his servant.

The poor man readily obeyed the summons, for he had been equally alarmed. He
entered the room pale and trembling, and was going to relate his fears; but
Lord Oakendale felt his valor return, and being ashamed to confess his fright
to his servant, he only said there were rats in the house; talked loud,
blustered, and ordered his servant to return to his bed.

In about an hour the steps and the voice were heard again. The idea that Laura
was concealed in some part of the Abbey occuring to his mind, he hastily called
up his servant, and ordering him to bring lights, he prepared himself to search
the Abbey. The man having heard the report of its being haunted, and being
already very much alarmed at what had passed, was not quite so willing to enter
into such service, and endeavored to persuade his Lord to wait for the
morning; but this suggestion only stimulated Lord Oakendale to begin the
search, having worked up his mind to the firm opinion that he should find
Laura. They each took a light, and proceeded through all the apartments; Lord
Oakendale with his sword drawn in his hand, swearing to murder the first person
he found, if they should endeavor to screen Laura from his possession. He
likewise exhorted his servant to be courageous, and to follow his example.

The man stood greatly in need of the exhortations; for as he tremblingly led
the way, and carried the lights, he expected to lose his senses by the sight of
some tremendous apparition; and when Lord Oakendale opened the rusty locks and
creaking doors, he thought his heart would have died within him.

When they approached the room, in which was the trunk and skeleton, Lord
Oakendale made a stop. -- The gloominess of its appearance, rendered doubly so
by the still dark hour of the night, had a momentary effect upon his
resolution; but he resumed his courage, and surveyed the room. The servant
trembled, and scarcely lifted up his eyes. They approached the trunk wherein
the skeleton was deposited. Lord Oakendale ordered his servant to lift up the
lid; and the light had no sooner glanced upon the ghastly figure, than the man,
dropping the lid from his hand, exclaimed, "God preserve us! here is a dead
man, bigger than a giant, with saucer eyes, and huge limbs!"

"Ridiculous!" exclaimed his Lord, at the same moment examining it himself,
though not without feeling a chill at this relic of mortality; and he was for a
moment undetermined whether or not to proceed, when the idea of Laura again
renewed his courage, and he advanced to the cloister, and following the light
carried by the terrified servant, arrived at the partition, which presented
neither a door, or any means of opening it, whatsoever.

This circumstance strongly excited his curiosity, and this aided by
disappointment, brought him to a desperate pitch of resolution; and observing
the boards were but thin, he set his whole force against them, and, with a
terrible crash, they all at once gave way. A confused rumbling noise assailed
his ears; but how were all his senses stiffened with horror at the sight of a
human body, apparently dead, but sitting upright in a coffin!

Lord Oakendale started at the sight; the sword dropped from his hand, and he
stood petrified with terror and amazement. The servant had fallen down, and
nearly extinguished the light; and as Lord Oakendale stooped down to preserve
it, he fancied a cold hand grasped him. His trembling legs scarce supported him
from this scene of terror! The servant was nearly deprived of his senses. His
master assisted him to rise, and hastily turning toward the cloister, they
made the best of their way through the apartments they had before so minutely
examined, rushed out of the Abbey, and alarmed the village!

The clock struck four, and some of the peasants were already rising to their
work: and seeing his Lordship, as they supposed, making his escape from the
Abbey, they, concluding he had seen something to terrify and alarm him,
gathered round, with a hope of being gratified by some marvelous adventure; but
his Lordship was in no humor to relate wonders. He ordered horses to the
carriage, and getting into it, bestowed something like a curse upon Laura, the
Abbey, and all the infernal spirits that inhabited it.

In this disposition he pursued his way to London. Various were his conjectures
during his journey; and he could form his ideas into no system of probability
as to the strange and unaccountable sights he had beheld at the Abbey. He
resolved, indeed, to have them thoroughly investigated on some future occasion;
but he never intended again to encounter them himself. He suffered great
uneasiness on account of Laura. He sound he loved her with sincere affection.
Her idea dwelt upon his heart with more uneasy sensations than he had ever
before experienced, although his love for her was neither founded upon esteem
or delicacy. But he was a mere sensualist; yet a something of tender anxiety
was combined with his passion for her. "Where could she be, and to what evils
and sufferings might she be exposed?" These were intruding questions that
forced themselves with compassionate tenderness, upon a heart but little alive
to the softer feelings of humanity. In this state we will therefore leave him
for the present, in order to give our readers an account of some other
personages who have as yet appeared but in the back ground of the history.

Lady Oakendale, of whom we have said that she was the only daughter of Lord
Westhaven, and that her immense fortune was the only inducement Lord Oakendale
had for making her his wife, was, as has been before related, by no means
calculated to sooth the brow of care, by which her Lord was now oppress^^ (...)
the contrary, they had conceived an aversion bordering upon hatred for each
other. But, in order to elucidate her history, we must go back to a very early
period of her life. She was an only child, and had lost her mother when she was
very young; and from that circumstance might date all her misfortunes, as she
was consigned to the care of a governess, and other mercenary dependants, whose
chief object was to inculcate in her the idea of her own consequence, by
continually reminding her of her great fortune she would in future possess, as
well as the high rank she held in life.

After being taught the various accomplishments necessary for her situation, in
so superficial a manner, that they could neither be an entertainment to others,
nor any resource to herself, she sound a void in her mind, which she would
sometimes endeavor to fill up by attempts at fancy-work, of some ingenious
device peculiar to the sex; but on these occasions she was always informed,
that such employments were by no means fit for her to engage in; and that there
were people sufficient who would be glad to do such little services for the
gratuity which she had it so amply in her power to bestow.

Thus was her mind (perhaps naturally good) withdrawn from every source of
instruction or amusement, and left to the idle workings of phantastic conceits,
which will always, if not subdued by rational amusements, lead to an indolent
lassitude, totally destructive of every moral and social virtue.

As soon as she was of an age to appear at her father's table, and be
indroduced by some of his acquaintance to public places, her whole mornings
were spent in trying on various caps, and other dresses; consulting her glass,
and assorting her ribbands and feathers to her complexion, and the color of her
hair. Her person was neither handsome or otherwise; her skin was fair, but her
features were irregular and wanted animation; and she had acquired an air of
hauteur, which, being unaccompanied by grace, bordered upon ill-humor.

Lord Westhaven, after the death of his wife, grew fond of drinking, and
engaged in a dissipated way of life, neither consistent with his age or
station. He loved his daughter, as something very nearly allied to himself; but
he took no pains to regulate her conduct, or to improve her understanding. He
frequently brought men home to dinner, whose free conversation was neither
suppressed by her presence, nor regulated by propriety; and from these she
heard toasts and sentiments by no means proper for her contemplation; which
gave her a bold assurance, but little consistent with the delicacy of the
feminine character.

She was known to have an immense fortune, and of course was addressed by every
man who wished to advance his own.

An officer in the guards, of the name of Vincent, was the most assiduous in
his attentions to her; and, indeed, for a time, kept all the rest at a
distance. He had an uncommon fine person, and was sufficiently well skilled in
the science of fashion and flattery to render himself agreeable. He studied her
disposition with the nicest attention; and, being well aware that her father
designed her for a man of rank, having no pretensions of that nature at that
time, he was resolved to supplant those that had; he therefore thought he had
only to secure her affections as the prelude to the possession of her fortune.

She loved Vincent as a girl of her education and disposition would naturally
do, who was captivated by his person, and pleased with his attentions. But she
knew he could not introduce her into the rank in life her ambition led her to
suppose she must fill, and she could not endure the sound of plain Mrs Vincent;
yet the idea of a tender lover, encouraged in secret, and met by stratagem,
enraptured her imagination, and was so consonant to her wishes, that what she
first admitted as a charming amusement for her leisure hours, became a serious
consideration, and in the end, a source of increasing misery.

It happened about this time that the Earl of Oakendale was introduced to her
by her father; and, after a few interviews, she was told to consider him as her
lover and destined husband.

Lord Oakendale was a man whom Miss Rainsford might have liked, had not her
heart been devoted to Vincent; yet the idea of being a Countess, with all the
flattering appendages of a title, gave a preponderancy to the scale of
grandeur, and made her accept of Lord Oakendale's proposals, and her father's
commands, without any seeming reluctance.

Meantime Vincent could not bear to lose the golden prize, and have the
mortification to behold, what he had thought so well secured to himself, given
to another. Thus fired with jealousy, and disappointed in his ambitious views,
he meditated mischief and revenge. First he thought to induce her to consent to
a clandestine marriage; but the idea that, in case of high resentment from her
father, she might, instead of a large portion, not bring him a shilling, proved
a too weighty consequence, and he durst not risque such a chance.

The next suggestion wore a more feasible aspect. Miss Rainsford loved him
passionately, though he believed she loved title and splendour better; the only
way then to supplant his rival, and secure his interest, was to make a marriage
with him necessary to save her reputation. There were tender moments, in which
Miss Rainsford's prudence might yield to love, and probable consequences might
bring even the Earl to solicit a marriage, to which, under no other
circumstances, he would have consented.

Having concerted this plan; not indeed the most honorable one, but such as
might well be expected from the nature of the parties concerned, he studied, at
the next private interview, the most insinuating address, and the most pathetic
complaints. He knew the exact state of Miss Rainsford's heart, and upon what
principle all her sentiments were guided. He lamented, in terms of despair, his
cruel and unmerited fate; he declared his love was founded upon the noblest
basis, that of affection for her alone; whilst Lord Oakendale's was merely for
her fortune, without the smallest particle of passion for that enchanting
person, which was the sole object of his adoration; yet such was his regard,
such his self-denial, that he would renounce all hope, and yield her to his
hated rival; whilst he tore himself away, never more to behold her, and sought,
in the field of battle, that death which alone could release him from the
misery of his present sufferings.

This was a language too persuasive, and too powerful, for the tender feelings
of Miss Rainsford. Charmed with such flattering delusions she could refuse
nothing to so fond and tender a lover; her melting heart acknowledged all his
influence, and she became his mistress. For awhile the stolen enjoyments became
sweeter by repetition; but what were the mortifying reflection she underwent,
when a short time showed the effects of their illicit connection.

This was the boundary of Vincent's wishes, and he concluded his fortune made;
yet such was the strange and unnatural disposition of Miss Rainsford, whether
ambition got the better of all softer ties, or from whatever cause her mind was
influenced, she no sooner discovered her situation than she conceived a mortal
aversion to the author of her disgrace; and, contrary to all his expectations,
and to his utter astonishment, she gave every encouragement to the match with
Lord Oakendale. Struck with aversion and disgust to the woman, who could be
capable of acting so contrary to delicacy and every feminine virtue, his heart
recoiled at the idea of a marriage with her, and he secretly triumphed in the
disgrace of his rival.

Meantime some embarrassing circumstances occured relating to the settlements
of estates, and necessarily delayed the match, which Miss Rainsford could not,
with propriety, hasten. Her situation, therefore, was become truly dreadful;
and before the completion of the settlements, she found herself four months
advanced in her pregnancy, by the man whom she had sacrificed to her ambition;
and which ambition still urged her to complete the sacrifice by giving her hand
at the altar to Lord Oakendale. The consequence of this marriage has before
been described.

Driven to the last extremity, within two months of her time, every day making
it more difficult to conceal her situation, and finding it impossible, from the
date of her marriage to impose the fruit of her guilt upon her Lord, she had
recourse to the counsel and opinion of a confidante -- the woman who had been
her favored attendant from her youth, and to whose pernicious flattery, and
improper advice, she, in some degree owed her ruin!

This woman's name was Marcel; she was a native of France, and had improved the
deceit and hypocrisy of that country by the lowest vices of this; she seemed,
however the proper friend, upon this trying emergency. After lady Oakendale had
bribed her to secrecy, she entrusted her with the whole history of her amor;
and, having consulted upon the wisest and most prudent methods, she suggested
that of retiring into the country, under the pretense of ill health, where she
would remain till after her delivery; and this was the more easy to put in
practice from the little attention Lord Oakendale had ever shown to his lady
since their marriage; for he seemed never in the smallest degree, interested
about any thing she did, or ever paid the least regard to her health, or any
thing that concerned her. Thus was she at full liberty to pursue her own plan
and inclinations.

Every thing therefore was arranged, and she went to a retired village in
Buckinghamshire; where, passing for the widow of an officer, she was delivered
of a son in the presence of only the accoucheur, and her faithful confidante.

The former had been engaged to secrecy upon his honor, for he was above taking
a larger bribe than his see; and Marcel was to provide a proper nurse, and
entirely undertake the charge of the infant.

The gentleman employed upon this occasion was by nature humane, and from
principle generous. Without prying into the reasons which made secrecy
necessary, he always wished to witness the effusions of natural affection from
the mother to her offspring, under whatsoever circumstances it might be
produced; he therefore took the smiling babe to the sight of lady Oakendale, in
the hope that its helpless innocence might plead for maternal protection. But
no sooner had she cast her eyes upon the unfortunate object of her disgrace,
than she gave a shriek of abhorrence, and begged he would take the odious brat
from her sight!

Shocked at her inhuman exclamation, he tenderly wrapped up the infant, saying,
"Poor child! this unnatural behavior will lead me to discover the mystery of
thy birth; and amply shall thy unfeeling mother provide for thy necessities."

He proved his words; for he made such enquiries as satisfied his curiosity,
and justified he measures he took to see that the child was properly nursed;
and during its infancy and afterward, he repeatedly obtained large sums from
lady Oakendale for its education; for he made no scruple to inform her ladyship
that he knew the whole secret, which he threatened to expose and discover,
unless she acquiesced in his demands. In reality he could only guess at the
transaction; but as her allowance for pin-money was very ample, and he had
taken an uncommon fancy to the child, as it advanced in years, he took the
entire charge of him, and chose that the boy's education should be upon the
most liberal plan.

Nothing was omitted that could improve his capacity, and give him every
advantage; and he had attained the age of twenty years, adorned with every
grace and accomplishment, which elegance of person and a natural understanding,
enlarged by the highest cultivation, could bestow, without ever experiencing
one glance of parental favor.

There was no part of his life, in which he had been led to suppose himself the
son of this humane guardian of his youth.

After repeated interrogatories to gain the knowledge, to whom he owed his
being, Mr. F -- informed him; that he was really ignorant of the name of his
father, but he knew his mother, and that some time or other he should be
introduced to her. This time was now approaching. Mr F -- was brother to
Monsieur du Frene, to whom he had sent Eugene, in order to make a proficiency
in the French language; and likewise to gain that polish so necessary for a
finished character, and to which the easy manners of the French nation
generally contributed.

The duel, in which he had so unfortunately engaged, together with the tender
attachment he had formed with Laura, were improprieties of a sufficient
magnitude for Mr. F -- to recall him to England; and to take care that none of
the many letters, in which he vowed eternal constancy to Laura should ever be
forwarded from England. If, in this instance, Mr. F -- should be blamed for
duplicity and unjust dealing, it must be allowed in his favor, that he
considered Eugene as a pledge of honor, for whose conduct he must one day be
accountable. He had stolen him from his nurse at a very early age, and secreted
him from lady Oakendale and Marcel, in order to restore him as a polished gem
when the time arrived, that his virtues should be rendered conspicuous.

Had Eugene fallen in love with any other than an adopted child of his
brother's, he would have let the progress of their attachment taken its course;
as it was, his conscience would not allow of Eugene's forming a connection,
which he considered far beneath his birth, until he had been properly
acknowledged by those to whom he was united by the dearest ties.

Lady Oakendale, from the hour of her marriage, had never experienced a moment
of felicity, except that which she derived from a round of dissipation, and
moving in the vortex of fashion. Her Lord never cared for her. The fortune she
had brought him was the only inducement he ever had for making her his wife;
and neither of them had endeavored to render the marriage state happy, by any
attempts to please the other.

Lady Oakendale had, soon after her marriage, the mortification to hear that
Captain Vincent had succeeded to a title and estate, by the unexpected death of
a distant relation. He was now Edward Lord Vincent of Vincent Castle, in the
kingdom of Ireland. He had been twice married; but had no children by either of
his wives, and the title and estate at his death would descend to a very
distant branch, if he left no heir; but he had a power of appointing a
successor to his estate, though not to his title.

The fruit of his intrigue with lady Oakendale often occured to his
remembrance. He had never made any inquiries of her ladyship concerning it; and
she, on account of her having the secret profoundly observed, had carefully
kept him from every information concerning the event. Lord Vincent, now wishing
more than ever to know if he was a father, and feeling the necessity of
appointing an heir to his vast fortune, caused an indirect application to be
made to her ladyship concerning his offspring, and to know if it now existed.

Alarmed at this unexpected demand, and terrified left the secret should be
discovered, she instantly sent for Mr. F --, desiring him to conceal, as far as
possible, the son she knew he had taken under his care, as it was now become a
matter of the utmost importance to her, that his birth should be buried in
oblivion; and as she had assured Lord Vincent that the child had died in its
infancy, it became necessary to engage Mr. F -- to corroborate the falsehood.

Having, therefore, explained her motives, Mr. F -- found this was the moment
of discovery for which he had so long wished and was likely to be fortunate for
his young favorite; he therefore determined to dissemble and acquiesce in her
demands till he had gained the wished for intelligence; he therefore told her
ladyship, that it entirely depended upon herself to secure his confidence, by
informing him, without reserve, who was the real father of that son, whose
future concealment alone depended upon a true information.

She at first resolutely refused to make the discovery; he knowing it would be
in vain to entreat, or to urge any plea of the injustice she was doing her son,
or to address her tender feelings, he only peremptorily insisted upon knowing
the truth, as the only terms upon which he would keep the secret.

After a very long and obstinate resistance, and making the future concealment
of her son the condition of her confession, she informed him, that Lord Vincent
was his father.

Mr. F -- was elated with pleasure at the prospect of seeing the noble youth,
the darling of his hopes, so happily placed; and, instead of venturing to let
him remain where he then was, in another kingdom, he immediately sent for him
home, determined to keep him under his own eye till the time arrived when he
should introduce him to his father, lest the machinations of lady Oakendale
might frustrate his design. Nor were these apprehensions needless; for her
ladyship, having informed her faithful confidante of the result of Mr. F -- 's
business, this artful woman instantly foresaw the consequences, and begged her
ladyship, as she valued her reputation and peace of mind, to counteract the
designs of Mr. F --; which she thought might easily be contrived, by demanding
to have an interview with her son, in which Mr. F -- might be present when her
ladyship should affect so much fondness for her son, that Mr. F -- might be so
effectually deceived, that he would be induced to entrust him to her care;
after which she would engage to have him concealed.

Meantime Mr. F -- recalled Eugene from France, and it seemed now a proper time
to introduce him to his mother. In consequence of this plan, so coincident with
theirs, and so well calculated to facilitate the designs of Marcel, Eugene was
accordingly introduced to his mother in the presence of Mr. F --; who, partial,
in the highest degree, to the young man, could not suppose, but when a mother
beheld the offspring of her fondest love in the person of one of the finest
figures nature ever formed, and animated by the most interesting countenance
that could adorn the human frame, her heart would undergo a change of
sentiment, and a thousand tender nameless sensations would betray the feelings
of a mother. Nor was he quite mistaken. Lady Oakendale, depraved as she was,
could not behold the captivating figure and manly beauty of his features,
softened to a tenderness of expression at being in the presence of a parent,
without emotions to which she had before been a stranger; and when he threw
himself at her feet, with the most affectionate duty, a tear stole down her
cheek; and, pressing him to her bosom, she had no occasion to have recourse to
dissimulation to impress the maternal embrace.

Her trembling voice could scarce articulate a sentence, and she would have
continued holding him to her heart, till the callous texture had been softened
to the most virtuous sensibility, had she not been recalled to recollection by
the interposition of Marcel; who, observing the soft sensations which the sight
of her son had inspired, reminded her of the dangerous consequences that might
attend her giving way to them; and lady Oakendale instantly resumed her
composure, and steadily preserved her purpose.

Mr. F -- saw that she had been seriously affected, and the sight gave him
infinite satisfaction; but he could not entirely rely upon a character like
here is, and happily suspecting that she was, in some degree, acting a part, he
would not therefore be persuaded to leave Eugene with her; but promising she
should soon be indulged with another interview, he took him away, and lost no
time in preparing his mind to expect the embraces of a father also, though he
did not yet think proper to inform him who he was.

Lord Vincent was now in Ireland, and Mr. F -- impatiently waited his return to
England, when he would restore him a son every way worthy the honors of his
house and name; and from whom he expected Eugene would meet with a more sincere
reception than he had received from his mother. He was at the same time
particularly cautious to conceal Eugene, as much as possible from the knowledge
of lady Oakendale, till the time came when he should be safe under the
protection of Lord Vincent.

The lively disposition of Eugene could but ill brook the restraints imposed
upon him by Mr. F --, and could not conceive any danger should arise from his
going whithersoever his fancy led him.

He had one night been at Ranelagh, in order to amuse his mind, which became
oppressed in the extreme, on account of never hearing any thing of his beloved
Laura. He had written letter after letter, fraught with the tenderest
expressions of regard, and everlasting constancy, all of which were intercepted
by Mr. F --, for the reasons heretofore mentioned.

The horrid accounts every day received from Paris, filled his mind with the
most cruel apprehensions; and, although he tried to divert his fears from so
melancholy a subject, by frequently running to places of public resort; yet he
always returned with a double portion of wretchedness, as they only recalled
back the remembrance of similar scenes past with his beloved Laura.

When he returned from Ranelagh the above mentioned evening, he was unhappy
more than usual. He told Mr. F -- he had been in company with a gentleman who
had given him so charming a description of the Lakes in Westmoreland and
Cumberland, that if any thing could remove his melancholy, and divert his
imagination, it would be a visit to those celebrated Lakes, and to rambling
about that romantic and delightful country. Mr. F -- thinking he might in such
an excursion, be more out of the reach and power of lady Oakendale, than he was
by staying in London, thought it best to make no opposition to his request; and
Eugene, therefore, obtained leave to make a tour to the nothern part of
England, where, he said, he should find some young friends, with whom he had
formed an intimacy at school. Mr. F -- could not refuse so reasonable a
request, and imprudently suffered him to depart without any attendant.

Having promised to write very frequently, Eugene took an affectionate leave of
Mr. F --, with no other weight upon his mind than that which arose from his
being ignorant of the fate of Laura.

After a fortnight had elapsed, and Mr. F -- had heard not from Eugene, he
began to be alarmed. He took every method in his power to gain intelligence of
him, but without effect. His mind underwent a tormenting suspense, for he
really loved him like a son; and, although he did not chase to inform lady
Oakendale whither he was gone; yet such were his suspicions of her, that he
caused such an application to be made to her as he thought might bring him some
information; but all to no purpose; she pleaded ignorance of his destination
and pretended great concern at the circumstance.

Mr. F -- suffered the most poignant grief; he accused himself for allowing him
to depart alone, and on this score he endured many bitter reflections.

As time wore away, the sweet hope of presenting a wished for son to a fond
father, which son justified by his merit and accomplishments, and even exceeded
the most sanguine hopes of the most partial parent; these hopes, and flattering
ideas, at length gave place to the bitter remembrance of the loss each had
sustained.

The continual advertisements he caused to be inserted in the daily papers,
besides hand-bills, and every other inquiry which could lead to a discovery,
were ineffectually continued for many months, without bringing him the smallest
information, or clue, to recover his favorite.

Fatigued with repeated disappointments and not knowing what further methods to
pursue, he waited upon Lord Vincent, the first hour he heard he was arrived in
England, informing that nobleman that he was a father; but that his mind was
torn with perplexity as to the present existence of that son, on whose virtues
and accomplishments Mr. F -- expatiated with the fond partiality of a parent.

Lord Vincent felt a glow of parental affection rise in his bosom, which was
every moment increased on the recital of his merits, and soon occasioned an
impatient desire of beholding him.

When Mr. F -- mentioned his recent loss, Lord Vincent was firmly persuaded
that lady Oakendale was privy to the concealment; particularly when Mr. F --
informed him, that he suffered Eugene to go alone; and that he had since his
departure, discovered that he had a private interview with lady Oakendale the
night before he set out upon his tour, and informed her to what part of England
he was going to make his excursion.

Persuaded in this opinion, they debated upon the measures to be pursued, which
would be most likely to bring her ladyship to make the discovery. They agreed
to begin by gentle methods, and treating with her by the most friendly and
secret persuasions; and if this failed, to make more decided and arbitrary
conditions.

In the meantime, and during these negociations, Lord Oakendale's mind suffered
so much painful uneasiness, as to produce a slow fever; he felt a cruel
disappointment at the loss of Laura, for whom he had conceived the most ardent
affection; and the manner of her disappearance, together with the dreadful and
unaccountable phantoms (...) Abbey, had so much agitated his imagination, that
it was sometime before he could bring his reason to that state of composure,
which was necessary in the projecting a scheme he had planned for investigating
the horrors which had so imposed upon his understanding at the Abbey.

He had formed and rejected many designs for this purpose, when lady Oakendale,
before he adopted any, was seized with a violent illness; the consequence, (as
Mr. F -- supposed) of the negotiation between her and Lord Vincent, concerning
the concealment of Eugene.

Lord Oakendale seldom gave himself much trouble about her, and her
indispositions were as little regarded as herself; but this became of a very
serious nature; and, upon his lordship's being desired to attend her sick
bedchamber, he obeyed the summons with unusual alacrity, secretly hoping that
he should not only be released from a bondage, from which he had never derived
the smallest comfort or satisfaction; but should yet be honorably blessed with
the hand of his charming Laura, could she ever again be discovered.

Elated with these hopes, he hastened to her apartment with no unpleasing
ideas; and, throwing an artful dejection into his countenance, he was
approaching her bed with a tender expression of enquiry; when he started, and
was diverted from his purpose by the surprise of beholding her with Lord
Vincent on one side of the bed, and Mr. F -- on the other, attended by a
gentleman of the law taking notes from her confession.

The moment she beheld Lord Oakendale she ceased speaking. Her eyelids fell, a
sudden convulsion affected her articulation, and she had only time to
pronounce, in a trembling voice and disjointed words, "My -- son! -- Oakendale
Abbey! -- " when she sunk down and expired!

Lord Oakendale, much as he had wished for her death, was shocked at its sudden
approach; and, not being able to comprehend the scene before him, and still
more astonished at her naming a son, together with Oakendale Abbey, he demanded
of her faithful confidante, Marcel, "who was in the room?

"Why, Lord Vincent, and the other gentleman, were present?

"And if her lady was in her right senses when she talked of a son, and
Oakendale Abbey?"

The confusion of the scene, and the sudden dissolution of lady Oakendale,
prevented every one present from giving an immediate answer; and Mr. F --
seeing Marcel instantly about to quit the room, instead of answering to the
interrogatory of Lord Oakendale, he eagerly seized her arm, and leading her up
to his lordship, said, "There is much to be explained, my Lord, and I look upon
this woman to be able to give the clearest account of the mystery which yet
remains unfolded; for this reason it seems proper to have her secured."

Lord Vincent joined in this proposition; and, having collected proper
assistance for the security of Marcel, the rest of the party left the room of
the deceased, and were joined by the gentleman of the law, who proceeded to
read the minutes he had taken from her ladyship's dying confession. They
consisted of a faithful relation of her being four months advanced in her
pregnancy by Edward Vincent, then an officer in the guards, at the time she was
married to Lord Oakendale.

That finding it impossible to impose upon his lordship, by pretending the
child to be his, she confided her secret to Marcel; by whose contrivance she
was in five months after her marriage delivered of a son, at -- in
Buckinghamshire.

That this was managed the more easily, on account of the ill terms upon which
she lived with her Lord.

That Marcel had engaged to secret the child, and keep it at nurse, which she
did, at a very little expense, till the end of five years; when the woman, who
had taken the charge of it, told them "that he had been stolen from her."

That this circumstance gave them no great uneasiness till about three years
after, when Mr. F -- declared himself to have been the person who had taken the
child away, and from that time made large demands upon her for its education,
always threatening her with a discovery in case of noncompliance.

That within the last two years Mr. F -- had insisted upon her seeing the young
man, and extorted a confession from her of his real father, to which, after
great reluctance, she yielded, and consented to see her son. She confessed,
that the interview made her feel herself a mother; but the idea of his being
introduced into the world as the son and heir of Lord Vincent, filled her with
perpetual alarm of a discovery, and made her suppress all her tender feelings,
and again have recourse to Marcel, to continue some method of securing the
preservation of her fame, before Lord Vincent made a public acknowledgment of
him as his son. Various methods were suggested; but none seemed proper to
adopt, till the idea of traveling alone was artfully contrived to allure him
from Mr. F --; and the gentleman, who met him at Ranelagh, was by them engaged
for the purpose of facilitating their design; and having so ordered, that his
curiosity should be excited by the accounts of Oakendale Abbey, he was there
entrapped, and secured in a subterraneous part of it, where, to the best of her
knowledge, he now remained.

This was the substance of lady Oakendale's confession; and an oath of
confirmation was administered to her by the gentleman of the law, who was also
a justice of the peace. She found, however, her mind was not relieved by the
confession, unless Lord Oakendale was made acquainted with her guilt, and would
pronounce her pardon; and, being sensible that the hour was appoaching, when
the most ample confession would not lessen her crimes whilst one particle of
dissimulation remained, she begged to see Lord Oakendale, declaring her
intention of acknowledging her deception, and imploring his pardon; but the
design was sufficient, and we hope accepted; she was, therefore spared the
confusion of confessing to him, whom she had most injured, by the Minister of
Death, who, on the moment of Lord Oakendale's approach, prevented her adding
more than the abovementioned words.

Having recovered their surprise, and given necessary orders for the interment
of her ladyship, Lord Oakendale was equally desirous with Lord Vincent to make
the investigation of Oakendale Abbey. He had no doubt but Laura had been
entrapped, as well as Eugene; and the impatient desire he had of making her his
wife, increased his anxiety, and even possessed him with the torments of
jealousy, lest Eugene, being in similar circumstances with herself, might be
captivated with her charms, and endeavor to make his escape with her.
Stimulated with ideas of this nature, his mind was kept in a perpetual
agitation, and his impatience would scarcely allow time for the necessary
preparations to be made for the journey, and to collect proper persons for so
arduous an undertaking.

Marcel would not, or could not, give them any more information than what has
been already related. She declared she had never seen Oakendale Abbey, although
she had reason to believe that Eugene was at this time concealed there; she was
however, kept in close custody.

Lord Oakendale determined, that if Laura was found, no forms of ceremony
should for an hour retard his marriage with her. He considered the confession
Lady Oakendale had made of her duplicity and infidelity a sufficient release
from the marriage covenant; and which gave him full liberty to form a second
union, long before the usual time of mourning was expired for the first. It was
not to be supposed he should be upon any terms of great cordiality with Lord
Vincent; yet, as the present case made him as interested a person as himself in
the projected discovery, he allowed himself to wave all animosity for the
present, and to confer with Lord Vincent upon the plan of operation necessary
to be made upon the occasion.

At length the arrangements were all adjusted, and a chosen set were appointed
to accompany the two Lords, Mr. F -- and the lawyer, into Cumberland, in order
to discover both Eugene and Laura, and to erase the Abbey to the ground, if it
was necessary to facilitate the search.

Lord Oakendale was elated with hope, and would allow no suggestion to intrude
that bore the most distant idea to any circumstance that was not consonant to
his wishes. Laura, the charming Laura, should now be lady Oakendale, and put in
immediate possession of all his wealth. Fancy had painted her with additional
allurements; and her having been so long confined in a subterraneous abode,
would render her more alive to freedom, and grateful for his splendid offers.
With these flattering hopes he endeavored to beguile the tedious hours that
intervened before the time fixed for their departure.

On the evening of the day before they were to begin their journey, he was
indulging in one of the above delightful reveries, when a servant opened the
door of his library, and informed him that a gentleman wished to speak with him
upon business of importance, which could not be trusted to a messenger.

Lord Oakendale peevishly ordered him to be admitted, at the same time
determining that no business whatsoever should occasion a delay to the
projected expedition. Accordingly a middleaged clergyman was ushered into the
room, and, after the usual compliments had passed, he asked Lord Oakendale "if
he had any relation in the East Indies?"

Lord Oakendale replied, "Yes, he had once a brother, whom, he believed, was
slain in battle in the East Indies."

The gentleman whose name was Martin, then proceeded to inform his lordship,
"that a few weeks since he was called upon to attend one of his dying
parishioners, whose conscience seemed to labor under some very heavy
oppression; and who said he had been on board a ship coming to England from the
East Indies, when she was taken by a French privateer. That there were several
passengers on board, amongst whom was a little girl, who had a small bag of
quilted satin tied round her neck, which she always held with great care, and
consequently he supposed contained something valuable. Indeed, he heard one of
the women on board say that it did, and caution the child not to part with it.
That he had frequently meditated to get it from her, but never had an
opportunity till the day they were taken to the prison in Paris; when, seeing
one of the French soldiers tearing it from the neck of the child, he persuaded
him that it was only a charm against infection; and, by making some trifling
exchange, secured the bag for his own. Upon opening it, he found it contained
some jewels of value, carefully concealed, by being quilted between the satin.
There was likewise a miniature picture of an officer, and a written paper,
signifying who the child was. The picture and the paper he preserved; but the
jewels he sold, and found the money amounted to some hundred pounds.

The picture and the paper he always wished to have restored to their right
owners, and, upon the exchange of prisoners, he made some enquiry after the
relations of the child; but, finding they were persons of consequence, he was
afraid to make any application to them, left it might lead to a discovery of
the theft. The time he said was now come, when he would give worlds never to
have had them in his possession; nor could he recollect one single satisfaction
or pleasure that the money for which the jewels sold had given him; that he
sincerely repented having wronged the child; that he begged I would pray to God
to forgive him; and all the restitution he could now make, was to place the
picture and the paper in my hands, beseeching me, if possible, to find out the
child, or its relations, and to restore what yet remained of their property. He
added, that he had lately met with a woman who had been taken prisoner with the
child, and who said it had been put on board, and entrusted to her care by a
female negro, who had lived with its parents; and that the child was carried
from the prison by a surgeon, of the name of du Frene, who attended them. Mr.
Martin having finished his relation, Lord Oakendale tremblingly opened the
paper. The first thing that struck his sight was the picture of his brother;
that brother upon whom he had bestowed so little care or anxiety, and whose
exact resemblance, now before his eyes, recalled to his recollection his many
virtues, and filled his heart with remorse and regret that he had so cruelly
neglected them, and paid so little regard to his memory. Having paid this late
tribute of affection, he proceeded to open the paper, which contained the
following lines, written in his brother's own hand:

"Laura Carleton, daughter of William Carleton, and Zelima his wife; was born
at Madras, April the 14th, 1778, and is the only surviving heir of the
Oakendale family.

"WILLIAM CARLETON."


"This paper, picture and jewels, are the property of Laura Carleton."

No sooner had Lord Oakendale read this paper than the color forsook his
cheeks; his eyes glistened, and he held the paper in his trembling hand, while
he preserved a profound silence. A flash of conviction rushed upon his mind
that Laura might be, and was in all probability his own niece; that Laura, whom
he was upon the point of making his wife. He hesitated for a few seconds in the
faint hope that some mistake might prove the matter to be different; but the
circumstances were too strong to admit of any doubt; and however he might wish
to disbelieve the facts, an impulse of a different nature from what he had
hitherto experienced, made him shudder for his own crimes, at the same time
that he felt an uncommon interest in the fate of Laura.

He again looked at his brother's picture: again he examined the hand writing:
it was certainly his brother's, for it was a remarkable hard; and again it
recalled to his remembrance the thousand virtues which had marked his
character, and the little value that had been placed upon them by those who
stood in the nearest relation to him. Should Laura really be his neice, and the
only surviving branch of the house of Oakendale, with what pleasure should he
allow her the possession of that fortune, to which she derived as much claim
from her virtues, as from heriditary right!

Such are the ties of nature, that his pride exulted in calling that woman
niece, whom he had a short time before designed and solicited for prostitution.
-- During the time these reflections were passing in his mind, he sat musing
without uttering a word: but at last recollecting Mr. Martin, he thanked him
with unfeigned sincerity, and told him he had every reason to believe that he
had seen the person, who exactly answered the description of the child, and
whom he had no doubt was his neice.

He then proceeded to thank Mr. Martin for the trouble he had taken to convey
the information to him: and, without telling him by what means she came there,
he added, that he verily believed she was at this time concealed in an interior
part of an old Abbey belonging to himself in Cumberland. That the next morning
had been fixed for their journey there, to make an enquiry which the present
information he had received would greatly accellerate.

Mr. Martin congratulated Lord Oakendale on the prospect of finding his niece;
and here it may not seem improper to give our readers a more particular account
of Laura's father, in order more clearly to elucidate the identity of her birth.

We have already mentioned that Captain William Carleton embarked with his
regiment for the East Indies.

After being driven by contrary winds, they found themselves chased by an
Algerine Corsair.

The spirit of the English determined to stand an engagement, in which they
were victorious, and very soon boarded the Corsair. On her way to Sallee, to
pay the ransom of her brother, who was a captive, there was a Greek Lady, of
illustrious birth, and exquisite beauty, and with her four female attendants,
who were taken prisoners. The gallantry of the English officer was exerted in
acts of attention and consolation to the fair Greeks, who, together with the
riches of the cargo, made it a prize worthy the bravery of their nation.

The beauty of the chief captive whose name was Zempronia, was the subject of
universal admiration: and the captain of the vessel appropriated to her his
cabin, and gave her every accommodation that could render her situation such as
to make her forget she was his prisoner: yet nothing could lessen or sooth her
affliction: she wept incessantly, and every effort of attention was only
answered by the most heart-rending sighs and lamentations: one of her
attendants, about the age of sixteen, appeared the least unhappy. Her
bewitching smiles, and captivating graces, fascinated the heart of William
Carleton; a slight wound he had received in the engagement seemed to excite all
her pity, and several tender glances had betrayed a reciprocal passion.

If the elegant person and accomplishments of William had attracted the
admiration of Zelima, he was no less enamoured of the fair Greek. She learned
his language with facility; but in that of love she was still a greater
proficient: and, by the time they arrived at the port of Grand Canary, where
they were to release the lady and her attendants, Zelima's heart was not less
wounded than her lover's at the cruel idea of separation. She was charmed with
all that he possessed. Her religion, her country, and her laws, were all
sacrificed to the powerful passion of love; and an English priest, then
residing at that port, tied the indissoluble knot.

She took leave of her mistress Zempronia with regret, but not with reluctance;
all her duty, love and obedience, were alone due to her husband; and she
attended her beloved William to the East, where her tender affection, and
unremitting attention, rendered him the happiest of men.

He wrote to Lord Oakendale an account of his marriage with the fair Grecian,
and anticipated the pleasure he should derive from presenting this lovely
creature to his brother and sister, when the conclusion of war should allow him
to return to England; but Lord Oakendale made his marrying a servant a pretense
for never answering any of his letters; and three years after, when the
Honorable William Carleton's name appeared in the list of those that were
killed in battle, Lord Oakendale's heart only palpitated with a secret joy,
that the many virtues, and universal good character of his brother, would no
longer upbraid, and be a restraint upon his own vices He put on the exterior of
mourning; but he made no sort of inquiry after the widow of William Carleton,
or wished to hear that he had left an inheritor to his many virtues.

Thus were the ties of blood dissolved, and a deserted orphan left to seek that
protection from strangers which she had a right to claim from relations so near
to her. William Carleton had been a bad economist; he had a small younger
brother's fortune, and his generous heart was too compassionate, and too
liberal, to his fellow creatures, to allow him to be affluent. He was, indeed,
too much engaged with his present felicity to make provision for future
misfortune, and he was killed by a random shot in the moment of victory!

The fatal wound which deprived him of life was rendered still more poignant by
the reflection of leaving Zelima but ill-provided for. She, indeed, did not
experience the want of his attention; for no sooner were the fatal tidings
brought her of William's death, than her heart sickened, and she only survived
to cast a mournful look upon the mangled corpse of her husband, gave a
convulsive shriek, and expired, leaving a female, infant "unpitied, and
forlorn!"

Lord Oakendale threw off all remembrance of his brother with his mourning, and
from that time never thought more of the connection. He followed his pleasures
with unremitting avidity, till after the course of a few years, when his
constitution began to warn him by frequent intimations that the career, in
which he was so deeply engaged, would some day be interrupted.

In these moments of admonition he wished for he knew not what comforts and
resources; real friends he had none. The tender endearments of a family he had
never known, and his heart felt an aching void for those dear attentions and
solicitudes, which can only be experienced from the tenderest ties.

In these irksome hours, the death of lady Oakendale was his ultimate wish, and
opened to his fancy an inviting path, when he might be at liberty to marry some
beautiful young creature, without fortune, whose gratitude would secure to him
her affections, and whose youth and health would insure heirs to his
possessions. But at the time these wishes were formed his hopes were vain; for
lady Oakendale was then by no means likely to give him such a chance. Her
health was her first care, and, to an excellent constitution she added the most
studious attention to its preservation, living by rule, and studying the whole
vocabulary of wholesomes. Neither did her present conduct afford him any other
hope of breaking the marriage fetters; for amidst the few virtues she did
possess, she adhered strictly to that of chastity, allowing no kind of mercy to
those who had been only suspected to have violated the marriage vow.

Such were Lord and lady Oakendale; when the former, finding his life every day
more unhappy, and viewing the infirmities of old age at no great distance from
him, he endeavored to beguile the tedious length of the summer-days, by
visiting different water places, which were situated in the most unfrequented
and obscure parts of England, where he went by another name, in order to follow
his favorite propensities; so that, when he returned to London, and again
assumed his name and character as a senator, he might condemn those vices he
had not only been practicing himself, but seducing the innocent and unwary to
fall into.

It was during the last summer that he had made an excursion to an interior
part of South Wales; from whence his fancy led him to Milford-Haven, where, as
he was one evening strolling near the sea, he accidentally met with Laura, the
uncommon charms of whose person attracted his notice, and he soon formed a plan
of becoming acquainted with her, which succeeding, he in a short time, found
himself violently attached.

Her beauty was the least of her merit, and a certain refinement and delicacy
which pervaded her whole manner, checked the licentious impulses which the
charms of her person occasioned, and he found it necessary to be more upon his
guard, and to act with more circumspection in the present case, than any he had
ever before encountered.

Her sensible conversation, the observations she had made upon the world, as
far as she had seen it, would have made her an entertaining companion, had no
other charms captivated his senses; but, alluring as she was both in mind and
person, he found it impossible to resist so engaging an object: he therefore
discovered as much as he could of her story, and found her chief misfortune,
and which she most lamented, was the loss of a lady who had brought her up, and
from whom she was divided in her passage from France.

Having gathered thus much from her own account, he concluded she was the
natural daughter of Monsieur du Frene, who had presented her to his wife as a
foundling; that Monsieur was dead, and in all probability she would never again
see Madame.

From these circumstances he considered her as a lawful prize for him, and
would have immediately offered her a settlement as a mistress, had not a
certain dignity, and modest superiority in her manner, awed his freedom, and
prevented his making such a proposal. He was, however, determined not to lose
her, and therefore formed the plan of enticing her to London, under pretense of
placing her with a sister till she should discover Madame du Frene.

His insinuating manners and address soon gained upon the unsuspicious heart of
Laura; she considered him as old enough to be her father; but for that reason
he was still better calculated to be her friend, and she was charmed with the
proposal of placing her with his sister. She felt veneration and esteem for Mr.
Thoranby (the name he had assumed) and it was not till she arrived in London
that she discovered the whole of his deception, which, when he endeavored to
palliate and excuse by pleading the most ardent love, she solemnly vowed to
sacrifice her life to her honor; and, as we have before observed, he sent her
to Oakendale Abbey, in hopes that the solitude of the place would induce her to
lend a more favorable ear to his wishes.

How did the retrospection of this part of his conduct now fill the mind of
Lord Oakendale with corroding thoughts! A ray of gratitude to the Supreme Ruler
of all events, who had not permitted him to commit a crime at which his soul
shuddered, diffused over him sensations to which he had hitherto been a
stranger. He made an ample confession to Mr. Martin of all his conduct, and
lamented his errors in such terms of contrition and penitence, that Mr. Martin
gave him all possible consolation, and readily joined the party, who were
waiting to make the projected search at Oakendale Abbey; to which place their
journey was completed as expeditiously as possible.

On their arrival at Oakendale, every thing remained in the state they had left
it; and no vestige of any human being appeared to have traversed its gloomy
apartments. They proceeded to the room which had, on more occasions than one,
caused so much terror, being now a very strong party, properly armed, and every
way determined to investigate the mystery.

Lord Oakendale himself led the way. The virtuous principle upon which he now
searched for Laura, actuated his mind with a manly resolution; and he felt none
of those perturbed tremblings which had assailed his heart on a former occasion.

In one hand he firmly grasped a pistol, in the other a short sword; and having
excited his attendants boldly to follow his example, whatever they might
encounter, he proceeded into the cloister.

All was still and silent, and by force they made their way into the room which
terminated it. It was totally dark, and they were obliged to light their
candles before they could even distinguish each other!

As soon as they were assisted by the lights, they perceived that the windows,
through which very little light could have been admitted, were entirely stopped
up, and this seemed to have been done very lately.

Lord Oakendale was convinced it was the very same apartment he had been in
before; but every thing now bore a different aspect! nothing appeared in the
room but a large table, and some loose boards. There were evident marks of
blood upon many parts of the floor, and in one corner lay a human scull! Lord
Oakendale shuddered! The idea of Laura and murder trembled in his heart; at the
same time that it renewed his courage, and animated his pursuit. "We will
proceed," said he, "and investigate this accursed mystery, or die in the
attempt."

"The scull cannot be Laura's" said Mr. F --;"it could not have been in this
state from the time she has been missing;" yet it might be Eugene's, and the
thought rested upon his imagination with a sickening horror!

Lord Oakendale, having searched every part of the room to no purpose, ordered
the floor to be taken up; when, as the men were beginning to execute his
orders, they discovered a trap-door, which was instantly opened, and they
descended down several winding steps into a huge vault, which seemed to extend
under the church. They lighted more candles, and left no part unsearched. No
object presented itself; but they picked up bones and sculls in various parts
of the vault.

Lord Oakendale fired his pistol; nothing returned but the vibration of its
sound; after which a perfect stillness was observed, and a deep hollow groan
arrested the ears of every one present. They turned to the left, from whence
the sound of the groan proceeded, and perceiving a hollow arch, they advanced
toward it; but could only be admitted singly, as the sides were too close, and
the roof too low to stand upright in.

Lord Oakendale still led the way, and the rest followed. He had again charged
his pistol, and he carried his sword and a candle in the other hand.

Having advanced several paces, something was thrown in his eyes by an
invisible hand, and for a moment he was in total darkness! He again fired his
pistol; and as soon as the sound ceased, a faint voice exclaimed, "O God, my
deliverance is at hand!" The rest of the lights came up, and discovered a
hedious figure of a man, with an uplifted bar of iron in his hand ready to
strike a fatal blow on the first person who advanced. He was instantly seized,
and made to deliver the keys of a grate which opened to a very small room.

Having secured the man, and entered the prison, in one corner of it appeared
an emaciated figure, altered indeed; but in whose thin and pallid countenance
Mr. F -- instantly recognized the features of his dear Eugene! He flew to
embrace and to present him to Lord Vincent; whilst Lord Oakendale felt himself
disappointed, and involuntarily exclaimed, "Where is my Laura!"

At the name of Laura, Eugene, whom the surprise and the joy of the scene had
till then rendered speechless, replied, "Laura! What Laura! Can she be in this
place of horror?"

"This is no time for explanation," said Mr. F --; "let us return to the less
gloomy parts of the Abbey; and as the man, who guarded this infernal dungeon,
is secured we may probably force him to a confession of what we still further
wish to know; in the mean time let us, my dear boy, give you all the assistance
in our power; and revive you by some immediate refreshment."

Eugene, altered and oppressed by the cruel confinement he had so long suffered
appeared scarcely the same; yet still a smile of grateful acknowledgment to
those who had so unexpectedly procured his enlargement, prejudiced them all in
his favor; and the prospect of liberty, together with the joy of beholding the
faces of those whom he knew to be his friends, animated his eyes, and gave a
glow to his pale cheeks.

Lord Vincent pressed him to his bosom, and acknowledged him for his son; and,
although his whole appearance bore testimony to his wretched condition, yet an
open countenance, and manly deportment, distinguished the graces of his person,
and his sentiments, such as he was able to express, did credit to, and
confirmed the educacation which the good Mr. F -- had bestowed on him.

Being returned to the other apartments, Lord Oakendale asked Eugene, in a
melancholy tone of voice, if he had, during his confinement, ever seen or heard
of a young lady in the Abbey?"

Eugene replied "that he had not." He said, "on the day he had gained the keys
of the Abbey, he thought to amuse himself with observing the structure of the
rooms, without supposing that any human beings, besides himself were withinside
of it. The inhabitants of Oakendale, and particularly the man from whom he had
the keys, had told him of ghosts and specter; -- but this made him only the
more eager to reconnoitre the place; and not being the least apprehensive of
any supernatural causes, he fearlessly walked about the rooms, in which he saw
nothing either to engage his attention, or excite his fears; till at last
coming into one of the rooms on the first floor, he was attracted by a
portrait, not in very good preservation, but whose features and countenance
bore so striking a resemblance to Laura, that he was fixed to the spot, and
stood gazing at it with surprise and admiration.

"He had just taken from his pocket a small letter-case, in which was a little
sketch he had himself attempted upon vellum, of the sweetest features in the
world; and was examining and comparing the likeness, when he heard footsteps,
and instantly found himself pinioned down and secured. All resistance was in
vain, and he was hurried down to the grated room in the vault from whence they
had now so happily released him; and where he was only supplied with common
necessaries, debarred of light, and every social comfort.

"He had" he said, "during his confinement, seen many different faces in the
persons who guarded him, and brought his provisions, and each were uniformly
silent to the questions he constantly put, in order to gain information of the
place he was in, and their designs. Once he had attempted to escape, but was
only more closely guarded afterward. He had heard strange noises, and had
reason to believe that some secret practices were carried on in the Abbey; but
of what nature he could not give the most distant guess. His spirits had sunk
to a degree of wretchedness past all description at the idea of never gaining
his liberty, and his mind had given way to the most cruel despair, when he was
roused only to a kind of callous indifference upon the report of the first
pistol; but when he heard the second fired, and saw through the grate that the
guard was agitated, and gathered up the dust to throw at some object which
appeared with a light, he felt a ray of comfort to which he had long been a
stranger, and which he had so joyfully experienced by his enlargement."

The next step was to interrogate the guard, who, after an obstinate silence,
said, "That he was hired for the purpose of guarding the grate, and was
relieved in the office by another, who was somewhere about the Abbey." But,
after many promises and threatenings of future rewards and punishments, and,
after having absolutely disclaimed the knowledge of any other person being
confined in the Abbey, he confessed, "he had been hired by a set of people,
whose business it was to steal dead bodies, and bring them to the Abbey for
defection; that there was a private door from the churchyard into the
cloister, where they used to be brought and deposited in the room which they
had partitioned off for the purpose, and which has before been described; that
the bo^es were afterward thrown into the vault from the trap door; that this
had been a practice for many years; and, by having the range of the Abbey, they
had taken care to preserve it for themselves by taking methods to frighten, and
effectually keep away every guest that made any attempt to inhabit it." He
added, moreover, "that they frequently procured bodies that were hanged at, or
near Carlisle; and that a man, who was hanged for murder in the neighborhood,
and whose body was brought there, and hastily deposited in an obscure room, had
as was supposed, returned to life, and made his escape; for on two men going at
midnight to fetch him upon a board to the dissecting room, they found him gone,
and in his place a young lady, who had sunk into a fit with terror upon their
approach, and whom he believed they conveyed to a hut in the village. That some
daring adventurers had lately broke in upon them; but their appearance had, as
he supposed, terrified them from proceeding in their attempts; but, from the
time, of the young man's being a prisoner there, and their having been pretty
much alarmed, they had thought it most prudent to take away their implements
till the young man was either removed or released. That he did not believe any
person had ever been murdered there, though many bodies had been brought from
places both near and distant, and many skeletons had been deposited in
different parts of the Abbey, as well to alarm those who might see them, as to
preserve them; and whenever any person came to stay there, they took care to
whisper in the passages, and make other noises, to prevent their remaining in
the Abbey. That he remembered hearing one of the gentlemen, he called his
master, say he alarmed a lady, by coming through a trap-door into a gallery
where she was walking by moonlight, though he believed she only saw his
shadow."

Thus was this great mystery at once explained, and the ghosts of Oakendale
Abbey were indeed the dead; but brought thither by those unfeeling monsters of
society, who make a practice of stealing our friends, and relations from the
peaceful grave where their ashes, as we suppose, are deposited in rest!

The next enquiry to be made, was that of knowing by whose orders Eugene was
entrapped in the Abbey; but of this the present informer could give no
intelligence.

Lord Oakendale questioned him very closely concerning the lady whom the men
had conveyed to the hut in so alarming a state; but this man could give no
further account of her than he had already mentioned; and all that could be
gathered was, that the time, in which he said it happened, corresponded exactly
with that in which Laura was missing from the Abbey.

Lord Oakendale was unhappy. The thoughts of Laura, and what might be her fate,
engrossed all his attention; nor was Eugene less anxious on the same score. The
idea of her being confined in the Abbey with himself, filled his mind with a
romantic extravagance of fancy, that they must be destined for each other.

The wild sallies of his imagination, or the more serious and pensive
sentiments, which exhibited a mind formed for every noble purpose, charmed Lord
Vincent; whilst Lord Oakendale viewed him with a kind of sullen hauteur, which
might be well accounted for by the circumstances of his birth; yet, when Eugene
considered him as the uncle of his Laura, a thousand at ntive assiduities were
offered to his services; and it was with difficulty Lord Vincent could prevail
upon him to accompany him back to London, in order to be introduced as his son
and heir. His heart dwelt upon the discovery of Laura and he would have given
worlds to have been deputed the chief employer in such an investigation.

Duty to his father at length prevailed, and he reluctantly bid adieu to Lord
Oakendale, who was determined to stay in the neighborhood of Oakendale, being
persuaded that Laura was somewhere concealed in its vicinity; and he offered
large rewards to any person who should bring him intelligence of her abode.

He likewise set on foot a prosecution, and an order to apprehend, or cause to
be apprehended, those wretches who had, for so many years, been the terror of
Oakendale, and by their diabolical practices made the Abbey be considered the
receptacle for evil spirits. But all his exertions on this score proved
fruitless; the perpetrators of these acts taking care to secure themselves
beyond the reach of justice.

Meantime Laura enjoyed, with Mrs. Greville, all the comforts, as well as
elegancies, for which she seemed by nature calculated.

The amusements, which filled up her time, served, in some degree, to drive
from her mind those gloomy ideas, which, when indulged by indolent musings,
never fail to divest the mind of its proper energy, and to cast a shade of
melancholy discontent upon every object. Her fancy, indeed, would sometimes
wander back to past scenes, and recollection would exhibit the youthful hours
when, with her dear Eugene, she passed whole days, delighted and beloved,
unconscious of the evil that awaited her, and of those many dark hours which
had succeeded them; that Eugene should never have made any inquiry, or sent one
letter to her before she left France, was what she could not place to any
account but that of her evil destiny; it was strange and unexpected; yet she
was sure his heart was faithful, and some untoward accident had been the cause
why two hearts, so firmly united, and formed for each other, were now so
totally divided and torn asunder.

These were sad reflections, and she indulged them as little as possible.

As the spring advanced, Mrs. Greville showed her many beautiful parts of the
country, and they were visited by the distant neighbors. Sir George and lady
Orland were expected; and Laura, though she knew not why, felt a cheering hope
as the time approached. At length the evening arrived, which brought Sir George
and his lady to the Grove. Mrs. Greville presented Laura to them as a very
valuable acquisition, which fortune had bestowed upon her since she last saw
them.

After the usual salutations and compliments, lady Orland stepped back, and led
in a lady, saying, "I have likewise an acquisition to introduce to you;" when
Laura, turning her eyes to the lady as she advanced, they were fascinated with
the sight of her dear and ever-valued Madame du Frene. The joy was mutual, and
they rushed into each others arms with unfeigned transports of delight.

Lady Orland had received Madame Du Frene into the house in the capacity of a
governess to her only daughter; and she had discovered so many amiable traits
in her character, and her whole conduct and deportment had been so uniformly
calculated for the trust reposed in her, that lady Orland never wished to
consider her in any light, but that of a polite and accomplished visitor; and
had given her so many proofs of her friendship and regard, as gave her every
reason to forget she was an emigrant. Madame Du Frene had frequently mentioned
and lamented the fate of her beloved Laura, and her joy was now completed in
finding her under the protection of the worthy Mrs. Greville.

After having related to each other their various adventures since the time of
their separation, Madame du Frene told Laura, that in one of the emigrants,
whom chance had thrown in her way to London, she had met with the woman, to
whose care Laura was entrusted, in her voyage from India; that she was now
servant at a hotel in London, was ready to give any testimony concerning her
charge as far as she knew; but she was in daily expectation of a brother from
the East Indies, who would bring a more particular account of the name and
parents of Laura, as she had sent him word of her having been taken prisoner,
and stripped of every thing that could direct her to find her relations.

Laura's heart glowed with gratitude to Providence for having so miraculously
preserved her, and raised her up friends in a country, where as yet she had no
knowledge of such a claim; and she doubted not but the dispensations of his
allruling power would enable her to find some being to whom she could prove her
kindred, and pay that filial duty with which her heart overflowed.

Thus was Laura situated during the transactions that had been passing at
Oakendale Abbey.

The society at Mrs. Greville's wanted not any addition. If the idea of Eugene
sometimes crossed the fancy of Laura with a painful sensation, she suppressed
even the sigh which the memory of past scenes, and the conviction that they
would not return, would occasion; for she knew that the happiness of this world
must admit of much alloy, and her present situation was such, that she had no
other cause for regret.

Meantime Lord Oakendale was indefatigable in his endeavors to recover his
niece, and had at last received the pleasing intelligence that she was at Mrs.
Greville's. He lost not a moment to go there, charmed with the knowledge that
she was under such a respectable protection.

It was after one sultry day that Laura, with the rest of Mrs. Greville's
family, were sitting near the point of a rock, contemplating the prospect which
commanded the view of a beautiful lake. She was reflecting upon her happy
situation, and only indulging one fearful and distant wish for a certain object
ever dear to her remembrance, when a servant, addressing Mrs. Greville,
announced Lord Oakendale.

Laura started, and screaming, said, "Ah! hide me, hide me, from that wicked
man!"

"Fear nothing, my love," said Mrs. Greville; "you have friends here sufficient
to protect you, and Sir George will wait upon his lordship to know his
business."

Sir George instantly arose to obey his aunt, and promised Laura that she
should never be carried from them whilst he had an arm to defend her. He
instantly left them, and Laura kept clinging to Madame du Frene when they
perceived Lord Oakendale and Sir George advancing toward them.

Laura trembled, but was determined to summon up courage to support and exert
herself, when Lord Oakendale flew to embrace her with the appellation of "my
dearest niece."

Laura stood amazed, and fancied that her organs of hearing deceived her, or
that Lord Oakendale was practicing some new deception; but when he stood for a
moment in silent admiration, and she saw the tears roll down his manly cheeks,
a sympathetic tear relieved her bosom, and a secret impulse chaced away her
fears. Lord Oakendale, in a few words, explained the mystery; and she had the
inexpressible felicity of embracing an uncle.

Lord Oakendale pressed her to his bosom with parental fondness; and drawing
from thence a miniature, suspended by a ribband, he held it to Laura, saying,
"Behold your father's just resemblance in this picture, which was torn from thy
infant neck by ruffians; yet presented by thy penitent uncle."

Laura received it with joy, and she knelt to her uncle with filial love and
obedience. Happiness was every where diffused around, and her heart glowed with
laudable pride when Lord Oakendale thanked Mrs. Greville for her unbounded
kindness to his niece, Laura Carleton, for such he had no doubt she was; he
therefore passed a few days at Mrs. Greville's, in joys to which he had
hitherto been a stranger; for although he was now near fifty years of age, he
had ever been debarred from the felicity of domestic society. He found Laura
(when she was divested of fear and embarrassment) a charming companion. When
she related her history and sufferings, he could not sufficiently admire her
strength of mind, her resolution, and above all, her resignation. In short, he
perfectly doted on her; and lost no time in sending for the testimony of the
woman's brother, who had brought her over, and of whom Madame du Frene had
spoken. The man was lately arrived, and brought with him a duplicate of the
paper Mr. Martin had before delivered to Lord Oakendale, written in his
brother's own hand.

Madame du Frene was ready to affirm, that Laura was the identical child her
husband had brought from the French prison; but, besides all this testimony,
Laura's own remembrance and account furnished the strongest proof. The
confirmation was beyond a doubt; and if there had been any remaining testimony
wanting from coincidence of circumstances, the uncommon likeness she bore not
only to her father, but to the picture of her grandmother, which had so
attracted poor Eugene in Oakendale Abbey, was proof sufficient; and the
fondness which Lord Oakendale felt for the only offspring of his family, wanted
no corroborating testimony that their blood flowed from the same source. Indeed
when he looked back upon the strange events which had brought them together,
and made known their affinity, he blessed the hand of heaven which had so
miraculously saved him from one of the worst of crimes. And as he gazed (...)
unspeakable fondness, on the fair form of his lovely niece, he considered her
as a rich blessing sent to comfort the remainder of his days here; and by
working a reformation in his conduct, to give him hopes for those of hereafter.

Lord Oakendale testified his most grateful acknowledgements to Madame du Frene
for her maternal care of Laura, and to whose good instructions he placed the
uncommon merit she possessed. When he gave a recital of the search which he had
made to investigate the mystery of Oakendale Abbey, he engaged the fixed
attention of his auditors; but when he came to give the account of finding
Eugene, and of his long confinement in the dreary vault, the description he
gave of his person and manners, convinced Laura that it could be no other than
her dear Eugene; the recital of whose cruel imprisonment and sufferings,
softened her heart with the tenderest pity, and rendered him still more dear.

When Lord Oakendale mentioned the poor emaciated figure in the grated room,
whom Mr. F -- called Eugene, Laura arose with great emotion, and expressed a
trembling impatience for the conclusion of a fate in which she was so nearly
interested. Lord Oakendale took but little notice of her perturbation; he would
not allow his heart for a moment to admit the idea of an union with Eugene.
Whatever might be his merits, a something, relating, no doubt, to his birth,
made his mind recoil at the bare supposition; and yet Laura, with all her
happiness, and all her titles, was but a wretch, if divided from that her
fondest hope; but she was now to engage in a new scene.

Lord Oakendale and his niece, having gratefully expressed their thanks to Mrs.
Greville and all her family, for their hospitality and kindness, took their
leave of the grove, and set out for London, where Lord Oakendale welcomed Laura
as mistress of his house, and sole heiress to the fortunes of Oakendale. She
was visited by a numerous train of company; some, who had heard her story, from
real regard and friendship; others, from curiosity, and a desire of finding
some flaw in a character so conspicuously superior! But her fascinating manners
gained her universal admiration. She shone in the most brilliant circles, in
which her eyes continually wandered in pursuit of an object dearer to her than
all the world.

It happened one evening, at an assembly, to which she went unaccompanied by
Lord Oakendale, that she heard Lord Vincent announced. Her heart fluttered at
the sound, and, in a moment after she beheld her loved Eugene.

He did not immediately perceive her; but the moment his eyes encountered that
fair form, which his heart had ever adored, he waited not for the ceremony of a
formal introduction. He made his way to her; he seized her hand, and for a few
moments they forgot that the eyes of a whole assembly were rivetted upon them.

Laura was covered with blushes; and some of those malignant spirits (who,
envious of her charms, and the splendour in which she shone, were continually
upon the watch to lower her merit) instantly took the hint, and a burst of
illnatured whispers assailed her ear. A lady, who was her chaperon, relieved
her embarrassment, by making room for Eugene to fit by her, with whom she
entered into chat, as if she had been one of his most intimate acquaintance,
although she had never seen him before.

This not only made Laura feel more easy, but also gave Eugene an opportunity
of uttering a thousand tender inquiries, in which his heart was truly
interested. The matter of his writing to her was cleared up to the entire
satisfaction of both parties, who had each lamented the silence of the other.
The subject of the Abbey was but slightly touched upon. It was evident they had
both been confined there at the same time; and this idea afforded sensations
too tender to be discussed in their present situation.

Eugene could not withdraw himsef from the side of Laura, notwithstanding she
represented to him the impropriety of so particular a conduct; and it had,
indeed, given occasion for a thousand observations replete with witticisms and
sarcasm. "Two such strange adventurers ought to come together! -- They had made
out a most delightful romantic story! -- It was pity so much invention should
ever be divided! -- How they must triumph at having so finely duped the two
doting Lords!"

Such irony as this was the most prevailing conversation of the different
parties who formed the assembly; but some few there were who saw them in a more
candid and favorable light, who admired their virtues, and seriously wished to
see them happily united.

Laura returned home with her spirits uncommonly exhilerated. Lord Oakendale
observed it; and, as she always gave him an account of whatever happened to her
when he was not present, she would not now omit the circumstance of meeting
with Eugene; well knowing that, had she not thought it right to have no
concealments of this nature, he would have heard it from common report; and she
likewise knew that no acquaintance could be continued without Lord Oakendale's
approbation.

As soon as she had related the account of their meeting, and had heartily
expressed her pleasure at seeing Eugene, Lord Oakendale bit his lip; his
countenance betrayed evident displeasure; and, after taking three or four turns
across the room, he said, "I hope, Laura, your heart has no share in the
interests of this Eugene; there are circumstances in relation to that young
man, which should make such a connection extremely obnoxious to me; besides, I
have other views for you." Having said this, he wished her good night with less
tenderness than usual.

The moment he was gone Laura burst into tears. The opposition Lord Oakendale
had expressed gave her extreme uneasiness; and she had so much of the obstinacy
inherent to human nature in her composition, that this very opposition only
drew closer the links her inclinations had formed. Her fond imagination had
never before seen Eugene in so fair a light. What were titles, honors, fortune,
she had almost said friends, in comparison with her loved Eugene! To him she
would sacrifice all her hopes, and all her prospects; and with these
resolutions she retired to rest; but her mind was disturbed; and when she saw
her uncle in the morning, his disconcerted brow bespoke uneasiness; of which
thinking herself the cause, she relaxed something of her resolves, and offered
him the most soothing attentions.

It was not very likely to suppose that Lord Oakendale could wish to see Eugene
the husband of his niece. He had indeed, acted in concert with Lord Vincent at
the discovery of the mystery at Oakendale Abbey; but since that time all
intercourse between them was broken off, and he never wished to have it renewed
by any circumstance, still less by that of an union between Eugene and Laura,
whom he loved with passionate fondness; and would have made her any sacrifice,
but that on which alone her happiness depended.

Thus was their felicity interrupted. Eugene and Laura sometimes met, and never
without lamenting the cruelty of their destiny. She returned Lord Oakendale's
kindness by the most dutiful attention; but she could not bring herself to
renounce her lover; neither would she marry him without her uncle's consent.
She hoped time would make an alteration in his sentiments, and from that hope
she drew comfort and resignation to herself; but could not so easily impress it
upon her more impatient lover.

Lord Vincent loved Eugene too well to oppose his wishes; though, perhaps, he
might, as well as Lord Oakendale, have formed connexions more pleasing to
himself; yet he acquiesced in all his son approved, of whom he was extremely
proud, and had, by an act of parliament, empowered him to take his name, and
succeed to his estates; he was, therefore, in point of rank and fortune, a
match for the daughter or niece of the proudest Peer; yet the circumstances of
his birth were such as could not fail to be obnoxious to the Oakendale family,
and could by no power be done away; though his father's interest at court was
such, that, (as the immediate heir to his title was now dead) he had obtained a
new patent, entailing his Peerage on his natural son, Eugene.

Meantime Lord Oakendale found his health decline with rapidity; and he formed
the fond wish of seeing his beloved Laura settled in marriage with some man
worthy her vast fortune, and still greater merit. He considered her attachment
to Eugene as a childish partiality, which would yield to better prospects and a
lover of his choice. With these ideas he introduced the son of his particular
friend, Sir Charles Burlington. He was a young man of good character and
handsome person; but he was five years younger than Laura, and was taken from
the University without having seen more of the world than a schoolboy, in
order to facilitate so desirable an union; for although Sir Charles had a very
good unincumbered estate, which must descend to this young man, yet a match
with Laura Carleton was beyond their most sanguine expectations.

When he was introduced to Laura, she could scarcely prevent her countenance
from showing marks of contempt and ridicule at the idea of his being her
husband; for his appearance was more childish and youthful than was common at
his age, and the embarrassment he felt on the occasion added to his juvenile
address. She received him with politeness, but with a determined resolution
never to consider him in any other light but that of an acquaintance.

Sir Charles Burlington was delighted with the prospect, and overwhelmed Miss
Carleton with unmeaning compliments and overstrained civility. He might,
indeed, be said to be courting for his son, who sat staring at Laura without
once venturing to give an opinion or utter a sentence. Even Lord Oakendale
himself was conscious of the impropriety and disproportion between them; but
the fear of seeing his niece united to Eugene would have reconciled him to yet
greater disparity.

Laura avoided as much as possible all particular conversation with her uncle.
She saw his health decline fait, and she could not bear the idea of giving him
uneasiness. She gave up all her time to attendance on him, and could seldom be
prevailed on to leave him. One night she went to the Opera, where she was met
by Eugene, who placed himself by her; and in a few minutes young Burlington
appeared in the pit, and, without any ceremony, thrust himself between them.

Laura felt herself angry, and Eugene, having gained a place on the other side
of her, asked, "if he should turn the boy out of the house?" which Burlington
having heard, resented with all the impetuous fury and violence of youth; and
not content with abusing Eugene, in very gross terms, he called to some
Oxonians, his friends, who were in the gallery, to come and give their
assistance to a devilish row that was going to begin.

Laura grew alarmed; the eyes of the audience were turned round toward them,
and several glasses in the boxes were employed to bring a nearer view of the
contending parties.

The lady, who came with Laura, had two daughters with her, who had never
before been at an Opera; it would, therefore have been a cruel mortification to
have taken them away before it was nearly half over; neither was her carriage
come for her.

But Laura could not bear to be the object of wonder, and, perhaps, ridicule;
and she earnestly requested Eugene to get her a chair, and she would go home.

Eugene readily obeyed her command, and led her out of the pit, followed by
Burlington, who expressed himself in the most childish and unhandsome terms.
The truth was, he had been drinking, and flushed with liquor. The idea of being
the ostensible lover of Laura, gave him airs of boyish consequence, that had
disturbed the pleasure of the evening, but could not be considered in a serious
light.

Eugene regarded it as no otherwise worth his notice, than as it had
discomposed Laura, and deprived him sooner of her company. This he was telling
her as he was going to put her into the chair, when young Burlington advanced,
and seized her hand, which she drew from him with a look and expression of
resentment; when just as he was about again rudely to take hold of her, one of
the chairmen instantly perceived, and immediately knocked him down. Eugene,
without paying any regard to the circumstance, put her into the chair, and
attended her to Lord Oakendale's house, in Portland-Place. He waited to see
that she was perfectly recovered, and heard the following discourse from the
chairman, who had knocked down young Burlington:

"Arrah, my dear young lady, I hope you will not be after being angry at my
lending a blow to the lad who was after being impertinent; becase, my dear
shoul, we be old acquaintance. Arrah sure I cannot mistake, when I took you for
an angel sent to deliver poor Patrick from pargatory; aye you're the same
cratur that opened the door, and let me make my escape after I was dead, and
was going to be disjointed by the hellhounds at Oakendale; and you be too kind
hearted to bring me again into trouble, seeing as I would be after sarving you
with my heart's blood.'

Laura stared at this harrangue of the chairman, and after some recollection
recognized, in the figure and features of this Hibernian, the very same man she
had beheld in so frightful a situation in Oakendale Abbey; when, as he said, he
had been hanged, and cut down before he was dead; and, having been thrown into
this room, was reserved for dissection; when recovering, her opening the door
released him! She was much surprised at the circumstance, to which she could
not but give credit. She gave him some money, and desired he would come again
the next day, when she assured him no harm should befall him; but she knew that
Lord Oakendale wished to see and converse with every person that could give him
any information of the transactions of the Abbey.

Patrick faithfully promised to attend in the morning, by which time Laura
prepared Lord Oakendale for so extraordinary a visitor; whom when he arrived,
gave the following account of himself, "That he was born at Carrick, in Ireland
and at a proper age was bound apprentice to a shoemaker, with whom he nearly
served his time; but getting acquainted with several bad people, he ran away
from his master, and joined the White Boys, with whom he committed several
outrages and violent depredations, for which he was frequently afraid of being
brought to justice, but good fortune always befriended him, and, after various
escapes, he came to London, where he engaged in ignoble employments, and at
last served in the honorable station of lamp-lighter!

"That one evening when he was lighting the lamps at Lord Oakendale's door, a
female, from one of the balcony windows, accosted him and enquired his birth
and education, and asked him, if he should not like to fill a more lucrative
and honorable employment than that of lamp-lighter? He replied, "He was ready
to undertake any business whereby he might raise his fortune, except that of
committing murder, and that he could never bring himself to do;" upon which she
assured him, that it was not to commit murder that she wished him to change his
profession; but only to follow, and bring her an exact account of a certain
young gentleman, whose abode she pointed out, and for which service he should
be very handsomely rewarded.

Nothing could better suit his inclinations and his genius, than such an idle
profitable business. He accordingly served her in this capacity with such
indefatigable zeal, that he gave her an exact account of all the young
gentleman engaged in; and, about a fortnight after this, he was sent down to
Cumberland to give information to some particular persons that the above
mentioned young gentleman would be in such a place, at such a time, where, he
believed, he was afterward taken and detained. That after he had undergone an
examination, as to his fidelity and secrecy, he was employed to assist those
wretches, and pests of society, called resurrection men, who brought numbers of
bodies to Oakendale Abbey. They were generally received in the night; and the
person, who was chief superintendant, and who paid the men who procured the
bodies, was named Marcel, and was brother to the woman of that name, who lived
with lady Oakendale, and was the same that spoke to him when he was lighting
the lamp.

Patrick continued to inform his lordship that he grew tired of the employment,
and thought it a shocking one; he therefore ran away, and joined a set of
coiners in the neighborhood of Penrith, where they were soon after discovered,
taken, and brought to condign punishment.

At his trial he saw his old master Marcel, at the sight of whom (to use his
own expression) his blood ran cold; for he supposed he was only come to watch
for his condemnation, and like a crow after carrion, bespeak his body. This was
really the case; for Patrick said he remembered nothing after the fatal words
of condemnation had passed upon him. His mind was all in a state of confusion;
and, if any thoughts did occur, they were only on the wretched state to which
his body would be subjected after he was dead; nor could the clergyman, who
attended him, impress any ideas of that more immortal and immaterial part of
him, which could not suffer by the hands of men.

The first idea of recollection he experienced. (after the noise of the crowd
and the mob that attended him to the gallows had ceased) was of extreme pain in
his head and neck, and a violent oppression upon his lungs. He struggled for a
few seconds, and gained respiration; a mist before his eyes seemed to vanish,
and he recovered sufficient sight to perceive he was in a room with a dead body
hung up on one side of it. It instantly occurred to him that he was in the
Abbey. He was horribly frightened, and he tried to articulate; but found his
throat so swelled that he could only utter a guggling kind of sound; when in a
moment the door of the room gently opened, and a beautiful creature entered,
whom he supposed to be an inhabitant of that world into which he had been
launched; yet, notwithstanding the appearance of this fair object, his first
idea was that of making his escape which he instantly effected by passing
through the door she had opened. Transient as was the glance he had of her
countenance, it nevertheless made an impression never to be effaced, and the
remembrance of this fair image coming to release him from a place which
contained all the horrors of death, created in him a penitence for his past
crimes, which would, he hoped in some degree, atone for the commission of them.

After this he ran as fast as his legs could carry him, till night overtook his
steps, and he laid down upon the grass till morning, when he asked for a crust
of bread, and a draught of water, at a small cottage, from whence he begged his
way up to London, where he has ever since been in honest employment, and has
sincerely and truly repented of his past crimes. When he saw Laura handed out
of the opera house by Eugene, he instantly remembered them both; and the strong
propensity he had to speak to her got the better of all decorum.

Thus ended the narrative of Patrick O'Dennis, at which Lord Oakendale
expressed much surprise. He handsomely rewarded Patrick for his trouble, and
strongly recommended to him to persevere in his good resolutions.

Lord Oakendale made some comments upon Patrick's narrative, and seeming to be
in very good humor, Laura took occasion to mention the circumstances of the
preceding night, not omitting to enlarge upon the firm and polite conduct of
Eugene, in opposition to that of the more boyish and insolent behavior of Mr.
Burlington. Lord Oakendale could not but admit and approve of the former; and
Laura gained so far upon his good temper, as to obtain leave to dismiss that
young fop from any love-like pretentions toward her. This was a great step
gained, and Laura promised, in her turn, to make some concessions equally
pleasing to her uncle.

Comfort seemed once more to dawn upon her, and she had sometimes (though not
often) the happiness of meeting Eugene. Lord Vincent frequently pressed him to
make another choice, since there was no probability of Lord Oakendale's giving
his consent to an union with Laura, and to see Eugene settled in marriage, was
the first wish of his father. But although Eugene received all the advances
from the misses, and all the overtures from their mothers and aunts, which are
authorized and encouraged by the present race of females, yet was his heart
faithful to its first attachment; and, however he might despair of gaining
Laura, he could never allow the idea of another woman as the sole object of his
affections. Indeed, these firm resolutions were become highly necessary; for a
young widow of the name of Sackville, laid ^uch a well-regulated siege to the
heart of Eugene, and had so many, and such fascinating charms, that it was
almost impossible to resist her power. She was besides highly favored, and
strongly recommended by Lord Vincent, for his future daughter; and this being
the case, Eugene was more frequently thrown into her company than he would
otherwise have wished; consequently the world had pronounced them a pair
destined for each other, with the addition of the most violent love subsisting
between them.

The report could not fail to reach the ears of Laura. She did not at first
give the smallest credit to it, but only considered it as the idle story of the
day. It was, however, so frequently, and so strongly repeated, that a spark of
jealousy began to light up in her mind, and several little circumstances
kindled the flame to a tormenting state of uneasiness and suspense.

She seldom saw Eugene. He never came to Lord Oakendale's; and the ill state of
his lordship's health confined her very much at home. Whenever she had met
Eugene he was in company with Mrs. Sackville. Her heart could not easily give
credit to his infidelity, yet a thousand corroding fears rendered her miserable.

During this state of uncertainty Lord Oakendale grew every day more
debilitated, and his health declined very fast. Laura was his sole comfort, and
to her he looked for every satisfaction the world could give him. He had
observed her late uneasiness, and, perhaps, guessed the cause, in which he
could not but rejoice, however he might feel hurt at the effect. He redoubled
his kindness to her; he told her she would be sole mistress of all his wealth
at his decease, and often signified how ardently he wished her to divide it
with some worthy man.

What were wealth and honors to Laura! There was, indeed, an object dearer to
her than all the world; and that object was now said to be devoted to another.
How cruel was her fate! yet a more severe one awaited her.

Her uncle grew every day worse; his disorder was slow but of such a nature as
no remedy could reach. He found he must soon pay the debt of nature, and a
lowness of spirits seized him. Something seemed to press upon his mind with a
particular weight of uneasiness. Laura, ever attentive, and willing to mitigate
(as far as was in her power) the sorrow that seemed to oppress him, used every
method she could devise to remove the melancholy he labored under, at the same
time that her own mind was cruelly agitated.

Lord Oakendale seemed sensible of her kindness. He would gaze at her for hours
together, whilst he uttered the most bitter sighs; and the pain of his mind
seemed to increase the malady of his body, and hastened his dissolution. It was
in one of these moments that Laura said, "Is there any thing I can do that will
make my dear uncle more easy and composed?"

"There is," replied Lord Oakendale; "but will my Laura make the sacrifice? I
know it is a weakness in me to desire it; but it is a weakness I have tried in
vain to conquer, and my peace depends upon her word."

"Speak," said Laura, in an agitated voice, though far from suspecting the
nat^^^ of the request, "and be assured of all in my power."

"Can you, then," said Lord Oakendale, "will my Laura promise, sacredly
promise, never to marry Eugene Vincent?"

"Stop," said Laura; "Oh! save me from this conflict." Lord Oakendale sat with
eagerness, and death depicted on his countenance. He seemed impatiently waiting
for a reply; yet trembling lest he had made a request which could not be
granted; at the same time fearing that his weak frame could not support a
refusal.

"Alas!" said Laura (turning her head this way and that way, in the most
distracted state of terror and perplexity) have I no friend to advise me in
this cruel conflict? Oh! my lord, Eugene is dearer to me than -- " Here she
stopped, and a violent burst of tears, in some degree, relieved her.

During this time Lord Oakendale trembled, and appeared convulsed. He grasped
the hand of Laura, and faintly pronounced, "I am dying!" She was extremely
terrified; and, as she supported him with one arm, she rang the bell with the
other for assistance. He was conveyed to bed, and proper advice was immediately
sent for.

The state of Laura was very little better than that of her uncle. She had not
as yet given the fatal promise that would seal her misery; but the dying
situation of Lord Oakendale, and the wish he had so devoutly expressed, seemed
to require it. She went to his chamber fully determined to make the sacrifice
of her happiness, if it was necessary to his peace of mind.

As she proceeded to Lord Oakendale's room, she reflected on the consequences
of what she was about to do. What were riches, honors, titles, fame, or any
worldly comfort, without the charming liberty of bestowing them on the only
object of her love! yet, might not the promise she was about to make be of the
utmost consequence to herself, as seemed so necessary to calm the departing
spirit of Lord Oakendale; that promise, which to confirm, tore her heart
assunder. In what estimation might it be held by the person for whose sake
alone she would withold it. Ah! (but there was madness in that thought) it
might be a happy release to Eugene, and at once enable him to cancel those vows
which had made hers so binding. These reflections brought her to the
chamber door; and, upon her entering, the physicians informed her Lord
Oakendale had but a few minutes to live, and that he had never once spoke since
she left him!

She approached the bed; she took his hand, and kneeling down, she pressed it
to her lips, while the tears fell in large drops from her eyes. He looked at
her with the tenderest pity. She thought him perfectly sensible; and she was
going to pronounce her promise, when he fixed his hand (already clammy with the
dew of death) upon her lips, as if to prevent her speaking. She raised up her
eyes in thankful expression to Heaven for the release; and, although he
mourned, perhaps, inwardly, his countenance conveyed content and approbation.
For a few seconds he seemed struggling for speech. He withdrew his hands from
Laura's, and, joining them in a supplicating form, he articulated "Bless my
niece!" and expired.

Laura was extremely shocked at the sudden, approach of his death, and she
grieved for him with the most affectionate sincerity. She was perfectly
satisfied that he wished to recall the promise he had desired her to make, and
was convinced that the hand of death had awakened him to contrition, and a
proper sense of the cruelty his more lively feelings would have imposed.

Laura found herself in possession of all his vast fortune; and she had the
comfort and advice of her dear Madame du Frene in the arrangement of the
funeral, and other necessary matters. She had likewise the satisfaction of
asking that dear friend concerning Eugene, to whom Madame du Frene had always
been extremely partial. Lord Oakendale had on that account not shown her so
much favor as he would otherwise have done; and during his illness Laura had
been but little out to meet with her.

When she asked concerning him, Madame du Frene looked grave, and only replied
"he was well."

Laura did not feel contented with the answer; but a certain dislike to lead to
the subject, unless more encouraged by her friend, prevented her adding more at
present. She thought it unkind that Eugene never made any inquiries after her;
and, as she did not yet go into public, she never chanced to see him. Soon,
however, she returned her visits, and appeared in public. Her sable dress
diminished nothing of her beauty, and the knowledge of her large and
independent fortune gave additional charms to her person. She once or twice saw
Eugene, and was shocked at the coldness of his address and manners toward her.
He always looked uncommonly grave, and avoided any further conversation than
the commonplace forms of ceremony required. Such behavior was to her
unaccountable, and cruel in the extreme. He could, she thought, but have
behaved in this manner had she really made that promise to Lord Oakendale,
which she had considered as so fatal to her peace.

Harrassed and fretted as she was from this conduct, and finding neither riches
or admiration afforded her the smallest happiness in this uncertain state, she
determined to come to a more particular explanation with Madame du Frene on the
subject so near her heart.

She accordingly took the opportunity of expressing her surprise and wonder at
the coldness of Eugene's behavior.

Madame du Frene remained silent for some moments, and then said, "My dear
Laura, how often, in your days of childhood, have I endeavored to prepare your
mind for those disappointments which come nearest the heart, and which, if
borne with pious resignation, are the brightest ornaments to the christian
character. I am truly sorry to have occasion now to enforce this doctrine; but
Eugene is, I am informed, engaged to marry Mrs. Sackville." Here she stopped,
and Laura sat with her arms rested on a table, and her hands covered her face.
She sighed bitterly. and when she looked up, Madame du Frene had the
mortification to observe marks of the most extreme sorrow depicted in her
countenance.

Nothing more passed at the present time. Madame du Frene was so much hurt at
the appearance of woe which Laura's looks expressed, that she was resolved to
speak to Eugene upon the subject, although she had little or no hopes of ever
seeing them united.

It happened soon after that Madame was, by her own contrivance, thrown into
company with Eugene; when she purposely introduced the subject of Laura,
observing upon her immense fortune, and still greater merits; adding her
earnest hopes, that she would bestow it upon some man truly worthy of so rich a
blessing.

Eugene sighed, and asked (in a melancholy tone) "If Laura was likely to be
married?"

"Not that I know," replied Madame du Frene. "I should imagine she would be
extremely careful how she formed a second attachment, having been so cruelly
disappointed in her first."

Eugene seemed much agitated, and, after a pause, said, "If she had suffered
any disappointment, it was of her own inflicting; and the cruelty was deeply
and forever transfixed in the bosom of another."

Madame Du Frene replied, "Good God!" what is it you mean? When nature formed
the fairest of its compositions, no material was omitted; and Laura is, I am
certain of that disposition, as would rather suffer pain herself than inflict
it upon others."

"Why, then," said Eugene, "did she make that rash -- I will say that accursed
promise?"

"What promise!" replied Madame Du Frene; "she never did make any; Lord
Oakendale was taken speechless before she had time to pronounce a promise,
which nothing but the agonies of death would have extorted from her; and even
in that moment she wavered, and professed that terrible you was dearer to her
than life! Nay," continued Madame du Frene, "she had the satisfaction of
knowing, and being assured, that her uncle approved of her conduct, and blessed
her with his parting breath!"

Thus was this distressing business brought to an amicable conclusion; and
Madame Du Frene had the inexpressible felicity of reconciling two lovers whose
hearts had never been divided.

It appeared that Lord Oakendale, extremely desirous to break the bonds which
so closely united Eugene and Laura, had mentioned to some particular friends
that Laura had given him solemn promise never to marry Eugene. In consequence
of this report Lord Vincent's pride took the alarm, and he repeated it to
Eugene with exaggerated proofs.

Thus had these two unhappy men nearly destroyed the felicity of those most
dear to them by their ill-judging zeal, and still more blamable subversion of
the truth.

Eugene, with a mind distracted with disappointment, flew to dissipation to
dispel his misery; and, falling in the way of a young and fascinating widow, he
had nearly formed that contract with her, which his honor would have obliged
him to fulfill, and nothing but death could have dissolved.

The death of Lord Vincent, soon after these occurrences, gave to his son,
title, wealth and power. His inclinations had long been fixed, and the merits
of Laura were amply rewarded by an union with her loved Eugene. Some of their
summers were passed in Cumberland; and the virtues of Lord Vincent and Laura
soon dispelled THE HORRORS OF OAKENDALE ABBEY.

FINIS

