A DISCOURSE, ADDRESSED TO THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETY OF YOUNG MEN IN DORCHESTER, ON
THE TERMINATION OF ONE HUNDRED YEARS FROM THE TIME OF ITS ESTABLISHMENT.

BY THE REV. THADDEUS MASON HARRIS.

"I write unto you YOUNG MEN, because ye have overcome the wicked one." ST.
JOHN. Charlestown: (Massachusetts.) PRINTED BY SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, NEXT DOOR TO
THE WARREN-TAVERN. 1799.

INTRODUCTION.
ON December 25, School, a number of young persons, actuated by a love for
religion, and a desire to assist and promote each other's advancement in the
offices of piety, agreed upon "a private weekly meeting, for religious
exercise, and the good improvement of the evening of the LORD's day."

ABOUT eleven years after, as the members had become numerous, and it was
inconvenient to assemble in one place, it was deemed advisable to divide; and
one branch of the society continued to meet in the south part of the town, and
the other in the north.

THE society is composed of serious and well disposed youths, who continue
members till they form family connections, or leave the town. There is no
recollection of a single instance of the expulsion of an individual for ill
conduct, or of any one having desired to leave the society from dislike. The
utmost harmony and fraternal affection have prevailed in their meetings: and
the institution has been promotive of the happiest effects in encouraging and
assisting youthful piety and practical godliness.

THAT a society constituted of persons whose dispositions and principles are
apt to be mutable, and easily affected and estranged by the dissipations of
early life, should have been zealously supported through a whole century, is a
circumstance which must forcibly excite our admiration. On the termination of
this period, the young men of the elder branch of the society requested that a
discourse might be delivered to them in public, to commemorate the
establishment of the Institution, and to further its views. In compliance with
this request the following was written and delivered, and to gratify the
society it is now published.

MY DEAR YOUNG FRIENDS,
TO commemorate the establishment of that little fraternity of which you are so
happy as to be members, is the design of the present address. Under the
patronage of Divine Providence, your society has been continued during ONE
HUNDRED YEARS, without intermission or neglect. Within this period, how many
institutions of this kind, in neighboring towns, and elsewhere, have been
formed and discontinued! The zeal with which they commenced soon subsided; and
the cold and languid spirit of the world chilled the fervors of their piety and
quenched the flame of their devotion! But the fire of love here enkindled, like
the lamp of the sanctuary, has been kept alive and bright; and, as "a light
shining in a dark place," has diffused its cheering influence, with increasing
splendour, through a whole century. What pleasure must it afford those who
improved this as the school of their religious discipline, and by it were
trained for that heavenly society of which they are now members -- how must it
enhance the joys of such of your pious predecessors as are now in glory, -- if
we may suppose them bending their regards, from the exalted spheres they fill,
to these humbler scenes, to behold the progress and the multiplied benefits of
this association! To find here those spiritual exercises commenced and
cultivated which prepare for a participation in their more perfect praises and
joys! And how must you, my dear young friends, be encouraged and animated in
all the duties and engagements of your retirement, by these considerations.

TO strengthen your attachment to this society, and to further its views, I
shall now call your attention to a few remarks on that passage of scripture
which you will find inserted in the vi th Chapter of the Epistle to the
HEBREWS, at the 11 th and 12 th verses.

"WE DESIRE THAT EVERY ONE OF YOU DO SHOW THE SAME DILIGENCE TO THE FULL
ASSURANCE OF HOPE UNTO THE END.

"THAT YE BE NOT SLOTHFUL, BUT FOLLOWERS OF THEM WHO THROUGH FAITH AND PATIENCE
INHERIT THE PROMISES."

THIS epistle includes a variety of interesting advice: but its general view
and ultimate scope appear to be, so to establish the faith and animate the zeal
of the Hebrew converts to christianity, that they might continue firm and
unshaken in the holy profession which they had embraced. They lived in a
dissolute age. The prejudices of their own nation, and the corruption and
infidelity of the world around them, exposed them to many difficulties and
dangers. Those who were faithful to GOD and the Redeemer, and steadily adhered
to the cause of truth and duty, had before them only the gloomy prospect of
public neglect or contempt; the relinquishment of personal ease and safety, the
forfeiture of property, or the loss of life. To allay their fears, to compose
their minds to fortitude and magnanimity, and to deter them from the shame and
guilt of apostasy, the strongest and most weighty arguments, the most powerful
and affecting dissuasives, were necessary. And such the Apostle used, to
confirm them in a resolute adherence to the truth as it was in Jesus. To
encourage them to "hold fast the profession of their faith without wavering,"
Heb. x. 23.
and to preserve them from "an evil heart of unbelief," Heb. iii. 12.
he reminds them of the superior excellency of Christ the minister of the
gospel dispensation, not only to Moses the founder of the Jewish economy, but
even to the Angels who were employed in its promulgation. Chap. i.
He mentions the higher and more eminent advantages resulting from the gospel;
that it would produce nobler effects, that it opened brighter prospects, that
it was enriched with much better promises, and that it had in reversion an
inheritance of heavenly rewards. And, that he might leave no motive untried
that could serve to excite their ambition and fire their zeal, he bids them
contemplate the conduct and recollect the success of those who had finished
their course with honor, and through faith and patience had gone to inherit the
promises; urging them to be followers of their steps, that they also might
arrive at the same height of glory and happiness.

JUSTLY are the examples of great and illustrious persons, who were remarkable
for the superior strength and constancy of their virtue, held in high
veneration, and proposed as patterns for the rest of mankind to copy after.
Such examples both instruct and persuade; excite admiration, inspire
resolution, and prompt to excel. They show the practicability of improvements
in virtue, and offer the greatest encouragements to a holy diligence in
religion, by presenting us with a view of its happy issue; they persuade us to
tread in the paths in which others have found the way to eternal glory; and
they assure us that if we gladly and eagerly follow them the same way, we may
hope hereafter to meet in the same happy society, and be joint inheritors of
the same promises.

CHRISTIANS are now "heirs of the promises." In faith and patience they pass
the scene of their trial. Their virtue exercised and improved, and their
warfare finished, they receive the reward of their faith in the salvation of
their souls, and go to inherit the proffered bliss. Then, their faith is
changed into sight, and their patient endurance into joyful triumph. They took
the course of piety and holiness, in which I trust we are progressing. They did
well. They got safe to heaven, where all of us profess a desire to go.?Who but
would follow? They have and enjoy; while we wait and hope. From their holy walk
and conversation while they tabernacled in the flesh, be encouraged, my
brethren, to take direction how to steer your course to reach the mansions they
now inhabit; there to be joined with them, not as companions in tribulation and
patience, but in the delights of endless praise and joyful love. As it was, and
must be still their "desire that every one of you should show the same
diligence to the full assurance of hope to the end;" be persuaded not to be
"slothful." Be not negligent of your duty, nor indolent in its performance. Do
not sit down in sluggish ease, or careless idleness; indisposed to action, or
heedless of your progress. Lose not your opportunities. "Be up and doing with
all your might what your hands find to do, while it is called to day, for the
night of death comes wherein no one can work." Make it the business of your
lives to serve GOD and do his will with holy earnestness, alacrity and vigor.
Loiter not on the way to heaven; but run with diligence the race set before
you. Let nothing retard or hinder your progress. Suffer nothing to interfere
with your obtaining the prize promised to the active, the faithful, and the
persevering. Be animated and quickened in its pursuit by the attractive
influence of their example and success, who have so run as to obtain. Possess
your minds with such high ideas of the incalculable value of the prize, as not
to be discouraged by any hardships you may have to encounter in order for
obtaining it.?Do you meet with trials and hindrances? Recollect their patience
undismayed with sufferings, and their zeal rising superior to all opposition,
who through much tribulation have entered the kingdom of heaven. Should these
trials prove so severe that "even the youths begin to faint and to tire, let
them wait upon the Lord and renew their strength;" and by his assistance they
shall "run and not be weary, and walk and not faint." Isai. xl. 30, 31.
While you have faith to direct, patience to endure, and diligence to execute,
you may successfully accomplish the whole work of virtue. While you order your
footsteps according to GOD's word, and put a firm trust and reliance upon him
who "gives power to the faint and to them that have no might increases
strength," you may be sure to finish your course with joy. His spirit will help
your infirmities, sanctify your purposes, assist your endeavors, and complete
all your works in you with prevailing and almighty power.

?Do you really wish to learn the great and important branches of duty which you
owe to society, yourselves, and your GOD -- do you desire to pass through life
with an honorable reputation and with an approving conscience, or to close it
with serene views and joyful hopes -- would you indeed become wise and good? --
you must diligently study and obey the will and commands of GOD, made known to
us in the SACRED SCRIPTURE. Make that your counselor and guide. It will give
you the best advice, furnish you with all necessary instructions in truths of
the highest importance, and safely conduct you through all the dangers of this
present evil world to everlasting peace and felicity. THE celebrated JOHN
LOCK, Esquire. in a letter, written the year before his death, to one who asked
this question --?"What is the shortest and surest way for a young man to attain
to the true knowledge of the Christian religion?" -- made this answer, "Let him
study the Holy Scriptures, especially the New Testament. Therein are contained
the words of eternal life. It has GOD for its author; SALVATION for its end;
and TRUTH, without any mixture of error, for its matter."
Other books may be read with profit and with pleasure; but let the word of GOD
obtain your preference, your principal attention: for it not only comprizes
knowledge absolutely requisite, but eternally beneficial. It was the high
commendation of the youthful Timothy that from a child he had known the holy
scriptures, which are able to make wise unto salvation through faith which is
in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy iii. 15.


THAT you have received, my young friends, and may still obtain great
assistance in a holy life from the association to which you belong, is certain.
Its beneficial effects in promoting youthful consideration and seriousness, and
in exciting and assisting a devotional spirit, cannot be denied. It serves,
also, to prepare its members for the exercise of family religion and prayer.
The latter circumstance, though not its primary object, is undoubtedly one of
its happiest tendencies.

YOUR advantages have been lately much increased by the use of that excellent
collection of religious books, presented you by the generous bounty and pious
regard of a worthy and zealous friend to religion. Doctor JAMES BAKER; whose
liberality was extended to both the societies.
Profit by his munificence, in the improvement of those means he has put into
your hands to get wisdom; and, by the frequent and careful perusal of your
little library, furnish your minds to a spiritual and divine intelligence.

WHILE hours spent in idleness or dissipation leave behind them a painful void,
or a sharp sting; hours thus employed are always recollected with pleasure.

IT is with inexpressible satisfaction that I perceive a spirit of serious
piety prevailing amongst you. I consider it as a token of the greatest good to
yourselves, to your friends, and to the church of Christ. It will, in all
probability, have a prevailing influence over you through the whole course of
your life. When you have arrived at years of maturity, you will retain the
religious impressions made in your privileged retirement, and recollect the
many solemn and affecting lessons there read to you.

IF you now serve GOD with cheerfulness, the time will come when obedience to
his laws will constitute your highest felicity. Every virtue you now possess
will acquire strength and vigor, till you arrive at the measure of the stature
of perfect men in Christ Jesus.

WHILST, with every grateful sentiment, you record the origin of this Society
and recollect the encouragement it has met and the advantages it has effected,
be persuaded still to keep it alive, and to add to its credit and its
usefulness. Let not its commendable object be lost by your neglect, or defeated
by your misimprovement: but show the same diligence with its pious founders;
and exert the like studious care, with which they were impressed, to promote
practical godliness, and establish in yourselves and others the full assurance
of christian hope.!O let your honorable esteem for them and respect for their
memory be improved this way! --!Let them be applied to this most important use
-- the forming you to pious habits, worthy principles, a good conversation; and
the training of you up for that excellent course of life which will both insure
your present and everlasting happiness, and make your conduct edifying and your
example inviting to all around you! And may your religious and pious zeal not
only capacitate you to fill their places well who have graced this society, but
prompt you to transmit the institution to your successors in all its purity and
advantages; that it may diffuse the spirit of piety and religion through all
succeeding generations to the end of the world.

I WILL not anticipate the pleasures and encomiums of posterity when they shall
contemplate the origin and review the progressive stages of this Institution.
But it may pass for an assumption that the next age will look back on this, as
we review the past. At that time, my brothers, your piety and zeal will be
recollected and acknowledged with a gratitude and joy like that we feel for
your predecessors.

TO conclude: GOD has given us, my hearers, exceeding great and precious
promises. While with an eye of faith we see the promises afar off, let us
eagerly desire and press after them. Among these are the pleasing assurances of
meeting in a happy society composed of "the general assembly and church of the
first born which are written in heaven." Heb. xiii. 23.


LET the joyful desire of being raised and united to this blessed company, the
ardent solicitude to obtain this illustrious inheritance, animate us to the
cultivation of every good disposition, and to the practice of every good work.
Yes, -- let us look up to the assembly of the blessed who surround the throne
of GOD -- to whom we are to conform, with whom we hope to be united. If there
be honor, surely it must be found in such an union, and if there be praise,
surely it must be that of following their steps. See, they beckon us -- "come
up hither." They unfold to us the golden portals of the temple on high; invite
us to the mansions of blessedness; and show us the unfading crown of glory
which shall be placed on the head of every persevering and triumphant
christian. Consider yourselves, my friends, as candidates for these honors.
Often soar beyond the precincts of mortality, and have your conversation in
heaven. Raise your thoughts a little, and survey your privileges. Contemplate
the animating promises and prospects of the gospel. Dwell upon its joyous
hopes. Send your warm desires toward that blissful world, and that glorious
society of the just made perfect. Cherish an inward, lively wish to dwell among
them and share their pleasures. Be continually looking, aspiring, longing for
the celestial regions, till GOD by his grace shall have completely prepared you
for the promised glory.

"FINALLY, brethren, I commend you to GOD, and to the word of his grace which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified."

AMEN!
APPENDIX.
"Let us be like minded -- walk by the same rule -- and mind the same thing."

FROM a little book, published about the beginning of the present century,
entitled "Private meetings animated and regulated," the following extracts are
made, which may serve to show the original plan and design of such institutions.

"THERE is yet another sort of private meetings, which ought with a more than
ordinary zeal to be recommended and encouraged; namely, the YOUNG MENS'
MEETINGS.

THESE duly managed, have been incomparable nurseries unto the churches, where
the faithful pastors have been careful to animate them and regulate them. How
often have we heard those that have joined unto our churches, declaring the
vast influence which the young mens' meetings have had upon them, to engage
them and confirm them, in the right ways of the Lord, and rescue them from the
paths of the destroyer; and blessing the glorious name of GOD, that ever they
were acquainted with such precious opportunities! Parents, encourage your
children: Masters, encourage your servants; to get as soon, and as much as they
well can, into such precious opportunities. Young men are hereby preserved from
very many temptations; and they are also prepared mightily for such religious
exercises as will be expected from them, when they come themselves to be
householders. Never did any one minister in the world, that encouraged such
meetings among his young men, see cause to repent of what he did: we are sure,
the great numbers of them lately erected in the city of London, have been the
crown and the joy of them that have been concerned in them. And such a minister
would best preserve his reputation with the wiser winners of souls, who shall
not go to dishearten the young men of his flock, from serious and humble
purposes in this way to fortify one another in the things that accompany
salvation.

WE will only make a tender of some orders; which may be, all or most of them
well observed in such a society: and then, let any man living, who has the fear
of GOD before his eyes, declaim, if he can, against the design of erecting
young mens' meetings, for the exercises of religion.

I. LET there be two hours in the evening set apart; and let there be two
prayers made by the members of the society in their turns; between which, let a
sermon be repeated; and there may be the singing of a psalm annexed.

II. LET all the members of the society resolve to be charitably watchful over
one another; never to divulge one another infirmities; always to inform and
advise one another of every thing that may appear to call for an admonition,
and to take it kindly when they are admonished.

III. LET all who are to be admitted as members of the society, be accompanied
by two or three of the rest, unto the minister of the place, that they may
receive his holy counsels and charges, and that every thing may be done with
his approbation; and so let their names be added unto the roll.

IV. IF any person thus enrolled among them, fall into a scandalous iniquity,
let the rebukes of the society be dispensed unto him; and let them forbid him,
to come any more among them, until they bring suitable expressions and
evidences of repentance with them.

V. LET the list be once in a quarter called over; and then, if it be observed,
that any of the society have much absented themselves, let there be some sent
unto them to inquire the reason of the absence; and if no reason be given but
such as intimates an apostasy from good beginnings, let them upon obstinacy,
after loving and faithful admonitions, be obliterated.

VI. ONCE in three months, let there be, if need be, a collection, out of which
the necessary charges of the society shall be defrayed, and the rest employed
upon such pious uses, as may be agreed upon.

VII. ONCE in two months, let the whole evening be devoted unto supplications
for the conversion and salvation of the rising generation in the land; and
particularly for the success of the gospel, in that congregration, whereto the
society does belong.

VIII. LET the whole society, be exceedingly careful, that their discourse
while they are together, after the other services of religion are over, have
nothing in it, that shall have any taint of backbiting, or vanity, or the least
relation to the affairs of government, or to things which do not concern them,
and do not serve the interests of holiness in their own conversation. But let
their discourse be wholly on the matters of religion; and those also, not the
disputable and controversal matters, but the points of practical piety. They
may propose questions upon this intention, and every one in an orderly manner,
take his liberty to answer them.

IX. LET every person in the society, look upon it, as a special task incumbent
on him, to look out for some other hopeful young man, and use all proper pains
to engage him in the resolutions of godliness, until he also shall be joined
unto the society. And when a society shall in this way be increased unto a fit
number, let it swarm into more; who may hold an useful correspondence with one
another.

AS arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so will young men constellated into
such meetings be unto the pastor that shall bring his vicinity to be filled
with them. Happy is the pastor that has his quiver full of them; they need not
be ashamed of what they do; they may say to their enemies, that which may shame
them out of their inconsiderate enmity.

AND now, bring forth your strong reason, if you have any, O ye men of sloth,
who are wiser than the men that can render a reason: What reason can be
brought, against such societies? Truly, as it was of old argued, that it was a
sign christianity was a good thing, because that such a man as Nero hated it;
so, the character of those men, who deride and explode these private meetings,
is for the most part such, that even this would rather afford an argument unto
serious christians, that it must be a good thing to uphold them, and a thing
disagreeable to the spirit that rules in this world. In fine:

THE man who shall be the instrument of setting up such a society in a place,
cannot comprehend, unto what a long train of good consequences, he is become
instrumental.

AND they that shall in such a society, together carry on the duties of
christianity, and the praises of a glorious CHRIST, will have upon themselves a
blessed sympton, that they shall be together associated in the heavenly city,
and in the praises and glories, that shall never have an end."

EXTRACT from a book entitled, "a help to national reformation," giving an
account of the religious state of New England; printed in 1705.

"OUR religious societies increase and prosper. They meet at proper times to
pray together, and repeat sermons, and forward one another in the fear of GOD.
They are helpful in doing abundance of good for the advancement of religion in
the neighborhood, and to make the ministry much more profitable in the weekly
exercise of it."

AFTER speaking of the societies of heads of families, and those for
reformation, the author observes that "the young men in Boston and its vicinity
have formed themselves in associations for religious exercises, signing some
good rules to be observed by them therein, much like the orders of the
societies of young men in London." [AN account of the societies of young men in
England, with rules and directions for their use, may be found in Baxter's
Practical Works, Vol. IV.]



