A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF Deerfield Academy.

AT a meeting of the TRUSTEES of DEERFIELD ACADEMY, January 1st, 1799: --
Voted, That the Rev. John Tailor, John Williams, Esquire. and Dr. William S.
Williams, be a Committee to wait on the Rev. JOSEPH LYMAN, and in the name of
the Trustees, to thank him for his sermon, this day delivered at the opening of
the Academy, and to request him for a copy thereof for the press.

WILLIAM S. WILLIAMS, Secretary.

THE ADVANTAGES AND PRAISES OF WISDOM. A SERMON, DELIVERED AT DEERFIELD, --
JAN. 1, A.D. 1799, AT THE OPENING OF THE ACADEMY IN THAT TOWN; FROM PROVERBS,
XII, 8. "A man shall be commended according to his wisdom." BY THE REV. JOSEPH
LYMAN, A. M. ONE OF THE TRUSTEES OF SAID ACADEMY.

PRINTED AT GREENFIELD, BY FRANCIS BARKER. M,DCC,XCIX.

TO THE TRUSTEES, TO THE BENEFACTORS, AND PATRONS OF DEERFIELD ACADEMY, And to
others, the Friends and Advocates of Literature and Religion, the following
discourse, upon the Advantages and Praises of Wisdom, is, respectfully
inscribed,

By their humble servant, THE AUTHOR.
Hatfield, January 16, 1799.
THE ADVANTAGES AND PRAISES OF WISDOM. A SERMON, etc.
PROVERBS, XII.8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom.


THIS proverb states to us, not only what ought to take place, but what
commonly does take place in the affairs of men. A man receives praises and
honors in a measure proportioned to the powers of his mind, the knowledge he
has acquired, and the discreet use which he makes of his reason and talents.
Possibly, in some instances, commendation may not, immediately, succeed the
exercises of wisdom and knowledge; but, in process of time, a man's talents and
wisdom shall be duly acknowledged, and celebrated. These praises are the more
valuable, as they are the natural and just reward of eminent and profitable
seize.

What I testify, in such strong terms, of the superior excellency and dignity
of wisdom, you will not misapprehend, nor mistake my words, as though by
wisdom, I intended the mere strength of a man's intellectual powers aided and
improved by science and literature. This is obvious, that a man of great
original genius and of greater acquired talents in the arts and sciences, may
still be a man void of understanding and discretion, and to be reprobated for
his folly and perverseness, in the misapplication of his powers and seize.

Wisdom is a moral virtue: It implies a disposition to turn our discoveries to
beneficial purposes; to promote the interests of others, and the purity of our
own hearts. Knowledge usefully employed, is alone entitled to the name of
wisdom, and is essential to the existence of it. Wisdom is the knowledge of
what is fitting and best to be done under existing relations and circumstances.
It is the discovery of the fit and the useful, and the avoiding of the
unsuitable and injurious. Wisdom is ever attended with singular advantages, and
of consequence, how to obtain it, ought to be among our first, and most
solicitious enquiries.

I am, at this time, to give you a lecture upon wisdom. The occasion calls your
attention to this subject. Happy should I be, could I place it to your view, in
an advantageous, and inviting point of light. What is wanting, in the
execution, your candor will excuse, and your own reflections supply.

Wisdom, is a lucrative and profitable attainment. The man, who, among
imperfect men, possessed the greatest share of wisdom, and well knew its
advantages, has left this testimony in its favor. Happy is the man that
finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. For the merchandise of
it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof, than fine
gold. She is more precious than rubies: And all the things thou can desire,
are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in her right hand, and in
her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness and all her
paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and
happy is every one that retains her.

We see men pursuing enjoyment, in amassing silver and gold, and rubies; in
acquiring titles, honors, and stations of rank and power; seeking happiness in
bodily health, and length of days, in the indulgence of pleasure, and the gay
scenes of amusement. Solomon tried all these various methods of happiness. But,
what was the result of his experiments? It was, that wisdom and understanding
possess all the advantages to be obtained by those other acquisitions, without
any of their concomitant evils. Wisdom secures the desired end of human
happiness, while other pursuits are empty and fruitless. Wisdom is the only
mean to secure that enjoyment, which is the perpetual object of human desire.
Wisdom is better than strength, beauty, and comely proportion; than health,
long life, amusement and pleasure: It is better than moneys, lands, mortgages
and obligations; than rich trappings and splendid wardrobes: It is better than
victories and triumphs; than titles, honors, thrones. Wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get understanding. Exalt
her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honor when thou do
embrace her. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee. Thou shall be commended according to thy
wisdom.

And why shall men be commended according to their wisdom? For this simple
reason, that wisdom renders men useful. Wisdom is an operative virtue,
producing the most salutary effects. Nothing is important, or valuable, in the
character of man, which does not render him beneficial to others, either by his
example, or by his labors. Wisdom, is the qualification, which enables us to
subserve the interests and happiness of our fellow men.

Ignorance and folly, render one insignificant and contemptible, because he is
unprofitable and incapable of advancing those useful designs and enterprises,
on which rest the happiness and glory of society. He knows not how to choose,
he is not disposed to pursue measures for the common good. Wisdom excels
folly, as far as light excels darkness, for the wise man's eyes are in his
head, but the fool walks in darkness.

The man of wisdom contemplates his various relations; studies and learns his
own powers; and applies those powers to the improvement and well being of his
connections and associates. As it is his wish to see others in an eligible and
prosperous situation, so he has the means and capacity of ameliorating their
condition, of assuaging the griefs and augmenting the joys of human life. The
higher are his seize in science and wisdom, the more extensive are those
effects which benefit human society.

To the wise man, must we look for those instances of moderation, self
government, chastity, purity, self denial, placability, and munificence, which
exhibit man the example, the ornament, and the admiration of the world. Wisdom
teaches to subdue unruly passions and moderate inordinate desires. This marks
the wide distinction between a continent refined Scipio, and a ferocious brutal
Alexander. This discriminates the humane Patriot and Savior of his country,
from the unfeeling conqueror and butcher of his fellow men. This stamps with
glory an ADAMS, a WASHINGTON; while folly and madness stain with infamy a
French Directory.

Do the virtuous of every age and country, read with delight the history of
Joseph? Do they propound his example for the imitation of their children and
youth? Wisdom has enrolled his name among the worthies of our race, and stamped
his reputation with deathless fame. Was it, that he was the son of his old age,
that Jacob loved him? No, it was because, as our translation should have copied
it from the original Hebrew, "He was as wise as a Senator." His superior wisdom
excited the grovelling and implacable envy of his foolish and froward brethren
to plunge him into the horrible pit: But the discerning eye of providence
raised him thence, exalted him to honor and glory, and led him into Egypt, to
save much people alive. A foreseeing and faithful mind, rescued him from the
lewd enticements of an insidious harlot, eventually set him in the second
chariot of the kingdom, made him a father unto Pharaoh, and the deliverer of
God's famishing heritage.

The omniscient mind, foreseeing the future meekness, fidelity, and wisdom, of
his servant Moses, prepared him for the great and eminent services to which he
was afterward raised; plucked him from that destruction to which he lay
exposed, in the fens, and among the Crocodiles of Egypt; placed him in the
house of the devout and pious Jochebed, to be instructed in the sublime truths
of the Hebrew faith; and removed him in maturer age, to the court of Pharaoh,
that he might be acquainted with all those arts and sciences, for which, the
Egyptians were then so famous. Thus was he furnished with a knowledge of the
sublime doctrines of the true religion, and was deeply versed in all the wisdom
of human science. He was Learned in all the wisdom of Egypt, and was mighty in
words and in deeds. Thus, by the fostering care of his parents, and the
attending blessing of heaven, Moses, in process of time, was magnified as one
of the most distinguished and useful characters in the page of history. And
there arose not a prophet since, in Israel, like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face: In all the signs and wonders, which the Lord sent him to do, in
the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land:
And in all the mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses showed in
the sight of all Israel.

What but unparelleled wisdom, spread abroad the fame of Solomon, into all
lands? Princes, from the uttermost parts of the earth, came to see and to hear
his wisdom. His own happy subjects submitted themselves to him with emulous
duty, and grateful love, when they perceived, That the wisdom of God was in him
to do judgment.

Why was St. Paul exalted to a distinction and eminence, superior to all the
blessed Apostles of the holy Jesus? Why was the greater part of the christian
scriptures the production of his pen? Why are his acts and labors peculiarly
noticed and celebrated in the inspired oracles? He was crowned with these
honors, in consequence of that unsual strength of mind, and that refined
education, which were superadded to his extraordinary purity, and his ardent
love to Christ. His usefulness, and of course, his reputation, were abundantly
increased by the force of his genius, and his learned education in the schools
of Greece, and at the feet of Gamaliel.

But most of all, let our recollection dwell upon the example of the HOLY CHILD
JESUS. This was the glory of his infant years, that, as he grew, He waxed
strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him. So
diligent was he to improve and enlarge his mind with truth, that at twelve
years of age, he confounded and put to silence, all the learned scribes and
disputers of the Jewish temple. When he manifested himself the instructor of a
perishing, deluded world, all men marvelled at his doctrines, saying, "Whence
has this man this wisdom?" And they testified of him, "Never man spoke like
this man." This was the glory of Christ, that he knew how to devise, and was
wise and faithful to accomplish the works of human happiness and salvation;
that work which his Father had given him to do. For his wisdom and integrity,
in the execution of his trust, God has highly exalted him, and given him a name
above every name which is named in earth or in heaven: He has commanded all the
angels of God to worship him, and to honor the Son even as they honor the
Father.

In these illustrious patterns, now set to view, you perceive the beneficial
effects, you approve the praises of wisdom. Are you her progeny? You will
celebrate her praises -- "For wisdom is justified of her c^^^dren." Do you
emulate the glories of the instructors, the reformers, the benefactors, and the
saviors of the world? Write after their copy and you shall participate their
fame. Apply your minds to knowledge; study to be useful, and you shall,
ultimately, wear an unfading crown. You shall erect to your memories, a
monument more durable than brass, a monument which shall outlive the ravages of
time.

Do I perceive your minds enflamed with the love of wisdom? Do you appreciate
its worth? Do you wish to possess this more than golden treasure? Let me, in a
cursory and partial manner, point the way in which you may secure this
inestimable prize.

Would you acquire a wise and an understanding heart? Then duly estimate your
noble part, your intellectual and immortal mind. This is the dignity of your
natures, the ethereal breath of your omniscient creator. By this are you
enabled to think -- to reason -- to judge -- to act a part worthy of rational,
moral, and spiritual agents. That attention which too many pay to the mortal
body, you must pay to the immortal mind.

Respect yourselves as rational beings, fitted for intellectual pursuits and
angelic happiness.

To know ourselves, is an essential branch of wisdom. Without this knowledge,
the highest seize in the arts and sciences, will leave us in a state of
deplorable weakness and folly. Man can never be wise, unless he knows his own
powers, and for what pursuits his genius and situation in life best fit him. He
has made a happy discovery, who has learned the tendency and force of his own
mind, and for what employments in life, the Author of his being has prepared
him.

But this discovery is not enough. He must cultivate and strengthen his powers
by study and exercise. We learn most rapidly in the school of experience. The
man, who seldom awakes his mind, by energetic exertions, who lets his talents
rust in idleness, is like Sampson, sleeping in the lap of Delilah. Roused, by
exertion, the mind feels its strength; brightened, by exercise, it knows how to
direct its force to the best advantage.

Having discovered in what line we can be must useful, prudence will direct us
to pursue that line: And by application to it, we shall not fail of gaining a
laudable distinction, and of being highly useful to all our connexions.

Possibly, you modestly think, that you are destined to the inferior
seize of knowledge; to walk in the lower steps of wisdom? But this, in
you, may be false modesty. You have not, duly considered, to what lofty
heights, you may arise, by a course of diligence, perseverance and enterprise.
" Nil desperandum" To despair of nothing, should be the motto of those who
aspire after wisdom. Prodigies of learning and wisdom have emerged from small
and unpromising beginnings.

Fortitude, an inflexible resolution of mind, are essential to the acquisition
of eminent degrees of knowledge. Be not afraid of the labor and expense of
getting wisdom. It was a proverb of the ancients, " Veritas in puteo" Truth is
in the bottom of a well. You must draw it out, with labor and perseverance.
Solomon gives a sanction to this proverb, when he tells us, that to get wisdom,
we must search for her as for silver, and dig for her as for hidden treasure.
The lazy man, the slothful soul, can never be replenished with truth and
knowledge.

Not only industry, but order and method are equally requisite in the pursuit
of wisdom. We must organize and arrange our studies, and turn our minds upon
subjects in their due order, and according to their importance, or we must
despair of success.

To one who asked that great statesman, pensionary Dewitt, How he performed so
much business in so short a period? He replied, by doing one thing at a time.

Be always doing: Study method and order; lose no opportunity; keep strait
forward, and you will be astonished at your own progress. You will leave
hurrying, bustling, wandering travelers, far behind.

But let us, always, recollect the distinction between a pursuit of wisdom and
the pursuit of knowledge. To improve and enlarge our minds, that we may be
useful and do good to others, is the pursuit of wisdom. But he pursues
knowledge, only, who studies for amusement, and seeks those showy parts of
learning, by which, he may make a blaze, and dazzle the eyes of gaping, ill
judging, spectators. But, if you know yourselves, your talents, your
opportunities, and circumstances, and redeem your time from unprofitable
studies, and from enervating indolence, and apply all your discoveries to some
good account, for the improvement and felicity of God's creatures, then do you
seek, then shall you attain to true and saving wisdom. For this end, no part of
human science is to be neglected, by which the purpose of doing good may be
promoted. The art of becoming great and eminent, is, by gaining practical
knowledge, the knowledge of doing to others the most extensive benefits.

Our personal applications to study and literature, should be in order to
qualify ourselves for usefulness. Every effort we make, to advance useful
knowledge in society, is a mark, no less of our wisdom, than of our benevolence.

The object of parents, in the education of children, is to enlarge their
minds, and direct them into such a train of reasoning, and to inspire them with
such beneficial sentiments, as will best fit them for the active employments of
doing good. To store their minds with useful ideas, and practical sentiments,
is to leave them the best legacy in a parent's gift.

All institutions of learning, are to be fostered and encouraged, as they lay
the foundations, in the minds of youth, of future usefulness. What youth
acquire, in this way, will be a durable inheritance, when wealth and titles
decay. While parents sleep in the dust, the precious fruits of their care and
foresight, in the good instruction of their children, will be tasted by
succeeding generations.

As, knowledge is essential to wisdom, and the arts and sciences are handmaids
to virtue, and give energy and success to the feelings of benevolence, so, we
cannot be too assiduous in acquiring knowledge for ourselves, or in promoting
it among those with whom we are connected in society; especially among the
youth, the rising hope of our country. Is he to be commended, who drinks deep
at the fountain of knowledge? How much more worthy of our admiration and
gratitude, is he, who liberally devises the ways and means of disseminating
science and wisdom, among our numerous youth of both sexes? He makes provision,
not only, that the Fathers, but, that the future Mothers of our race, may be
richly furnished to train up their children to learning and virtue, and to
become the Timothies, and Paul's, the Moseses, and Solomon's, of succeeding ages.

In pleasing anticipation of these future benefits to community, do I, now,
gratefully, discharge the duties of my appointment, in making an honorable
mention of the laudable zeal, of those worthy citizens of Deerfield, who have
made such copious subscriptions, and donations, for the purpose of establishing
a seminary of learning in this place. In aid of their noble exertions, and in
answer to their petitions, the Legislature of this Commonwealth, have granted a
charter of ample privileges for the establishment of an Academy, by the name of
DEERFIELD ACADEMY; and have endowed it with a valuable tract of land, for the
encouragement and support of the institution.

The gentlemen, who, by the act of incorporation, are entrusted with the
interests and government of the Academy, have been enabled, by the munificence
and energies of the friends of science, to erect an elegant building, for the
accommodation of those numerous youths, who may wish to tread the paths of
truth and virtue, and qualify themselves for future service in church and
state. The Trustees have been mindful of that sacred deposit, which the bounty
of individuals and of the public, have placed in their hands. They have been
diligent to accomplish the wishes and expectations of the public and of
individuals.

Having completed the academic edifice, they have procured an instructor, for
the education of those children, and youth of both sexes, who may be committed
to his care. Having received ample testimonials of the literary and moral
character of this instructor, the Trustees do, this day, with auspicious hopes,
present him to the public, the first Preceptor of Deerfield Academy. As
occasions may require, other able and virtuous instructors, will be provided
for teaching the useful branches of knowledge, and leading the youthful mind to
wisdom and happiness.

In this the Trustees are happy, that their wishes for the prosperity of the
institution are anticipated and exceeded. By the liberality of several private
donors, the foundation of a Library is already laid, which they wish to see
increased by additional favors from munificent and enlarged minds. The
improvement of the pupils, would, in this way, be abundantly increased, and the
interests of literature greatly promoted.

A surprising progress, for so short a period, has been made, in the collection
of rare and valuable curiosities into the Museum of the Academy, where the
minds of the inquisitive and philosophical, may be luxuriously fed, in
contemplating the productions of nature and art.

Nor have the friends of science and humanity, been unmindful of the advantages
of endowing the institution with a suitable apparatus, for aiding the enquiries
of naturalists and philosophers, and for promoting the knowledge of the pupils,
in the more sublime parts of learning. Provision is made for valuable additions
to the present small beginnings of this infant institution.

The gentlemen of the Trust, are deeply impressed with a feeling and grateful
sense of their high obligations to Mr. DAVID WELLS* of Greenfield, Deacon
JONATHAN ARMS, and Mrs. ABIGAIL NORTON, for their munificient donations to the
Academy, for the purpose of procuring a philosophical apparatus. Following
years shall celebrate this liberality and largeness of heart. Future
generations shall reap the harvest of their bounty. -- And new patrons of this
happy institution shall emulate their virtues.

It is, with pleasing confidence expected, that the friends of freedom, of
order, of science, and of religion, will be the friends of Deerfield Academy.
It will be the care and felicity of the Trustees, to merit the approbation and
encouragement of such worthy patrons. They will labor to improve, with
economy, the revenues of the corporation -- to impart to youth its many
privileges and advantages -- to provide instructors, who, by example* and
teaching, shall advance the interests of learning -- of liberty -- of social
order -- of wisdom -- of virtue -- and of christianity. They will, humbly,
endeavor, when they shall be called off, from this honorable service, that
this trust be committed to faithful men. That their labors may be animated,
may be wisely directly, and happily succeeded, may a gracious God give to his
servants, wise and understanding hearts. May the Almighty Ruler of the
Universe, ever have the Academy, its officers and members, in his holy keeping.

To draw to a close, may this respectable assembly, who now worship God in this
house of prayer, and honor the cause of literature, by their presence, at the
consecration of the Academy, to the purposes of knowledge and virtue, duly,
appreciate their privileges, in this land of liberty, of light, and of
christian knowledge. May they cultivate their own minds with wisdom and virtue.

Would you, my hearers, be useful in time, and wise for eternity? Let me, last
of all, and most of all, entreat you to go to the Babe of Bethlehem, and learn
of him, who was meek and lowly, and you shall find rest to your souls. Go
without the gates of Jerusalem, and set under his cross, where he bore your
shame and expiated your guilt. There, while you hear the tongues of scoffing
wits, and blaspheming infidels, deride the doctrines and insult the griefs of
your dying Redeemer, you shall be compelled, in admiration of the mystery of
eternal wisdom, to cry out, "Truly, this man was the Son of God." In that
Cross, which was to the Jews, a stumbling block, and to the Greeks,
foolishness, you shall see and adore the wisdom of God, and the power of God to
your salvation.

Do you realize a careless inattention to the most important truths? Do you
feel yourselves perishing in your sins? Do you perceive the dark glooms of
infidelity, and the hopeless despair of modern philosophy? Do doubts and
perplexities accompany your meditations upon the grave? Is all beyond
conjecture and uncertainty? Look to the sufferer on Calvary; enter the tomb of
Joseph, of Arimathea; hear the earthquake, ushering in the Resurrection of
Jesus; go to Olivet; stand gazing up to heaven, until you see the ascending
Jesus, received out of your sight. These scenes shall pluck the scales from
your eyes; shall dispel your doubts; shall silence your fears; shall fill you
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. -- For by him, who has died and risen
again, Life and Immortality are brought to light.

With what more salutary exhortation can I conclude this discourse, If any of
you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men, liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Take fast hold of instruction, let
her not go; keep her, for she is thy life.

AMEN.
When returned from the Meeting House, to the Academy, the Rev. ROGER NEWTON,
President of the Corporation, delivered the following address, introductory of
the Preceptor into office:
GENTLEMEN and FRIENDS,
WE have now, under the smiles of divine providence, arrived to a period which
we have been anticipating with pleasure, when we have an opportunity to
dedicate this Academy, to the literary and virtuous purposes, for which it has
been erected. -- Upon this occasion, in the name of the Trustees, I commit to
you, Mr. BROWNSON, the key of the Academy, and office of Preceptor. And you,
sir, being thus introduced into this seminary, in its infancy, to begin the
rearing and improvement of it, your situation is of consequence, to yourself,
to the Pupils, and many others. Upon your exertions and success, as a
preceptor, we conceive the future encouragement, and prosperity of this
institution, much depend. It is our ardent wish, that you may fulfill the
pleasing expectations which arise from the character, under which you come
recommended, in teaching and governing the children and youth committed to your
care, and in forming their minds and manners; and under your fostering hand,
with the aid and patronage of others, may this institution flourish, and for
many years to come, afford those means of instruction which shall be highly
beneficial to individuals, and eventually, to the public.


