JULIA; OR THE ADVENTURES OF A CURATE's DAUGHTER. By MR. McMILLAN.

Printed at WALPOLE, NEWHAMPSHIRE, For THOMAS and THOMAS, By DAVID CARLISLE,
And sold at their Bookstore. 1799.

JULIA.
IF thou art a Curate, O Reader, and have already one parish in thy possession,
be contented, and seek not to have two. Be assured that contentment is better
than to have two livings.

Many good people besides Shakespeare have been born upon the Avon; and one of
them was the Curate of the Parish of Elmwood. Of a family of nine people,
parents and children, only he and his daughter Julia remained.

This old Parson could do many things besides eat his pudding, drink his
October (both which he loved affectionately), and collect his tithes; -- those
important qualifications which have been, from time immemorial, annexed to the
office of a Country Curate. He carried the Sciences in his head, and the Arts
in his heart -- I mean, so far as they are connected with manners or sentiment.
Besides all this he preached an excellent sermon, wore his own gray hairs, and
had the gout: but, above all, he loved, most dearly loved, his daughter Julia.

And well did she deserve his love. -- Sweet Maid! If ever I forget thee, may
my fancy lose her flights, and my pen its movements! If ever I forget the
majestic elegance of thy form -- or the liquid blue swimming in thy eye -- or
the half rose, half lily colors glowing in thy cheek, like the streaks of the
west in a July evening -- Oh! if I remember not the lovely confusion over all
thy features, when I first beheld thee in the arms of thy Ravisher -- may I
cease to dream of thee! -- If I do not, Julia! may thou never think of me!

Such was the daughter of the Curate of Elmwood -- a fair form, and a pure
heart! -- It was nourished in the pure bosom of a father.

Though the mansion of these contented relations rose in the center of the
Parish, it was neither stately nor proud: like its inhabitants, it was modest,
and seemed to retire into an obscure and silent glade, formed between various
clumps of shrubbery, and a ridge of rising ground. At a small distance rolled
the silver Avon, ever musical, now mantling over a rocky channel, and now
gliding through green plains and fields covered with wild flowers.

Through these fields, and along these skirted banks, full often did the Curate
and his daughter pursue their walk. In that sweet hour of the evening, when the
sun seems dropping behind the hills, and throws a feeble but pleasing beam over
the landscape, then might you see them walking arm in arm, and slowly, on the
Avon side. "Julia, (he would say to his daughter) my dear Julia, you and my
Parish are the comfort of my life. Ye all are my children -- but you, Julia,
you are my Friend. The thirsty loves not to drink, nor the weary to rest, more
than I love to look upon you. What would become of me, Julia, were thou gone?
and when I am gone, my daughter, what will become of thee?" -- I hope, father,
we shall die both together," -- "God grant it! God grant it!" answered the old
man.

Thus peaceably glided on their lives, till an unlucky accident in the
neighboring parish disturbed their tranquillity. The Vicar of that parish died.
Now, the moment our Curate was informed of this, it roused one of his worst
passions: he had now but one wish to be gratified in this world; and that was
-- to have the neighboring vicarage in his possession. "My dear father (said
the unambitious Julia), have we not competence? and does not competence afford
us happiness? and is not this sufficient?" -- Ay, all that was very true: but
then the vicarage lay so snug just at his own door; and he wanted to have it in
his power to leave something to his Julia after his death; and, now that he was
so very old, and so very gouty, what a comfortable thing it would be to have a
Curate under him, to perform service when he was confined at home! The thing
was evidently a snug thing, and would be very convenient: besides, he knew the
Patron of the living -- he had been his school fellow -- as good a nobleman as
ever was born -- he was certain of success -- It was impossible that he could
not succeed -- he had set his heart upon the thing -- and Julia, his child,
could not oppose it.

Here he was right. Julia would sooner have expired at his feet. She yielded
the point with a smile.

But much remained yet to be done. The Curate had talked like a man
unacquainted with calculations, and his fancy (old as it was) got the start of
his judgment. He did not consider that Lord C --, the patron of the living,
resided at London, and that his own limbs were too gouty to carry him thither
-- for personal application is absolutely necessary in these cases: besides,
the Clergy, though they are continually advising their flocks to keep their
eyes fixed upon the good things of Heaven only, have a strange trick of keeping
their own eyes constantly fixed upon the good things of this earth: every
moment, therefore, was important; to lose a minute was to lose the Curacy; and
while he was talking, some other reverend brother, who had no gout in his toes,
no daughter to provide for, no want of an assistant Curate, might be posting to
his Lordship in Berkely Square.

The old man became now greatly agitated; and that bosom which ought to have
been the mansion of resignation and peace, was disturbed by restless wishes and
ill timed despair. The sympathetic soul of Julia was roused; her heart throbbed
with guiltless pangs, and she felt for the griefs of her father. She tried to
soothe him, but tried in vain: she argued against his wishes, but she was
arguing against the follies of old age, which are incurable. The Curacy was
lost, and he was resolved to bewail it.

The evening came, but came not as usual; this man of despair was unconscious
of its charms. His soul was deaf to the voice of Nature, even when her notes
were sweetest -- at the close of the day. He listened not to the carols of the
hinds, nor to the rustic music of the fields: the flocks clustered in the
meadows unnoticed; and the sun poured his evening glories over the landscape
unregarded. Even Julia did not charm him: he saw her kneel at his side without
emotion, and he heard her sighs in silence.

Here a father and a friend was lost to happiness -- the only friend too she
had in the world -- and sorrows much less than these would have murdered the
peace of Julia. She had already knelt by the side of her father: she now
clasped his hand closely in her own, and fixing her blue eyes pathetically on
his countenance, begged that he would not refuse her one request -- "What was
that?" -- To permit her to go to London, in quest of the Curacy.

Electricity could not touch him quicker. The voice of Julia was pathetic, and
it awakened him. His affections returned in an instant: he leaned over his
daughter, and gave her to understand that it was impossible to grant her
request; that he would not part with her for a Bishopric; and that she must not
think to part with him. She replied; he answered; and she re-answered: in
short, the contest was long, stubborn and eloquent; and though there was not
much learning in it, it abounded with nature, a richer quality. Suffice it to
say that Julia conquered; and she obtained with great difficulty what she
called the honorable office of being her father's messenger.

It has been observed already that dispatch is one of the few roads to
preferment. As no time was therefore to be lost, it was agreed upon that she
should set off the next morning. The Warwick stage passed through the
neighboring market town, and she might walk thither to meet it. The old man
retired to get ready his letters, and Julia to make her little preparations for
her journey.

How they slept, themselves know best; but when the morning came, the Curate's
opinions were entirely changed. "He had thought better upon the subject, and he
was resolved not to let her go. The roads were dangerous, and London was still
more so -- besides, she might turn sick -- or the coach might be overturned --
she might be killed -- and he would never see her more." Julia knew that these
fears were only the tender works of timid nature, and she opposed them. In
short, the contest was renewed with its former warmth; and the affection of the
daughter triumphed once more over the tenderness of the Father. He consented
again to let her go, on condition that Joe (his labourer, his gardener, his
footman, his hostler, his every thing) should attend her with his friendly care
-- should be the companion of her journey.

Now this Joe was the awkwardest mortal -- Never, sure, did a more simple
squire page it at the heels of a fair lady. Neither the Sancho of Don Quixote,
nor the Pedrillo of Rosalva, were more arrant children of Nature -- were guided
by more native simplicity. He and his occupation seemed made for each other, so
exactly were they respectively fitted. He was never famous but for two things;
viz. for whistling, after his team, the loudest and most musical notes of any
in the whole village -- and for knitting stockings: this was all the reputation
he had in the world; and he was now going to set out for London (where he had
never been) in high expectation of seeing fine things and fine folks, but
without any idea of receiving treatment different from what he met with in the
parish of Elmwood.

Now, reader, stop a moment, and bethink thee of this plan and of this journey;
and then confess that they were highly worthy of the politic heads which gave
them birth. A village virgin, attended by a village boor -- both equally
accustomed to traveling, and the bustle of an English turnpike road -- both
equally skilled in the knowledge of men and of their characters -- are setting
our for London -- for London, I say -- in quest of a Curacy! The thing was
worthy of a Village Curate. The descent of Eneas into Hell was, in comparison
of this, walking upon carpets.

Facilis descensus Averni,
Sed revocare gradum --
Our travelers were now ready to begin their walk to the market town, which
was but four miles distant. Without palfrey, armor, or other retinue than the
children of the neighborhood (who regarded Julia as the good and fair Genius
of the village) the cavalcade set out. Julia and her father led the van, and
the rest followed. Joe, as if conscious that he was entering upon a service of
danger, assumed a statelier port and a more august visage; and, with a clean
shirt in his left pocket, much good bacon and cheese in his right, and a lusty
sapling in his hand, he towered majestic forward in the midst of the children,
with stern aspect and long strides.

The company had now walked a mile, and were to part. On this trying occasion I
could say much, but will not. To describe the glances of affection and the
looks of love which glistened in every eye, which played in every feature,
would be extremely tedious to many of my gentle readers: I shall therefore
content myself with informing them, that in this difficult scene the simple
heart of the Curate failed him; his eyes confessed it, and he played the woman.
The ender Julia caught the soft contagion; and from her it passed to the little
villagers who composed her train. Joe, who now saw what was passing all around
him, was not willing to be singular: his eye forgot its haughtiness for a
moment, and he mixed his plaintive notes in the concert of woe. -- Thus they
are all crying together.

But these lamentations were soon over. The Curate, taking his daughter by the
hand, showered blessings and advices upon her in great plenty; told her to be
cautious, prudent and expeditious; that while she took care of herself, she was
serving him; and then again wishing her ten thousand blessings, bade his child
adieu. The Curate marched slowly back at the head of his young flock, and our
two travelers ses forward to the market town with a hasty pace and high
expectations.

Having now begun a journey, we must be expeditious. They arrived at the market
town, met the stage coach, and took their respective stations -- Julia in the
inside, and Joe, like her guardian angel, perched above her upon the top. Now
why should I loiter to rehearse the trivial adventures of a stage-coach journey
-- how, always as town rose to view after town, hill after hill, and county
after county, the spirits of Joe rose in proportion, and still he whistled on
both loud and long, like the lark at day break; or how, though all the silly
people in the coach stared continually at Julia, the timid Julia durst not
stare at them? or why should I relate the idle small talk, the impudent regard,
and the uncourteous gallantry, with which she was entertained by a foolish
officer of the guards (those coxcomb troops), who is well known to be a fop in
the Drawing room and a fribble on the Parade? Otherwise they went smoothly on,
till they arrived at the Lane which is three miles on the west side of
Uxbridge; when a very civil gentleman came to the window, and desired them to
give him all the money they had. The gentleman at the window was far from being
unpolite, considering he had declared war against Society. He bespoke them very
gently, beginning at the right hand, and following them all, man by man, and
woman by woman, till he went round to the left side. The officer was unhappily
first, and he gave his purse with a sullen silence. Julia was next, and held
her little money in her hand, but durst not look toward the window. A meagre
cockney gave all, but begged a few shillings back to carry him to St. Paul's. A
little fat woman surrendered her purse with a threat; and a plain dressed man
regretted he had not more for so civil a gentleman.

When they arrived at the inn at the next stage, each one expressed his sorrows
as his feelings prompted: but they were now to enter upon their last stage, and
none had such weighty cause to be aggrieved as Julia, who had not a friend
before her. To go forward was madness, and to go back was impossible. What was
she to do? -- She called in Joe, and asked if he had provided himself with any
money, in case of an emergency. -- "Yes, that he had -- and there it was at her
service," -- throwing down his entire flock upon the table, which in the whole
amounted to the sum of three shillings and nine pence. This made despair more
black. It was her first misfortune; and she thought it but a rough entrance
into the world, for one who never deserved it.

The officer now entered the room; and seeing Joe there, began to upbraid him
for suffering the highway man to escape, when he was seated so advantageously
at the top, with an oaken sapling in his hand -- "You stupid oaf! (said this
military hero) why did you not attack him?" -- "'Case I had not a sword by my
side, like you (replied Joe, with the greatest frankness) -- he -- he -- he!
icod every man to his traid, measter!" -- These arguments were unanswerable.

The officer now walked up to Julia, whose embarrassment he perceived; and
taking her aside, told her he guessed the cause of her sorrow, and that he was
happy he had it in his power to remove it: "for (continued he) I know the road
too well to venture my all upon it, and to leave myself unprovided with
resouces. Here (says he, untying his stock, and shaking out of it a slender
green purse) here is my corpse de reserve: I gave the robber a few shillings,
and I secured this for your use." Now Julia examined the face of this affair
simply as it stood. It was a case of necessity; and she thought it ridiculous
for one who was many, many miles from Elmwood, and who had not two pence in her
pocket, to refuse the loan of a few guineas, which would remove all her
sorrows. She might probably have an opportunity of hinting the matter to Lord C
-- when she saw him, who would no doubt advance the money upon the Curacy and
thus all would be right again. She therefore thanked him politely, and told him
that when she saw her noble friend Lord C --, she hoped to be able to repay
him. "Lord C --! (says he) -- what -- you are going to visit him?" -- Yes, Sir.
-- "O -- a relation I presume, Madam?" No, Sir -- only a friend: his Lordship
and my father were great friends when they were young, and at school -- "Ay, ay
-- your father, I presume, Madam, lives in the country?" -- Yes, Sir; he is
Curate of Elmwood, near -- in Warwickshire. "Your visit, Ma'am -- is it a visit
of pleasure or business?" -- Business, Sir: I am only come to town with a
letter from my father to Lord C -- to solicit the Curacy of --. -- " O I
understand you, Ma'am. Lord C -- is my particular acquaintance, and it will
give me pleasure to be your protector and your guide, till I deliver you safely
and honorably to his Lordship. -- Would you choose to alight, Ma'am, at any
particular place in London?" -- No (said the simple Julia) I intend to stay at
the Inn all night, and to wait upon his Lordship in the morning. -- " Ah! Madam
(replied the officer), you do not know the confusion, the disgust, and danger
which you will meet with at the Inn: I have a mother in town, who lives
elegantly: be prevailed upon to be lodged this night at her house. She will
receive you with cheerfulness, and treat you with tenderness. May I perish,
Madam -- may I beg the honor to know your name, Madam?" -- Julia. -- "May I
perish, Miss Julia, but I am interested in your case as sincerely as if you was
my sister!" This last proposal was better and better. To meet so good a friend
at once! -- She was certain her father's prayers for her were heard; and she
thought she could not be too thankful to Heaven -- nor to the Gentleman. She
accepted his officer; and they mounted the stage coach once more.

As the stage coachman was at this place paid his full demands, there was
nothing to be done but to roll into town, and go where they pleased. The fat
woman lived in Holborn, and the coach stopped to set her down. "Here too, Madam
(said the officer to Julia), we may get out for we are near our home." The
artful abruptness and hurry of the summons -- the consciousness of finding
herself suddently in the midst of the immense metropolis, where she already saw
strange things, and expected to see still stranger -- her total ignorance of
every thing around her -- her hopes -- her expectations -- her simplicity --
all contributed to throw her mind into confusion, her spirits into a flutter:
she forgot every thing -- she forgot even Joe -- and Joe, alas! forgot her; for
he was exactly in the same predicamant. He was astonished: he was in a new
world: his recollection forsook him, and a mist wandered over his eyes: he set
nailed to the top of the coach, with his mouth open, looking at every thing,
and seeing nothing. In this cloud Julia escaped; and she neither spoke nor
looked around her, till her gallant commander led her into Lincoln's Inn Fields
-- Now when a young Gentleman, with a young Lady by his side, who is resolved
to follow him, finds himself in Lincoln's Inn Fields, the road to Covent Garden
lies direct: it is only going up Queen street, crossing the Lane and the Acre,
and you're there. He conducted her into that well known house situate between
the gate of the Theater and the Piazza Coffee house. The polite inhabitants of
this house received the young gentleman with all the freedom and civility of an
old acquaintance, which convinced Julia that he was quite at home.

Now, gentle reader, while Julia and her friend are seated at a bottle of
Madeira, rocollect, and confess whether we have not traveled to good purpose.
From the banks of the Avon -- from the mansion of innocence -- from the warm
bosom of a father -- to place our Heroine on the very brink of perdition at
once! -- by Pegasus, it was rapidly done! Other authors, indeed, have, by
degrees, from adventure to adventure, from scene to scene, carried their
Heroines into very extreme danger; but we, fully resolved to excel all that
have ever gone before us, have seated her upon the pinnacle of ruin at once. --
And now, ye guardian spirits (if such spirits there be, as certain divines have
told us) whether ye be Sylphs, Genii, or Fairies -- if ye have indeed any
regard for innocence, and a virgin too -- now open your golden eyes, and now
ply your silver pinions -- for innocence is in danger. -- And now, thou
wretched old man, thou ambitious Curate of Elmwood -- rekindle your piety, and
redouble your prayers -- for your daughter, your Julia, is in a Bagnio -- and
without a fear!

Every thing that passed around Julia in this house appeared too plausible for
her eyes to be opened, or her suspicion to be roused -- (for she had never been
in a Tavern before: and as to the incessant tinkling of bells, and the
incessant running of waiters -- why, bells and servants must be in all great
families, and no doubt, must be continually employed) -- The deception, I say,
was good, and every thing appeared extremely well, except one thing: it puzzled
her to conceive why they should be conducted into a bed chamber! But perhaps
(she thought) it was the fashion in London, and what was that to her?

Julia drank very sparingly, but not so her companion; he was to attempt the
gaining of a difficult post, and the coward wanted spirits. It is a tribute
paid to virtue, that, though it be lodged in the possession of but a frail and
weak woman, its spoiler, before he attempts to ruin it, musts call to his
assistance foreign aid, acquire fictitious spirits and debase himself into a
brute. The second bottle began to tune the spirits of our Hero: his veins
swelled, his pulse quickened, his eyes glistened, and his cheek glowed: he
snatched the hand of Julia, fed upon it with fury, and devoured it with a
tumult of unholy love: if indeed he loved Julia, it was with the love of a
tiger.

She started from his embraces, and retreated some paces from her chair. He
followed, and renewed the attack, and Julia her resistance: he grew stronger,
he grew wilder, his hand was wandering over her charms (where hand never
wandered before), and he became furious; Julia became faint -- she was yielding
-- her tender frame was exhausted, and she could now only shriek. A shriek was
a new thing in these apartments, and it alarmed a gentleman in the adjoining
room, who, with his coat off, a dirty boot on one leg, and his face glowing and
besmeared with sweat, kicked open the door, and rushed violently into the room,
with all the zeal of a man who was to assist the distressed. The Officer let go
his hold of Julia, and she threw herself breathless upon a chair. The man in
dishabille stared at them both alternately, now at Julia, and now at the
Officer, and at length broke silence:

"What! force! -- Why, thou damnable and silly animal, what a dirty business is
this you are engaged in -- forcing a woman to your wishes! -- To force a woman
in any place is a meanness that no man of honor will stoop to -- but to force
one here in this house -- D-mn -- n! you scoundrel! get out -- walk off, or
I Will kick you."

We need not be surprised that the Officer was mean enough to take his advice.
He looked at the man in dishabille as if he had recollected something, and left
the room precipitately.

"And now, my angel (said the gentleman in the boot to Julia, taking her by the
hand), let us drink a glass or two and I dare say we shall agree better." --
Oh, Sir! (replied Julia, clasping her bands and falling on her knees before
him) -- have mercy on me! -- pity me! -- or you will kill me -- "Pshaw, my
dear! I never kill quite upon these occasions -- you will but die at the most.
-- But, Child, you look d-mn'd serious upon this business -- Is any thing the
matter with you?" -- Oh, Sir I (answered Julia, in the midst of many tears) I
don't know where I am, and I don't know where to go -- I am just come to town
in the Warwick stage. -- "In the Warwick stage! -- what through Uxbridge?' --
Yes. -- "And was that fellow one of the company?" -- Yes. -- "When -- w! -- And
you met a highwayman, didn't you?" -- Yes. -- "That was me, by G-d!" Here Julia
shrieked, terrified at the sound of the name; but he stopped her in good time:
"You must not be afraid (said he), for I will not hurt you. Tell me honestly, are
you virtuous or not? -- that is, are you a maid?" -- Oh! upon my honor, Sir.
-- "How came you here, then, in company with that fellow?" -- When you took --
when I lost all my money, he advanced some for me; and as I had no friends in
London, promised to take care of me, and bring me to his mother's till
tomorrow, when I could have finished all my business. -- "Then you are really
honest?" -- As I love Heaven and my Father, Sir, I am. -- "Then thou art a
lovely girl and it is pity so fine a woman should 'be honest. But I believe you,
and shall be your friend -- shall guard you from harm -- for, by G-d! I am a
man of honor! and though misfortune and my evil spirit force me sometimes to
the highway, I scorn to do a mean thing, by G-d! -- In the first place, as you
lost your money, you shall divide this purse with me. In the next place, you
are now in a house full of wh-res and scoundrels -- I must leave it myself in a
minute, in case that fellow should have twigg'd me, and I fancy you had better
leave it too. Trust yourself with me, and I shall take care of you till
morning." Julia told him he could not serve her more agreeably than by carrying
her to the Inn where the stage and Joe were. That, he said, was more than he
durst do; but he would carry her to a place equally or more secure. So saying,
he returned to his room, to throw off part of his road dress, and adjust the
rest.

If the Reader has a fancy worth two pence, he will conceive how Julia's
thoughts were employed in this interval, till they are interrupted by the
entrance of the highwayman, who appeared now to be a handsome and genteel young
fellow. He paid the reckoning, and they departed: it was now between nine and
ten in the evening.

They had not quitted the Piazza, when four of Sir John Fielding's men rushed
forward, and seized the highwayman with the most incredible activity. They
swept him away, as the whirlwind sweeps away the leaves in autumn, and whirls
them, the Lord knows where. Julia ran rapidly away, nor cast one look behind.
She continued to go forward (as she thought), till she had run a great way; and
then stopping for breath, she was exactly on the spot from whence she set out
-- she had only run round the Garden, not suspecting but she was going forward
in a straight line. "Madam! Madam! (says an Irish chairman to her) do you want
a chair?" I don't know what I want. My fait, but I do -- you want to be carried
to Mother H -- 's, my jewel, which I and Connor yonder can do in five minutes."
-- My good friend, if you can carry me to any honest place, I shall bless you
for ever. -- " Honest plase! -- Devil burn me, my honey, an if I know one
honest plase in the whole town -- Ha, ha, ha! -- honest plase! -- Ah, you
cunning Devil you! -- To be sure you want to go to an honest plase! -- Ha, ha,
ha! -- Here you, Mr. Watchman -- this Lady wants to go to an honest plase --
Cannot you show her the way?" "Aye, that I can (roplied the watchman) -- Ah,
Madam, it is you? -- I know you of old -- Come along, come along with me: you
shall go to the honestest place in all King George's dominions -- the Round
house." -- The watchman happened just at that time to want a pot of beer; but
Julia not understanding his meaning, to the Roundhouse he led her in triumph.
-- Ah, Julia, Julia, ah!

She had been hitherto overwhelmed in a kind of insensibility: the suddenness
and horror of the last adventure were too powerful for her; her faculties lost
their power, and her recollection was suspended; she was led by the watchman
without seeing whither she was going, and she was dragged along without feeling
that he held her by the arm. But she had not been long seated at the top of the
bench, where they placed her near the fire, before she awakened from her
stupor. She awakened, looked around, and saw herself seated in the midst of a
horrible assembly, whose visages would make Angels weep and Demons tremble.
High above the rest, like the Evil Spirit in Pandemonium, sat the Constable of
the Night, a beef headed knave, with a pipe in his mouth, and a tankard on a
stool before him. -- "Here (said this man in office) you, snoring Dick, reach
this here tankard to that there Lady, and then bring her before me for
examination. -- Oh, she will not drink! -- Well, well, that is all one -- if she
does not drink she will pay; so bring her forward here."

Julia now advanced: her cheeks were suffused with tears, her breath quickened,
and her whole frame trembled.

"Ay, ay (says the Constable), you may well shake when you look at me. -- Hem!
what account can you give of yourself, Miss? -- No, that is not it neither: I Will
begin with you, I think, Mister Watchman -- Where did you find this here Lady
here, Snoring Dick?"

"Found her! (replies Dick) why, please your Worship, I found her picking a
gemmun's pockets."

"Picking a gemmun's pockets! -- Mercy on us! -- O ho, Miss, you may well shake
when you look at me -- Well, Dick, go on."

"And so, Sir, as she was a picking the gemmun's pockets, as I was a saying, I
comes close behind her, and lays hold of her hand in the fact."

"In the fact?"

"In the fact."

"Transportation, to be sure. -- Well, go on, Snoring Dick."

"And so, Sir, as I catches her hand, she turns about, stoops down for one of
her pattens, and before you could say Pervey, hits me the nastiest blow in the
skull I ever had in my life since the great riot -- You please to feel, Mister
Constable. the hugeous lump it has raised on my skull."

"Ay, God bless me! so it is -- it is a thumper, in faith!"

"A thumper! It will stand damages. I never had such a blow in my life -- I
warant ye it bleeds under my hair. It floundered me like a stock fish."

"Ay, she wanted to murder you."

"Yes."

"Oh; the horrid monster! -- Well, Madam, have you nothing to say for yourself?
-- Ah, you impudent -- Dick, take off her patten, that we may carry it as a
witness before Sir John in the morning."

"Ay, that I will, Mister Constable; the patten will speak for itself, and a
damned heavy patten it is."

Dick stooped for it, but Julia wore no pattens.

"Ah, the cunning Devil! (continued Dick) she has thrown them away. I thought I
heard her throw something away as we came along.

"Oh, let her alone! (said the Constable) -- she is a knowing one: but she shall
doll it in Bridewell to morrow, for all that. -- Ay, you may well shake when
you look at me, you bloody-minded -- You may now return to your seat."

As Julia was returning to her bench, she trembled incessantly, but never
uttered a syllable. -- " Oh, (says Dick) she is dumb founded with the
highousness of her crime." "No, (replies a second) she is drunk." "Not so far
gone neither (echoes a third) but a quartern of gin would recover her."

"Ay, ay, (says the Constable) there is no doubt but she will drink; and it is her
turn now to send out. Please, Madam, to give this gemmun money for a gallon of
Trueman's best, and for half a gallon of hot, and for four papers of tobacco,
and for a loaf, an for three pound of Cheshire. -- Here, Scout; walk over,
Sirrah, to the Lady, and make her your Sunday's bow -- Bring every thing of the
best, and then we'll drink to the Lady's health, and to poor Snoring Dick's
head; and old Uglyface in the corner yonder will sing us the comical song about
the Cat and the Tailor, and make his wry faces, and we'll be as happy as
Princes."

When this oration was finished, Scout made his obeisance to Julia. -- She was
just able to ask him what he wanted? -- "Money, Madam." -- How much must you
have? -- "Oh, you may let me have five or six shillings, and I Will make the best
market I can, and return you the rest faithfully, Madam, upon my honor! -- And
if that will not be enough, I Will return for more."

Julia felt in her pocket for her purse (which the highwayman had given her)
but she could not find it -- it was gone:

On seeing this, the President bawled out immediately, that it was "a sham!"
and Julia protested in vain. The company around heard this with an arch smile;
the watchmen shook their heads, and the Constable grew noisy; which awakened an
old gentleman who had hitherto stepped very soundly in a corner. Estimating the
thing as favorably as possible, he had not above half the appearance of a
gentleman. The truth is, he was no other than the well known Mr. B -- who once
had three thousand a year, though he has not now sixty; but being a man of
plain manners and a generous disposition, is still well received among his
relations, and strangers who know him. He had been lounging, as usual, for
eight or nine hours, in a Coffee house in the Garden, and then withdrew, as he
frequently does, to the watch house, either to sleep or drink. On this last
account, he was regarded there with some degree of respect.

He naturally inquired the cause of the noise; and the majority informed him,
that it was "only a Madam there, who pretended she had lost her purse." Julia
now appealed to him in her turn; and, with that unaffected simplicity which
ever clothes the words of innocence and truth, informed him, that a watchman
had taken hold of her unexpectedly in the street; that she was positive she had
her purse at that time, because a gentleman had given it to her but two minutes
before; that from that time she had only walked thither with the watchman, and
now she missed her money."

"Which watchman was it?" said the gentleman.

"Me -- " replied Snoring Dick boldly.

"Was it you? (repeated Mr. B. --) Ah, Dick! you and I, you know, are old
acquaintance, and it is long since I have known you to be a scoundrel. --
Therefore, Sirrah, deliver the purse."

"Me! (answered Dick) -- Have I the purse? -- I Will be d -- mn'd if I have any
purse about me."

"You hav'n't?"

"No."

"And you will not deliver?"

"No -- "

"Why then, Mr. Constable, I charge you with -- "

"Except indeed (interrupts Dick eagerly) something that I picked up on the
street, as I was coming along with that there lady."

"Ah, you old fox! (said the gentleman) I thought I should unkennel you. Where
is this something which you picked up from the street?"

"Here it is -- but it does not belong to her."

"Pray, Madam (said Mr. B --, addressing Julia) is this your purse?"

"If it has a gold tassel at either end (answered Julia) it is mine, Sir, upon
my honor."

It had so, was delivered to her, and Mr. B -- immediately retired back into
his corner to sleep.

Julia now willingly paid all the demands made upon her; and the President
observed to her, "that as to be sure as how she was a good natured lady, and
civil, and all them there things, and had given a good account of herself, why,
to be sure, she might now go about her business."

Julia thanked him, but n. entioned, that she did not know whither to go till
morning. "Not know! (said the Constable) -- why there are five hundred beds
round you, where you may sleep for half a crown." -- But she was a stranger in
town, and did not choose to venture into strange houses.

"Lord, Ma'am, (observed Snoring Dick) for sixpence I Will conduct you to a
bagnio where you will be as safe as if you was in a tower." -- She started at
hearing a eagnio mentioned. -- "Why then, Ma'am, if so be as you are so shy and
a'n't proud, hire me well, and I Will let you sleep in my house. -- There Is no
body there but my wife. -- I Will seek but five shillings, and your purse can
well spare that."

This proposal did not require to be repeated. Julia took him at his word. Even
though he took her purse, as he was a poor man, she thought she might be safe
in his house for a night. Besides, she was pleased with the thoughts of being
in company with a woman once more. With Dick, therefore, she went into one of
the little streets behind Long Acre, and followed him into a three pair of
stairs room, humble enough, indeed, but where all was silence. Dick awakened
his wife, told her the story, whispered to her to look sharp after her lodger,
and left them.

Julia chatted a little while with her landlady, and found her to be civil
enough, for a watchman's wife. The first thing she begged of her was to be
favored with pen, ink, and paper. She got these readily; the landlady retired
to bed; and Julia wrote the following letter:

"Ah! my dear father, shall we ever meet again? -- When shall we meet --? --
Are you well? -- Shall I ever see you? and ah! shall you ever see me?

"I am now -- alas! I do not know where I am -- nor where I have been -- nor
where I shall be to morrow. I seem an outcast from society: I have not met one
friend since I left you: every one deceives me -- every one insults me: they
have treated me cruelly -- they have broken my heart. Even Joe has forsaken me:
he has deserted me, or he is lost -- or I know not what is become of him.

"Ah, my father! my dear father! -- that Heaven which we both serve, let that
Heaven bear witness, that one wish alone fills my whole soul -- the wish to see
you, once more, to talk with you, to gaze upon you, to sit once more by your
knee -- I would rush into your bosom: I would wet it with my tears, but I would
never forsake it -- never, never!

"They are not mankind who surround me -- I do not live among the human race:
these are the habitations of the Furies. When shall I leave them? Shall I ever
quit the dreary mansion where I now write? -- I tremble -- Shall I never more
see Elmwood? -- Shall I never more fly into the bosom of my father!"

"And oh! (continued Julia, in words half stifled with grief) if it be
possible, as my father has told me, that dreams have any meaning and that the
soul is most susceptible of these visionary impressions when it is most
o'ercharged with woe -- most surely this night I shall converse with my
father." She sealed these hopes with a shower of tears.

Now, gentle reader, if it has been at any time your fate, (as it has been
mine, and as it is at this moment many a nobler fellow's) to be sitting in that
lofty habitation called a garret, plunged in deep distress -- no two pence in
your purse, no mirth in your heart, and no beef in your belly -- when, throwing
your eyes around the rayless walls, you are conscious that sighs and tears are
the only commodities in plenty about you -- if this has been your case, you
must well know the comfort that arises from shedding your sorrows in secret --
the relief that flows from a shower of solitary tears. In such a situation,
next to instantaneous and absolute relief, it is the first of blessings, and
Julia now felt it in all its force. Her heart was eased, and she hoped for a
night of rest and for better days. Having then sealed up her letter, she
retired to a bed so humble that it kissed the very ground.

Watching and grief had given her too good an appetite for sleep not to enjoy
it. Whether or not she dreamed, I cannot really inform my reader, because she
never informed myself of this circumstance. This I know, that she slept nine
hours incessantly, and, when she awoke, found her head resting upon the
partition wall which rose at the back of her bed. It consisted only of a single
file of boards, and was full of crevices. Her ear lay upon one of them, and it
conveyed to her the most doleful accents that ever struggled from the human
breast. She started, and applied her eye to the crevice, but every thing was
solitary: she saw no one. The voice ceased. It ceased only for a moment. Again
it murmurs, weeps, laments, sobs, and again it ceases. Her sympathetic soul
followed it through all its variations; and, led by a soft humanity, she
mourned with the mourner through every change of his woe. She applied her eye a
second time, but could see nothing. A moment after, the voice was renewed. It
was now more querulous, then more plaintive, and at length died away upon her
ear, as if it had expired for want of strength. She heard it no more.

For the present, Julia suppressed her feelings, and arose. Snoring Dick had
retired for an hour, to sleep away the fatigues of the night and of the
beer-pot. His wife was at breakfast, (tea) and invited Julia to partake. She
consented willingly; and the woman, who had but one dish, politely offered it
to her guest, and took for her own use a pint pot from which her husband had
been drinking beer.

This repast over, Dick awakened; and Julia, who was during breakfast-time
devising what measures to follow, proposed at first to engage him to go along
with her to the inn where Joe and the stage coach were; but on recollecting the
dangers she had already experienced in the streets, she resolved not to venture
upon it again, without a better guide than her friend the watchman. She
therefore judged it more prudent to hire him to go to the inn, and to bring Joe
along with him to the place where she was. Dick readily assented to this
proposal, for the hire of a half crown; which, he stipulated, should be paid
him before he set off, as well as the crown for the bed. All this he recieved
on the spot, with the letter for her father to be put into the Post Office. He
now departed, assuring her, that though she had not the name of the inn to give
him, he could discover it.

This business happily adjusted, the groans in the adjoining apartment rose
upon Julia's mind. She had purposely delayed her inquiries till Dick's
departure, whom she knew to be unblessed with humanity. His wife, by a softer
temper and a more complacent behavior, had recommended herself better to the
observation of Julia, and she reserved her sympathies for her ear. Assuming,
therefore, that eager and serious aspect which the face wears when we are in
earnest, she inquired who were the inhabitants of the neighboring mansion? "An
old man, (answered the woman) who I fancy is sometimes in distress; but we have
too many wants of our own to mind any others." -- Indifferent as the woman was
when she said this, Julia felt herself interested, and conceived much more than
was expressed. Seeing her hostess not very fond of social woe, she suppressed
her emotions, and in a short time after stole out into the stair case. The door
of the man in distress was exactly opposite to the watchman's, and she gently
knocked at it. There was no answer. She knocked more loudly, but all was
silence. -- "Alas! (said she to herself) if your grief is past utterance, I
must enter without leave." She raised the latch, and entered. -- It was a
piteous sight, and worthy of the tears of those bright eyes which now shed them
so plentifully. Imagine in your own mind, this lovely girl bending over a bed,
which contained in it, stretched along under a tattered rug, a man upon whose
features Heaven seemed to have poured its bitterest pangs. He was alive, but
had ceased to groan because he could groan no longer. In his arms were two
children. His left was circled round one who was asleep, -- his right round one
who was -- dead. He gazed upon Julia without any emotion, and made not an
effort to move even his head. He looked as if he was RESIGNATION. That great
Poet who suffered no scene of the soul and no situation of nature to escape
him, has almost described him. He seemed.

-- to pine in thought,
And, with a green and yellow melancholy,
He lay like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at Grief.
SHAKESPEARE. Here was that feast of exquisite grief, that luxury of
sensibility, which is fit only for those exalted souls who move in the higher
departments of humanity -- It was fit for Julia.

At length Julia spoke. "Poor -- poor man! what can relieve you?" -- He shook
his head -- Nothing. Here Julia's sympathy once more broke loose: her tears
poured down incessantly. Tears are infectious. Two or three trickled down from
the poor man's eye. "May God bless you! (said he) you have shed the first tears
that have been shed for me these ten years. The fountain of my sorrows is
almost exhausted, but I have still a drop to mix with yours." "Poor -- poor
man! (returned Julia) what shall I do to serve you?" -- " O nothing! (he
replied) nothing! -- One of my children is dead, and the other will be so in
half an hour -- I am waiting for its death, and I shall then follow it." --
"Alas! (said Julia sitting upon the bedside) would not you have it live? Is it
impossible to recover it?" He answered, "I hope it is." She then attempted to
take hold of if; but he pressed it closer to his side, and would not let it go.
"I pity you, (said Julia) and wish to relieve you: you and your child may still
live. Suffer me to be your friend." At this he only shook his head, and
attempted to smile, as if to tell her it was impossible. However, not to be
guided longer by a man who was in despair, she was resolved to administer to
the woes of the wretched. Sue left the room, and returned to the watchman's
wife. She slightly mentioned to her where she had been, told her there was
great distress, and begged of her to go out for a little wine, to be warmed for
the use of the sick. The woman (who was not destitute of much good nature,
though it was strongly seasoned with that vice so peculiar to good natured
people, indifference) readily obeyed. The wine which she brought was warmed,
and carried in by Julia herfelf to the solitary father. She insisted that her
landlady should not accompany her; from an opinion, perhaps, that this scene of
sorrows was too sacred for the profane eye of the vulgar.

The man of despair, (naturally enough, in his situation) refused relief; but
Julia insisted on the thing, and she had shed too many tears to be refused. He
desired, however, that since they must be relieved, the child should be
relieved first. "As for you (said he, withdrawing his arm from the child, which
Julia was taking hold of, and turning to the one that was dead) as to you, my
dear and lamented girl -- my last and my best beloved -- you have closed your
eye upon me, and you are smiling at life in the bosom of your mother. You were
weary of hearing your father's groans. You fled to invite him to follow." He
now kissed it, gazed upon it, hugged it, and wept upon it; and then dried the
tears off its face, as if it could be conscious of the favor.

In the mean time Julia was very busy about her child, but her assiduities were
almost baffled. The child had opened its eyes, but it refused to open its
mouth. In short, she was obliged to call to her assistance her hostess, who
readily came, and between them they poured down some warm wine mixed with water
in its throat. Still it was insensible; and at length it was thought prudent to
carry it to the next room, to be nursed before the fire; which the hostess did.

Julia now administered to the father, and he was revived. The balmy strength
of the wine recalled his expiring spirits, and warmed a heart which was almost
cold. The first use he made of his new acquired strength was to thank his
benefactress, and to enquire for his child. Being informed where it was, he
seemed to be satisfied. Julia soon after prepared for him a bit of bread, thin
and toasted, which he ate with some difficulty. This, however, paved the way
for his recovery; and in about two hours he was tolerably easy and strong. The
child in the other room made a slower progress back to life, but they did not
despair.

This child (a boy) having been put to bed again, the watchman's wife resumed
her usual occupations; while Julia, whose gentle faculties were still attuned
to softness and distress, waited upon the father, and pressed him warmly to
reveal the origin and progress of his misfortunes. He shook his head at this
request; and told her it would be a hard task; besides that, she had already
shed tears enough that day upon his account. However, he complied: and Julia,
sitting upon his bed side, her cheek leaning upon her left hand, listened to a
tale of deep and desperate distress. "Behold before you (said he,) starved with
hunger and covered with rags, a man who has long fought for his King, and spilt
for him his dearest blood -- whose body is covered with wounds, in defense of
that country which now leaves him as you see him! Such is the balm they have
applied to my wounds!" -- Though his notes were querulous, they were eloquent.
But truth is always eloquent. -- At present I am neither in leisure nor in the
humor to repeat them; and perhaps I never shall.

When he finished his melancholy tale, he caught hold of the hand of Julia, and
pressed it to his bosom. -- "This bosom was once warm (said he): but though it
is cold, you are welcome in it. I cannot thank you; but my boy will live and do
it, when I am crumbling in that grave from which you have drawn me for a
moment." Julia, with that true politeness which is natural to virtuous minds,
begged him to accept some money for his present necessities, and promised to
visit him till it could be no longer in her power

It was now rather more than dinner time, but neither Dick nor Joe appeared.
Julia was growing uneasy. Four o'clock struck, out brought no comfort with it.
It was five -- but nobody arrived -- Six -- seven -- eight -- nobody! During
these intervals she had paid frequent 02 visits to the man in distress, and
applied every lenitive she could invent to his affliction; and she charged her
hostess with great sincerity, at whatever time she went away, to be attentive
to his necessities 'till her return, which would be hoth certain and quick. So
he was for the present pretty well provided for.

I have said it was now eight o'clock, and nobody appeared. She became very,
very uneasy. It was now half past eight. "Still nobody! -- Good Heaven! are my
misfortunes never to end?" -- it seems not, Julia: for about a quarter before
nine two of Sir John Fielding's men entered with Dick -- drunk, very drunk --
at their head.

Ah! it is as I always thought it -- This dirty world has but few good persons
in it, and these few it is continually harrassing and pestering with its evils
-- nor does it often cease till it breaks their hearts. Shame on it, that an
innocent beautiful Curate's daughter, who never prayed for the good things of
this world, nor for the evil upon its inhabitants, should not be suffered to go
upon an errand for her father without molestations and misfortunes! I repeat it
-- Shame upon so dirty a world!

Now, gentle reader, whatever your thoughts upon this affair may be, certain it
is that Sir John Fielding's men are come in quest of Julia; and (as one of our
great Poets says in one of his Tragedies, which, however, he styles a Comedy)
I Will lay you plums to pippins that you cannot conjecture their business with
her.

To understand it, then, your menory must recur to the adventures of Julia with
the highwayman. He had met her in the bagnio, and given her a purse with money
in it, and in their departure together from thence the highwayman was
apprehended. Julia fled, and was afterward by chance conducted to the round
house -- as we have before related at large. Now the highwayman was apprehended
upon the information of the courageous Officer of the Guards, of whose heroic
and military virtues we have already spoken so loudly. Just when this coxcomb
arrived at the office, the fat woman of Holborn had alighted there upon the
same business. When the highwayman therefore was apprehended, the first
business thought necessary was to search him, and all the different purses of
the company were found upon him, except that of the fat woman. It was agreed
that he could not have spent it in so short a time: ergo, he must have given it
away. To corroborate the suspicion, the men recollected that a woman was along
with him when he was apprehended, and the coxcomb Officer confirmed it. The
case was therefore plain: Julia must have the purse in her possession. Away
they sally, with the Officer at their head, through streets, bagnios, taverns,
and night houses: but in vain: she was no where to be found. The next night,
between eight and nine, one of them met Dick the watchman. (Dick was at this
time returning home to Julia without any answer or information; for instead of
going on her errand, he went to get drunk with her money.) The thief taker
inquired of him by chance, as the adventure happened within his circuit, if he
had seen such a lady -- after describing her very minutely. "Seen her (says
Dick)! why, she is at my house." This information was sufficient for the
servant of Justice: he took Dick by the arm, and summoning one of his
companions, set off for the lodging of Julia.

We have already seen them introduced where she was. They seized her without
ceremony, and proceeded, as usual to search her. The fatal purse, so remarkable
for the golden tassel at either end, was in a moment found. -- This confirmed
the suspicion, and she was carried away as an accomplice. -- When will
persecution cease to follow Virtue?

Sir John was not that night at home, and they informed her that she must be
imprisoned till morning. Imprisoned! She shrieked at the very sound -- "Pshaw!
(said one of them, seeing her confusion) you need not be terrified, I assure
you, Ma'am: we are not going to a common prison. I have a pretty, little, snug
house, and as close as a cage, where you may sleep as safely and soundly as in
your own bed chamber. No difference in the world, I assure you, Ma'am -- only
that every door and window in the house is enclosed with strong and triple iron
bars. That Is all, I assure you, Ma'am: and notwithstanding all these
advantages, it will cost you only a guinea for your bed -- not a farthing more,
I assure you, Ma'am. I keeps the best usage, the best tendance, and the best
wines in the garden, I assure you, Ma'am! -- Lord, Ma'am then, what do you pout
at? no cause to be terrified, I assure you, Ma'am!"

Eloquent as this language was, and comfortable, it did not greatly gladden the
heart of Julia. But there was no choice in the case, and she followed her
guides. Arrived, they led her into an upper apartment, where there was a fire,
and good furniture. She was left alone for ten minutes; at the end of which the
landlord waited upon her, and asked what she chose for supper. "Nothing" --
What did she choose to drink, then? "nothing." (Oho, replied he) an' if so be
that you are so rusty, good night to you with all my heart." He then turned
upon his heels; and pulling the door after him with fury, locked it with a key
which grated as it turned, amidst the rattling of chains and the clanking of
iron bars.

Dreadful sounds to such an ear as Julia's! Her teeth gritted, and her joints
trembled. This was the severest stroke of all. To be imprisoned! and as an
accomplice of a highwayman too! "But she submitted to Heaven, where all her
wishes rested: her hopes leaned upon that, and upon the prayers of her father."

She retired to bed, but could not sleep; her misfortunes still interrupted,
and occupied her whole soul. She tried again, but in vain: and to this purpose
she recollected the lines of her favorite Young. Sleep, says he,

-- Like the world, his ready visit pays
Where fortune smiles: the wretched he forsakes;
Swift on his downy pinions flies from woe,
And lights on lids unsullied with a tear.
Her mind recurred to the scenes that were past, and reluctantly brooded over
the gloomy assemblage. And in truth, when we reflect upon it, her case was
rather hard. It was now only the third night since she had quitted the peaceful
mansion house of Elmwood, and the arms of her father. -- The first night she
was somewhere upon the road; the second she was in a bagnio, and in a round
house, and in a garret; and the third she was in prison. Each of these
misfortunes was a mountain upon her mind, under which it struggled; but by the
struggle it only became more feeble.

At length the soul by its powerful and violent workings, overcame the body.
Wearied with affliction, her spirits languished, and nature sunk into slumber.
Sleep of this kind, though not always the most placid, is the heaviest. She
slept till eight in the morning, when she arose. At nine they paid her a visit,
and she ate some breakfast; and at ten she was carried, with a beating heart,
in a coach to Bow street.

Here she did not wait long for the appearance of the Justice, for every thing
was prepared; even the unhappy highwayman was in waiting, as necessary to the
examination. Indeed, it was thought most proper to begin with questioning him
apart upon the subject, and then with examining Julia; and by the comparison of
their respective evidences the truth might be easily discovered.

When the highwayman had been examined upon his own account, an obstinacy
natural to men in his desperate situation prevented him from giving any account
of the purse which was missing. But now, when he was informed that Julia was
really in custody, that honor which was not yet entirely extinguished in his
heart, was roused for her safety. He ingenuously told Sir John the history of
the purse, with even its most minute circumstances; that he had robbed her
amongst the rest! that he afterward met her accidentally in the bagnio, and
gave her the money only with a view of restoring her own; that he had not been
above ten minutes in her company, and that she was in every respect innocent of
the crime with which she was charged.

Julia was next examined, and her evidence most exactly squared with the
former. Ingenuous as usual, she took up the story at Elmwood, and carried it
forward to the story of the purse; and she told her little tale with that truth
and simplicity which can never be counterfeited. Yet frequent attempts are made
to imitate these amiable virtues, and the Justice was sensible of this: he had
heard her mention that she had letters for Lord C --, and he desired to see
them. These she instantly produced to vouch for her sincerity. She added too,
that there was somewhere in town a person who could confirm her words beyond
suspicion; but alas! poor Joe! she knew not where to find him. " Joe! (said one
of the Justice's men who stood behind Julia) -- what, is your name Julia,
madam?" Yes (replied Julia)." The man immediately ran out, and brought back in
his hand the Daily Advertiser, in which he read the following advertisement.

"If a sarten yung Lady, Miss Jullia -- (whose name is nothing to nobody, and
which I doan't mention here, because I doa'nt think it proper) -- sees this,
this is to let you kno, Miss Jullia, that Joe dusn't kno where you be, and that
you dusn't kno where Joe is, for he is to be found at the sine of the Swain
with too Necks in Lad Lane, and no where else, as witness my hand by me. JOE
--,"

This very extraordinary advertisement is copied verbatim et literatim from the
real paper, which I have now in my possession. Julia listened to it with
attention, and confessed her feelings in her eyes, which glistened with
expectation. Not contented with an aural information, she snatched the paper,
and devoured the precious morsel with her own eyes. In short the simplicity of
the thing spoke for itself, and Joe it was most undoubtedly.

But it may be necessary to explain this affair. I again summon the memory of
my readers back to that time of our history, when Joe and Julia unluckily
parted in Holborn. Joe did not look for her till the coach stopped in the Inn
yard, and then he waited at the door of it for her appearance. He thought her
long in coming, but his patience was not exhausted. The rest of the company had
been out of the coach some minutes. At length he ventured to thrust in his head
-- but she was not there! He started back on his heel, and gazed wildly round
the yard, but in vain. Opposite to him he saw the door of a public room open,
and he rushed in without ceremony: from thence he sallied into the kitchen,
strode into the parlour, threw his eye into the bar, and peeped into the
larder. Wounds! he looks furious, and he is almost breathless! He marched into
the stables, and in short into every place where he saw a door open to receive
him -- but all would not do: she was not to be found. He returned to the coach,
took one peep more into it, but all was solitary! "God bless my heart (said Joe
to himself fidgetting, and scratching among his auburn hair) protect and save
me from all temptations and evil spirits! I wish I could see Miss Julia again."
Now, at last, he bethought him of what he ought to have done at first, viz. to
question the coachman concerning the affair, and the coachman informed him of
the whole truth. This information in no degree abated his anxiety. "Didn't she
leave no word with you for me?" (said he to the coachman.) No. -- "Don't you
know where she went?" -- No. -- "Don't you think she will come here this night?"
-- I cannot tell you upon my word -- Joe with downcast looks and folded arms
measured the space across the yard with long and melancholy strides. He walked
into the passage of the house, and marked the clock. He counted the hours, as
they rolled slow and heavy, but he saw not his mistress. It was now ten
o'clock, but no Julia came. -- Alas! alas!

They are not the severest, but they are the most anxious moments the mind
knows, when the possessor of it, simple, timid, and honest, feels himself far
from home, and forsaken in the midst of strangers. These moments Joe now felt
in all their bitterness. He went to bed without hope, and he arose in the
morning in despair. He grieved incessantly, and he wished for the bosom of a
friend to lean his griefs upon it. At length he disclosed his mind to the
hostler, and the hostler gave him his advice. It was this: to advertise. Every
body, he said, did it, upon every subject. "Always when he lost a horse, he
advertised for it; and why might not Joe do the same now for Julia? It would
certainly lay open the whole affair, for advertisements could do any thing."

At this time Joe stood too greatly in need of comfort, not to take any advice
that was offered to him. But he thought this advice excellent. He accordingly
wrote with great care the advertisement we have already repeated, and the
hostler sent one of his boys with him to the Daily Advertiser. -- And this is
the history of this extraordinary advertisement.

When the Justice found so many circumstances spontaneously conspiring to
vindicate her innocence, that her amiable simplicity subjected her to so many
dangers, and that she was the object rather of a polite humanity than of
persecution, he resolved to interest himself in her safety. And in the first
place, he ordered one of his men to go and conduct Joe to his mistress. As to
the fat woman, the Justice told her that her money should be taken care of; and
the highwayman was remanded to prison.

Joe arrives. I have not time to describe every thing; but my readers may be
assured that the meeting. between him and Julia was full affectionate. Suffice
it to say, that Julia pressed him warmly by the hand, and half cried with joy;
and that Joe took fast hold of the skirt of her robe, as if he dreaded her
running away from him once more.

The friends thus met, the Justice politely asked Julia how he could most
effectually serve her? She replied, that her only business in town was to
deliver her letters to Lord C --, and that if he would favor her with a guide
thither, she would always remember him with the most unfeigned gratitude. This
she obtained; and, once more acknowledging her obligations to the Justice, they
all set off for Berkeley square.

Here they soon arrived. The guide leaving them at the door. Joe immediately
took off his hat, for he thought it high treason to be covered within six yards
of a Lord's door: they knocked, but were told by the porter his Lordship was
not at home. Julia said she was sorry for that, because she had letters of
importance for him. "I cannot help that (answered the porter,) he is not at home;
and he will not be at home -- I don't know when he will be home." -- But could not
you guess Sir; -- because a great deal depends upon it. -- "Lord, Ma'am
(replied Cerberus)! I tell you I know nothing about it." -- Sounds so ungentle,
uttered by so rude a voice, frightened Julia effectually, and she hastened away
from the door; and Joe, sorrowful enough, was preparing to follow -- when the
porter beckoned him back with a hem! and the motion of his finger. "Pray, my
lad, (said this dog in office) who is that?

My mistress (answered Joe.)

"Ay -- from the country, I suppose?"

Yes (replied Joe): I come from the country too.

"O -- so I see -- so I see. -- You are not acquainted, I find, with the ways
in this town?"

No, Sir, (said Joe) -- not with all of them.

Why, then -- (come hither -- your ear a moment) I have the honor to be Lord C
-- 's porter) and my master has ordered me -- that is, I and my master have
agreed -- to receive no letter here, unless the bearer gives me a crown. --
However, as you and your mistress are strangers, and I am a man of honor, I Will
be more merciful to you, and so consent to take only half a crown -- But mum --
sly -- not a word for your life -- for if my master was to hear I take so
little, he would turn me out of my place.

Sure I am, master, (answered Joe) we are both very much obliged to you for
being so kind. -- But then what can you do for us, if so be that my Lord a'n't
at home?

"Pshaw, man! (said the porter) run after your mistress and bring the money,
and I Will satisfy you about that."

O -- an' that be all (replied Joe) I can pay the money myself.

He drew out his last half crown, and gave it. He then ran after Julia, and as
he went he murmured to himself -- "Icod though wern't that a Lord's house it
looks hugely like bribery and corruption."

Our two travelers now returned, and were received by the porter with a more
gracious complaisance. He now informed them that, though his Lordship was out of
town, he was only at his villa, and would certainly return to town to dinner;
but that if they were in a hurry, my young Lord was at home, and that he had
leave to open his father's letters in his absence. Julia delivered her packet
to the porter, and they were ordered to walk into the anti chamber. The letters
were sent up to the noble youth in his dressing room.

Now in order to prepare my readers for a very important era in the life of my
heroine, it may be necessary to relate what this noble youth was. A foolish
grandmother had lest him three thousand a year independent of his father, and
of his age; all which, with three thousand more, he gallantly spent like a man
of spirit, long before the year was done. He used to say, that every kingdom in
Europe contributed to furnish his seraglio: he only meant by this, that he kept
in pay one French, one Spanish, one Italian, one Scandinavian, one German, one
Irish, and one British nymph, all at one time; which he actually did. He was
deep in the secret at Soho, very deep in the mysteries at Arthur's. He boasted
-- and he had a right to do it -- that he had killed five waiters, and shot two
clergymen, and seven hundred sheep; which last feat he performed as follows. He
was a fowler when at his father's estate in the country; and when he had been
unsuccessful in pursuit of game, he always discharged his piece into the body
of a sheep. As this amusement exactly hit his taste, he would sometimes
recharge, and redischarge, till perhaps before his return home, he would leave
half a dozen dead upon the field. He frequently observed, that this was an
amusement which ought to be practiced by all Noblemen, in order to fit them to
command in the field in time of war, in the service of their country. -- He
boasted too, that he had killed fifteen women by breaking their hearts with a
hopeless passion. This, however, was (to use an old and honest English phrase)
a lie: for he never killed but one woman, and that was by breaking -- not her
heart, but her neck, and then throwing her into the horse pond, where he swore
she had drowned herself -- But she was only a dairy maid. He boasted also --
But, in short, we are tired with repeating his glories. Suffice it to say, that
he is at present the pink of the young Peerage, and the ornament of mother II
-- 's -- and St. James.

Such was the youth to whom the letter of the father of Julia was carried. He
opened it, and on reading the following paragraph,

"I have presumed, my Lord, to send my Daughter as the bearer of this
petition," etc.

On reading this, he rang his bell with great haste, and enquired if the bearer
was below? Being informed that she was, he flew down the stairs, and, looking
in Julia's face, with the most polite courtesy be desired her to walk up stairs
while he considered of her letter. The servants were ordered at the same time
to conduct Joe into the hall, and be civil to him. Julia ascended after her
noble patron.

-- Hic pauca defunt. We must here pass ever the history of half an hour,
because it is not yet ripe for relation. --

In the mean time Lord C -- 's Chaplain, who had been with his Lordship in the
country, arrived at the house. He came home before his Lordship, to finish some
business of importance to himself before dinner time. When he entered, he
observed Joe staring about in the hall, and perceiving him to be a stranger
from the country, entered into conversation with him. He had not many questions
to ask, for Joe with his usual frankness told him the whole history -- about
himself, about Julia, and Julia's business, and where she was now, and with
whom. Now this Chaplain was plain in his manners and equally plain in his dress
-- so plain that he scarcely appeared to be of the cloth. Though an enemy to
bloodshed, he was far from being a coward; though a Churchman, he was no
hypocrite; and though he detested subscription to the Thirty nine Articles, he
was allowed to be a very honest man.

The Chaplain, having finished his interview with Joe, was retiring to his own
apartment. He had not opened his door, when a loud shriek saluted his ear --
then another -- and another. A thousand ideas rushed upon his mind. He knew
Julia by report, and he knew his young Lord by experience. There was no doubt
of the business below. He hastened down the stairs, and listened a moment at
the key hole. He could only perceive that some persons were engaged in a
violent struggle, and that the chairs were knocked against each other. He tried
to enter, but the door was locked. Placing his shoulder against it, therefore,
he forced it forward with gentleness and with ease. He entered; and lo! --
Innocence was once more in distress!

The hair of Julia was dishevelled, and a handkerchief was drawn close over her
mouth, which prevented her cries. Her cloak and handkerchief lay upon the
floor, and the arms of her ravisher were twined closely around her. A shoe had
dropped from her foot, and many of the pins had quitted her bosom. --
Unfortunate girl! doomed continually to be the prey of cowards and scoundrels!

The noble youth quitted his hold when the Chaplain appeared, and, advancing to
him, exclaimed in a thtreatening tone, "How dare you, Sir, force your
impertinence upom me in my own dressing room?"

"My Lord -- (returned the young man, putting his left hand in his bosom, and
giving him a full but indifferent look) -- My Lord -- does it suit your high
spirit to be told, that you are the meanest -- O by far the meanest creature in
your father's house? Noble, without worth -- and proud, without dignity -- you
are beneath the pimp who caters for your appetites. -- Poor, pitiful, wretched
animal! I do not pull you by the nose -- I do not kick you on the breech -- I
do not lash you round the room -- I do not in any degree deign to chastise the
wretch, who has stooped to insult a woman. -- Go, then, you boaster! retire
into your closet, and blush in private; and remember that you have reduced
yourself to be forced to hear these stinging truths even from so humble a man
as your father's Chaplain. -- I scorn, Sir, to tell your father that you are a
scoundrel; but do not forget that for the future I consider you as my inferior."

He finished: and taking Julia by the hand, he led her out of the room, and
drew the door behind him.

He conducted her into his own apartment, and sympathized with her in that
strain of humane politeness which is ever inseparable from undebauched minds.
After she had composed herself, he distantly enquired (as if he had not known)
into her business. This was exactly a repetition of Joe's narration.

"I thank you, Madam, (said he) for your politeness. You will see Lord C -- in
about an hour; but previoulsly I think it my duty to inform you of what ought
not to be longer concealed from you -- it is now one o'clock -- Exactly at ten
-- about three hours ago -- Lord C -- appointed me to the Curacy you are come
to solicit. This information in no degree startled Julia, nor unruffled her
features. She observed that since her father had not been lucky enough to
obtain the Curacy, she was happy the appointment was bestowed upon a man who
resembled him so much in his virtues.

At the time specified Lord C -- arrived. Julia was introduced o him by the
Chaplain, and he sent to his son for her letters. On reading them he confirmed
what the Chaplain had mentioned.

He then turned to Julia, saluted her with that virtuous freedom for which he
was always remarkable, and fondly conversed with her about the moments he had
spent with her father about fifty years ago. He next insisted that she should
stay with him two or three days; to which she with the utmost difficulty
assented, and of which she informed her father by letter. When the young Lord
heard that Julia was to continue her visit, he assumed some pretense for
retiring to his father's villa till her departure.

Need I mention, that the Chaplain selt the force of the eyes of Julia? Alack!
from the moment he first saw her in tears, his heart was wounded to the core --
for the tears of a woman are irresistible. Indeed the only good lines in one of
our new tragedies are to this purpose:

-- Unskilful they
Who dress the Queen of Love in wanton Smiles:
Brightest she shines amidst a shower of tears:
The graces that adorn her beauty most
Are softness, sensibility, and pity.
ALONZO. Now with regard to this Chaplain -- Julia, on her part -- But I will
not say any thing about it. Be it suffcient to observe, that from the moment a
man evinces his courage and his honor, the heart of a virtuous woman is ready
to receive him.

-- Hic multa desunt. Here we must leap over the history of three days, for
Julia will have it so. --

On the morning of the fourth day, Julia and the Curate were preparing to set
off on their journey for the banks of the Avon: she to her father, and he to
take possession of his Curacy. Before their departure, he begged once more a
word with her in private. He led her toward a very distant part of the house,
into an humble apartment possessed by one of the old family nurses, whose
favorite he long had been. Now, though it may seem strange that he should lead
her thither as a place of retirement, certain it is that it was by far the most
retired and secret spot in the house, for the old woman was completely deaf,
and almost blind: A few more days would close her eyes forever. In this humble
mansion, he sat at one side of a table, opposite to Julia, and he told her he
had one favor to beg. "Three days (said he,) my beloved Julia, are past, in
which I told you the true tale of my heart You listened, it is true, but so
faintly listened, that my hopes are scarcely kept alive. Before we depart --
before we enter upon the bustle of a high road -- deign to bestow on me one
mark, to give me one assurance, that you do not detest me. Were it but -- " The
blushes and smiles of Julia interrupted him. She stretched her hand to him
across the table, and he almost devoured it with kisses.

In short, they sat off on their journey, attended by the trusty Joe. Without
any accident, they arrived in due time at Elmwood. The father, overpowered by
love and tenderness, sunk at the side of his daughter. The daughter, agitated
by affection and joy, filled the bosom of her father with sighs, and revived
him with the plenty and warmth of her tears. The evening was spent in the
recital of her adventures: while Joe, in the center of the green, had the whole
village collected around him, and related to them the wonders of London.

I must now close this history. Several months have elapsed since the above
events happened, and the young Curate is now happy in the warm bosom of his
Julia. Julia too is blessed, for the houses of her husband and of her father
are adjoining to each other.

FINIS.

