AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4, 1799, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF American Independence.

By JOHN LOWELL, jun.

"HE who has no Religion at all, is that terrible animal who perceives his
liberty only when he tears in pieces, and when he devours."

Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws. -- A French writer. AS distant as heaven is from
earth, so is the true spirit of Equality from (...) extreme Equality. When the
spirit of extreme Equality pervades a (...) Virtue can no longer subsist in the
republic. The people are desir^^^ of exercising the functions of the
magistrate, who ceases to be revered. ^^^entiousness will soon become general.
Wives, children, slaves will (...) all subjection: No longer will there be any
such things as manners, order or virtue."

The same. Do the Directory of France acknowledge any other right than their
convenience? But I understand you -- The treaties! the promises! the oaths!
Look at Geneva!! Did not their Agent, Adet, tell them the following lie? -- "I
ASSURE YOU that the French people will never do any thing against your
independence."

Mallet du Pan. BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING. 1700.

TOWN VOTE.
AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the town of Boston,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, the 4th day of July, A. D. 1799;

ON MOTION, Voted, That the Selectmen be, and hereby are appointed a Committee
to wait on JOHN LOWELL, jun. Esquire. in the name of the town, and thank him for
the elegant and spirited ORATION, this day delivered by him at the request of
the town, upon the Anniversary of the Independence of the United States of
America, in which, according to the institution of the town, he considered the
feelings, manners, and principles, which led to that great National Event --
and to request of him a copy for the press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

BOSTON, July 5, 1799. GENTLEMEN,
IT would be affectation to apologize for submitting the following sheets to
the press, when invariable custom has rendered it indispensable. If any thing
which I have said shall contribute in the smallest degree to raise the
thermometer of national pride, or to preserve it from sinking, I shall be most
amply rewarded.

With respect and consideration, Your humble Servant, JOHN LOWELL, jun.

The Selectmen of Boston.
AN ORATION.
SHALL America be free or enslaved? Shall she be an humble province, an
ignominious tributary, a tame vassal, a beast of burden, to a proud,
overbearing, oppressive, foreign government?

SUCH were the indignant questions, which agitated our high-spirited countrymen
on the 4th July, 1776. The appeal was made to the Most High! The decision is
registered on the archives of Heaven! -- and gratitude impels us solemnly to
commemorate the occasions which gave it birth.

THE history of the oppressions which we suffered or were preparing for us, is
fresh in the memory of every American. It has been depictured a thousand times
with the glow of Genius, and with the fervor of Patriotism. It has been
occasionally burnished by reiterated wrongs. It has been perpetually preserved,
polished, and colored by a formidable faction, stimulated by Gallic intrigue.
With your permission therefore, my fellow-citizens, I will assume the Advocate,
rather than the Historian, -- and will vindicate the glorious feelings,
manners, and principles which led to our Revolution, from the opprobrium, the
calumny, the gross misrepresentation with which they have been assailed.

THE feelings of 1776 were those of high-minded Freemen. The manners were
dictated by unsullied virtue, uncorrupted simplicity, and pure and undefiled
Religion. The principles were an ardent Love of Liberty -- an unconquerable
Spirit of Independence -- a hatred of foreign dominion -- a detestation of
domestic oppression. Recent as has been our Revolution, virtuous as it was in
its principle, just in its design, honorable to the feelings which originated
it, moderate and pacific in its progress, and brilliant in its termination, it
has been its fate in common with all other good and great things to be grossly
misunderstood, or wilfully calumniated.

WE have the misfortune to live in an age of violent Revolution. A new spirit
of Chivalry, more Quixotic, more sanguinary, and more destructive than that
which formerly deluged Europe in blood -- a blind and novel fanaticism, more
violent, and less restrained by moral sentiments, than that of the Crusaders of
former ages, have seized upon the passions, have inflamed the imaginations, and
threaten to destroy the repose of the whole Civilized World. Not content with
overthrowing despotisms -- with destroying monarchies -- with subverting
aristocracies, -- without the request, and against the will of the People, who
are most interested in their fate -- Not satisfied with attacking and
destroying happy and peaceable Republics, which had the prescription of ages to
prove their title to enjoyment and quiet, this restless and infernal spirit is
employed with equal ardor, and with equal malevolence in undermining the only
stable foundations of Social Order and Happiness.

THE Law of Nations opposed the propagation of this modern principle, and the
"musty and worm-eaten" authorities of Grotius and Puffendorf, like cobwebs,
must be swept away by the Revolutionary brush. The Civil Law regulating and
enforcing the Contracts of individuals, and prescribing the titles to property,
was a feeble barrier against a doctrine which destroyed all Contracts, and
levelled all Property; it became a badge of Feudal Slavery, and must be
abrogated. The code of Criminal Law was a restraint upon the purity and
patriotism of pirates, and assassins, and not one relic of such tyrannical
establishments must stain the pages of Revolutionary History.

THE civil institutions of Society were a check upon the inordinate lusts and
passions of mankind; they were some protection to the cause of order and
ancient establishments; they must be abolished as the fruits of blind and
ignorant prejudices. The moral and virtuous habits of the common people in all
countries fettered their understandings, and restrained them from embracing
with ardor the seductive doctrines of "Liberty and Equality" -- the liberty of
plundering their neighbors, and the equality of Crime; such fatal habits must
be subverted, or this new-light Doctrine must perish. The Christian Religion,
which taught mankind to reverence their Rulers; the belief of a Future State,
which restrained villains from enormities which their passions would prompt
them to execute; the existence of an omniscient GOD, which awes the most
abandoned, whom human laws cannot fetter; these were prejudices which
tyrannized over the human understanding; they must therefore be ridiculed as
the errors of weak and superficial minds; they must be uprooted, or the mild
and philosophic reign of the "Rights of Man" cannot be firmly fixed and
permanently established.

In fine, this Revolutionary Hydra, more terrific than any spectre which poetic
fancy has described, more horrid in its aspect than the much famed Gorgon, more
carnivorous than the Monster of Thebes, more baleful than the most portentous
Meteor, which has ever affrighted the imaginations of mankind, has spared, in
its destructive progress, neither age, nor sex, nor helpless infancy, nor
customs, nor manners, nor ties, nor principles. Mercy forms no part of its
attributes; Humanity is not a handmaid which appears in the train of its
followers; Innocence supplicates it in vain; inexorable to the demands of
Justice, or to the milder claims of pity. In propagating Liberty, it has
established the worst of slavery. Professing to secure the rights of man, it
has thrown down all the barriers which have hitherto protected them. It has let
loose upon Society the most ferocious passions of the worst of men. Virtue it
has persecuted -- Vice it has patronized and rewarded. Industry has been robbed
of the fruits of its labor, to enrich and to pamper the lazy and the dissolute.
Not confining itself to the wretched luxury of depriving mankind of the
external comforts of life, it has burrowed into the inmost recesses of the
human heart, and tried to play the Tyrant over the Conscience. To make and to
keep men Slaves, it has stripped them of those virtues and of those principles
which alone fit them to be free. Whatever was established it has overturned --
Whatever was ancient it has modernized -- Whatever was virtuous it has
corrupted -- Whatever was respectable it has ridiculed -- Whatever was sacred
it has profaned. In lieu of order, it has substituted confusion -- In place of
obedience, it has organized insurrection -- In the room of government, it has
established anarchy -- In the stead of Religion, it has propagated Atheism. It
has made man as wretched as he is capable in this world, and it has persecuted
him beyond the grave, by depriving him of the hopes of future happiness, as a
solace for present misery. In fine, it has thrown Law, Order, Morals,
established Institutions, Religion, every thing but the Solid Globe which we
inhabit, into a state of Volcanic eruption, of chaotic confusion.

THIS is but a faint picture of the modern Revolutionary Spirit. It would
require the hand and coloring of a master, of a BURKE, or of an AMES, to give
to it its genuine tints, its living expression. And is this the fiend-like
spirit to which our glorious revolutionary "principles, feelings, and manners"
have been compared? Is this the Liberty which is said to have been an emanation
from our own? Is this the Freedom so often recommended to our patronage and
support, as the Legitimate Offspring of the pure and virtuous Flame which
animated the breasts of Americans? It is a counterfeit, not a Legitimate
Progeny. To call this Liberty is a gross perversion of language -- It is a
wilful calumny upon the best and most distinguished patriots -- It is a
nefarious Libel upon the principles of our Revolution. To give it credit and
currency, would be to fix an eternal stigma upon the American Character. Our
hoary Patriots would rise up, and disclaim their share of the disgrace. Our
departed Heroes and Statesmen would burst their cold imprisonments, and
vindicate their memories from the unmerited reproach. They would disdain to
partake with Brissot, and Danton, and Robespierre, and Merlin, and Talleyrand,
the disgraceful infamy of this modern, murderous, Revolutionary Theory.

BE it our task then, my Fellow-Citizens, to rescue the character of the
American Revolution from this unmerited obloquy. That illustrious event had its
origin in the justest principles, in the noblest feelings, in the purest
motives. It was not the blind and convulsive effort of slavery to shake off
fetters and manacles of despotism; but it was the calm, the dispassionate, the
august resolution of enlightened Freemen, to resist the earliest encroachments
of arbitrary power. It did not proceed from a mere instinctive struggle to get
rid of present suffering; but it was a penetrating foresight, and a determined
opposition to future usurpation. Conformable to the rectitude of its
principles, and to the wisdom of its actors, was the equal and moderate
temperature of its progress. Internally, America exhibited no marks of a wild
and fanatic Revolution. No Vendean war imbrued the hands of our Citizens in the
blood of their brethren -- No Revolutionary Tribunal was glutted with the gore
of the innocent victims of revenge and of avarice -- No Savage Females
exhibited the ghastly visages of the victims of popular fury, with
Cannibal-like Triumph -- No helpless Infants were torn from the anguished
breasts of their mothers, and impaled alive upon the pikes of our National
Soldiery. In our Courts of Justice, no pretended material and moral proofs were
ever substituted in the place of Testimony. In our Legislatures, no galleries
abridged their Independence, no mountain awed their deliberations. No
Robespierre in our Revolution was permitted to take the Liberties of the People
under his kind protection -- And no Marat has rendered our National Character
execrable, by the savage atrocities which he perpetrated.

IN their principles, the People of America were as correct and exemplary as in
their conduct. Distributive Justice, Civil Subordination, Moral Rectitude,
Religious Institutions, were as highly respected as in times of ordinary quiet.
They had no spirit of conquest, no passion for universal domination. Their
patriotism was of the old fashioned kind -- It was the love of their country,
and of their neighbor -- not the modern Philanthropy of Pain and of Godwin,
which persuades us to despise the tender affections which play about the human
heart, to contemn the ties of kindred, to hate our own Country, and to embrace
with ardor the human race. The System of Morals preserved by our Patriots, did
not teach them that man was not entitled to the fruits of his own labor; that
property was not transmissible to the children for whom it was acquired; that
the end justifies the means; that marriage is a solemn farce; and that mankind
may live forever: No -- these discoveries in Ethics and Physics were reserved
for the modern Illuminati, and we, my Fellow-Citizens, will relinquish to them,
without a murmur, the exclusive benefits of their invention.

The extreme length of the performance, and the feeble health of the Speaker,
obliged him to omit the two following pages in the delivery.
FROM the moment we assumed the attitude and character of a nation, obedience,
peaceable submission to the constituted authorities, have been the standing
creed of Americans. In what page of the Constitution of the most revolutionary
State will you find insurrection inculcated as a sacred duty? Knowledge has
been revered in this country, as the surest solid foundation for genuine
freedom. Seminaries of learning have been founded and encouraged, and the means
of general education have been diffused and cultivated.

WE did not with barbarian ferocity obliterate all the monuments of learning
and genius. The American populace did not with Vandal rage destroy the ancient
classics, because they were often printed for the use and by the permission of
tyrants. In our Legislatures, no Chabot denounced learned men, because the name
was synonymous with Aristocrat; no Dumas dared to propose, that all men of
genius should be guillotined; no Robespierre ventured to declare, that there
ought only to exist one. The declaration of American Independence, which we
this day celebrate, contains a solemn appeal to the Supreme Being. It professes
a humble reliance on Divine Providence for protection and support. The same
veneration for Religion has brightened every footstep of our Revolution. The
Most High GOD was the Pillar of Fire by night, and the Cloud by day, to conduct
us through the thorny paths of our difficulties and distresses. We have not
been ashamed to acknowledge our crucified Savior, nor to take up the cross and
follow him, in this age of fashionable Infidelity. Here no mad Fanatic of
Liberty dared to denounce the Altars of the Almighty! Here no atheistical
Infidels ventured to arraign the majesty, and to provoke the vengeance of the
Deity! Here no wretched libertines substituted a courtezan as an object of
profane adoration, and no High Priest performed the mockery of religious rites
to the most prostituted of her sex! We have not in this country persecuted the
pious Teachers of the Gospel; we have not driven them from these sacred desks,
and hunted them like wild beasts from the haunts of men: If they have of late
been scandalously vilified and abused by the servile copyists of the
Philosophers of France, it is because they have rendered the meed of merit to
the Government of the United States. But let them be consoled with the
reflection, that their Lord and Master was exposed to the like ridicule, and
that our Savior himself was denounced in France as an Aristocrat, because he
rendered unto "Royal" Caesar the things that were Caesar's. To reduce this
extensive picture to a single contrasted view, the principles of France, as
explained by their practice, tend to establish in every country the government
of the sword, "to reduce mankind to the two simple classes of Soldiers and
Cerfs," President Adams.
while ours lead simply to a mild government of Laws and Manners, founded on
the solid and sacred basis of Rational Liberty and Revealed Religon.

SUCH, Americans, were the glorious "feelings, manners, and principles," which
stimulated you to assume an independent rank among the nations of the earth.

WORTHY of such principles is the form of Government which you wisely framed
and calmly adopted. Worthy of such feelings and manners are the enlightened
Statesmen, whom you have ever chosen to administer it.

CAN we recall to our recollection our distinguished Patriots and Statesmen, and
refuse one tributary tear, one solitary sigh to the memory of our lately
extinguished Luminary? Shall the splendour and festivity of this Anniversary, so
lately honored by thy presence and enlivened by thy smiles, make us cease to
remember thee, thou blessed and immortal Shade? "Remember thee? yes, from the
tablets of our memories we'll wipe away all trivial fond records, all saws of
books, all forms, all pressures past which time and observation copied there,
and thy bright virtues all alone shall stand within the book and volume of our
brains, unmixed with baser matter. -- Yes, by heavens." Shakespeare.
--

BUT are there no dangers which threaten you? Is there no lurking spirit of
apostasy which meditates the subversion of this fair Fabric, the fruit of all
your labors and of all your toils?

IF this celebration is not merely a pompous and useless ceremonial, it is my
duty to hold up the mirror to the failings and vices of my countrymen; to
appeal to their consciences, as well as to illustrate their virtues; to
depicture the abrupt precipices which endanger, as well as the verdant lawns
which variegate the landscape; to exhibit the black whirlwind, the fierce
tornado big with destruction, as well as the mild rainbow which beautifies the
scene. We are enveloped with dangers, domestic and foreign. We have enemies
without, and traitors within. We must repel the one, and restrain the other.

TO expect to be free from a domestic faction, is as mad as to look for a
golden age; it is as visionary as the hope of universal liberty; it is as
fruitless as the search after the philosopher's stone. As in the natural, so in
the political world, the Tree of Liberty cherishes its own destroyers. Although
it is planted by Patriotism, and nourished and protected by Loyalty, yet the
destructive insects of Faction will generate and fatten upon its luxuriance,
will blight, and almost destroy the very verdure which supports them. So long
as men have passions, they will have vices; so long as the globe lasts, there
will be distinctions in society. Nature, Education, and Fortune, are not equal
in the distribution of their favors. This man is an Aristocrat in
understanding, that a Jacobin in heart. There will always be the lazy and the
industrious, the drones and the working bees; of necessity the poor and the
rich, the ignorant and the well informed. There will be ever gloomy Jealousy,
suspicious of its successful neighbor; dark and lurking Envy, corroded by
fortunate Virtue; proud and towering Ambition, seeking elevation upon the necks
of the people. The last is the "Serpent which swallows that of Aaron, and of
all the rest." President Adams.


A FREE Government is the very hot-bed of ambition. Ambition is an indigenous
plant in Democracies, which produces and scatters its seeds like the Balsamine,
and propagates with indescribable rapidity. In such governments, therefore,
there is always a plentiful crop of Candidates for promotion; of proud and
haughty claimants, as well as servile beggars of popular favor. These
gormandizers of popularity are no Epicures; they have not very nice
discriminating palates. They are ready to taste the sweets of every office,
from the high dignity of the Presidency, down to the lowest municipal
employment in the State. Still, however, with this humble spirit of
accommodation, they cannot all be gratified. The disappointed will pursue their
revenge with an acrimony proportioned to the ravenous hunger after fame which
impelled them. The mortified ambitious are never in want of tools to carry on
the trade of faction. The ignorant, the jealous, and the envious; the bankrupt
in morals and character, and the insolvent in purse, are the small weapons,
with which the great Leviathans in opposition continually operate. Review the
past history of the United States, and what page is there in which the proofs
of these principles are not inscribed? Coeval with our Government has been an
inveterate opposition; an opposition growing with our growth, and strengthening
with our strength. At first small and feeble, it uttered its discontents only
in the gentle whispers of disapprobation; now, bold, hardy, and shameless, it
thunders its anathemas in the language of rebellion. We have remarked that
faction is the spontaneous production of a free soil; but like all native
plants, it is not destined wholly to destroy the vegetation which surrounds it.
It is by the introduction of exotics alone, that the work of extermination can
be effected. In vain would our domestic enemies assail the goodly Fabric of our
Constitution; vain would be the calumny against our ablest Patriots; feeble and
nerveless would be the assaults of our internal enemies, if they were not
supported by foreign gold, and encouraged by external assistance. Without this
aid, our infant Hercules would have strangled the rebellious reptile in his
cradle. Still our young and vigorous Samson would have burst asunder the cords
with which an insidious faction had bound him, if this internal foe had not
entered into a Treaty of Alliance, offensive and defensive, with a foreign
adversary.

TO the Mazzeian tribe of Philosophers are we indebted for the introduction of
this foreign Auxilary. From the Treaty of 1778 to the present hour, these
Gratitudinarians have stunned our ears with the magnanimity, the disinterested
benevolence of Monarchical and Anti-Monarchical France. In former times,
Gratitude was considered as a relative, personal, and rational virtue. It was a
generous sentiment, flowing from the tenderest feelings of the heart of the
person who received, toward one who had conferred a benefit. In the vocabulary
of modern Philosophy, it has a directly opposite meaning. According to this
new-light, and inhuman doctrine, we are to love the persecutors of our Patrons.
We are to hate Louis the XVIth. who ordered his armies and navies to our aid,
and we are to cherish the Regicides who brought his head to the scaffold. Nor
does this unnatural sentiment stop here. Like the loyalty of the Vicar of Bray,
it is to change with the daily storms which obscure the Parisian sky. From the
King, it must be transferred to the Fayettes and Petions. From the Petions, to
the Brissotines. From the Brissotines, it is to be cooped up in Robespierre
alone. From Robespierre, it is to be enlarged to the Taliens. From the Taliens,
to the Barthelemys. From the Barthelemys, to the Merlins and Talleyrands. From
the Talleyrands, for aught we know, to Beelzebub himself, the arch fiend of
Revolution. Still we could forgive this weathercock sensibility, if we could
discern one ray of relief from this oppressive obligation.

BUT payments and requitals swell rather than diminish our debt. Robbery,
perfidy, and murder from the hands of our benefactors, are, according to this
new Philosophy, but fresh stimuli to these grateful sentiments.

WE could almost overlook all these absurdities, which outrage the best
feelings of human nature, if it had not been insisted upon, that we should make
a perpetual league and covenant with these pretended benefactors; that we
should sit down and partake of their banquet; that we should sip their
poisonous drugs, and "be as mad as they;" that we should throw off our ancient
virtues, and array ourselves in the disgusting habiliments of their vices; that
we should discard our own Religion, and become proselytes to their Atheistical
System, as intolerant as it is blasphemous.

THE Gallic faction in this country would not have merited so full a share of
our execration, if they had contented themselves with echoing in sonorous
plaudits, the bombastic details of French victories, or if they had confined
themselves to the patriotic pleasure of degrading their own country, by
attributing its Freedom and Independence to the arms and generosity of France.
But they have done it an injury which I fear may be irreparable; they have
inflicted a wound in the bosom of their Parent, of which she "languishes, and
languishing may die." By propagating the disorganizing, demoralizing,
atheistical principles of France; by inculcating the holy right of
Insurrection; by justifying the inhuman and savage atrocities which have
disgraced the French Revolution; by applauding her perfidious violations of the
Laws of Nations; by encouraging venal presses in the pay, or under the
influence of France; by promoting and cultivating a spirit of audacious calumny
against every Patriot, distinguished by his virtue and his talents; by
introducing, republishing, and scattering the immoral, irreligious, and
deleterious productions of Condorcet, of Volney, of Pain, and of Godwin; and
lastly, and worst of all, by establishing secret, affiliated societies, which
have organized opposition, which have systematized treason, which have
marshalled all the vices of mankind against law and order; and which, although
they were banished from the public eye, and driven into their lurking places by
the virtuous frowns of our WASHINGTON, have been busily employed in sapping the
foundations of society, and may ere long spring a mine, which shall blow up our
Constitution and Liberties.

SUCH are the domestic dangers which threaten our repose. Our external hazards
are not less imminent or less obvious. To say that France threatens our
subversion -- that she meditates the destruction of our liberties -- that she
has long waged an open, and carried on a secret war against our Rights and our
Independence, would be but to repeat the language of every honest American, for
these two years past, would be but the detail of her aggressions and her
outrages. Does any man doubt that France is imitating the policy of Philip of
Macedon, or of the Roman Republicans? Does he question whether the stupendous
schemes of Universal Conquest, conceived by Louis XIV. are received by his more
ambitious and tyrannical successors, the Directory of France? Let him ask the
enslaved Batavians, who are tasting Gallic Freedom under the Pike and the
Halbert. Let him inquire of the oppressed Belgians who have been impelled to
the madness of desperation, and to open rebellion, against their savage and
ferocious oppressors. Let him mingle with the unhappy Genevans, and compare
their present ruinous freedom with their former prosperous slavery. Let him
peruse the history of Venice emancipated from the pretended tyranny of its
Doge, and its aristocracy to be sold, by its perfidious deliverers, like an
African slave, or like an inanimate chattel. If he still doubts, let him apply
to the wretched inhabitants of Switzerland, whose valor was only equalled by
their happiness; whose freedom and independence were only rivalled by their
justice, moderation, good faith, and love of peace. They can inform him of the
tender mercies of Frenchmen. The peasants of Switzerland can exhibit the iron
chests from whence the fruits of their labor have been plundered by their
generous emancipators. They can point to their beautiful daughters, brutally
defiled by these friends to the Rights of Man. They can lead him to the
ensanguined valleys, where whole hecatombs of Freemen were immolated by Gallic
worshippers, to the ferocious Goddess of Equality.

WHAT hopes have we then to escape this ravenous, this insatiable Monster,
whose support is plunder, whose nutriment is carnage, whose pastime is to
inflict human wretchedness? Have we any reason to expect its forbearance, to
hope for its friendship, to trust to its moderation, or to confide in its
justice? I ask you, my mercantile friends, whose ships and whose cargoes the
French have taken into their disinterested keeping. I appeal to you, my honest,
hardy, and brave seamen and fellow citizens, who have experienced their
generosity in nakedness, and hunger, their freedom in a dungeon, and their
tenderness in stripes, and at the end of their sabres.

BUT there are some of the honest part of my fellow citizens, who are yet dupes
to their diplomatic skill. Swayed by a dastardly love of peace, awed by the
unmanly terrors of hostility, they are too prone to give credence to their
persidious and deceitful professions. They are weak enough to believe that a
sudden and miraculous conversion has overtaken these political reprobates:
That, abandoning their love of conquest, and of plunder, as a Serpent casts his
skin, or a Harlequin his coat, these pious and disinterested philosophers are
sincerely disposed to bury past dissensions, to overlook, generous friends! to
overlook the injuries we have done to them, and to bestow upon us as a
retribution for plundered millions, the kiss fraternal, and profitable and
honorable mention in the bulletin of the Grand Republique.

TO such men, I cannot better reply, than by a reference to the sentiments of
our beloved President, in his late public answers and declarations -- a man who
is as much above praise as the Directory of France are beyond execration.
"Although (says* that great Statesman) our government has exhausted all the
resources of its policy, in endeavors to avoid engaging in the present uproar,
-- neither the Faith, Justice, or Gratitude of France would suffer it to
succeed." "In my opinion as well as yours, there is no alternative, between war
and submission to France." "You see that neither justice nor moderation can
secure us from a participation in the war, which has agitated Europe." "America
is of too much importance, for the purposes of wealth, and power, to leave her
the smallest hope of escaping, without her own determined exertions, the
contagion of the general distemper."

SUCH are the sentiments of the first Statesman in our Country. Sentiments so
just, and truths so momentous, cannot be too extensively embraced, or too
carefully cherished, to guard the public mind against false hopes of
pacification. Assailed by the insidious arts of that Machiavelian Cabinet;
courted and solicited to renew the disgraceful train of delusive negociations;
the President nobly spurned the Olive Branch, under the leaves of which was
concealed a Dagger. He knew that the Serpent had power to charm the bird which
it destined for its prey. He was aware that the "Tiger crouches before he leaps
upon his victim." He refused to permit his ministers even to pass over to
France, until they should have assurances that they should be received,
respected, and honored, as the Representatives of a great, free, and
independent Nation.

BUT, Americans, why should you indulge this meek, dastardly anxiety and
solicitude for peace, which you know must be delusive? Where is fled the
magnanimous and unconquerable spirit of your forefathers? Where the courage,
where the heroism which animated the Patriots of 1776? Have you not hands and
hearts, as well as they? And does not your pulse beat as high for your Rights
and Independence, as theirs? Which of you is ready to abandon his altar, or his
fireside? Will you, my military friends, tamely surrender the honor of your
country, with* our gleaming bayonets unsheathed, and with your trusty swords by
your sides? Will you, my youthful brethren, calmly behold those revolutionizing
Gauls violating that innocence, which GOD and Nature require you to protect?
Suppose we should make peace with these rapacious Philosophers -- Think you it
would be safe, permanent, or profitable? If you entertain an idea so visionary,
you know not the enemy you must yet encounter. Has she changed her ferocious
and ambitious disposition? No. Is she less hostile toward the United States?
No. What has prompted her to extend the Caduceus, to proffer the olive branch,
to exhibit a new affectation of friendly sentiments? I answer, Our own Jacobin
faction; our self-created Ambassadors; our Dr. Logans, and our Joel Barlows!
What are the real views of our external and internal enemies, in promoting
peace? I reply, To restore the lost influence of France; to introduce a fresh
host of her myrmidons; to raise the expiring spirit of Jacobinism, and the
courage and consequence of its professors; to support new Ministers and new
Consuls to insult us, and usurp our Sovereignty; to bribe new Chronicles and
new Auroras; and finally, to establish a Parisian Republic upon the ruins of
our Government!

WHAT our enemies so ardently wish, must be our bane -- what they dread, must
be its antidote. Let us then heroically meet our danger in the face. Let us
discard the dangerous idea of false, premature, and dishonorable Peace.
Bountiful Heaven has blessed us with a Country rich in resources, exuberant in
productions; let them not remain neglected and useless. Our citizens are
numerous, enterprising and brave. Let us then proclaim our Rights from the
mouths of our Cannon. Let us treat with Frenchmen, only at the points of our
bayonets. Already our Commerce sails protected over the Ocean; already our
stripes and stars, heretofore disgraced, wave triumphant over the tri-coloured
flag of our enemies.

"Should danger impend, every grove" should "descend
"From the hill-tops they shaded, our shores to defend." PAINE's patriotic and
justly admired Song, " Adams and Liberty."

THEN shall our Navy ride triumphant in every clime, and future TRUXTONS be
victors of the Nile. Discard a mean, parsimonious policy, a disgraceful
calculation of pecuniary interests -- Then we should not want able and
courageous defenders -- Then, should Gallic lightning assail us, "Our
WASHINGTON, unmoved, would conduct, with his sword, every flash to the deep."
The same.
-- Then these sacred Altars of the Most High should be secured from
profanation; your wives from defilement, and your children from slaughter --
Then should United America join in one choral gratulation of "ADAMS, LAW, AND
LIBERTY." Then --

Never should COLUMBIA stoop to Gallic sway,
Trust to their arts, or their proud laws obey;
One Cent for tribute, nor one homage yield,
While yet one Son his trusty sword could wield.
Then should our EAGLE wing his rapid way
To the bright regions of unclouded day --
Upheld by Justice -- armed in Virtue's cause --
Nerv'd to protect our Government and Laws;
With vengeful ire should hurl the bolts of Fate,
(...) pierce proud Gallia's tyrants in their haughtiest state.

