THE CONSTANT LOVER; OR, William AND Jeanette: A TALE. FROM THE GERMAN OF
AUGUSTUS VON KOTZEBUE, AUTHOR OF THE STRANGER, LOVERS' VOWS, SELF IMMOLATION,
VIRGIN OF THE SUN, etc. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, AN ACCOUNT OF THE LITERARY LIFE
OF THE AUTHOR.

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR JOSEPH BUMSTEAD. SOLD BY HIM AT No. 20, UNION-STREET; BY
THOMAS AND ANDREWS, NEWBURY-STREET; BY E. LARKIN, AND WM. P. AND ^. BLAKE,
CORNHILL. 1799.

THE Author's Dedication. TO MY FRIEND CHARLES GEORGE GRAUMANN, ST. PETERSBURGH.
"OLD love rusts not," says our German adage, and, like many others, it is
false; for a thousand times in my life have I seen old love rust, nay, rust,
and so completely moulder away, that not the least memory of the fondest and
most endearing connections seemed to remain.

Let us my dear GRAUMANN, substitute friendship for love, and say, "Old
friendship rusts not." With grateful heart, then, I can raise my eyes to
heaven, and exclaim, "The adage is true!"

My faithful, my generous friend for eighteen years, far distant removed as
sometimes lay the paths we have pursued in the journey through life, we have
never forgotten to cherish our acquaintance with kind remembrances. Allow me,
then, to indulge the delightful hope, that in those regions to which death is
our common guide, and where, by various caurses, our wanderings must all
terminate at last, you will offer the same generous hand to the mature old man,
which you gave to the rising youth.

The child of my fancy, which I now present to you, deign to receive with that
indulgence, with which, eighteen years ago, you condescended to listen to the
first prattle of my nurse. Whatever faults you may discover in it, think still
that it is my child, and, for the father's sake, you will not cast it from you!

KOTZEBUE

MY LITERARY LIFE. The following account of the Literary Life of Kotzebue is
written by himself. Sill preserving the narrative in the Author's own words,
the translator has omitted many things which, to the English reader, would have
been uninteresting, and which would have extended this article to an excessive
length.

AS an author, I have experienced both good and bad success, both in a high
degree, both frequently unmerited. I flatter myself that it may be useful to
young men desirous of entering upon the slippery career of literature, to read
the history of a man, who has not reached the goal indeed -- for how few ever
do reach it! -- but who has so far advanced before them in the progress toward
it; one who, without ceremony, joins their circle, and relates without disguise
when he fell, when he erred, and when he was deceived; where he enjoyed the
assistance of the Nine, and where he mistook the ravings of a Bacchante for the
inspiration of the Muse.

Come hither, then, ye inexperienced youths, who have, for the first time,
dipped the tip of your tongue in the honey of Parnassus, and think it desirable
because it is sweet; sit down and listen to me. You see I am in the vein; my
soul is unconstrained, and my lips are opened to confess with candor when I
have been deluded by vanity, and when my mind has been warmed with the feelings
of the true and the beautiful.

Rise then! rise before me, ye fairy phantoms of my happy childhood! In
remembrance you now scarce form a part of the being I now am! Rise and hover
round me, ye gentle shades! -- Gracious Providence! suffer once more those
delightful hours to rise out of the ocean of the past, like a dim mist before
my fancy!

Seize then the fleeting shades as they pass! -- See thou there that boy who
hangs with rapt attention on his mother's tongue, as she reads to him and his
sister some winter evening the interesting tale? -- That boy was yourself! --
See thou again how he makes the chair his table, and the footstool his chair?
See how he devours the romance, while ball and playthings lie neglected in the
corner! -- That boy was yourself!

My honored mother -- Heaven be praised she still lives, she hears my grateful
acknowledgments -- My good mother, when but a very young widow, denied herself
many of the pleasures and enjoyments of life to devote herself entirely to the
education of her children. She possessed taste, reading, sensibility, and a
rich portion of patient maternal affection. With these qualities, her efforts
could not be wholly unsuccessful She provided preceptors of different kinds,
but to her own discernment and taste I owe more than to the tutors to whose
care my instruction was confided.

In the evening I used to read to her in the parlour. The first book that made
a lively impression on me was a Collection of Tales selected from all
languages, then in great repute; the next was Don Quixote; Robinson Crusoe then
engrossed my fancy, and I wished myself the possessor of some desert Island.

Even in my sixth year I began to compose rude essays in verse; not long after
I made my first dramatic effort. I made a comedy, which was just the length of
an octavo page. I was sensible, indeed, that it ought to be much longer, in
order to resemble a comedy; but who was to teach me the art of spinning out the
thread, and expanding my materials?

I now come to that incident of my life, which, in its consequences, produced
the greatest influence on my character, and from my tenderest childhood
irrevocably destined me to be a dramatic writer. The late Abt, the player, came
with his strolling company to Weimar. Since I possessed any power of thought,
there had been no players in Weimar, and my curiosity was unbounded. Musaeus,
the amiable and excellent Musaeus, who was attached to me from a child, offered
to take me to the theater.

I went with a kind of reverential awe; my expectation was wound up to the
highest pitch. The piece was Klopstock's death of Adam. Musaeus placed me
before him on a bench, that I might see over the heads of the spectators. The
curtain drew up. I was all ear, all eye. Not a word, not a movement escaped me.
Never had I before experienced such powerful impressions. I returned home
enchanted. Robinson Crusoe and the desert island disappeared. The theater now
engrossed my whole soul.

My joy, therefore, was unbounded, when the Duchess Amelia, that favorite of
the Muses, established a theater at Weimar. Several of the most celebrated
performers of the time came there, and among others, the admirable Eckhof. I
never omitted any opportunity of going to the play, and I wondered that those
who could do what they pleased, could prefer any other species of
entertainment. As a proof of my attention, I could repeat the whole of
Lessing's Emilia Galotti without ever having had the book in my hand. To the
honor of the fashionable world at Weimar, I must confess indeed that Emilia
Galotti was very often performed, and always to full houses.

Meanwhile I was a pupil of Musaeus in the Gymnasium (...) Weimar. Among other
things, we had every Saturday an hour dedicated to the reading of little
poetical attempts. At this period the rage for ballets was at its height, and
the magazines swarmed with terrific stories of chivalry and ghosts. I composed
a ballet in the taste of the times. It contained abundance of murder and
ghosts; a Spirit read a lecture on vice, and the sinner was at length carried
away by the Devil.

I read this performance the first Saturday after it was ready; and judge my
raptures when after it was finished, Musaeus pronounced those words which I
shall never forget: "Well, very well! From what magazine have you taken this?"
With what triumph did I reply, that it was my own composition* "Really!"
answered Musaeus: "Bravo! go on." Nothing could exceed my transports at this
panegyric, and my poetic propensity was confirmed.

At this time of life every thing is imitation, and I am convinced that there
is not a single original idea in a man's head till he is of an age to propagate
his species. Every thing I now made was only an imitation of the book I had
last read. I wrote a comedy called All Is Well that Ends Well, which I believe
had a strong resemblance to the Count of Ol^bach. Goethe used to visit in our
house; he heard of my comedy, and was so condescending, or so polite, as to ask
a reading of it. By this wish he highly gratified my mother; and this probably
was his object, for I never heard more of the comedy. This able man, however,
in my boyish days always treated me with great kindness.

In my sixteenth year I went to Iena. At first my attention was principally
directed to the acquisition of the dead and living languages, and in both these
my knowledge was considerably increased. At Iena my partiality for the stage
still continued. Before my arrival, there was a private theater established
among the students, and it was one of my first objects to be admitted into the
association. As it is not customary for ladies to appear in such theaters, on
account of my youth female characters of the younger sort were often assigned
to me. My propensity for rhyming likewise continued, and I produced a number of
poetic trifles.

In my eighteenth year I undertook to write a Romance, which I finished. It
consisted of eight or ten sheets, and, in my own opinion at the time, was
nothing inferior to Goethe's Werter. The story indeed was much more terrific;
for my hero precipitated himself from the top of a high rock, and was dashed to
pieces. This performance I sent to the Weygand, then publisher of most
fashionable romances at Leipzie. After waiting some time, however, I had the
mortification to receive an answer from him, in which he told me that the
manuscript was at my service, and desired me to order payment of the postage of
it! I never, however, inquired after it.

In the year 1779 I returned to Iena from the visit I had paid to my sister
then lately married, and applied with considerable zeal to the study of
jurisprudence. I likewise attended the professors of history, logic, and
metaphysics, and continued to improve myself in modern languages.

I this year produced a tragedy called Charlotte Trank, which was performed at
our private theater, and I myself enacted one of the principal characters. The
reception of it, however, was rather cold. Soon after I wrote a comedy, which
was much better received, and, as far as I recollect, containing some tolerable
comic touches. I likewise instituted a poetic club, from which I derived
considerable improvement.

In my nineteenth year I returned to Weimar, and studied the Pandects with
great industry; was examined by the Government, and admitted Advocate. While I
waited for clients, I myself continued a zealous client of the Muses. The
summer after my return I wrote several little things, which I am not now
ambitious to recall into notice. I likewise wrote some Tales, which were
published with my name by Dyk, at Leipzic, with an hundred and fifty pages by
some other hand. Several little dramatic pieces were likewise the produce of my
partiality for the theater.

In 1781 I went to Petersburgh. For some time I repressed my turn for poetic
pursuits, but I again began occasionally to indulge my ruling propensity. There
was a German theater at Petersburgh. It was then in a very indifferent state;
but soon after it was put in the number of the royal theaters, and the
direction of it given to my friend General Bawr, of the artillery, a German. I
now again found myself in my element.

I wrote a tragedy in five acts, called Demetrius Czar of Moscow. By a
whimsical circumstance the representation of this piece was nearly prohibited.
In the history Demetrius was by many called an impostor. In my play I found it
convenient to make him an hero. It turned out, however, that there was an old
proclamation of Peter the Great, in which this same Demetrius was declared to
be an impostor. With much difficulty, however, the piece was allowed to be
performed; after I had in a very formal manner been made to declare that I was
perfectly satisfied of the imposture of Demetrius, and the justice of the
proclamation, and that the freedom which I had used in my play was merely a
licentia poetica. I likewise wrote a comedy, called The Nun and the
Chambermaid, which was performed with great success. It was never published,
and the copy of it was accidentally left.

In the year 1782, some of my friends who had influence at court proposed to
procure me a place, and to facilitate their exertions I was requested to write
a small volume of Tales and Fables for young Princes, to be dedicated to the
young Grand Duke. Though I felt no great call for such a task, I complied; and
the volume was printed in a most superb manner by the direction of one of my
friends. Finding, however, that I was not qualified for this kind of writing, I
resolved, after the work had proceeded a considerable length, to repay the
publisher for his expense, and to bury the four sheets which were finished in
eternal oblivion.

Ye who so often and so loudly accuse me of vanity, to my Fables I appeal as
the proof of your falsehood! Their suppression cost me some hundred rubles, but
my vanity not a sigh.

I now come to the period when I went to reside at Revel. Soon after this I
wrote two plays, The Hermit of Formentera, and Adelaide of Wulfingen. The
former was performed at a private theater, and my propensity for the stage
revived. To this propensity the people of Revel are indebted for a theater,
which for the last ten years has had an excellent company, and can boast of
performers of no common merit. It was opened with a piece of mine, called Every
Fool has his Cap. The piece bore a striking resemblance to Moliere's Miser, and
I have buried it among my papers.

In autumn, 1787, I was seized with a severe illness, which for several years
reduced me to a state between life and death; or, what is worse than death, a
state of gloomy dejection of spirits. In the very height of this malady I wrote
Misanthropy and Repentance, The Stranger.
and soon after The Indians in England. Both of them were finished within about
eight or nine weeks. Never in my life, either before or since, did I feel such
copiousness of ideas, such vigor of imagination, such fertility of diction;
and I believe it to be undeniable that there are some kinds of maladies (among
which may particularly be included those which increase the irritability of the
nerves) which elevate the powers of the mind to an unusual height; just as,
according to the story, a diseased muscle forms a pearl.

In the year 1790 I wrote The Virgin of the Sun, The Child of Love, Lover's
Vows.
and Brother Montz the Humourist. I likewise proceeded in the collection of my
smaller works.

Upon Misanthrophy and Repentance many foolish things were said and written at
the time. Among other things, it was objected that it was defective in poetic
justice, because, by an unconditional forgiveness, I had restored the criminal
to the enjoyment of all the pleasures of life. Whether any forgiveness could
completely remove the cruel punishment which her crime carried with it; whether
such a woman as Eulalia, Called Adelaide, or Mrs. Haller, in the play as
performed here.
with a conscience so awakened, could ever again be happy, are questions which
nobody thought it worth while to ask, except Mr. Ziegler, who, however, took up
the whole affair erroneously, and by the unjustifiable freedom of calling
Eulalia's seducer from the dead, completely changed the nature of the case. I
therefore wrote The Noble Lie, in which, although certainly there appears a
young lady fallen from virtue, a circumstance on which the impure imagination
of Reviewers continues to dwell, unquestionably prevails the purest moral that
ever was inculcated from the pulpit or the stage.

In 1790, I experienced one of the severest dispensations of Providence in the
death of an amiable wife. Grief for this loss drove me to Paris, and the
account of this excursion I published under the title of The Flight to Paris,
This book was likewise severely attacked by some critics.

Full of indignation against the Parisians, of whose excesses I had been an
eyewitness, on my return to Mentz I wrote The Female Jacobin Club, a f^rce not
without some humor. My friend Huber, however, because he happened to be of a
different political creed from me, ^ell soul of it in the most violent manner.
Nevertheless, however, despotism is to me as hateful as to him, and this I
testified soon after in my Philosophical Sketch of Louis XIV. My publisher at
Strasburgh sent me the work in manuscript, and the correspondence which I had
with him on the subject was broken open before it reached me. I complained to
our minister at Frankfort on the subject, who took my side; but it was alleged
at Mentz that the letters were open before they arrived there, and I never was
able to learn who it really was who did me the honor to mistake me for a spy,
or a red-capped Jacobin. It seems to be my fate, that while Mr. Huber and Co.
exclaim against me as an advocate of despotism, the despots around consider me
as a dangerous democrat, worthy of their most jealous attention. I could give
signal examples of this, if a man were at liberty to tell all he could.

Once in my life I had the weakness to write a book in complaisance to another.
It was the book on Nobility. I could say a great deal on this subject, but I am
not at liberty to do it If the world knew -- and perhaps they may one day know
-- into what equivocal reputation of a certain kind I have been thrown by the
opinions, which both before and since I have expressed, and which have been so
egregiously misrepresented; if they know how my most confidential private
correspondence was turned against me; if they knew what inducements I had, and
from whom they proceeded, they would decide upon that production upon quite
different grounds; they would take into view not only the author, but the
citizen and the father. I confess, however, that my inconsiderate complaisance
laid me open in several points to the attacks of criticism; but for attack from
those with whom I had lived in habits of friendship, I was not prepared.

All that I have written since has been received by the public with
approbation, and by the critics announced without approbation. These are, Count
Benyowsky, The Death of Rolla, The Youngest Children of my Fancy, Under this
general title the following Novel was first published.
Poverty and Honor, The Man of Forty Years, The Negro Slave, The Chase, The
Count of Burgundy, The Defamers, False Shame, and La Peyrouse.

Many of my plays have had the good fortune to be translated into French,
Dutch, Danish, Polish, Russian, Italian: (...), when this was written, heard of
the great (...) ^untry.
a new thorn in the side of the Reviewers! A few days ago I received the
following piece of intelligence in a letter from Moscow: "Your play, The Child
of L^ve, was as often represented, and with more applause here than The
Marriage of Figaro in Paris. It is very well translated into Russian."

Is it not matter of surprise, that at the same time, and in so many countries,
the Public should every where have judged wrong, and approved of things upon
which the Reviews had pronounced irrevocable sentence of condemnation? -- The
investigation of that phenomenon, however, I must reserve for the continuation
of this article on some other occasion.

What may follow I must beg to be considered as the defense of a man accused;
for the critics have to often charged me at the bar of their judges and mine,
the Public, that it would seem a contempt for that tribunal never to take the
^ouble to answer. In this (...) I certainly may have some ^m ^o indulgence. Yet
(...) all i^ being ^avour as far as it is in my power, to in e^sperte with s^wn
(...) day a subject (...) what B^u^ch^s ^o we^ (...) F^, part qu^ (...) r^n
d^nn^^ des ^ap^ur^ (...) Et sa^s^b^rd (...)? Leur e n'est (...)! (...) right,
are you to give your r^der^ (...) ^h ennu^? Their s^ (...)


THE CONSTANT LOVER; OR William AND Ieanette. A TALE.
CHAP. I. THE BOY.
WILLIAM sat by the side of a brook under an alder tree. He had just slipped
the bark from a willow branch, and formed it into a rustic flute. He sat and
drew from his artless instrument simple, plaintive melodies; and now and then
he would gaze upon the brook that babbled by, and weep bitterly. A few steps
from the banks of the rivulet lay his hat, and in the hat a piece of bread. The
linnets and goldfinches hopped from twig to twig, approaching nearer and
nearer, till at last they had the boldness to peek the crumbs out of the ^t.
William viewed them with a melancholy smile, and struggled to suppress his sobs
that he might not disturb the little guests.

"Why do you weep, my boy?" suddenly cried a rough voice behind him.

"Why do you weep, my boy?" repeated a sweet tender echo. William started, and
blushed as if he had been caught in some criminal act. Mankind are ashamed of a
gift which testifies their noble origin. We are ashamed to shed tears. Nobody
chooses it should appear that he has been weeping. We pull out our
handkerchiefs, and press them to our red eyes, to wipe away the last traces of
humanity.

William had not time to dry up the large drops which trickled over his
sunburned cheeks. With his fine black eyes he gazed at the strangers from whom
the question proceeded. Before him stood a corpulent man, dressed in a close
dark blue coat and a bob wig. In his right hand, which displayed no common
size, he carried a long Spanish cane with a golden head, and in the left he led
a beautiful girl of eleven years of age, on whose rosy cheeks the evening sun
played through the trees, while the gentle zephyr wantoned in her fair flowing
locks.

"Why do you weep, my boy?" repeated this benignant creature, and dropped a
tear on the bunch of May-flowers which she had newly plucked.

"Ah, Miss!" said William, as he rose from the ground where he sat, "I weep
because I know not what in the world will become of me."

"Are you an orphan?" said the corpulent man.

WILLIAM. -- Ah! no. I have a father; you, Sir, know him well, for he has often
wrought in your house.


CORPULENT MAN. -- Who is your father?


WILLIAM. -- John Meadows the porter. Till now he has kept me at school. I can
read and write, and also construe Cornelius Nepos. Times, however, are at
present very hard. My father says he cannot any longer afford to support me at
school; that I must turn porter, and earn my bread.


CORPULENT MAN. -- And you are averse to your father's proposal?


WILLIAM. -- I wish to apply myself to some settled profession.


CORPULENT MAN. -- My good boy, every man in the world is at bottom no other
than a porter; and he that can take up his burden in one house, carry it to
another, and there throw it down, has not the hardest lot in life.

William stared at the corpulent man; in his fine eyes it was easy to read --
"I do not understand you."

"You do not understand me," proceeded the corpulent man; "and it were better
that I did not understand myself. -- How old are you?"


WILLIAM. -- Thirteen.


CORPULENT MAN. -- Then, indeed, are you too young and too weak to pursue your
father's occupation.


WILLIAM. -- I am extremely willing to work, but then I should forget all I
have learnt at school. I used always to think with myself that I ought to be
diligent and attentive, for it was possible that I too might one day come to be
a schoolmaster, and be able to provide for my old father when is no longer able
to carry burdens.


"Give him something, father!" lisped the little Miss as she clung round the
corpulent man, and looked up to him with eager, sparkling eyes. When she found
that her father did not immediately answer, she added, in querulous accents,
"This too, is my birthday, and you have yet made me no present."

The good old man was touched; with a complacent smile he chucked her tenderly
under the chin, and said to William, "Dry up your tears, my boy; I will pay the
expense of your education at school. Come tomorrow morning early with your
father to my house, and we will talk farther upon the business."

William hastily seized the corpulent man's right hand, and bathed it with his
tears; the little girl kissed the left; the old man was affected. William gave
his flute to the little girl. She accepted it, kindly nodded her head, and in
return gave him the bunch of May-flowers. Not a word passed between them; but
the young Miss viewed the flute with complacency, and William pressed the
May-flowers to his heart.

"Farewell till tomorrow!" said the corpulent man as he went away, and the
little girl tripped gaily by his side through the willows. William followed her
with his eyes. She frequently looked behind, and every time with a kindly nod,
till a hillock concealed the lovely angel from his view. William took up his
hat, crumbled the piece of bread, and scattered it on the grass for the linnets
and goldfinches. He then stuck the bunch of May-flowers in his hat with more
pride than a young cornet his first cockade, and went home in the highest
spirits.

CHAP II. THE FIRST VISIT.
HE that goes to bed with his head full of the idea that tomorrow he has
something of great importance before him, commonly awakes betimes. Scarce was
it daybreak, when William stood before a shattered looking-glass to prepare
for his visit. He powdered his hair, and spared no pains to deck out his locks
in the neatest style. A rose-coloured coat, of pretty fine stuff, but now worn
threadbare, which three years before had been purchased from an
old-clothes-man, and consequently now much too short at all points, this day
received a new decoration from the half-faded bunch of May-flowers, which
William had fastened upon his breast with two large corking pins.

Old John Meadows spread a towel upon his shoulders, and pulled the brass comb
at least twenty times through his close-cropped hair. From the chest, which he
ever kept locked with religious care, he drew out his Sunday's coat of dark
blue cloth, and his scarlet waistcoat. It was trimmed superbly from the
shoulders down to his thighs; his clean shirt was most carefully plaited, and
displayed innumerable folds. A dark cane with an ivory head waved in his hand
by a leathern thong, and a hat with three huge cocks covered his head.

Thus proudly arrayed, they bent their way to the house of the corpulent man;
and as they paced along, old John Meadows thanked God in silence, who had
inspired the heart of a heretic to assist William honorably through the world.

What! and the corpulent man then was an heretic?

Yes, courteous protestant reader! yet was he no political, but only a
theological heretic; and at this time of day such a thing has ceased to be a
crime. The cut of your religion and of your clothes, the form of your creed and
of your hair, are now subjected to the omnipotent scepter of Fashion; and
Voltaire, who was once banished from his country because he ventured to start
the impious doubt whether Adam and Eve in Paradise had their navels cut, Le
Mondain.
would now have been driven back to his country because he makes Titus exclaim
-- -- Je^ ^n mon c^r
Let be^e g^av^e ^^les ^ol^ ^n horreur I carry freedom in my heart, and hold
kings in abhorrence.
.


Mr. Jerome, whom the inhabitants of the little country town of L * * *, by an
easy corruption, used to call Skrum, was a French emigrant -- driven from his
native land, however, neither by the revocation of the edict of Nantes, nor by
the violence of the National Convention. He had left the country of his
ancestors in pursuit of fortune, because she had not chanced to visit him at
home. He was a staunch, thorough Roman catholic; by trade a
stocking-manufacturer, a calling he had exercised for twenty years, during
which he had been settled in Germany. Here by a pair of fine eyes his
conscience was so overcome, that he was fain to accommodate it to the wishes of
his heart, as he fashioned his stockings to answer every size of foot, great or
small. In other words, he had ventured to marry a protestant heretic, who,
however, for the punishment of her misbelief, died in childbed a year after
their union, leaving him an only daughter, who was called Jeanette by her
father, and Jenny by the rest of the family.

Mr. Jerome was corpulent; but when a wretched fellow creature laid his hand on
Mr. Jerome's breast, he felt his heart beat loud and kindly enough. He was of a
cheerful disposition; well he loved a laugh, heartily enjoyed a glass of
Burgundy, delighted in the social circle, but most of all when his morning had
been employed in performing a kind and beneficent action. Benevolence, indeed,
is the parent of gaiety, and the cheerful man is ever more ready than the
gloomy and morose to draw his purse to relieve a brother.

The doors instantly fl^w open when John Meadows and his son were announced.
Mr. Jerome was smoking a pipe of tobacco, and Jeanette was soaking a roll in
tea: beside her cup lay the flute. She nodded benignantly to the giver, who
returned her salutation with awkward bows, and blushed till his cheeks vied in
color with his father's waistcoat. She looked at the flute, and then at
William, as if she meant to say, "Do you see how much I value your present?"
William stood with downcast eyes, and played with the May-flowers, as if he
would have answered -- "Nor is yours less dear to me."

John Meadows broke silence. He spoke at great length of the Christian temper,
and of God's blessing. He even ventured to maintain, that the man who protected
and supported the poor orphan might, in spite of his corrupted faith, be placed
among the sheep on the right hand.

Mr. Jerome smiled with much goodnature, and glanced at his tobacco smoke as
it rolled up in spreading volumes, as if he would have said, smoke or cloud, it
is all one in the end.

"I shall be very happy," said he with a gentle inclination of the head, "if
the young lad continues to be diligent and well-behaved. I will pay the expense
of his education at school, and take care likewise that he shall not want any
thing necessary to his progress. Let him attend the precentor of the parish
church two hours a week to learn to sing, as I understand he has a mind to be a
schoolmaster. He may come here every day, and dine with the superintendant of
my manufactory upon what Providence is pleased to bestow. I shall then have an
opportunity of hearing what progress he makes. Adieu! the table is always
covered at two o'clock."

"Now, William, mind what you are about!" muttered his father, pinching his
son's arm! "go and kiss this worthy gentleman's hand!"

Heaven knows from what feeling it proceeded, but William bashfully walked up
with trembling steps to the tea-table, and kissed Jeanette's hand. Jeanette
blushed as red as scarlet. John Meadows said: Blockhead! and Mr. Jerome
laughed. "Be not displeased, good John! The lad has done quite right, since
what I now do to assist him he owes originally to my daughter."

With many bows which no dancing master would have endured, and many cordial
blessings which God and the worthy old man's heart accepted, the happy pair
took their leave. William, at first, in compliance with the dictates of
politeness, was about to withdraw to the door, carefully observing always to
present his face to the company. Vanity, however, whispered him to turn round,
that the pretty little girl might have an opportunity of seeing his finely
dressed and powdered hair. He wheeled abruptly round therefore, and with head
erect he marched out of the room.

CHAP. III. THE PEAR TREE.
WILLIAM continued to advance in stature; he learnt to write, to read, to cast
accounts, to sing, and had Luther's smaller catechism at his finger's ends.
Jeanette likewise improved in size, and learnt even more than William. When
they were together, however, they were wont to forget what they had learnt.
William dined every day with Mr. Jerome's overseers. Frequently upon Sundays he
was invited to his benefactor's table, as he was a well bred, modest lad. On
these occasions he never forget to drink the healths of the whole company, and
generally had the misfortune to spill a few drops of wine on the table-cloth,
because, in making the circuit of the guests, his hand trembled whenever his
eye lighted on Jeanette.

Every year William celebrated Mr. Jerome's birthday in a poem in Ale
andrines, a yard long, elegantly transcribed upon royal paper, stitched up in
morocco with blue silk. Jeanette's birthday was likewise sung with equal
honor, but in dactyls; and instead of blue silk, the binding was ornamented
with purple red. The father, on these occasions, rewarded him with a guinea,
and the daughter with a kind glance. The guinea dropped into his pocket, the
glance went to his heart. The guinea he usually carried to his father, and not
a halfpenny did he retain for himself; the glance he would not have shared
either with father or mother. He felt something like the same sensation as the
young gentlemen of London when they ascend Dr. Graham's celestial bed.

Of the most delightful of all feelings, man is unable to give the least
account, because, praised be the great Creator! they are original instincts in
his nature. Envy, hatred, slander, and all the furies which compose the black
catalogue of vice, are, at a later period, the bastard brood of the social
state. W^am had never reflected why he employed purple silk for Jeanette, nor
examined for what reason, at the sight of her, his heart leaped like his own
dactyls. Neither did Jeanette know why at noon, just at the time when William
came to dinner, she was sure to seat herself at the door. As little did she
reflect why upon Sundays, in helping about the soup, she never failed to give
William the largest share of the bouilli. It proceeded doubtless from this
cause, that, without our ever suspecting it, in the first part of our life we
are ripening for love, as in the latter part of it we are ripening for death.
Love and death have many things in common. No mortal can defy their power. Both
come upon us by surprise, like a thief in the night; both transport us in
Elysium. A dying man and a lover resemble each other in this too, that the
spectators generally discover before the person himself, what is his real
situation. Fortunately this was not the case with William and Jeanette. Mr.
Jerome never dreamt that Jeanette could ever forget in the amiable youth, poor
William the porter's son; or that William would ever aspire to the daughter of
a manufacturer. He did not consid^r that liberty and equality is the great
mysterious law in love as in death.

When the light down began to spread itself on William's upper lip, and
Jeanette's bosom began to extend, Cupid, the mischievous boy, with cunning
artifice prepared by various little incidents to unravel that web which, with
playful hand, he had wove in their infant hearts.

Mr. Jerome, who was universally considered a (...) of property, among other
things possessed a garden in front of his house, where, in a fine summer
evening, he was wont to enjoy himself. Hither used William to come after he had
harassed his memory all day long, or had sung himself hoarse with the parish
clerk, in order to refresh himself with new milk and vegetables.

One harvest day Jeanette happened to long for a pear, which hung deliciously
tempting on the top of a branch. William instantly proceeded to climb the tree.
The wish to gratify her was combined with the little vanity of showing with
what speed and adroitness he could mount the highest tree; for it is a
delightful sensation to extort admiration from those we love. He soon ascended
the trunk, and lightly swung from branch to branch.

"William! William! you will fall," cried the old man from the bower. "There is
no danger," returned William carelessly, and stretched out his hand to seize
the tempting fruit. As his arm, however, was too short, in leaning forwards he
lost his balance, tumbled, grasped a rotten branch; the branch broke, and
William fell to the ground like a piece of lead.

Jeanette screamed. "There it is!" cried the old man, and waddled up in all
haste quite breathless. In the fall the splinter of the branch tore the
thoughtless boy's temple. "William!" cried Jeanette with trembling voice;
"William! you bleed!"

"'It Is a trifle!" said William, his countenance distorted with pain as he
writhed himself on the grass.

Mr. JEROME. -- Then rise.


WILLIAM. -- Immediately, immediately.


JEANETTE. -- O heavens! what is the matter with you? Rise!


WILLIAM. -- I cannot.


JEANETTE. -- Why not?


WILLIAM. -- I have broke my leg.


Jeanette very near swooned away at these words. She wept, and bemoaned his
misfortune with so much anxiety, that William only lamented that he had not
broke both his legs. He was immediately laid upon a barrow, conveyed home with
all possible tenderness, and lodged in Mr. Jerome's house, where he was
attended with the utmost care for six weeks. Twice a day came Jeanette with the
knowledge of her father to visit him, and twenty times a day did she come
without her father's knowledge. She brought him preserved fruits, strengthening
soups, and kind glances, endued with the most wonderful healing powers.

"How are you now?" said she one day at the beginning of the seventh week.
"Alas!" said William in a querulous tone, "I am well, and the happiest of my
days are flown!"

"You dream dear William. Have you not lain constantly in bed, and endured the
most violent pain?"

"Ah! how soon was it forgotten when I saw Jeanette enter the room!"

At these words, he concealed his glowing countenance with the bed-clothes; and
Jeanette, overspread with the most captivating blushes of modesty, pretended
some business at the window; in doing which she awkwardly overturned three
phials with medicines. Of these, however, there was store remaining. The
surgeon declared what William of his own free impulse would never have
announced, that his patient was completely cured. William, with a deep sigh,
left the house in which his heart had enjoyed more delightful emotions than his
leg had cost him painful hours. Winter covered with snow the garden in front of
the house, and the glimmering sparks of first love. Jeanette and William saw
each other less frequently, and, when they met, they were constrained by an
embarrassment which they had never before experienced.

Meanwhile the youth received the most flattering testimonies from his
instructors. "He is diligent," said they, "and he has talents; it is a pity
indeed that he is sometimes a dreamer. For hours together he will sit with open
mouth, and gaze. Do you call him, he does not hear; do you shake him, he starts
up in amaze! and do you ask him what he has been thinking of, the common answer
is: Of nothing."

I know very well what I am thinking of, would William whisper aside to
himself; I know well of what I dream, but I cannot impart it to you. --
Jeanette felt some kind of sentiment, as if she knew likewise; but it was a
subject which she was still less qualified than William to mention.

CHAP. IV. THE CANARY BIRD.
SOON as the spring again awaked every bud to life, and every bird to love, Mr.
Jerome began to visit his garden. There would Jeanette often sit under the
fatal pear tree, and wonder that her bosom, which was now so much enlarged,
should feel even more confined than when she wore frocks. With the frocks of
childhood its joys too had flown. Last harvest the pear tree was interesting
only on account of its fruit, but now she preferred the blossoms. Formerly she
delighted to see the linnet with his clipped wings hop through the room, but
now she would rather listen to his song in the groves. Childhood loves to
demolish; youth to enjoy; manhood wishes to build up, and to repair, but in the
midst of its schemes is surprised by old age, which loves to lie down beneath a
ruin, and doze away the remainder of existence.

Out of the abundant treasure of her youthful joys, Jeanette had nothing now
remaining but a favorite canary bird, which, by the help of a violin, had been
taught to sing the melodies of the song, "Marlborough's to the wars gone." He
would often fit upon her shoulder, and peck the sugar from her mouth. As her
father and this canary were the only living creatures she could venture to
acknowledge, either to herself or to others, that she passionately loved, she
soon became persuaded that little Marlborough was indispensible to her. "I
should fret to death," would she often say, "were he to die." This in other
words meant, "I cannot live without love, and I know not yet how easy it is to
supply the place of a canary bird."

One hot sultry summer day it happened -- and William chanced to be in the
garden -- that all the windows of the house were thrown open to invite the
breeze, which gently waved the vine-leaves that arched round the window. While
little Marlborough hopped at liberty through the room, the restless spirit of
his great ancestor suddenly began to move in him. Perhaps he was enticed by the
twittering of a sparrow on the outside, which reminded him, that in spite of
his golden plumage, and his present delicate style of living, he was originally
sprung from the sparrow race. He resolved, therefore to teach the courtier a
lesson, by condescending to acknowledge his humble relation. Presto! in a
moment he was out at the window, and Jeanette had well nigh leaped out after
him. She stood with uplifted arms, and screamed as if she had seen somebody
murdered below in the garden.

It was long before the cause of her screams could be ascertained, since nobody
had observed the little fugitive, and Jeanette was so frightened that she could
not for her life stammer out the word Marlborough. William stood before her,
moved his lips, twisted his fingers, and with anxious looks seemed laboring to
draw the words from her mouth. When he at last learnt what was the matter, he
took the shortest way out at the window; and Jeanette was on the point of
following him, had not female delicacy in the critical moment pulled her by the
sleeve, and held her back. She flew out at the door, and soon joined William,
whose eyes wandered from tree to tree.

"There he sits!" cried he at last, pointing to a cherry-tree, where
Marlborough perched, and devoured with keenness a May cherry. "But how are we
to entice him down without frightening him away?"

William whistled; Jeanette cried, but all in vain! A lump of sugar was shown
him at a distance; but he eyed it askance, like a contented peasant who is
invited to the table of a prince, and yet would eat his buttermilk at home with
much greater pleasure and appetite. After the little fugitive had pecked the
cherry to the stone, he flew merrily away, like the favorite of some great
lady, who is compelled to give the tone to the feelings of his mistress, though
his heart refuses to beat in unison, and at last has the good fortune to fall
into disgrace. His pursuers followed him close. He then perched upon a birch,
and the feelings of liberty appeared quite to overcome the duty of gratitude;
for he took not the least notice of Jeanette's fond, enticing complaints.

William was preparing to climb the birch, but Marlborough saved him the
trouble, and flew from tree to tree. At last he flew over the hedge into the
adjoining meadows. Without wings, and in spite of the thorns, William soon
contrived to find his way over the hedge. Poor Jeanette, however, was obliged
to remain behind, and content herself with her tender hands to make a little
opening in the thicket, through which she could have a prospect of the meadow,
and at least follow the beloved fugitive with her eye.

"Ah! William! William! get me him back" cried she to the youth with a voice so
touching^y sweet, that he would have pursued the bird into the very cage of the
fairy Strigillina, for whose acquaintance we are indebted to the facetious
Cazotte. The meadow was but thinly planted with trees, and at the distance of a
few hundred paces was bounded by a river of considerable breadth, though not
very deep. On the banks of this stream Marlborough perched on a willow, so low,
that he seemed easily within reach. William slipped up upon tiptoe, and when he
was opening his hand -- away the little fugitive took his flight across the
stream, sat down upon an aspen tree, and began to sing merrily -- not
Marlborough's to the wars gone -- but the song which nature had taught him
without the help of an instrument. It is thus that we all do. Every one has his
piece which he has learnt by rote, and he sings it no longer than he is
obliged. The parson drones it from the pulpit, and at home resigns himself to
the spirit of the cloth, while he calculates the amount of his tithes.

There was no time to be lost. William sprang forward into the water without
consideration, clothes and all, waded up to the shoulders, and safely gained
the opposite bank, but not the object of his pursuit.

Jeanette through the hedge saw what William had done, and the big tear of
anguish which rolled down her cheek changed into the silent stealing tear of
tenderness. She trembled still, but it was not for Marlborough. "Kind William!"
said she aloud: "Dear William!" softly re-echoed her heart.

He had now, together with the bird, disappeared from her view. He leaped and
sprang over hedges and ditches, keeping the runaway favorite constantly in
sight. His strength now began to fail; his breath was nearly exhausted; the
agitation of his breast was visible; the moment seemed at hand when he would be
compelled to drop down with fatigue, and the resuscitated Marlborough would be
abandoned to his fate.

Unexpectedly a third party now came into action, who, unobserved, had long
watched his advantage. A hawk soared in air, lurking like a villain that prowls
abroad to ruin innocence. Ah! that nature had not bestowed upon man the
instinct of the feathered creation, to detect wickedness and treachery at a
distance, when they seem to hover careless over him without menacing
destruction! Little Marlborough, in his golden prison, had never seen a hawk,
but nature distinctly told him -- "Above you there is your foe!" What neither
seducing love nor tempting dainties could accomplish, fear at last effected. He
shaped his flight lower and lower; at last, but just above the surface, he
perched upon a juniper bush -- the hawk darted down -- and Marlborough leaped
for refuge into William's protecting hand.

"I have got him!" cried William panting for breath; "thank God, I have got
him." He forgot that his strength was exhausted; he thought only of Jeanette's
transports, and the idea inspired him with new vigor. He could not allow
himself to think of going round by the high road over the bridge, and through
the town to Mr. Jerome's garden. With the bird in his hand he leaped more
lightly than before over all the hedges and ditches which separated him from
Jeanette; with the bird in his hand he plunged again into the river, and held
his captive over his head.

"I have got him!" exclaimed he, when he saw the white robes of his beloved
waving through the hedge. A tender tear stole down her cheek when she at last
saw William standing before her breathless, drenched to the skin, his hands
torn and bloody, his face inflamed and discolored, his hair as wet with
perspiration as his clothes with water. She darted an animated glance which
betrayed her whole soul; she forgot Marlborough and her disordered morning
gown, suddenly threw herself round his neck, and with loud sobs kissed his
glowing cheek.

Poor William, indeed, had earned well his reward. He was so much exhausted
that he could not even return Jeanette's caresses. He sunk down on the grass,
and panted for breath; Jeanette could not speak her thanks -- she was silent;
but this moment decided the fate of her life. William was requested to go to
town and change his clothes. He would not go. Next morning he was seized with a
fever and ague.

CHAP. V. LOVE FOR LOVE.
THE cunning boy Cupid claims an indisputable right to inhabit every damsel's
heart. Should you knock and inquire whether he is within, and you find him
denied, you must not conclude that he is really absent, but only that your
visit was not acceptable. Cupid is unquestionably the greatest potentate upon
earth, and accordingly he sometimes exercises the privilege of other great
folks, to slap the door in the face of th^se low-bred worthy people who have
nothing to pretend to but their honesty. This celestial divinity too has it in
common with the gods of the earth that he submits to the tyranny of favorites,
provided they never fall into disgrace with him. Gentle reader! do you guess
the names of these favorites? They are called Vanity and Sense. Love, indeed,
has also a friend, less a favorite, as usual, it is true, than the flatterers,
but often possessed of the greatest influence. This friend is Pity! and when,
as it sometimes happens, the friends and the favorites combine together, the
most rigid heart must open to their addresses.

William, without being aware of it, had succeeded in interesting both the
friend and the flatterer in his favor. As early as the day when his tears
dropped into the brook, and the flute breathed the simple tones of his
plaintive melody, Pity first stole into the gentle bosom of Jeanette. The
broken leg of last year nourished this feeling, and the ague now lent it
incalculable strength. Hence was formed the triple alliance to which we have
just alluded. Vanity whispered in soothing accents: "For thy sake it was he
climbed the tree; for thy sake he plunged into the river." -- Sense -- Fie! fie!
what has an innocent girl of sixteen to do with the suggestions of Sense?

Forgive me, dearest ladies! but be careful not to confound this refined
feeling with its coarser sister Sensuality. Do you not contemplate with greater
pleasure the head of an Antinous than that of a So^es? (...) who will impute
this pleasure of sense to you as a crime? -- William was a tall handsome
stripling; he had the glow of health upon his cheek; his countenance displayed
the fresh bloom of youth; he had a fine intelligent eye, purple lips, white
teeth -- Is it my fault that nature has communicated to these qualities the
power to please? When all is done, must we not exclaim with Boufflers: Que
deviendroient les familles,
Si les coeurs des jeunes gar^ons
Etoient faits comme ceux des filles?


The very same apartment where last year William had found his health but too
speedily re-established, was on this occasion likewise the scene of his joys
and sufferings. He entered it with delightful warmth of emotion, to which the
shivering fit of his distemper was for a moment forced to yield.

Almost the whole day Jeanette was wont to sit by his bedside. Her father
troubled himself little about the matter, partly because the slightest
suspicion never entered his imagination, and partly because his affairs, for
some time fallen into disorder, occupied his attention, and soured his temper.

Jeanette had learnt botany from an old Frenchman, a pupil of Rousseau, and
inherited from her mother a number of notable receipts. She liked to dabble a
little in medicine too, and she resolved to undertake in person the cure of her
beloved patient; a design, in which she very probably would have ultimately
succeeded without the assistance of any receipts whatever. Sometimes she
prepared for him fresh decoctions of cresses, borage, and other herbs; again
she would give him mint leaves with honey; and sometimes she made him drink
coffee with lemon juice. William, without reluctance, swallowed whatever her
fair hand presented to him; and ^d it pleased her to prescribe it, he would
have drank coloquintida without making a wry face*

When he at length perceived that the fever had left his body, but that his
love for Jeanette was not likely to be soon expelled from his heart, he became
pensive and melancholy. Jeanette daily made tender and pressing inquiries after
the cause; but in vain! no decoction could loosen his tongue. Most willingly
indeed would he have rolled away the heavy burden that lay upon his heart, but
where could he find courage for the attempt?

"Bashful boy! when love is deficient in courage, it has recourse to art. You
dread Jeanette's resentment? Why, well! Try then to discover your love without
betraying the design. Have you not a fever? Cannot you affect delirium? The
ravings of a distempered fancy she cannot take amiss."

Something, I know not what, whispered these suggestions to William's heart,
and to its soothing accents William lent a willing ear. Several days he
revolved his little plan of imposture, and watched only for a favorable
opportunity to put it in practice.

One evening Jeanette amused him in reading the celebrated Reinecke Fuchs,
which M. Goethe has dressed out in a new garb. He was so wearied with the
pranks and the jokes of master Reinecke, that he had abundance of time to study
his part. Twenty times was Jeanette, yawning with fatigue, on the point of
laying the book aside; but as William was silent, and his eyes, steadily fixed
upon her, seemed to indicate that he was interested in the story, she concluded
that it must be very entertaining, though she could not comprehend it. She
continued to read on to the ninth canto, and kept herself from sleep as well as
she could. She was at the place which says that the "hero boldly addressed
himself to all the barons," when the word boldly struck William's ear, and
vibrated to his heart. "Why do you hesitate?" whispered Love; "take courage! be
bold!" -- Here, however, it was no barons that William had to deal with; and he
would have thought it far easier to address himself to all the barons in
Christendom, than to expose himself to the offended looks of Jeanette.

Suddenly William began to toss himself about in bed, and to utter
unintelligible jargon. Jeanette looked up: "William, are you not well?" -- He
returned no answer. Jeanette repeated her question, and William still refused
to answer. Alarmed, she threw away the book, rose, leant over him, and gazed
upon his countenance with inquisitive looks. His cheeks glowed -- and that
appeared a suspicious symptom; his brow was hot -- it was a return of the
fever; his eyes rolled -- he breathed quick -- she was seriously alarmed.
Silent and anxious she stood beside him to watch the symptoms.

William now began to give loose to his tongue: "Jeanette!" exclaimed he
without turning his eyes toward the place where she stood, "my beloved
Jeanette!" Then he proceeded to talk enthusiastically of palaces and cottages,
which he would inhabit with his Jeanette. Now he would suppose that he saw Mr.
Jerome before him; with tears he entreated and conjured him not to refuse him
Jeanette because he was poor. Now he thought he saw her in the arms of another;
then wept and raved, complained and stormed.

Jeanette was terribly frightened. She attempted to run away, but did not go;
she was about to cry for help, but she did not. William's ravings were so
interesting that they fixed her whole attention, and the confession of his love
she heard with rapture, as his situation spared her blushes.

After the pretended sick man had played his part for a considerable time with
great success, and had unveiled the most secret wishes of his heart without
embarrassment, he sunk down upon the bed as if exhausted, and peered at
Jeanette with half-shut eyes, in order to ascertain the effects of his talents
for theatrical performance. His sinking down appeared to Jeanette to be a
swoon; and when he gazed steadily at her, she thought that his eyes were set in
his head. Away she ran to the window, where stood a phial with cordial drops,
took a cup, and intended to pour out twenty; there were at least eighty
however, partly because her hand trembled, and partly because she reckoned as
much out of rule as if she had in her life heard no more of addition or
multiplication than of Kant's Criticism on pure Reason. Had this cordial been
applied as it was intended, the roguish patient would indeed have sustained no
injury; for on the way between the window and the bed her trembling hand had
spilt four parts of the potent drug. With the remainder she approached the
patient's lips, and with soothing accents said, "My dear William!" -- At these
words, instead of the cup he seized her hand, pressed it ardently to his mouth,
and gazed upon her with languishing softness.

"You will spill the drops!" cried Jeanette confounded. But the drops were
already spilt. William troubled himself no more about them; he threw his arms
round the lovely girl, hid his face in her bosom, and stammered, "Forgive me,
Jeanette, I do not rave!"

"What is the matter with you, William?"

"Alas! I am poor! I have nothing but a heart that dotes upon you!"

"You are sick!" --

"O yes! to death if you disdain me!"

It was indeed an excellent, though a very dangerous fashion among the old
Germans, which assigned to the fair sex the practice of the healing art. What
extraordinary cures might not in those days a young handsome baggage have
performed! How often, on the other hand, might she not have been the victim of
her humanity! How often has the patient been cured when the physician caught
the distemper!

Jeanette felt that she had more occasion for the cordial drops than William.
She would have run out of the room, but she wanted strength to disentangle
herself from his arms. She would have chid, but she wanted breath to speak, as
William's glowing lips were pressed to hers. At this moment the juggler Cupid,
with inconceivable dexterity, exchanged their hearts; and showed them, by the
help of a little of his Necromantic skill, instead of a yawning abyss under
their feet, a distant prospect of flowery fields and beds of roses.

CHAP. VI. THE SCHOOLMASTER.
THERE are four kinds of happy mortals in the world. With three of them
happiness glides swiftly away, like the light clouds which the helpless
mariner, as he clings to the shattered helm of reason, at a distance mistakes
for land. With the fourth only is it permanent; provided no physician happens,
uncalled, to interfere. The three first are, the drunk man, the lover, and the
child. -- The last -- alas! why must I acknowledge the unwelcome truth? -- the
last is -- the madman. All the four have this in common, that they are
contented with what they possess; they enjoy the present, and entertain no
apprehensions for the future. On account of the coincidence which we have
mentioned, it is usual to call lovers childish, drunk, or mad; and I have
nothing to say should the reader be inclined to apply these honorable
appellations to the principal personages of my story; for it was childish at
their age to permit love to steal into their hearts; it was intoxication to
acknowledge their mutual attachment; it was madness to dream of future bliss.

William's most ambitious hopes scarcely aspired so high as the rank of a
schoolmaster. Jeanette, indeed, thought that love ennobled every station, and
constituted the happiness of the beggar as well as the prince. She already
anticipated in imagination how she would feed the hens and geese, and bake
cakes at Christmas. Even the difference of their religious faith gave her no
uneasiness. Lovers have only one religion.

William thought these sentiments extremely well founded, and did not fail to
add many other reasons no less conclusive. If a warlike prince, would he argue,
returns his sword into the scabbard to repose in the arms of his confort, why
it is the same thing exactly when the schoolmaster lays down the rod and
embraces his helpmate. The prince adorns his brows with laurel, and the
schoolmaster at Whitsuntide decorates his apartment with birch. The laurel is
dyed with blood, but the birch sheds a sweet perfume. -- Love delights to amuse
itself with such companions. The imagination admits them without scruple; but
as with infants, who thrust every thing indiscriminately into their mouth, it
is soon discovered that some things will not go down.

William, whose fever had now taken a different turn, appeared endued with
supernatural powers since Jeanette's lips had been pressed to his. His masters
no longer called him dreamer. He was the most attentive, the most studious
scholar in the school. He acquired every branch of knowledge with extraordinary
expedition, and never lost sight of the object of his exertions, the valuable
prize for which he struggled. He now learnt more in six months than formerly in
as many years; and at a public examination, in presence of the
superintendant-general Hori^iophilius, he made so favorable an appearance, that
notwithstanding his youth he received the appointment of schoolmaster at
Walldorf, a situation of no contemptible emolument.

Prouder than a cardinal who has received from the visible head of the church
the right to wear a purple robe, and to lead a great white horse by a golden
bridle; happier than a shipwrecked navigator, who for many weeks has defied the
attacks of hunger and thirst in a crazy canoe, and at last descries a friendly
South Sea island at hand, on whose coasts the bread-tree invites him to allay
his hunger; prouder and happier did Wiiliam now sly home to revive his sick
father with the news.

Good old John Meadows was not destined to enjoy the fruits of his son's
industry and preferment, for he died a few weeks after. To the day of his
death, however, he continued to amuse himself with a hundred little plans how
he should spend an easy old age, how he should superintend the kitchengarden
and the orchard, or undertake the management of the school upon occasion, when
urgent business took his son to town In the midst of these flattering dreams
John Meadows fell asleep -- the happier for him, perhaps! The imagination is
wont to paint al fres^o; its performances will not bear a narrow inspection.

It may naturally be supposed that William, on being invested with his new
dignity, immediately after communicating his good fortune to his father, ^ied
away to Mr. Jerome's house. Before he set out, however, he carefully renewed
the powder upon his temples, which, in the terrors of his examination he had
wiped off. On the road his senses were inaccessible to external objects. Now he
just^ed against a milk-woman, and again a cart-horse shoved him into the
kennel* He pressed onward without looking at his way, talked to himself as he
went, and his smiles easily discovered that his soliloquies were not of a
gloomy character.

"I am extremely happy to hear it," said Mr. Jerome; "God bless you, my son!"
Jeanette's cheeks glowed with transport; and she could scarce resist the
impulse to throw herself round his neck, and kiss the beloved youth. The word
son, which her father had employed, awaked in her mind a train of smiling
images.

William was invited to stay dinner. He sat in speechless joy; he could not eat
a bit, and satisfied himself with feasting his eyes; and when the old man
poured out a glass of wine, and kindly said, "Your health, Mr. Meadows!" -- the
tears burst into Jeanette's eyes; she was obliged to rise from ^able on
pretense of business.

It is a good old practice to drink healths. It is indeed the most insipid
thing in the world when it is merely a piece of ceremony in a polite company.
But upon particular joyful occasions, when heart drinks to heart, the tear
starts into the eye of manhood, and the youth exclaims with the old man --

"God preserve the good old customs of our forefathers!"

CHAP. VII. PATIENCE!
A FEW days after this joyful incident, death summoned some half-dozen princes
and lords to the other world, and by the same conveyance dispatched likewise
John Meadows the porter, there to be interrogated, by a more penetrating
examiner than the superintendant-general Horistophilius, how each of them had
borne his burden through life, and whether they had dragged it without
stumbling from the cradle to the grave?

After William had dropped a tear of filial piety upon his father's grave, and
taken possession of his whole inheritance, consisting of the blue Sunday's coat
and the scarlet waistcoat, he departed in good spirits for Walldorf. He found
on his arrival a delightful country; a hospitable mansion, inhabited by a good
old lady, the widow of the deceased schoolmaster; a kitchen-garden and orchard,
a bower formed of honeysuckles and jessamines; a piece of arable land, a small
meadow, an honest peasantry, and a worthy clergyman! All, all exceeded his
wishes and his hopes. Happy as a child, he made his little domestic
arrangements in the gaiety of a benevolent heart. His arrival had alarmed the
old widow of his predecessor, as she was afraid that she would be thrust out of
the little cottage, in which for more than thirty years she had lived in peace.
Her fears were groundless. "You may live in my house, mother!"

William, "till death summon you hence, and God may perhaps provide in the same
manner for my widow when I am gone." He thought of Jeanette. She is
unacquainted with the management of a family, and the old woman will teach her
both by her advice and example. The old woman understands cookery as well even
as the parson's wife; and when I bring home the bride, she will treat us with a
dish of pancakes, which I know Jeanette dearly loves. Then shall we dine in the
honey-suckle bower, and after dinner shall I lead her through the fields, and
show her all our riches. In the orchard are pears, and as good too as those for
which I broke my leg; and in the kitchen-garden are sallads, which little
Marlborough will relish sweetly.

With thoughts like these did William nightly lull himself to sleep, till he
had fairly settled in his new habitation; and according to his opinion, every
thing was properly dressed out and prepared for the reception of the bride. One
Morning then, with anxious beating heart, he sat out for town, and, as he went,
conned over a speech, which was quite to overwhelm Mr. Jerome; every word of
which however, he forgot the moment he laid his trembling hand upon the door of
the room. "Hah! welcome, Mr. Meadows!" cried the old man when he entered, "how
goes it with you?"

"Thank God, Mr. Jerome, matters succeed very well. I have enough for all that
I want, and something over."

Mr. JEROME. -- I am glad to hear it. Sit down.


WILLIAM. -- I want nothing in the world but a good wife.


Mr. JEROME. -- So! so! Think you of that already? You are very right, very
right. Well do, never rue. You must try and lay your hands upon some rich
farmer's daughter.


Jeanette drew in her breath, and listened behind the door. Her bosom heaved
with agitation, an^ alone prevented her from being mistaken for statue.

"Ah! Mr. Jerome," proceeded William with trembling voice, "what should I do
with riches? The art to be rich is the art to have few wants, and thank God I
am content. The daughter of a farmer, or a beggar, it is all one if my wife
loves me."

Mr. JEROME. -- Aye! very well. You are a good-looking young fellow, and will
find plenty of girls to like you.


WILLIAM. -- I -- I have already found one --


Mr. JEROME. -- O^! I wish you joy. You are come then to invite me to the
wedding?


WILLIAM. -- Her name -- is -- Jeanette --


Mr. JEROME. -- So! Why, that is the name of my daughter.


WILLIAM. -- Dear Mr. Jerome! you are my benefactor! you have raised me from
nothing, and made me a man -- Complete your work! -- Give me Jeanette to wife!


"What! what! are you out of your wits?" said Mr. Jerome, and the pipe dropped
from his mouth.

William seized the old man's hand, devoured it with kisses, and bathed it with
his tears as he stammered the words: "Jeanette loves me!"

"This is very absurd in you," said Mr. Jerome, after he had a little recovered
from his surprise; "very childish and thoughtless in both of you. I am indeed
no friend of old-fashioned whimsies, but order must still exist in the world.
Every one should match with his equal. Besides, I am a catholic, and two
religi^s will never do in marriage. The children would not know whether to
believe their father or mother. In short, my friend, I can forgive you for
hankering after Jeanette; for you are young, and she is a handsome baggage: but
I hope you will give up all ideas of matrimony, and never return the benefits I
have conferred upon you with ingratitude."

This was the first time in seven years that Mr. Jerome had dropped a hint of
the word benefit; so it went the more severely to poor William's heart.
"Ingratitude!" said he, while his quivering lips drank up the falling tear:
"No! God preserve me from that crime! Befall me what may, God preserve me from
ingratitude!" -- He squeezed his hat between his hands, looked to heaven, his
eyes bedewed with tears, and exclaimed: "I may be wretched, but never
ungrateful!"

With these words he staggered to the door. The old man was affected. A
compassionate emotion pleaded the cause of his adopted son; but reason
interfered, and protested with decisive voice: "it must not be!" -- So he bade
him go in God's name.

When William opened the door, Jeanette lay upon the threshold and sobbed. From
the threshold she crept to her father's feet. She could not speak, but her eyes
spoke a language which her father's heart understood. Mr. Jerome was obliged to
summon up all his firmness to withstand its dumb eloquence. He struggled, and
was victorious; for the good man's opposition to the marriage was founded
neither upon regard to rank, nor to the catholic religion, but upon reasons
which he was ashamed openly to avow.

High living, indolence, and dishonest servants had squandered his means of
subsistence, and for some time past he had been meditating some scheme for
repairing his fortune. The easiest and most commodious appeared to be to marry
his daughter to a rich young tradesman who had lately settled at L***, and
seemed to be much attached to Jeanette.

The world talks a great deal of prejudice, and yet in nine instances out of
ten it is only the cover for human actions. Interest and passion are the secret
springs of the machine, and prejudice is only the puppet that plays before our
eyes. Gentle reader! be not offended with the corpulent man. He did what
millions of honest Christians would have done in his situation; he bestowed
upon the young people a fruitless, unavailing compassion, suggested
commonplace topics of consolation, and recommended to them patience.

CHAP. VIII. THE SOLDIER.
THERE are a number of virtues of which we are unable to form any just
estimate. A number did I say? -- Perhaps all! -- Climate, constitution, and age
here form a saint, and there a villain. If the Indian, whose fruitful soil
returns his increase an hundred-sold, is more beneficent than the native of
Findland, who must draw his scanty bread from the rugged rock, in what does the
superior merit of the former consist? When Boileau preaches chastity, because a
cold-blooded tutor had in his boyish years taught him to be a woman hater, in
him it is no virtue. And if Mr. Jerome, in the sixtieth year of his age, should
practice the patience which he recommends, he is indebted for it to the sober
temperament of his blood, which no longer darts rapidly through his veins, but
creeps on in a slow and easy current.

The existence of youth is composed of wishes and of hopes; that of the old
man, of habits. Wishes and hopes, the youth may change or renew; but the old
man clings to his habits like an oyster to his shell; tear him from his habits,
and he dies. Mr. Jerome felt that an easy life, a well covered table, and a
glass of good wine, were become indispensible to him. William was unable to
supply him with these, and accordingly he persisted resolutely in his refusal.

William and Jeanette parted as life parts from youth, with struggles and
convulsions. "Alas! had fate but ordained me to be a porter!" exclaimed
William, as he tore himself away. "Even then should I have loved you!" returned
Jeanette in a voice almost stifled with sobs. In vain her father employed every
means to divert the attention of the doting maid. He took her out to the garden
-- but there lay William under the pear tree! -- He walked with her in the
meadows -- there sprang William into the river! -- He invited company -- but
among them at table she still saw the image of William! -- He presented her
with new dresses -- but for whom should she now adorn her person? Her hair
remained uncurled; her flowers were no longer tended; and poor Marlborough was
almost starved. She exchanged her apartment for that where she had nursed
William in his sickness. There she would sit upon the bed where first he had
encircled her in his arms; there she would rivet herself to the ground where
the fatal drops he had spilt yet stained the floor.

William returned to his village with a stern indifference to every thing that
is called mankind and the world. The good old dame at home observed with
sorrow, that he gave to the dog the savoury pancakes she had so carefully
prepared for his entertainment. He went out to the fields, and smiled when he
saw that the vermin had destroyed the green shoots of the ^orn. He traversed
the orchard, and conceived a sullen joy when he saw the caterpillar hang upon
the blossoms. He accidentally looked up, and saw a hawk which had stolen one of
his chickens from the courtyard, and he involuntarily exclaimed: Bravo!

In this temper of mind, he proceeded with hasty steps to the village. His arms
across, his h^t slouched over his face, his head leaning upon his breast, he
saw neither man or beast; he looked neither to the right hand nor to the left.
Suddenly he heard the voice of sorrow moaning at a little distance. He awaked
for a moment from his stupefaction, raised his hat from his eyes, and
discovered a country woman weeping and wringing her hands in despair. William,
the once tender, kind-hearted William, ever ready to comfort and to relieve,
now did not think it worth his pains to inquire the cause of her sorrow. "What
can be the matter?" thought he. "She has perhaps been robbed, or her cow-house
has been burnt down. Poh! a trifle!" He was passing on.

"Ah! Mr. Schoolmaster!" cried the woman, "help me, for God's sake!" "God help
you!" said William carelessly.

"Ah! the cruel soldiers! they have taken from me my only son!"

"The soldiers!" -- A flash of lightning darted into William's soul. "Where are
they?"

"There, in the alehouse. -- Alas, my Henry! I shall never see him more! He is
but a weakly lad, and never can stand the fatigues of service!"

"Patience, Goody! We shall see what is to be done."

With rapid strides William approached the alehouse. In his soul was a cruel
struggle. -- Who am I? -- What am I? -- Is there any thing now upon earth to
which my heart can cling? -- My father is dead! Jeanette is dead! -- Shall I
here remain, and eat and drink, and walk and sleep, tomorrow and tomorrow,
just as I did the day before? -- Uniformity and repose were intended for happy
mortals. Noise, bustle, and war; here to day, there tomorrow; well to day,
tomorrow wounded -- This is the life for the miserable!"

He* went into the alehouse. A Prussian sergeant sat at a table toasting the
king's health, and laughing at the effeminate recruit who sat weeping by his
side. William called the sergeant aside: "Sir!" said he, "what can you make of
that poor delicate fellow? He can scarce yet carry a musket."

"There is no help for that," pursued the man of war, "we have no alternative.
Food for powder -- food for powder! The French cut out work for us. If we were
now to look so closely to the height and the broad shoulders, not a company in
the service would have its complement."

WILLIAM. -- But what say you if, instead of this recruit, I should furnish
you* with a stout, healthy, robust young fellow six feet high?


SERGEANT. -- O ho! that is another affair. In God's name, be it so with all my
heart.


WILLIAM. -- Done then! I am your man.


SERGEANT. -- (stepping back) What! you, Mr. Schoolmaster?


WILLIAM. -- No more words. Give me a glass of wine. Here Is to the king's
health!


SERGEANT. -- Has your honor drank a glass too much already? How? Would you
exchange your snug, comfortable situation for eight pence a day?


WILLIAM. -- That is my affair, good Sir. There is my hat, clap a cockade in it.


SERGEANT. -- Why, then, since you will have it so --


WILLIAM. -- Hold! that would attract too much notice in the village. When do
you march?


SERGEANT. -- This very evening.


WILLIAM. -- So much the better. When yo^ pass my house, down there in the
corner, whistle, and I shall immediately join you.


SERGEANT. -- But the bounty money --


WILLIAM. -- Bounty money? Ha! ha! ha! The bounty money is my wretchedness; I
will not run away from you. Now go and inform the poor devil that he is at
liberty.


SERGEANT. -- Not till I am sure of my bargain, and you have taken the bounty.


WILLIAM. -- Must it be so? Why then here!


William received a few guineas, and followed the sergeant into the room. Here
he viewed with indifference the joy of poor Henry, And the raptures of his
mother. Into the hand of the latter he slipped the guineas, not for the sake of
doing a beneficent action, but to be rid of the money. Followed by a thousand
blessings, which neither moved nor gratified him, he went home to pack up his
linen in a bundle. The old dame looked at him with astonishment, and twenty
times asked him what he meant, but received no answer. In the evening the
sergeant whistled. "Farewell! good mother!" said William, and threw his bundle
over his shoulder.

"Gracious God! Where are you going? and so late in the afternoon too?"

"Go to sleep in peace, good mother! When the morn shall dawn in that place
where merchants and schoolmasters, catholics and protestants, awake together,
we shall meet again!" -- The old lady understood him not. She looked after him
till the hawthorn hedge concealed him from her sight. She shook her head,
waddled away to a neighbor, with whom she puzzled her brain till midnight in
vain, to conjecture what could have befallen the schoolmaster.

The sun rose majestic in the east, as the sergeant and his recruits ascended a
hill, from which they could command a view of the place of William's nativity.
William distinctly discovered the top of the house in which Jeanette lived. The
garden before the door appeared quite plain to his sight, and he thought that
he could even distinguish the fatal pear tree.

Hitherto he had followed his conductor in gloomy silence. Neither words nor
sighs had betrayed the sufferings of his heart. Now he suddenly stopped, as if
rooted to the spot on which he stood, stretched out his arms toward the place
of his nativity, and wept bitterly.

"Courage!" said the sergeant. "Though you were to spend twenty years in his
majesty's service, the town wont stir an inch from its place. When you return,
too, as a corporal discharged, with a medal dangling in your button-hole, it
will sparkle far differently in your sweet-heart's eyes from that black
old-fashioned coat!"

"My sweetheart!" said William, alarmed: "How do you know --?"

SERGEANT. -- Po! it is easy to see that. I have lived too long in the world not
to know that such things are. Were there not a sweetheart in the case, you
would not gaze so earnestly upon yonder valley.


WILLIAM. -- My father lies buried there.


The sergeant smiled significantly, and opened his knapsack. "I see you wont
tell me. Why, no matter! Here, then, take a glass. There is an excellent song I
have heard sometimes, which says, A glass to the silent dead!"

William took the glass.

"To the dead or to the living?" said the sergeant, archly.

"Why should I deny it?" returned William, "it is to my Jeanette!"

SERGEANT. -- Jeanette? Here Is her health!


The sergeant's observation recalled to William's mind the song to which he had
alluded, and he felt himself soothed as he repeated it to himself. -- "Come
along," said he after a short pause, "I am a man again."

CHAP. IX. A NEW CHARACTER.
WERE it not inconsistent with the respect which I entertain for what is called
spirit, I would say, that the soul sometimes resembles a sprained joint -- you
cannot touch it without causing violent pain. Often, however, a little stroking
by a skilful hand is sufficient to restore every muscle to its proper tone.
Accident led the sergeant to quote a few words of Schiller's sonnet to Pleasure.

William had the song completely by heart; every line rushed into his memory,
and every one bore the stamp of perfection; every one irresistibly roused his
soul to heavenly emotions. I know no human ills for which this exquisite poem
will not afford a cordial drop of consolation. Blessings on the poet's head who
wrote it! Once in a dreary hour it revived me! -- "Blessings on his head!"
exclaimed William, as a beam of hope dawned in his breast, and a spark of
courage awoke in his soul.

William, with moistened eyes, cast a parting look at his father's grave, the
beloved pear tree, and the ivy mantled roof of Mr. Jerome's house. With hasty
strides he darted down the hill, and felt a kind of satisfaction when he found
that it concealed the last spires of the town from his view. Satisfaction do
you say? -- Certainly. As long as a man can grasp at a beloved image with the
smallest probability of reaching it, he is more wretched than when the last ray
of hope vanishes from his breast. As often as William saw, in the blue horizon
behind him, the hill which the preceding day he had descried in the blue
horizon before him, as often as he crossed a river, and saw the flying bridge
again removed behind him, he felt as if his heart was ever collected more
firmly within itself; the storm in his soul was silent; and if he did not enjoy
tranquillity, yet the tempest had ceased to rage.

Very naturally, the sergeant, in this expedition, became his confidante.
Communication is indispensably necessary to a lover; and had no human ear been
open to William's melancholy tale, he would have stolen a dog in the first
village he came to, and made him the partner of his sorrows. William's
companion, indeed, was no such rough fellow as his fierce whiskers and his
stern voice seemed to indicate. He had left a wife and a child at home. He
loved to talk of war and battles; but he loved still better to talk of his dear
Nancy, and his fine boy at her breast. The man who combines affection for a
virtuous wife and a sense of domestic happiness can never be hard-hearted.
Patiently he listened to the complaints of his lovesick recruit, or at least
seemed to listen; and that was enough for William.

After several days journey they arrived at the place of their destination, a
fortress upon the frontiers, where the recruits were assembled, and the new
levies instructed in military service. The sobriety, regularity, attention, and
rapid progress of the young man soon gained the regard of his superiors. With
ease he acquired dexterity in the manual exercises of his new profession. He
was steady and correct in his conduct, and never was involved in any unpleasant
adventures. He wrote a fine hand, and instructed his captain's children in the
rudiments of education. By these means he gained universal love and respect;
and even the wildest of his comrades entertained no animosity against him, as
he pretended no call to the office of a preacher of morality* and never
interfered to damp their pleasures. There was one, however, more attached to
him than the rest; and this was precisely the most dissipated among them.

Frederick Perlstadt, the son of a collector of the revenue, combined with an
open generous heart a very sprightly disposition. When a boy he used to tease
and torment his master by his mischievous tricks, and was inexhaustible in
wanton sallies of waggery. Sometimes he would fasten a hook to the venerable
peruke of the schoolmaster, and whip it off, to the infinite entertainment of
his companions. Sometimes he would sew together the skirts of his
schoolfellows' coats, or stick their heads between the spars of the benches, as
if they stood in the pillory. Neither admonition nor the rod was spared for the
good of his soul, but the latter succeeded worse than the former. His father,
who had been several years a widower, was disposed to overlook his boyish
tricks; and perhaps every thing would have gone smoothly with him, had not his
evil genius cursed him with a stepmother.

Truth demands the confession, that sometimes good step-mothers may be found;
they are very rare, however, like honest divines. Such a rarity the French call
belle mere; the common stepmother they style maratre, Step-mothers (les
maratres) desolate cities and villages; and, no less than poverty, they people
the earth with beggars, vagabonds, domestics, and slaves. -- Characters of La
Br^yere.
a very significant and energetic phrase, for which the poverty of our language
has no corresponding term. Frederick's pest was a maratre. She hated the wild
boy from the bottom of her soul, and every childish waggery she ascribed to a
rooted bad disposition; every thoughtless, youthful extravagance she imputed to
a vicious and corrupted heart. His wildness daily increased; and as no debt on
earth is more faithfully repaid than that of hatred, he returned his
step-mother's animosity with silent detestation. Wherever he found an
opportunity to do her a mischief, he was sure to seize it. His usual
enterprises of hostility were to throw sugar into the cream; to catch rats and
mice; and then set them loose in her bed-room; to place a number of beetles
under her pillow, to keep her from sleeping. By this conduct he eternally
disturbed the peace of the family; and his father was daily more and more
spirited up against him, till his stepmother began seriously to consider of
getting rid of the graceless youth.

One day she was to stand godmother to the child of some person of consequence.
For this festival she had brought out of her wardrobe a splendid white dress,
which was carefully spread out upon the sofa. Frederick saw it and chuckled. He
went and brought into the room a large tabby cat, which had the bad custom of
considering the most valuable things of no more importance than the most
useless. The cat was laid on the middle of the gown, and the consequences
answered Frederick's most sanguine expectation. -- At last, however, the storm
which had long been gathering over his head, burst.

"It is impossible to live any longer with Frederick," said the stepmother;
"either he or I must leave the house!"

"But where shall he go?"

"It is no matter to me! I will no longer live under the same roof with him. Is
not the rascal big enough? Why, let him be a soldier. I Will warrant the mus^
will soon drive the mischief out of his head."

Frederick laughed; his sister wept and prayed; his father made some feeble
objections, but in vain. The irresistible decree of his stepmother was
pronounced, and before a month elapsed Frederick was a fusilier in the
celebrated regiment of Ostein.

But the musket did not drive the mischief out of his head. Without being
guilty of any very criminal excesses, he still continued, as formerly, a wild,
thoughtless fellow, ever ready to knock his head against the wall, and in
danger of being betrayed by his impetuous temper into troublesome scrapes. It
is difficult to say what such a temper, with a mind totally neglected and
uncultivated, would have led to, had not chance brought a company of players to
his native town. With this intellectual pleasure he was altogether
unacquainted. By the help of a few shillings, with which the savings of his
sister enabled her to supply him, he had sometimes an opportunity of going to
the theater. The Grateful Son was the first ^ece which he saw represented. It
made a wonderful impression upon him. He laughed and wept. They were the first
tears of sentiment which he had shed. He was ashamed of them, and was still
more astonished at the delightful sensations which they produced.

This moment, however, decided the nobler character of his soul. He was not,
indeed, all at once changed into a new mortal, Still he was sometimes hurried
away by his impetuosity, and indulged his disposition to wild and boisterous
enjoyments. There were periods, however, in which he tasted the pleasure of
reading. There were moments in which he perused Don Quixote and Tom Jones with
delight; and at last he began to relish Don Carlos and Oberon.

It was at this era that the hero of this history became Frederick's
companion, and the books which William received from him, and read over and
over with so much rapture, formed the first links of their acquaintance. It was
yet a slender tie, but time gave it strength. The dissipated Frederick
sometimes followed the prudent counsels of his sober friend; could not help
entertaining a kind of respect for his judgment, and profited by his society.
William, too, would sometimes gratify Frederick by joining his social parties;
and often by his presence prevented many follies and quarrels which so
naturally aris^ among the votaries of Bacchus. In a word, William descended to
Frederick, and Frederick elevated himself to William. He daily discovered in
the unexplored regions of his heart new delicate emotions; his judgment every
day became more correct, his soul more refined; and in a short time, of all his
youthful foibles nothing remained but his ardent temper and impetuous spirit;
qualities which, if they do not constitute a virtuous man, at least are more
compatible with goodness of heart than insidious coldness and frigid equanimity.

CHAP. X. THE MURDERER.
IN this way of life two years had now elapsed. William had never received any
intelligence from home, nor did he wish for any. What indeed could he expect to
hear from such a quarter? -- That Jeanette had married some rich respectable
husband? That now, perhaps, she was a mother? -- Melancholy news! ungrateful
ever to a lover's ear. William carefully avoided meeting any body from the
neighborhood of his native place; and was even afraid to read the newspapers,
from a fear of finding Jeanette's marriage announced. Still he continued to
love Jeanette beyond every one in the world; and, to tell a secret, Frederick
Per^stadt would not so easily have gained his friendship, had he not chanced to
have a sister who was likewise called Jeanette. It was not that his sister
herself could ever have gained an interest in his heart. He had not the least
desire to see her, though frequently invited by Frederick to accompany him to
visit her. It was enough for him to know that his friend too was affectionately
attached to a creature called Jeanette. On this account, he delighted to hear
him talk of her; and whenever the word Jeanette was mentioned, William nodded
benignantly, as if he would say: "I too have a sister called Jeanette."

The incessant activity of his situation alone prevented William from falling a
victim to the melancholy of this lasting hopeless love. The leisure hours which
the service allowed him were employed in the instruction of some children, and
in the cultivation of his own mind. It was but seldom that his gay friend could
contrive to draw him from his books to roam abroad. The weather must have been
very inviting, and the heavens very serene indeed, if William consented to
accompany Frederick in his excursions. When he did so, however, he could be
extremely cheerful in his way; for his sorrows were never so intense, but that
the beauties of Nature were able, at least for a moment, to sooth his mind to
tranquillity.

One delightful May Day Frederick came and persuaded William to accompany him
in a walk to a neighboring village. They went, and strolled along in friendly
chat between two blooming hawthorn hedges. Near the village, where they
intended to drink a glass of beer, another soldier, called Frank Moritz, joined
them. This Moritz was a peevish, ill-natured fellow, constantly seeking
quarrels and taking offense. When he had drank a glass of brandy too much, he
fell on friend and foe, like Huber the reviewer; A critic who has frequently
fallen foul of our author's writings.
and if you could not get out of his way, you were obliged either to take no
notice of him at all, or compelled to cane him.

William and Frederick would gladly have gone out of his way; but they never
perceived him till they met directly in the teeth, at the corner of a hedge.

"Good day, Mr. Parson!" said he.

FREDERICK. -- Whom do you mean?


MORITZ. -- Who but his worship Mr. Meadows there? who is soon to be our
chaplain.


WILLIAM. -- I thank you for the information.


MORITZ. -- Then will you be stationed in safety beside the baggage.


FREDERICK. -- Even there he would not be secure against the darts of
malevolent tongues.


MORITZ. -- Heaven guard him! Who dare attempt to assail our captain's
favorite? He holds him out as a pattern to the whole company.


FREDERICK. -- And shame it is that you, and those like you, profit so little
by his example.


MORITZ. -- Po! it were a fine thing truly, if, instead of his cartridge-box,
every man in the army carried a book in his pocket, and, when he ought to give
fire, should present the enemy with a poem.


WILLIAM. (calmly.) -- Let that matter alone, Moritz. Allow every man to amuse
himself in the way he likes best.


FREDERICK. -- And look you, Moritz, that is nobody's business; do you
understand me?


MORITZ. (contemptuously.) -- And if I were to say that I do not understand
you? what then?


FREDERICK (warmly.) -- Then I should let you know my meaning more distinctly.


MORITZ. -- O! ho! is this the case?


WILLIAM (to Frederick.) -- Let him passon; return him no answer.

They both were silent, but Moritz continued to follow them. "Where are you
going this way?" said he again.


WILLIAM. -- To Greendorf.


MORITZ. -- And what do you mean to do there?


WILLIAM. -- Drink a glass of beer.


MORITZ. -- A thimblefull I should guess!


FREDERICK. -- Hark ye, Moritz! you are but a sorry jester! I Would advise you to
hold your tongue, or perhaps you may repent it.


MORITZ. -- How so?


FREDERICK. -- Really your company is not agreeable at present.


MORITZ. -- Why, I have seen the time when you did not think my company so
disagreeable.


FREDERICK. -- I beseech you don't remind me of the sins of my youth.


MORITZ. -- Why truly, comrade, you were once a fine fellow; but since you have
attached yourself to that canting --


FREDERICK. -- Hold your impertinence. That canter is my friend; and whoever
dares to be rude to him must not think that his sword will rust in the scabbard.


MORITZ. -- Mine you see is pretty easy to draw!


WILLIAM. -- I entreat you, Frederick, not to gratify him so far as to quarrel
with him.


MORITZ. -- His reverence the parson there probably cannot stand the sight of
blood!


FREDERICK. -- Why not? Were I to give you a bloody nose, perhaps he could
stand that.


MORITZ. -- O, ho! Mr. Smockface! we shall see that.


With these words he struck Frederick a blow on the face, and, springing a few
steps back, drew his sword. Like lightning Frederick's sword flashed in the
air; with blind rage he darted at the villain, and before William could run
between them the miscreant lay at his feet weltering in his blood. Half-drunk,
he rushed on his antagonist's point, and received the mortal blow in his heart.

"My God!" exclaimed William, "what have you done?"

"The rascal has met with his deserts," said Frederick. "Has he not compelled
me to do what I have done?"

WILLIAM. -- But what is now to be done? Will you not be punished as a
murderer? Will the testimony of a friend in your favor be admitted?


FREDERICK. -- I doubt it! What then is to be done? I must fly.


WILLIAM. -- And your poor old father? your good sister?


FREDERICK. -- It is hard! but my misfortunes are unmerited.


WILLIAM. -- And on my account too! To that I will never consent! -- Recollect
yourself, Frederick; put up your weapon; go to town; declare me to be the
author of this deed; and in the mean time I make my escape.


FREDERICK. -- Are you mad?


WILLIAM. -- There is no time to be lost. Yo^ have never been from home; you
are unacquainted with the world; you must be taken. I am better qualified to
fight my way. Besides, I have neither father nor mother, sister nor brother; my
fate will cost no human being a tear.


FREDERICK (wiping his eyes.) -- Are not these tears? Think you I could drive
you to misery, and ever enjoy a moment's repose? Think you I could read your
name upon the gibbet, and not sink into the earth with shame?


WILLIAM. -- Unmerited punishment can be no disgrace. My name will remain
engraved in your heart, and God is our witness here!


The two friends fell into one another's arms. There was no time now for much
reflection. The danger required an immediate resolution. Every moment they
might be surprised beside the corpse. Delay would render flight more difficult.
William exerted all his eloquence to convince Frederick that regard for his
parents and relations, on whom his disgrace would redound, imposed it on him as
a duty to allow his friend to fly. He did not convince, but he silenced him.
Alas! Frederick, the involuntary murderer, was already so confounded, that he
knew not what he did. Weeping, he put his purse into the hand of the generous
youth -- speechless, he pressed him to his heart. William tore himself away. He
flew light as a roe; for, instead of a murder, he felt in his breast the
consciousness of a noble action!

CHAP. XI. THE PRIEST.
WHEN a fugitive with a few shillings in his pocket, and the consciousness of a
good action in his heart, grasps the beggar's scrip with more joy and
satisfaction than the crowned robber his seeptre -- O God! can man demand from
thee a still farther reward for that conduct which, in the moment it is
performed, so richly rewards itself? About the close of day William heard three
guns fired, and soon after the sound of bells in the neighboring villages. He
knew that he was the object of pursuit, and he concealed himself in a ditch
under a bridge that crossed a river on the highway. Over the bridge in a short
time he heard the trampling of the horses of the hussars who were scouring the
country in search of him. He did not quit his hiding place till darkness
favored his flight. Although he was unacquainted with the road, he knew that
he was near the frontier; and after he had traveled on as fast as he was able
for two hours, a crucifix apprised him of his safe arrival on a foreign soil,
as the adjoining country was catholic.

Wearied with his journey, ^e threw himself upon the grass to rest himself. He
had not laid long before the purple morn announced the coming day, and at a
little distance he discovered a village, in which he resolved to seek an asylum
till the evening, since even in a foreign territory he durst not, for fear of
the hue and cry, venture to pursue his journey during the day. "That church
spire before me," thought he, "is a proof that there is a clergyman in the
village. He is not of my persuasion, to be sure, but humanity dwells among all
religions; Jeanette, too, was a catholic. If I tell him heartily the
circumstance, which compels me to fly, he will not refuse me a corner of his
hayloft till it grow dark."

Having formed this resolution, he entered the village, and knocked at the
priest's door. A window opened, out of which locked a chubby round head with
the clerical tonsure. A pair of small squinting eyes peered with gracious looks
over his red bloated cheeks, and played on his pursy double chin.

"What do you want, my friend?" said the fat priest to the fugitive.

"I wish to speak a word in private with your reverence."

"A little patience, and I will open the door."

The rosy priest drew in his head, shut the window, came to the door with
silent steps, and opened it without noise. William now saw that the head was
only a model of the belly, which, if another Jonah had been doomed to be thrown
into durance, and no whale at hand, would have been able to contain a couple of
prophets. That fat men may be generous and beneficent, William had already
experienced, nor was he staggered in his opinion by the tun-bellied figure of
the little priest.

Kindness, however, is of two sorts. The one is like the dust on a butterfly's
wings; men's faces are only powdered over with it. The other bears the rich
color of an autumn fruit; it indicates full maturity and exquisite flavor; it
refreshes the thirsty. When men smile, and smile whenever you address them; if
they are always smooth and simpering, the kindness of such men is only farmed;
it is not their property. From a lease-hold it is usual to draw as much
advantage as possible; while the proprietor alone has a real regard for his
possession without continually planning how he is to draw some profit from it.
The little fat priest farmed his kindness, and it brought him annually large
sums from his parishioners. He looked with the same gracious smile on the bride
and bridegroom whom he married, and on the poor sinner whom he reproved when
doing penance before the congregation.

William had not sufficient skill in the science of physiognomy to determine
whether the kindness of his host bore the stamp of the heart, or of custom.
With courage and calmness, since he was no criminal, William informed the
priest of his difficulties, who listened to him without altering his
countenance.

"Very well, my son," said he with a soft and gentle voice; "follow me without
apprehension." He conducted his guest to a loft, which was formed by a
partition of boards, and showed him a bundle of hay for his bed.

"It is probable you have wandered about all night, and will require repose.
Here nobody will disturb you. At dinner time, I myself will fetch you a basin
of broth, and whatever kind Providence may send. When it is dark you may, with
the blessing of God, proceed on your journey. Two leagues hence lies a
market town, the mayor of which is my friend. I will give you a recommendation
to him that you may procure a passport, for without a passport you will find it
difficult to proceed. I advise you likewise, as soon as possible, to exchange
your uniform for a peasant's jacket."

William, affected and transported by this active and voluntary attention,
kissed with ardent expressions of gratitude the fat hand of the priest. "I
thought indeed," said he to himself after he was alone, "that a religion which
Jeanette professes must teach humanity." Free from all care and apprehension,
he sunk down upon the new-gathered hay, and slept sweetly for several hours.
When he awoke about noon, the priest stood before him with a basin of broth, a
slice of bread and bacon, and a bottle of beer.

"Here, my friend, take this and refresh yourself. There also is the letter to
the mayor. I advise you, however, not to quit my house till midnight. There are
Prussian hussars in the village; the alehouse where they are quartered is not
far off, and you had better not stir till the landlord and his guests are all
gone to sleep. If you had only your dress changed, and the passport in your
pocket, you are safe."

William renewed his expressions of gratitude. The priest took leave of him
with his usual kindness. William ate, drank, and again fell asleep. Toward
evening he awoke refreshed and invigorated, and in this solitude resigned
himself to his reflections. With melancholy emotion he reviewed the past;
hopeless he looked to the future. Whither should he go? What was to become of
him? He knew not, and indeed it was almost indifferent to him. A man who can
work, thought he, may earn a subsistence any where; and i^ he must forego love,
it is of no consequence ^e he finds a livelihood.

Till now the most profound silence had prevailed in the house. William heard
not a footstep, not a word, not a whisper. Two or three mice attracted by the
savor of the bacon, and which ran about quite tame, seemed the only
inhabitants of the place. In the dusk of the evening, however, William thought
he heard a feeble moaning in the room below. He listened -- and again all was
silent. I must have been mistaken, thought he, and took no farther notice of
the circumstance. Scarcely had his mind turned to some new object, when the
moans he had heard again struck his ear. He held in his breath, and again
listened. He now distinctly heard, sometimes with longer, sometimes with
shorter intervals, sighs and groans. They appeared to issue from the apartment
directly under his place of refuge. The house was built entirely of wood, and
the thin floor favored his curiosity. He laid himself down, and put his ear to
the boards. He now heard quite distinctly that he was not mistaken; but from
whose breast the complaining proceeded* and by what sufferings it was
occasioned, he could not guess.

Sometimes he thought he heard the voice of the priest. From this he concluded
that there must be another wretched sufferer in the house besides himself, who
was treated by the benevolent priest with the same kindness and hospitality.
Still, however, he could not conceive from what the accents of grief and pain
which he had heard could arise. If it was a sick person, the illness must be
severe indeed which could extort such violent expressions of pain and anguish.
His heart sympathised with the unknown sufferer; and in that feeling he forgot
his own danger.

As night advanced the groars became more violent and more incessant; at last
they changed to shrieks. They were the shrieks of a female, and they cut
William so cruelly to the heart that he wished himself with the hussars in the
alehouse. In about half an hour all was silent; he listened, and heard some one
step softly; in a little time the house door creaked on its hinges. Curiosity
led him to the window; the moon shone bright. He saw the priest slip through
the court to the garden, and he seemed to carry something under his cassock.
William's eyes followed him into the garden. The priest stopped under a large
tree, laid his burden on the ground, took up a spade, and began to dig.

The female shrieks had meanwhile changed again into groans and sighs, and
William was withdrawn by their gentle influence from the extraordinary scene
which he now witnessed. He slipped down stairs upon tiptoe, and, keeping in his
breath, approached the apartment from which the voice of anguish proceeded. A
glimpse of light discovered to him that the priest as he went out had left the
door a-jar. He advanced, and saw the floor stained with new-shed b^ood; a lamp
threw a feeble light upon a bed, in which lay a young woman pale as death. --
Here I must drop the pen, nor attempt to paint the horror of William's feelings
-- Eternal Providence! it was Jeanette!

Cold as a stone, and deprived of sensation, stood the wretched youth. His feet
were rooted to the floor, his knees knocked against each other, his hair stood
on end, his eyes gazed motionless on the spectre that threw around a doleful
glance, and groaned. He attempted to cry, but his throat was choked; he
attempted to fly, but his limbs were nerveless. -- How long he stood, how at
last he had torn himself from the frightful scene, how he reached the
street-door and gained the high road, and of every circumstance which had
passed, he had next morning nothing but a confused remembrance. When he first
recovered his senses, he found himself seated under a tree; the sun was high,
and a young peasant girl that stood before him asked kindly whether he was ill;
offering him at the same time a pitcher of milk for his refreshment.

He gazed at this girl with wild looks. He felt as if he had recovered from the
delirium of a fever. "I thank you, my girl," said he in seeble accents, "I want
nothing." -- The girl threw a compassionate glance at him, shook her head, and
went away.

CHAP. XII. THE PRISON.
WHEN God sent grief into the world he gave insensibility as its beneficent
companion. Grief sometimes would, in a moment, annihilate the machine, if it
did not plunge us into the bosom of insensibility.

William flew, unconscious, from the scene of horror. Hastily, and without
reflection, he continued to walk on. He went past the alehouse; by the moon
light he saw two hussars sleeping upon a bench, and never mended his pace.
After walking several hours, exhausted with fatigue, he threw himself upon the
grass, under a tree. The chill morning due wet him to the skin -- he felt it
not. -- Night succeeded to day -- he saw it not. -- The lark mounted ^loft to
greet the morn with her melodious notes -- but he heard it not. When the
milk-maid left him, he gazed after her without thinking what he did; he dropped
his head upon the ground, and, as far as he could reach, plucked the daisies
which grew around.

About noon a storm arose, and the distant thunder rolled. William heard it, as
through a slumber, and it was pleasant to him. The heavens were obscured with
gloomy clouds, and he raised his eyes with satisfaction. The big drops of rain
fell upon his face; they cooled the heat of his glowing cheeks. The lightning
flashed more and more vivid; the thunder p^aled louder and louder, and William
began to breathe more freely. A violent shower of hail, accompanied by a
furious whirlwind, rushed from the black bosom of an angry cloud. A little
penthouse offered a safe shelter to the traveller. William saw it, but he moved
not from his place.

At this moment, a party of hussars passed by. To shield themselves from the
storm, they had drawn their cloaks over their faces, and rode on at a rapid
pace. They saw him not; but William viewed them without apprehension; he
recognized them to be Prussians, and could not comprehend for what reason they
appeared in such numbers in this neighborhood.

The louder the storm howled and the thunder roared, the more he felt his
breast lightened; with more firmness he looked up. The tempest now hung over
his head. Not an hundred paces from the place where he lay, the lightning, with
tremendous crash, struck an oak-tree, and shivered it to pieces from the top to
the very root.

"Why not this!" said William, pointing to the tree under which he lay. "O God!
annihilate me amidst this conflict of the elements! Take back thy unwelcome
present of existence, and give it to the fool who thinks it worth his pains to
thank thee for it!"

Happy for thee, wretched youth, that thy lips, which anguish had sealed, are
again opened. Accuse thy lot -- murmur, complain; and when thy warm tears
mingle with the cold rain which beats upon thy countenance, the demon of
despair resigns his prey and passes by thee. Wrapped in the mysterious
invisible bosom of the pea^ing thunder, the softer genius of melancholy
descends into thy breast. The tempest is now silent -- the sun bursts through a
watery veil -- the birds awake to melody -- thou weepest.

Weep on -- sigh -- sob -- these tears extinguish the rising thought of self
murder. "I am not yet wholly detached from the chain of existence," exclaimed
he, "I have still a friend whom I must save! a friend to whom I have pledged
myself to defend my life. -- Fly! fly! every step increases his tranquillity,
and removes you from the faithless woman on whom you doted! -- Ah! Jeanette!
Jeanette! how low art thou fallen!

He now rose, and proceeded on his journey. Toward evening, he arrived in the
town to which the priest had directed him. Here he recollected the letter he
had received to the mayor; and though his heart revolted at the idea of
obtaining a favor by the assistance of a man who had violated the sanctuary of
his heart, yet the consideration that the safety of his friend was now his only
duty, prevailed, and reluctantly compelled him to take this step. He went to
the mayor's house, was ushered in to an old silver-haired personage with a
benevolent countenance, to whom he presented the letter.

The old man took the letter, perused it with amazement, threw an inquisitive
look at William, and the symptoms of dissatisfaction were visible in his face.
He took off his spectacles thoughtfully, laid the letter on the table, and
paced silently through the room. At last he pulled a bell, his trembling hand
seemed reluctantly to perform the service. An officer of justice immediately
appeared.

"My friend," said the old man to William, "I am sorry to inform you that you
have been betrayed. You have fallen into a priest's hands, and of course into
bad hands. Were you merely a deserter, I would willingly overlook the
circumstance; but this letter charges you as a murderer. You are my prisoner.
Officer do your duty."

William stood petrified. "Is it possible," exclaimed he, "that so much villainy
should lurk under the mask of friendly tenderness? This deceitful priest, who
has so scandalously abused the confidence of a persecuted man, has seduced an
innocent girl, murdered his own child, and buried it, last night, under a tree
in his garden."

The honest old man heard this charge with satisfaction* which William, whose
natural feelings of resentment were roused to the highest pitch,
circumstantially related, without considering the danger to which he thus
exposed the wretched Jeanette. With feelings most cruelly distracted, his
reliance upon love, faith, and the whole human race severaly shaken, he
followed the officers of justice to prison, where an heavy chain upon each leg
fastened him to the wall. In other respects he was treated with as much
indulgence as the strict duty of his judge would permit.

The following night the magistrate repaired, with a party of officers to the
house of the priest. The mother did not deny her situation. When asked what had
become of her child, she replied, that it had been taken from her, and given to
a country woman to nurse, though she would willingly have suckled it herself.
She spoke this with the tone of innocence and truth; but terror and anxiety sat
on the priest's countenance, and betrayed his guilt.

They went out to the garden, and found under a tree the earth n^w turned up.
They dug, and found the body of a new born child, wrapped in a bloody cloth,
with a large nail driven through its temples. The officers seized the culprit,
and threw him in irons into a dungeon, from which the spiritual power soon
after removed him. He did not, as he deserved, expiate his crime upon the
scaffold, for the honor of the church was concerned in hushing up the affair.
He was shut up in a distant cloister, and nothing more was heard of him.

When poor Jeanette was informed of the murder of her child, she lay three days
senseless; on the fourth she was delirious. The humane justice did not attempt,
in this situation, to throw her into close confinement. He ordered a physician
to be called, and appointed nurses and midwives to attend her; and after the
lapse of a month, when the physician declared that she could be removed without
danger, she was carried to prison.

During this period, William languished in his cell, without knowing what was
determined respecting his fate. Legal forms had retarded his being delivered
up. It was necessary to write to the garrison, and receive answers backwards
and forwards, till at last the news arrived that a party of soldiers were sent
to take him into custody. The justice was anxious to accelerate William's
removal; because the place where he was confined was the only apartment in the
prison in which a man could be lodged without danger to his health.

One morning when the youth was busy in trying to entice, with crumbs of bread,
a mouse, which was his only companion, to come nearer, he heard, at an unusual
hour, the doors of his prison grate harshly on their hinges, and the heavy keys
rattle. The officers of justice opened the door, and pushed in a woman, who
sunk senseless on the threshold. -- "Jeanette!" e^claimed William, and tore his
chains, and tugged with all his might at the rings which fastened him to the
wall. In vain, however! His hard fate denied him the feeble consolation of
lending his aid to the faithless beloved. He roared out with agony! -- The
noise he made, and the clanking of his chains, awoke the wretched girl from her
swoon. She opened her eyes, and shuddered with horror, for she thought the
figure she saw was William's ghost.

William stretched out his arms to clasp her. She rose to throw herself into
his arms, but suddenly the burden of her conscience again weighed her to the
ground.

"No! I am unworthy of your embrace! You know not why I am in this place!"

"I know it," cried William: "you have forfeited your innocence -- but I trust
in God you are no child-murderer!"

"No! of that I am innocent!" She crawled upon her knees to her beloved, seized
his chain, and pressed it to her streaming eyes.

What imagination can describe the scene of sorrow which the first melancholy
hours exhibited? Broken sentences choked with tears, woeful looks, and
lengthened groans -- ^h were the joys of a meeting, after so long a separation!
"Ah! Jeanette! how was it possible?" repeated William with indescribable
anguish; and Jeanette, in a voice interrupted with sobs, began her confession.

CHAP. XIII. THE PENITENT.
"GOOD William," she began, "it was neither pride nor a difference of religion
which steeled my father's heart against our wishes. We and the whole town
thought him rich. He was indeed so once, but dishonest people had cheated him
out of his property. He was anxious to have an opulent son-in-law to
re-establish his affairs. Alas! had I known the reason why he so earnestly
wished such an alliance; had I known that he dreaded poverty in his old age, I
would have made him the sacrifice at the expense of my happiness. I should not
thus, then, corroded by shame and remorse, have been compelled to hide my head
before the man I love. I would then have met him with confidence, and said:
'Thy faithful Jeanette sought to console herself for hopeless love in the
discharge of duty.'

"It was not destined to be so! Fate had ordained me to experience how much
misery a feeble woman can endure. False shame induced my father to keep the
secret locked up in his breast. When he went to the counting house, he saw that
every day the ruin of his house approached; and when he came home, he was
tormented by the sight of a daughter who pined for thy loss.

"When, at last, the news of your elopement reached my ears, I wept
incessantly, and shut myself up for weeks together to prey upon my grief. Our
house, once the center of social pleasure, became desolate as the grave. The
once healthy, blooming girl walked about like a spectre, and Jeanette was no
more the consolation of her drooping father.

"The luckl^ss old man cherished his grief in silence; carping cares laid him
upon the bed of sickness; the hand of death was on him, and in his last moments
he gave you and me his blessing, and departed to those regions where he would
receive the reward of his integrity and benevolence. His death tore my bleeding
heart; but I yet knew not the full extent of my misery. Through the gloom which
surrounded me shone a tender ray of hope. Something whispered me that I was
free; 'I am rich, and richer too in my father's blessing. I will seek out
William, and find him -- for into what quarter of the globe will not the voice
of love penetrate? Then will he return to my arms, and share my father's
inheritance, his property, and his blessing.'

"Such dreams soothed my sorrow in the first weeks which succeeded my father's
death. At last a distant relation came, examined the papers of the deceased,
and very coldly informed me that I was a beggar, a beggared orphan!
Unaccustomed to earn my subsistence by the labor of my hands, without friends,
without acquaintances; a stranger in the wide world -- whither could I fly?
Where seek a refuge from want and hunger? My distant relation, from an
apprehension of entailing a burden upon himself, said a great deal of his
numerous family, his scanty means, and advised me to go to Mansier, to an old
aunt, by the mother's side, of whom I never had heard in the course of my life.
Necessity compelled me to follow his advice. Out of my father's house I took
nothing with me but little Marlborough, and, after encountering many
difficulties, arrived safe at the house of my old aunt, who was very rich, very
devout, and very avaricious.

"She hesitated long with herself whether she should acknowledge me as a
relation. At last she took me into her house, as she expressed it, to lend her
charity to heaven upon interest. Heaven, I trust, will not deceive her hopes as
she deceived mine, or her capital and her interest in the other world will be
but small. She scarcely supplied me with the bare necessaries of life, and
every morsel she allowed me was seasoned with reproaches on my poverty, and
cruel reflections on the mismanagement of my worthy father.

"In her house have I shed more tears than I drank drops of water; I suffered
more than in the happy days of my youth I could have thought it possible for me
to endure. And would to God I had then descended to the tomb with the (...)
innocence! Fate had not yet poured out on m^ full measure of my woe!

"Accident brought to our house father Hieronymus. He had formerly lived at
Munster, and had been my aunt's confessor. No man ever could more perfectly
assume the mask of honesty and devotion. To this art he was indebted for a rich
living in the country. He saw and was pleased with me. His living was only a
few miles distant. He often returned, and spent whole weeks in our house; yet
never did there a word escape him that could offend my innocence.

"At last, he addressed the old lady with a proposal to take me as his
housekeeper. He himself indeed remarked, that I was too young; but he relied
upon my discretion, and upon his own well-established character. This proposal
was extremely acceptable to my avaricious aunt. She never ceased to
congratulate me on my good fortune; she extolled his piety and the fame of his
holiness throughout the country. She displayed, with all her eloquence, the
advantages of such a situation in the clearest light. She represented to me,
that I should be supplied with every thing, that my reputation would be
shielded from all attack. In a word, she considered this as the best means to
cure the errors of belief which I appeared to have imbibed in an heretical land.

"I saw how eagerly she wished to be rid of me; and far was I from suspecting a
profligate villain under the hypocritical mask of kindness and of devotion.
Consider too, dear William, that the inconveniences and oppressions of my
situation daily increased, and you will not blame me for at last yielding to
the solicitations of the priest and the importunities of my aunt.

"For many months, indeed, I had no reason to repent the step I had taken.
Father Hieronymus treated me with studied attention; whenever it was in his
power he anticipated my wishes, and seemed as dependent upon me as I was upon
him. At this period indeed tranquillity, that friend by whom I had been so long
deserted, again returned to my breast. I called him father; he called me
daughter. Gratitude filled up the void in my heart.

"Sometimes, indeed, it struck me that his eyes dwelt upon me with unusal fire.
I called it kindness; it was voluptuousness. Spare me the recapitulation of all
the hellish arts which he practiced to ensnare my innocence; how at first he
attempted by jesuitical morality to overflow the rooted principles of my
education. When he found that he did not succeed in this attempt, he
endeavored by a thousand arts to inflame my passions. When here too he was
baffled, he employed the most villainous arts, mingled heating drugs in my
food, and stupefying potions in my drink, till in an evil hour he availed
himself of a death-like insensibility to render himself master of a violated
form, and reduced me to a wretched, degraded woman! -- Alas! I know it well, I
ought the very first instant that I penetrated his diabolical plan to have fled
naked from his house, and thrown myself upon the protection of my aunt. --
Rather ought I to have suffered every mortification than have exposed my
innocence a prey to this danger; but I relied too confidently upon a heart
where William reigned, and the principles which a virtuous father had
implanted. Alas! I knew not the villainy of my seducer, and my own feeble means
of resistance.

"I am punished! -- The cup of my sufferings is filled to the very brim, and I
must drink it to the dregs. -- I defy the utmost malice of fate, and I fly to a
prison with joy, there to conceal my shame. -- At least, these were the
sentiments I felt an hour ago. I suspected not that my destiny had prepared for
me another cruel stroke; I suspected not that in this ^son I should meet with a
man from whose looks I would have hid myself in the grave! -- Or do I murmur
unjustly? May there yet be a drop of consolation reserved to cool my parched
tongue? -- Shall I quit this world without your forgiveness? -- Perhaps you
will not refuse to the repentant sinner the last consolation in death?"

She threw herself at his feet, and bathed his knees with her tears. Her
moistened hair clung round his chains; her trembling arms embraced the pillar
to which he was fastened. William's heart was bruised to pieces, and his tears
mingled with hers.

"Till death shall I love thee!" exclaimed William suffocated with sobs; "till
death shall I love thee, poor ill-fated girl! I -- I alone am to blame for thy
undoing! -- My precipitate elopement gave this cruel turn to thy fortune. Had I
patiently waited in my lonely cottage for the support of God, who crowns true
love as well as virtue, for they are sister graces, we should now have lived in
sweet tranquillity and union, rich in content. How could I impute my
thoughtlessness to you as a crime! -- I -- I alone am guilty of your undoing!"

Thus did this luckless pair mingle their complaints, and mutually exculpate
each other, till in about an hour the doors of the prison were again opened,
and a party of soldiers entered, to whom the jailer delivered up William.
Jeanette sunk to the ground insensible, and clasped the pillar to which her
beloved was chained. By force they tore him from her. She remained lying upon
the ground in convulsions; and several hours after, when she opened her eyes,
she found herself abandoned to darkness and solitude.

CHAP. XIV. THE GENEROUS CONTEST.
"MY friend," said the captain to William, "you have here played a foolish
trick. As to running that miscreant Moritz through the body, any one in your
situation would have done the same thing; as he knew from Perlstadt's
information that the fellow was drunk, provoked you for a long time, and at
last roused your passion by a box on the face. But why did you run away for
this? -- Means might have been found to assist you; but now God knows what will
be the consequence!"

"Whatever God pleases!" said William, without betraying the least fear or
anxiety.

CAPTAIN. -- You seem very composed?


WILLIAM. -- I am drawing near the period of my sufferings.


CAPTAIN. -- I pity you very much. You were ever an excellent lad; my children
inquire daily what is become of you. Would to God I could be of any service to
you! Without running the gauntlet you can scarcely get off; but we shall try to
save your life.


WILLIAM. -- Your honor will then confer upon me no favor.


CAPTAIN. -- Po! for shame! What! if you have a mind to die, go face the
enemy's cannon; but keep out of the hangman's way as long as you can. Tomorrow
your first examination will take place; be rational; say nothing but what you
answer to the questions proposed; and in God's name lay all the blame upon the
deceased, who cannot contradict you.


With these words the good-hearted captain left the guiltless prisoner. William
was put into close confinement, again chained to the wall, and fed upon bread
and water. There was a little grated window, through which you might see into
the cell. Almost all his comrades came to the grate to see him, and to
sympathize with his situation -- Almost all -- except Frederick Perlstadt.

"He is right," thought William. "His heart is made of too susceptible stuff;
he would betray himself." -- In tranquil expectation he awaited the coming day,
in order to confirm the supposition of his guilt by a solemn confession upon
his trial.

Meanwhile the scene was suddenly changed. Two hours after William's arrival,
Frederick Perlstadt came pale as death, but firm and collected, to the
guard-room, took off his sword, gave it to the corporal, and desired to be
taken into custody, as he was really Frank Moritz's murderer. They stared at
him and thought him out of his wits; but he persevered in his purpose. The
commanding officer of the watch was called. Frederick repeated his story. He
was therefore taken into custody, and the affair reported to the commanding
officer.

Next morning a court martial was assembled, which was not a little confounded,
at the behavior of both the prisoners, as each of them resolutely persisted in
saying that he was the criminal. They were confronted, sunk into each other's
arms, and kindly reproached one another with their mutual obstinacy. The
circumstance was so singular that it excited great attention. The duke of
Brunswick, the commander in chief of the Prussian troops, happened to be then
in the garrison. His curiosity was raised, and he ordered the prisoners to be
brought before him. Frederick, without hesitation, relate^ the affair as it had
really happened, and how his friend had sacrificed himself on his account to
spare the sufferings of an old drooping father. He had accepted the magnanimous
offer of his friend, in hopes that he would make his escape, and because by his
talents he would be able to provide for himself every where. Now, however, as
the innocent young man had been apprehended, it was impossible for him to
derive any advantage from his generous devotion. He knew that he must die, but
death would be less bitter to him than the thought of having brought his friend
to the gallows.

William contradicted this story in every point, told how Frederick from his
youth had been the victim of a cruel stepmother, and at last had been driven
by her artifices to enlist. He had embraced the life of a soldier with
reluctance; since ever he had known him he had been overwhelmed with disgust at
existence, and he had often expressed how eagerly he wished for some favorable
opportunity of sacrificing his life for a man of worth and honor. He entreated
the duke not to ask him to profit by this mental malady of his friend. He only
in an unlucky hour had done the act, and was willing to suffer the punishment
which it involved.

The excellent duke eyed them alternately. "You are a couple of brave lads,"
said he with emotion; "one or other of you must have done it. Confess to me
heartily: I will report the affair to the king, and who knows what may happen?"

His arguments, however, were in vain. The two friends persisted in their
story, and Heaven knows how the affair would have terminated if the visum
repertum had not contributed to unravel the mystery. The body of Moritz had
been examined with the usual formalities, and a detailed account of it drawn
up. From these minutes it appeared that the wound had been inflicted with a
sword, which, a few inches from the point, had a pretty deep notch. The auditor
availed himself of this hint, caused the swords of the two delinquents to be
examined, and it was discovered that Frederick's sword had this identical
notch. William's denial was now in vain; the affair was decided. Frederick
resigned himself to joy, and William to despair.

But the generous contest between the two young men had made a deep impression
upon the mind of the duke. He reported this extraordinary occurrence to the
court, and employed his interest to procure a pardon for the parties. William
accordingly was liberated without punishment, and Frederick condemned to a
year's labor on the ramparts.

William now applied himself to the service as before; and when he could spare
an hour, he flew to the ramparts to visit his friend, and to carry him
refreshments and consolation; or, when duty permitted he would labor for half
a day instead of his companion. By this generous proceeding, by his attention
to his duty, his sobriety and fidelity, he gained the friendship of his
superiors in so high a degree, that in a year's time he was promoted to be a
sergeant. The period of Frederick's sentence was now expired, and the two
friends were more inseparable than ever. Officers and privates considered them
with some degree of respect, and William was rendered particularly interesting
by a settled melancholy which hung upon his countenance. Alas! how could his
heart enjoy tranquillity when he thought of Jeanette's fate!

He had received intelligence, that although pronounced innocen^ of the charge
of child-murder, she had been condemned to six years imprisonment in the
correction-house for having concealed her pregnancy; that this sentence had
been put in execution, and that Jeanette now daily moistened her task with
tears. The image of this sufferer, still so dear to him, haunted his
imagination incessantly. He could not drink a drop of wine while he knew that
Jeanette was languishing upon bread and water. He could not be gay while she
pined in tears.

CHAP XV. FORTUNE OF WAR.
WILLIAM's regiment received sudden orders to march. The victorious enemy
revenged the disgrace with which their capital had rashly been threatened. They
rushed over the boundaries of the German empire, and every effort was required
to check their impetuous career.

William and Frederick fought with distinguished courage; for the one fought
death, and the other an opportunity to save the life of his friend. Courage is
a quality which combines with every other passion; it equally associates itself
with love and honor, with hatred and revenge. Toward the end of the campaign,
one day the grenadier company of the regiment of Ostein received orders to
storm an enemy's redoubt immediately under the eye of the commander in chief.
They advanced under a shower of grape shot. The captain lost an arm, the first
lieutenant a leg, and the second was left dead on the spot. The ensign, a
delicate milksop, took to flight. The brave grenadiers deprived of their
leaders, exposed to an horrible discharge of artillery, began to give way, and
but a moment longer and they would have fled. William then sprang forward, and
exclaimed with animation: "Follow me, my friends! for the king and for our
country!"

With fixed bayonet he ascended the hill; his companions pressed round him with
wild cries; Frederick was at his side. A shot carried off his grenadier's cap
and half of his ear. Bleeding violently, his head bare, William reached the top
of the eminence, and ran through the body the engineer as he was on the point
of applying the match to the touchhole. The conflict was now decided by the
bayonet. William received a thrust through his side. Frederick stretched upon
the ground the man who did it. William sunk down, and shouted "Victory!"
Frederick thought his friend was killed, and raged like a lion among the enemy.
A private soldier here decided the event of the enterprise. Reader! you are
surprised? -- The gazette, it is true, says nothing of the matter. Often,
however, has the courage of a common grenadier, whose exertions are afterward
rewarded with a crown, achieved exploits which in future periods, shine in the
biography of the general.

The redoubt was taken; the enemy fled; William was carried to the hospital.
His wounds were no farther dangerous than from the loss of blood they had
occasioned, and in three weeks he was perfectly recovered. He received a
message to attend at headquarters.

"Ensign Meadows," said the general, presenting him with a sword, "it gives me
pleasure to reward your gallantry. The king allows you an hundred ducats to
provide your accoutrements."

The modest young man was almost ashamed of a distinction for which he was
conscious that he was indebted to the courage of despair. He even ventured to
represent to the general, that, if the discharge of duty constituted any claim
to reward, Frederick Perlstadt's pretensions were perhaps better founded than
his.

"I have not overlooked his merits," replied the general. "Perlstadt succeeds
you."

Ha! What sneers were thrown out by the little-minded noblemen when they saw
William the porter's son appear with scarf and epaulets, and invited to the
general's table! "To raise him to the rank of ensign might pass, as it is
possible that such a thing might be deserved; but to bring him to the table of
a prince, among men of birth and rank, that was too much."

The sneers and the whispers were still more loud when William, who had just
enjoyed the honor of dining with the commander in chief, met his friend
Perlstadt at the door of his tent, and embraced him without ceremony. One of
his new comrades, a hero over a glass and a lamb in the field of battle,
tripped up to him with great self-importance, and, pulling him by the sleeve,
whispered: "Ensign, that really is improper."

"Lieutenant," interrupted William abruptly, "my epaulets have within these two
hours been changed to gold, and his are still of tape, but Heaven has formed
our hearts of the same materials. The action which has raised me to be an
officer, cannot permit me to be a rascal. The man who in prosperity will not
acknowledge his friend, or would allow any injurious tongue to wound his (...)
is indeed a scoundrel!" -- This warm declar^ (...) accompanied by a significant
(...) right hand toward his sword, produced its effect. The gentleman shrugged
his shoulders, and withdrew.

The young gentry of birth were shy of mingling in his company, because he took
the pains to gain by his personal exertions what they inherited without trouble
from their ancestors. Sometimes, indeed, an old staff officer would shake him
kindly by the hand, or a general converse with him familiarly; but the proud
subalterns took the advice of their noble mammas, and shunned him as a Bramin
shun^ a Pariah on the coast of Coromandel.

William smiled -- "I have often heard," would he say, "that family pride is
intolerable, but I find the contrary to be the case; for it rids us of
troublesome company."

Modest and unaffected, firmly attached to established principles, indulgent to
fools, and haughty to the insolent, William showed that he knew how to maintain
by the dignity of merit what he had gained in the field of battle by the
equivocal courage of despair.

The troops retired into winter quarters. William divided his days between the
performance of his duty, the calls of friendship, and the cultivation of his
^d. His nights were spent in broken slumbers, (...) in tears for Jeanette. More
than once he entertained the design of asking leave of absence, to to and carry
consolation to her dreary imprisonment. (...) the thought came across his mind,
he was deterred by a feeling of delicacy -- "How will she be able to stand the
sight of me? Am I in a situation to help her? Should I not rather increase her
distress by depriving her of the only wretched consolation she possesses, in
being accustomed to her situation?"

He checked the wish he felt to see her, and contented himself with sending her
every month, by the hands of a worthy merchant who had extensive de^lings at
Munster, the money which he was able to save out of his pay. "I am not actuated
by love here," would he say; "this I owe to the daughter of my benefactor."

Jeanette received this gratuity with astonishment. "Lives there yet a human
being in the world who pities me? I know nobody but William, and him I have
cruelly injured! His magnanimity, indeed, forgav^ me; but is he still alive?
Has he not taken upon himself another's guilt? And if he still lives, is he not
a poor soldier, who cannot be in a situation to snare his hard-earned pence
with such an o^cast as me."

She considered the matter to no purpose, and (...) herself in conjecture^. At
the end of every month a merchant's clerk regularly appeared, whose whole
conversation was: "Here is money, and be good enough to sign this discharge."
He never said a syllable more, and neither tears nor entreaties could extort a
word from him. Jeanette thought him cruel, but he knew nothing of the matter
himself.

What rapture did William feel, when first he saw Jeanette's subscription! what
sorrow when he read: "The unfortunate Jeanette Jerome returns her thanks to her
unknown benefactor, and earnestly wishes to know his name. The name of this
generous friend will gladden her dr^ry solitude, and render her prayers
acceptable to God" -- William wept over these lines, and kissed away the tears
with which she had bedewed the paper. Thus in the most desolate situation some
cheering blossoms spring up to the noble mind. He that can share his penny with
her he loves, is not poor! He that can impart consolation to the wretched, is
not a stranger to joy!

The army passed the winter in sullen repose, like a sick man who sinks into a
short and feverish slumber to awake to new struggles. Not the bleating of the
folds, nor the song of the lark, now invited the friends of nature to the
field; drums and trumpets drove the peasant from his hut, and the linnet from
her not.

The campaign was opened with great fury; skirmishes and battles were daily
occurrences. Discord sat on a sable cloud, looked down with a ghastly smile,
and with bloody lips kissed her general, Death, who with unwearied efforts
overthrew the hopes of wives and mothers. William and Frederick, as in the
former campaign, behaved with great gallantry. Courage without fortune,
however, is like merit without birth; neither of them can obtain distinction.
The two young heroes wanted an opportunity to distinguish themselves; and to
confess the truth, William did not covet such an opportunity so eagerly as
formerly. What had he to lose the preceding year? At that time death to him
would have been a joyful event. Now, however -- who would share the scanty
pittance with Jeanette, should William fall? -- Whoever wishes to raise an army
of desperate heroes, let him admit no lover among them who contributes to the
support of his mistress.

But stop! Once indeed chance presented the young hero with an opportunity of
signalizing himself, and he seized it with avidity. Under the view of the king
a decisive action was to be fought. Each party endeavored to gain a march upon
the other, in order to be able to occupy the most advantageous position upon
the plain where the action was to take place. It was the intention of the
general to extend the left wing to a village, which it was necessary to occupy
before the arrival of the enemy. A strong corpse was detached to take possession
of this village. The enemy, who had gained a march of some miles, were
approaching very near. They had already advanced into the village in great
numbers, compelled the corpse to give way, and were on the point of
disconcerting the king's plan of operation.

William saw how extremely important it was to gain time. He found himself in
the middle of the disordered crowd, and was hurried along with the fugitives.
By threats and remonstrances he at last collected a little troop, and, with a
few hundred grenadiers and some rifle-men, threw himself into the church, which
was situated in such a manner as to command the whole of the plain. Here he
barricaded the doors with the benches and seats, and posted his men
advantageously at the windows. Grenadoes were scattered among the foe wherever
they appeared in numbers, and the rifle-men levelled every one who ventured to
come too near.

The enemy, whose numbers every moment increased, were ungovernable with rage,
to find themselves checked by a handful of men. In vain they poured showers of
balls in at the windows. The gallant fellows were sheltered by the walls. A
general advanced, and, convinced of the importance of the post, condescended,
at the head of an army, to offer the little party a free retreat. William
answered: He was determined rather to bury himself under the ruins of the
church.

Already more dead lay on the graves in the churchyard than under the ground;
but William's companions had nearly expended all their ammunition, and the
enemy were preparing to open their heavy artillery upon the church, when the
king, who had availed himself of this diversion, suddenly appeared with the
whole army. As long as William held out, it was impossible for the enemy to
form their right wing as they wished. They were, therefore obliged to abandon
this position entirely, and the fortunate issue of the battle was partly
ascribed to the gallant officer who had so bravely defend^d the church.

"Who is he? What is his name?" said the king.

William was presented to him. With glowing cheeks and downeast eyes, he stood
as if ashamed of the service he had performed.

"I return you my thanks, lieutenant," said the king, "You have this day done
us most noble service. Speak, what can I do for you?"

"Please your majesty!" exclaimed William, throwing himself at his sovereign's
feet, "I have an unfortunate sister -- she does not carry my name indeed -- she
is but my half sister -- yet I love her more than if we had lai^ under the same
heart. -- Youth and base seduction have plunged her into misery! Three years
has she languished in prison, and three years more is the ill-fated girl
condemned to expiate the crime of a villain. I entreat your majesty for her
liberty!"

The king inquired the particulars of the affair; and when he heard that
Jeanette was entirely innocent of the child-murder, he granted William's
prayer, gave him a letter of recommendation written with his own hand, and
leave of absence for ten days, that he might in person announce to his beloved
sister her freedom.

William could not express his thanks, he could only weep. It is a charming
thing to see a man shed tears, who two hours before has performed an heroic
action. The king was affected. "I will provide farther for you," said he.
William flow out of the tent. Frederick in vain asked him what was the matter.
He could utter only a few broken syllables, embraced his friend with tears,
ordered his horse to be saddled, and set off full speed.

CHAP. XVI. THE MEETING AND SEPARATION.
MUNSTER is a city of considerable celebrity. The traveller, if he is a
politician, visits with respect the town hall, in which the famous treaty of
Westphalia was concluded, of which the different contracting parties observed
just no more than they sound convenient. If he is a curious traveller, he seats
himself with fear and awe in the chair of king John of Leyden, who twice
baptized his followers, though once seems quite sufficient. The sentimental
traveller, however, will in future visit the little cell where for three long
years Jeanette suffered for the absurdities of the primitive church, and the
arts of priestcraft which it had produced.

The shades of evening had already begun to descend upon St. Paul's hill, in
the neighborhood of the town, and the harvest mists began to veil the tops of
an hundred useless steeples, when William allowed his blowing steed to stop at
the barriers, and with hasty impatience answered the questions of the officer
on guard. He dismounted at the first good inn he came to, gave his horse to the
first person he met, called a porter from the street to guide him, and, covered
with dust and sweat, was usher^d into the antichamber of the magistrate to whom
his letters were addressed. Some time elapsed before he obtained an audience;
for the magistrate, in company with his confessor and an old gouty counselor,
had five points to play out at an interesting game of ombre. William bit his
nails, and viewed, without the least interest, the pictures of the saints which
adorned the antichamber.

At last the doors were opened, and he delivered his dispatches. The king's
superscription produced a powerful effect; the affair was immediately decided;
but the execution of it was postponed till the next day, and the lieutenant
invited to sup. Although for three days William had scarcely eaten a morsel, he
felt not the slightest sensation of hunger. He could not conceive how the
magistrate had invited him so calmly, how the servants so unconcernedly waited
at table, and every thing proceeded so evenly in its natural course.

"Speedy assistance," said William, "doubles its value. Night appears long to
the ^ck, but to the wretched it seems longer still. The sooner you apply
medicine and consolation the better. If your excellency then would permit your
secretary to attend me -- "

MAGISTRATE. -- You will first do me the favor to eat a bit of supper?


WILLIAM. -- I shall cut but a sorry figure at your table.


His whole appearance prayed most affectingly to be excused, as he said these
words, but there was no remedy. Your great people think they can confer no
higher honor upon a common untitled man than to permit him to eat in their
company; and as they themselves place so high a value upon the favor, they are
not pleased that others should treat it with indifference. They do not
consider, that a man of sense and independence pays dearer for his dinner by
constraint and ceremony, than if he went to dine at the most expensive tavern.

Poor William sat upon thorns* and whenever he saw a new dish placed upon the
table, he was ready to expire with vexation. During supper, his excellency read
a lecture upon politics, in which he declared that he had long ago predicted,
in the cabinet, every thing which had lately happened, and every now and then
appealed to the counselor for the truth of his story; and the latter
corroborated every word with "Yes, brother," and at last became as eloquent in
his turn, when the conversation related to the different flavours of Rhenish.
On this subject the confessor found himself at home. He swallowed every glass
with the air of a connoisseur, smacked his lips, and began to rail against a
party of Prussian hussars, who, when he was superintendant of a certain
convent, had drank a whole cask of the best old hock.

At last the hour of breaking up arrived, and William received his discharge.
With what rapidity did he descend the staircase! a little fat secretary was
scarcely able to follow him. In the street he would have left his companion
behind, if he could have found his way to the correctionhouse without him. His
cool-blooded conductor came blowing, a few steps behind him, and by his
questions of What news from the army? almost drove poor William to despair.

"You have gained a battle?" -- "Yes." -- "It was at first reported that you
had been defeated?" -- "Yes, Sir, you are right." -- "How? What? I do not
understand you."

"My God! Victorious or defeated, any thing you please. At present I have no
leisure to talk of battles. Tomorrow, tomorrow, my good Sir, I will tell you
things which at present I know nothing about!"

The secretary shook his head, as if to say that all was not well with the
strange gentleman. At last, however, they reached the gate of the
correction-house.

"We must ring," said the secretary; and in an instant William had broke down
the bell. Jeanette was paying her evening devotions. William was the saint to
whom she commended herself; for she thought him dead, and her unknown
benefactor she warmly remembered in her prayers.

Hark! the hasty tread of a man's footsteps sounded through the long empty
passage. -- What can be the meaning of this late visit? -- Hark! some one
rattles at the door. -- What can it be? -- Who drives open the door so hastily?
-- An officer rushes into the cell -- Jeanette had not time to recognize him --
he lay at her feet, and breathless exclaimed -- " Jeanette, you are free!"

There are scenes in human life which after the curtain drops appear a dream to
those who have played the principal parts. Such scenes defy all the skill of
art to represent; and if the artist does not find the picture already sketched
in the imagination of the reader, it is better to throw away the pencil.

Jeanette was unconscious of what passed around her. Insensible she lay in
William's arms, insensible was she carried to an hackney coach; and when she at
last recovered from her swoon, in a strange room, she began to consider, with
astonishment, how she had come into this house, and lay in this bed.

All was still around. Near the bed stood a night lamp, which shed a melancholy
light on the old embroidered tapestry. "Where am I?" said she. "Did not William
appear to me? Alas! I have had strange dreams."

She now accidentally looked round, and saw her beloved sitting at the
bedside; the excessive fatigue of the three preceding days and nights had
thrown him, in spite of his efforts, into a short slumber. "William!" shouted
Jeanette. He awoke, and sunk down on her bosom. A flood of joyful tears eased
his panting bosom. After many silent embraces, William at last recovered
strength and recollection to relate his story in broken sentences.

Jeanette listened with great attention, and particularly inquired the period
when he was raised to be an officer. His answer coincided with her suspicions.
The mystery of the unknown benefactor was now solved. -- "Yes, it is you to
whom I am indebted for every thing! My heart long since whispered it to me!" --
She hung, sobbing, round his neck. Day found them dissolved in delightful
tears; night surprised them in innocent endearments. Quicker than thought two
days flew away.

What might not a young man, who had gained so many titles to the love and
gratitude of his mistress, have asked? What might he not have ventured to
attempt? But William honored innocence and virtue, which, though once left
defenseless in the spoiler's cruel fangs, had never forsaken the fair mansion
in which they resided. At the word innocence, perhaps some prudes may sneer. It
is an eternal truth, however, that innocence is gone only when the purity of
the heart is lost, and many women, who may boast themselves innocent from man,
have forfeited theirs.

When they began to enjoy some moments of tranquillity, the question naturally
arose, "What is to be done with Jeanette?"

"She shall be my wife!" exclaimed, William, and pressed her, blushing, to his
breast.

"God forbid," said the generous girl, "that one who has suffered an
ignominious punishment should stain thy opening fame! How could you submit to
the sarcastic jests of your comrades?"

"Ha! I would -- "

"Why, yes, I know what you would do. You would dye your sword in blood to wipe
away my shame; you would make me a widow, or yourself a murderer. -- No,
William, the king cannot trust the honor of a man who could give his hand to a
degraded outcast like me. Though I may be more unfortunate than capable, though
I deserve pity rather than contempt, this I must demonstrate by the refusal of
a hand, the possession of which I so willingly would have purchased with my
blood. You have called me sister -- Then, brother William, let us for ever
forego the sweetest and the most endearing of appellations!"

William exerted all the eloquence of love to shake this resolution. Five days
of his period of absence were now elapsed, the sixth arrived, and he had no
time to lose. The heart of the poor girl was assailed with caresses and with
specious arguments, which in such cases commonly pass for invincible reasons.
She felt that longer resistance exceeded her power, and that she must at length
yield to the solicitations of her lover. With great difficulty she obtained a
short respite from him till next day.

When he tenderly pressed her hand, as he retired to bed, and had opened the
door to go to his apartment, she threw herself abruptly round his neck, and
wept bitterly. "What ails you, Jeanette?" -- "Nothing! nothing! -- Tomorrow!
tomorrow!" "How? Do you think with alarm of the happy hour which will extort
from you the delightful promise to be eternally mine?" -- "No! no! -- Eternally
thine! -- Go, good William -- sleep sound -- for God's sake go! -- I can endure
it no longer!"

William withdrew. Delightful hopes soon lulled him to sleep, and pleasant
dreams hovered over his head. Hastily he sprung out of bed next morning, threw
on his great coat, and slipped softly to the door of Jeanette's room. He found
that it was only on the latch, opened it without noise, and whispered, "Are you
awake, dear Jeanette?" -- There was no answer. -- He put his head into the
room, it was empty -- he threw a glance toward the bed, it was empty! and,
alas! not a trace was to be seen that it had been used that night at all. The
blood flew rapidly to his face, a fearful presage arose in his breast; with
beating heart he entered the room, looked anxiously round, and saw a letter
lying upon the table. His eyes devoured it.

"Forgive me, good William! I fly from myself. How could I longer have resisted
you and my own heart? And yet I must resist, to spare you disgrace and
repentance. In the violence of passion you will reproach me. Ah! William
reproach me not! My resolution has cost me a dreadful struggle. Acknowledge,
that to be worthy of you I must fly. Farewell! banish all anxiety on my
account. Your kindness has placed me in a situation to live for months without
other assistance, till I can find employment in some respectable family, were
it ever in the humble character of a servant. -- Farewell, inquire not the
place of my abode. You must never see me again, till I can call you brother
without a blush; till the period of my guilt, of my shame, and perhaps of thy
love, shall be forgotten. -- Thy love! -- Alas! why must I wish that? -- Stop,
poor Jeanette, while you yet have strength to fly! -- I have been in your
bed-room -- I have heard you breathe -- perhaps for the last time in my life! I
thought my heart would have burst. -- Already I held the lock of the door, when
an invisible power impelled me to slip once more to your bedside, to see you
once more. -- I feared you might awake, and that your impetuous love might
annihilate my honorable resolution. I withdrew my hand, and covered with
kisses and with tears the handle of the door which tomorrow your fingers would
first touch. I kneeled upon the threshold, and with folded hands implored the
blessing of God upon you. -- Now it is over! -- I fly to conceal myself from my
beloved. Farewell, brother! Remember thy ill-fated sister!"

William gazed upon the letter with tearless eyes; his lips quivered, but not a
word could he pronounce. After a long pause he awoke from his trance, wrung his
hands and exclaimed: "Ha! this is too much!" His wild look wandered round the
room, seeking some relic of Jeanette. Alas! not a trace of the beloved fugitive
could he fi^

"Yet did she not cover the handle of my bedroom door with kisses? Did she not
kneel upon the threshold and pray for me?"

William kneeled in his turn, and prayed for Jeanette, and his tears renewed
the faded marks of hers.

Suddenly inspired by a burst of passion he sprang up, raged and stormed
through the house; demanded from every kitchen wench, an account what had
become of Jeanette, and in the heat of his resentment knocked down a waiter who
very naturally asked him whether the young woman had robbed him.

When he found that nobody could give him the ^ast information, when, how, and
whither Jeanette had gone, he dressed himself in haste, stormed the house of
her old aunt, traversed the whole city, the suburbs, and the neighboring
country. Wherever he saw two persons conversing, he listened to hear if they
talked of Jeanette. Wherever he saw a female face lurking behind a
window-curtain, he remained standing below, and gazed till curiosity induced
some stranger to look out. Wherever he saw a church door open he slipped in,
examined every corner where he saw some devotee kneeling before the image of a
saint.

Without having received the least refreshment, and obliged by the coming night
to abandon his search, he returned to his inn. As he went back, he even
ventured to cherish the hope that Jeanette, during his absence, might have made
her appearance. The landlord sat quietly before the door' smoking his pipe.
"She must certainly be come back!" thought William, "how else could the
landlord be so tranquil?" He attacked him with an hundred questions; and when
to every word he got no answer but an indifferent No, he felt the last ^eam of
hope expire in his breast.

His leave of absence was now reduced to four days. Three he had spent in
traveling to Munster, four were still necessary for his return to the camp.
His horse, too, was so jaded that it seemed doubtful whether he could hold out
the journey. At daybreak he mounted the battered steed, in sullen
stupefaction, took the road by which he came; and when, as he ascended an hill,
he turned round to Munster, the morning sun shone upon his tears.

CHAP. XVII. THE WANDERER.
JEANETTE, with a small bundle hanging on her arm, and a few pieces of gold in
her pocket, had silently stolen at midnight out of the inn. She first thought
of applying to her old aunt; but after what had happened how could she expect a
welcome reception? Had she, during three years, ever shown the least anxiety
about the poor orphan, or ever sent the least refreshment to her cell? Jeanette
preferred throwing herself on the wide world.

With great difficulty, and by doubling the toll at the gate, she prevailed
upon the sentinel to let her pass, under pretense of going to visit a sick
person in the suburbs. When morning dawned, she had already walked a mile, and
arrived at a village where two roads crossed each other. She sat down to rest
herself under a row of trees at the entrance of the village, where she had not
been long when a stagecoach passed by. A few hundred steps farther on, the
carriage stopped at an alehouse, because the postillion, according to the
laudable custom of his calling, wished to have his morning pint.

The idea instantly struck Jeanette, "What if I should take a place in this
coach, and go on with it, in order the sooner to escape from William's
inquiries?"

She yet was entirely ignorant whither the road on which she now traveled
conducted. This, however, was of little consequence, as she had the world
before her, and had left Munster behind. In the first considerable town,
whatever it was, she resolved to apply for service.

Engrossed with these reflections she went into the alehouse, and found the
postillion at breakfast. S^ proposed to take a place in his vehicle, and at the
same time offered him some drink-money. He grinned at the sight of her white
teeth, expressed his consent by a nod, and seasoned his complaisance with some
dry jokes at the expense of the solitary pedestrian. After he had finished his
breakfast, and with rustic politeness invited Jeanette to drink a glass, he
went out to the coach: "Gentlemen, sit a little closer if you please, and make
room for a pretty young girl, who has walked herself lame." With blunt
officiousness he assisted Jeanette into her place; and, as the weather was
fine, he took his great coat down from the coach-box, and spread it under the
seat as a bolster. The power of beauty is felt by the peasant as well as the
poet, and the postillion's coat was as great an homage to Jeanette's charms as
a sonnet.

When she took her seat she apologized to the passengers with modest
condescension for incommoding them. It was impossible to be angry with her, and
they willingly made room. -- A stage-coach is often a place where a young
woman, like Gresset's Vert-vert, finds herself in bad company. Jeanette had
already experienced this the first time she went to Munster to her aunt.
Scarcely had she now taken her seat, therefore, when she began unobserved to
examine the physiognomies of her fellow-travellers, to discover what she had to
hope or to fear.

This survey (for which the penetrating, infallible eye of a woman requires
only a second, were the coach stuffed as full as Noah's ark) gave her great
satisfaction, as she saw four or five grave old men who had the appearance of
merchants, and did not seem inclined to interrupt her melancholy meditations.
Instead of saluting her, they had only pulled up their night-caps a little, and
one of them offered Jeanette a pinch of snuff. This how^er, was all; they gave
themselves no farther concern about her.

She felt a strong desire to ask the person who had offered to share the
contents of his snuff box with her, to what place the coach was going. She was
afraid, however, of betraying by this question that she was setting out in the
wide world without object or provision, and by that means attracting attention.
She therefore remained silent; her companions continued silent also, and seemed
as if they were calculating the profit or loss of an adventure. The gloomy
silence, which was interrupted only by an exclamation of "God bless us!" when
any of the company happened to sneeze, cherished Jeanette's melancholy; and the
jolting and rattling of the carriage could not withdraw her from her
comfortless reflections.

For the first two days they traveled only through villages and little towns,
the names of which were utterly unknown to Jeanette, as she had never troubled
herself much about geography. As she had no opportunity in these obscure places
to attain the object she had in view, she pursued her journey. On the evening
of the third day, as she gazed pensively on the fields and trees on the right
hand, which seemed to recede from the coach, she suddenly started, and with
difficulty suppressed a loud shriek.

William rode past the carriage! -- His horse moved on at a sluggish trot;
William's head was reclined upon his breast, and his eyes seemed to be so
intent on the pummel of his saddle, that he never once looked at the
stage-coach. Indeed he could not have seen Jeanette, as she sat back in a
corner. A single glance was enough for a lover, and she would have pledged her
salvation that it was William. How it appeared evident, that instead of ^ying
from him him she was running directly into his arms.

"My God! what shall I do now? -- At the next stage the carriage will be
emptied, I must dismount, and perhaps meet William at the door!"

She became restless and uneasy on her seat, her face glowed, her heart beat.
The nearer they approached the stage, the more violent her anxiety became. One
of the passengers happened to ask the postillion, "Friend, have we far yet to
go?" -- "Half a mile farther yet," replied the postillion, Jeanette was
alarmed, and formed an hasty resolution. "Stop, friend!" cried she suddenly.
The postillion stopped. She took up her bundle, put half a guinea into the
postillion's hand, and bade him drive on.

"What a God's name do you mean, Miss? What! It is almost dark. You don't mean
to stay here on the road all night.?"

"In the next village I am at home," returned Jeanette; "drive on if you please
without me." The postillion shook his head, mounted his horse, cracked his
whip, and in a few minutes the carriage disappeared from Jeanette's view. She
looked after it with a kind of stupefaction; and when she saw herself alone and
helpless amidst all nature, when she heard the cricket chirrup its evening
song, and the grasshopper buzzing in the bushes, she began to weep bitterly.

"Poor girl! what will now become of you? -- Return? -- Whither? -- Advance --
Alas! William!" -- She paced on a little way upon the high road, till on the
left hand she saw a little foot-path, which she followed without farther
consideration, and in secret prayer she proceeded.

Hitherto twilight had shed a feeble ray upon the pathway, but night darkened
round, and she found herself at the entrance of a thick wood. A few moments she
stood irresolute, but her courage revived. "This foot-path," thought she, "must
lead to the abode of men. I must surely find some village, or at least a
farm-house, and the deeper in the wood the better." At first she pursued her
way with spirit; but the darkness every moment increased, and the sullen
silence was interrupted only by the distant cooing of the wood-pigeon. She felt
a fearful oppression steal round her heart which she had never before
experienced. She redoubled her speed, and terror lent her new strength.

Till now she thought that see had observed the marks of a beaten foot-path;
but at length her progress became so embarrassed by the thick twining bushes,
that she began to fear she should lose the path altogether. Alas! what she
feared soon happened. She suddenly found herself in a small opening, bare of
trees; and where all around the pines and ^rs entwined their branches, the
shrubs opposed their close-grown twigs, and apprised her that here no human
foot had smoothed a passage. Terror now deprived her of strength and
reflection: she groped round as if struck blind, and was unable to find the
path by which she had come. Trembling, she sunk down upon the root of a tree,
and recommended herself to God and to his angels.

In about an hour the moon rose, and with it a beam of hope in her soul. She
rose, and chose the place where it seemed easiest to penetrate through the
bushes. After she had wrought her way through with great perseverance for a
considerable distance, her hands scratched and bloody, and her white cloak torn
to pieces on the thorns, she came to a hedge, which, as far as the feeb^ light
of the moon enabled her to judge, seemed to border a stack of hay. "God be
praised!" exclaimed she, "here must be the habitation of men!" She had not
advanced many steps farther when she really saw a light at a distance. "Ha! a
light! she hastily cried, and felt her strength invigorated. With renewed
courage she followed the side of the hedge, advanced toward the light, and
soon perceived that it issued from the window of a little house which was
thatched with straw, but yet had a better appearance than common cottages. It
was surrounded by a few outhouses, and skirted all round by the wood.

CHAP. XVIII. THE HUMORIST.
MAN, who now no longer has a window in his breast, nor carries a mark upon his
forehead (should he even have killed a brother,) yet in two ways displays his
character with considerable precision, namely by his aress and his habitation.
He whose head is clear, and whose heart is tranquil loves to dress himself with
taste, and to live in a pleasant so^y. Only the enthusiast or the miserable
bury themselves in deserts.

Such thoughts as these lay heavy upon Jeanette's breast when she saw the
little house in the midst of the wood. "Could I but find an ^ylum here; could I
but be allowed here to attach myself to some unfortunate being, who flies from
envy and persecution as I fly from love!"

She advanced a few steps nearer till she came to an aged oak, which shaded a
seat formed of turf. Higher up on the trunk of the tree something glittered in
the light of the moon. It was a white board with some inscription, and fastened
to the tree by a gilt thong. Jeanette stepped up on the bench, and by the
moonlight read the following lines in French: La plainte est pour le fat, le
bruit est pour le sot;
L'honnete homme trompe s'eloigne, et ne dit mot. The fool complains, the knave
makes a noise; but the ho^ man decei^ed retires and says nothing.



"Ha!" exclaimed Jeanette, "here lives some mortal who has quarreled with the
world; he will not shut his door upon the wretched."

Animated with hope, she leaped down from the bench, and went straight to the
house-door. A large dog with a chain about his neck suddenly rushed out of his
kennel, and bawled out like a reviewer. Jeanette was frightened, and did not
venture to approach. She stood like a young bashful author, whom the reviewer
denies admittance into the temple of fame, the sacred recesses of which he
himself enters as little as the watch-dog the house of his master. Both are
kept only to bark, and to growl at every stranger.

At the noise which the dog made, Jeanette thought she saw the light in the
house move past the window. She heard a bolt drawn; the door opened, a man
looked out, said "Tush, Fagel!" to the dog; and when the bark softened into a
lower growl, the woodman turned to the place where the white figure of Jeanette
glanced in his eye, and cried: "Who is there?" -- Jeanette told in a few words
that she had lost her way, and begged a night's lodging.

The stranger answered not a word. He went in and shut the door behind him. The
poor wanderer could not conceive what this meant. The cur again began to rage
as before; the light appeared to be placed in its old situation; and, except
the dog, nobody seemed to think of her being there.

After a few minutes of anxious expectation, the light again moved through the
house; the bolt was withdrawn, the door grated on its hinges, the man who had
before come out, made his appearance, said "Tush, Fagel!" to the dog, and to
Jeanette two words: "Come in." -- Jeanette followed. She now perceived by the
light of the lamp that her conductor was an old man, with a blue jacket and
close cut hair. He did not appear to share the curiosity with which she viewed
him, as he scarcely once looked at her. He led her into a little room adjoining
to the lobby. "Here is a bed," said he; put the lamp on the table, and retired.

Jeanette knew not well what to think of this extraordinary reception. She
examined the room, in which a kind of indigent cleanliness seemed to prevail.
The furniture consisted of a small folding bed with fine bed-clothes, a
looking-glass with a brown frame, two tables covered with green cloth, and six
straw-bottomed chairs. The floor was strewed with white sand and new cut fir
branches. The only articles which seemed to indicate the owner to be a man of
property, were four valuable landscapes by Wouvermann, which were fixed to the
wall.

When she observed that all was quiet in the house, and that nobody thought any
thing more of her, she threw herself in her clothes upon the bed; and exhausted
by three sleepless nights, by bodily exertion and mental distress, she enjoyed
a pretty calm night's rest. The day was well advanced when she was awaked by a
noise in the room. It was the same silent man who had attended her the night
before. He entered with a basket, from which, without saying a word, he drew a
white cloth, and spread it upon the table. He then placed upon it bread,
butter, cheese, honey, a basin of milk, and a glass of small beer. "Here is
breakfast," said he, and again withdrew.

This laconic invitation extorted a smile from Jeanette. She remained lying on
the bed for half an hour, and puzzled herself with conjectures to account for
the singular behavior of her host. She then rose, and refreshed herself with
bread and milk. As she happened to look out at the window, she observed another
man, about forty years of age, in a gray coat, and short hair like the other.
He sat upon the turf seat under the oak, reading a book. His pale, haggard
countenance bore the traces of sorrow; his eyes were hollow, and shaded with
shaggy eyebrows, which gave his features a gloomy character mixed with
something of wildness.

Jeanette considered him long with attention. She concluded that he was the
master of the house; and she resolved, as soon as he gave up reading, to throw
herself in his way, to thank him for his hospitable entertainment, and to offer
herself to him as maidservant. The man in gray, however, did not seem disposed
to quit his place. Sometimes indeed, he laid aside his book, stroked a spaniel,
or cut a piece of hazle, in doing which he lost himself in meditation; he would
then take up the book again, though he seemed to read but little.

About midday the servant, for ^ch Jeanette considered the man in the blue
jacket, placed a table under the oak tree, and carried out a few frugal dishes,
of which the man in gray sparingly partook. Immediately after the servant
brought the same fare to Jeanette, and said: "Here is dinner," and went away.
"These men," thought Jeanette, "are not curious. It appears to be very
indifferent to them who I am. I however am very anxious to know who the person
is to whom I owe this asylum."

When the servant returned to clear the table, she ventured, for the first
time, to ask him a question: "Where am I?" -- "Among honest people," returned
the man, and went his way. Jeanette concluded that speech was here used only as
a necessary, and not, as at court, as a luxury. Notwithstanding her desire to
gratify her female curiosity, she felt a repugnance equally strong to harass by
her questions; and she struggled with herself the whole morning, whether she
should go out and speak to the man in gray. More than once she had the door in
her hand; but after she had summoned courage to make her proposals, she
perceived that the stranger had left his seat, and hid himself in the woods.

The shades of evening closed around. The man in the blue jacket brought a
lamp, and said: "Here is a light." In a little white he covered the table in
silence; and when he had placed the victuals upon it, he retired, saying: "Here
is your supper." The conversation for the day there closed. Jeanette remained
alone, neither saw nor heard any thing farther, and slept as well as she could
till next morning.

When next day her breakfast was placed on the table, and she had begun to eat,
the monosyllabic man in blue said: "Now you may go. The road on the left hand
takes you out of the wood." -- "Alas! my friend!" said Jeanette, "does your
master want no servant girl?" -- The man in blue for the first time looked her
broad in the face, answered however not a word, but went out to his master, who
was seated under the oak-tree. In a few minutes he returned, and said: "No. The
left hand road takes you out of the wood."

"I shall go this moment," said Jeanette with a sigh; "but may I not be
permitted to return your master my thanks?" -- "No!" was the rough answer with
which the man in blue left her. Melancholy and disconsolate she went to the
window, every moment thought of preparing to set out, and still postponed it.
"Where shall I find an asylum so peculiarly adapted for the gloomy temper of my
sorrow? The bustle of cities, the ceremony of great houses, the importunity of
talkative men -- and here -- this dreary wilderness, the solemn firs, the
domestic silence -- O! he must retain me; the strange mortal there under the
oak must take me into his service."

Suddenly she felt, as it were, something whisper her: "To succeed in your
object with singular characters you must yourself act in a singular manner." --
The day before she had accidentally observed, that at this hour the servant had
brought some pails out of an adjoining house, taken them to the well, and
washed them clean. He had then gone into a little shed where a couple of cows
were kept, milked them, and brought the milk into the house.

On this discovery, Jeanette immediately formed her plan. She hastily pinned up
her gown, went out without hesitation, carefully avoided looking at the man in
gray as she passed him under the oak-tree, went into the out-house, took the
pails, and washed them clean at the well. She then posted to the shed, milked
the cows, and proceeded to carry the milk into the house. All this she did with
the same neatness and dexterity as if she had been accustomed to it all her
life.

The man in gray dropped his book upon his knees, and eyed her with surprise.
When she came out of the shed and was passing by him, he said: "What is the
meaning of this?"

"Good Sir!" -- "I am no good Sir! But I am a man!" -- "Alas! I am
unfortunate." -- "Who is not so?" -- "I wish to remain with you as
maidservant." -- "I want no maidservant." -- "If you do not want me -- Ah!
good Sir! I stand in need of you!"

The man in gray remained a few moments silent. "Peter!" cried he to the
servant, "the girl may stay." After these words he took up the book, and took
no farther notice of Jeanette.

CHAP. XIX. IMPROVEMENTS.
AN old Latin proverb maintains, that the same consequence does not always
follow when two men perform the same action; and this observation holds as true
in the woods of Westphalia as in the city of Rome. If nature is adorned with
youth, beauty, gentleness and grace, the fortunate possessor of these
advantages may boldly undertake what (...) old wrinkled beldame durst not
attempt. Had not Jeanette been a lovely girl, had not her hand excelled the
milk in whiteness, and her form transcended the elegance of the poplars,
perhaps the man in gray might have considered her unbidden officiousness as
extremely impertinent and disagreeable. But it was impossible to meet the
glance of the lovely girl's fine benignant eye, without feeling some emotion of
kindness, though you had been stretched on a bed of thorns. When you saw her
you felt the same effects which Moritz, in his Magazine of Moral Experiments,
mentions to have been produced by the glowing tints of an evening sky. A
melancholy man was walking one fine summer evening up and down upon the Mall,
with his face first turned toward the east, where the sky was dark and gloomy.
Corroding care and disgust of life filled his breast. Suddenly he turned round
-- The soft beauties of the purple western sky saluted his view. Hope, love,
and confidence awoke in his soul.

The man in gray would not listen to Jeanette's thanks. He said; "O! very
well!" and beckon^ with his hand for her to retire. He conceived that he had
performed a pure duty of humanity, abstracted from all collateral feelings and
views. "She is unfortunate," thought he, "and imagines that it is possible in
this world to enjoy happiness. Happy for her! so long as she continues to
cherish this dream! -- But what misfortunes can she have sustained? -- O! it is
all one! What is it to me?" -- He continued to read, but soon perceived that he
knew nothing of what he had been reading. "My thoughts wander," said he to
himself, put his book in his pocket, and plunged, as was his custom, deeper
into the wood.

Meanwhile Jeanette went cheerily about her new occupation. She took possession
of the kitchen, arranged every thing in the neatest order, ^ou^d and burnished
what was not sufficiently bright, cleaned the pots, put water on the fire,
ingeniously made herself a scuttle of twigs, which she pealed with her fair
hands. All this she did without saying a word; for she had already observed
that in this house silence was the greatest recommendation, and she was
determined to show the man in gray, that it was not necessary to banish the
fair sex from his solitude on account of their reputed deficiency in this
virtue.

Peter stood and gazed at her. He said not a word indeed, but he smiled kindly,
and sometimes with a half nod muttered Ha! hem! However eagerly Jeanette longed
to know where, and in whose house she was, she reflected that her silent host
had still a better right to anticipate her curious inquiries; and as he allowed
her to remain undisturbed, she thought it fair to observe a similar delicacy.

Thus passed a whole month without a human voice being heard in the solitude.
Every hour of the day was dedicated to its appropriate employment, every
employment had its established form* Good morning! Good night! were expressed
with a nod of the head, and at most by a single word. The dishes required for
dinner were settled and communicated to Jeanette by their bare appellations.
Never once had they inquired her name. When she was called, it was, Girl! --
The man in gray was called Master, and the valet was called Peter.

Jeanette endeavored, by every little attention, to win the favor of her new
master. She had now cause to rejoice that her old aunt at Munster had initiated
her in the mysteries of cookery. From the happy days of her youth she had still
cherished her propensity for gardening. She was skilled in rearing fruits and
flowers; and every thing, as formerly, ^ourished in her hands.

In a corner of the kitchen-garden she chose a spot of good rich soil for a
flower-plot. "Peter," said she, "take the spade and dig me this spot." Peter
looked at her, smiled, muttered, with a half nod, Hem! hem! ha! and prepared
the ground as he was desired. In a short time, roses and hyacinths began to
shoot up, which Jeanette carefully watered every evening. When they began to
perfume the air with their full-blown beauties, she transplanted them into
flower-pots, and stuck them in the ground, by the turf bench, round the
oak-tree. When the man in gray repaired next morning, as, usual, to his
favorite spot, it seemed as if during the night, roses and hyacinths had sprung
up under his feet.

When he first observed this little piece of gallantry, he stood a good while
gazing at it. Peter brought breakfast, and his master pointed with his finger
to the roses. Peter understood him, and answered, "The girl."

"The girl!" involuntarily repeated the man in gray, and a smile escaped him
which still pla^ed ^ound his li^ with a cast of severity. He t^ (...) a guinea,
gave it to Peter, and said "The girl." Peter carried the money, with the words,
"From master."

"For what?" -- "For the flowers." -- "If the flowers afford master any
pleasure, I am rewarded. Kindness cannot be purchased with gold."

Peter looked at her with a little astonishment, and for the first time in his
life clapped her on her shoulder. He carried the money back, laid it on the
table, and said: "She refuses." -- "Why?"

She says, "If the flowers have afforded master any pleasure, she is rewarded.
Kindness is not to be purchased with money." -- "Said she so?" -- "Yes."

This time the countenance of the man in gray relaxed into a smile, in which
the severity was almost totally eclipsed. Thus did Jeanette avail herself of
every opportunity which presented to smooth the brow or the humourist. He was
not ungrateful; he was sensible of the effort, though he long remained silent.
When she passed him in the morning to milk the cows, he could not refrain from
lifting his eyes from the book, and looking after her. This stolen pleasure
had, without his being aware of it, become so necessary to him, that, if she
happened to be longer in coming than usual, his eye wandered an hundred times
from the book to the house-door, to catch her dear form. This, however, was
all. In the same uniformity passed a quarter of a year. Jeanette could not help
feeling her female vanity a little hurt, that with all her efforts, and all her
attention, she had not been able to interest the man in gray so far as to
inquire her name. At last, however, she hit upon a thought, the execution of
which at first appeared extremely difficult, but which succeeded beyond her
hopes.

"Who made the tablet which hangs on the oak?" said she one day to Peter. --
"It was I." -- "And who painted the inscription?" -- "I." -- "Are you a
painter?" -- "I was in my youth."

"I am glad of that. Make me such a tablet." Peter looked and smiled. "Are you
serious?" -- "Yes. You must say nothing of it, however, to your master. I wish
to procure him an unexpected pleasure." Peter laughed, again muttered hem! hem!
and made the tablet. When it was ready, Jeanette gave him a stanza to be
inscribed upon it. Peter wrought con amore, and surpassed himself. The kind
thanks with which Jeanette repaid his trouble gave him more satisfaction than
the celebrated Casanova enjoys in a present from the Semiramis of the North.

When the man in gray, according to custom, slipped out one morning to the turf
seat under the oak-tree, and happened to look up to the trunk, behold! the old
tablet was taken away; in its place hung a new one, on which he read, with
great surprise, the following words: Ne te vante point d'avoir en cet asyle
Rencontre le parfait bonheur.
Il n'est point retire dans le fond d'un bocage,
Il est moins chez les rois,
Il est encore moins chez le sage;
De cette court vie il n'est pas le partage:
Il y faut renoncer; mais on peut quelques fois
Embrasser an moins son image. Think not you have found happiness in this
retreat. It lives not in gloomy woods; still less is it to be sought at court,
as little in the breast of the sage. It is not the portion of this fleeting
life. We must then forego the possession. Yet ^times we are permitted to
embrace at least its shadow.



He read it over twice, three times, and could scarcely believe his eyes. Peter
brought breakfast, his master pointed with his finger to the tablet. Peter
understood the gesture, and replied with a smile, " The girl."

" The (...) involuntarily repeated the man in gray, and smiled without any
mixture of severity. When Jeanette passed by, quite unconcerned, a short time
after, to pay her morning visit to the cows, he could no longer maintain his
reserve. "Girl!" cried he. -- "Sir," replied Jeanette, and turned round to him.

"Who are you?" -- "I am unfortunate." -- "Can you tell me no more?" -- "Excuse
me." -- "Well, I am not displeased to see the unfortunate take refuge with me.
Will you remain with me till I die?" -- "Most willingly." -- "What is your
name?" -- "Jeanette." -- "Well, you may go." Jeanette withdrew.

The man in gray had not spoken so much at one time for many years. He was
surprised, even himself, at the effort, and fell into a profound meditation, in
which he forgot his morning walk. What was the precise subject of his
reflections, kind reader, he ne^ ^ntured to communicate even to the oak-tree;
and perhaps he himself did not exactly know. This explanation, however,
produced no alteration in the mode of life of the hermit and his domestics.
Every thing moved on in its usual course; and except the new inscription upon
the oak, every thing remained in its former place.

Winter had now stripped the leaves from the trees, covered Jeanette's
flower-garden with snow, and kept the man in gray confined to his chamber. To
the want of exercise, perhaps, it was owing that secret grief, and incessant
brooding over a silent sorrow, affected his health this season more than he had
before experienced. He was attacked by a severe illness.

It is a proud destiny which the fair sex enjoy, the to them we owe the most
delightful of our pleasures; but it is still a prouder distinction they
possess, ^n soothing our moments of sickness and distress. Jeanette never
stirred from his bed. Botany, formerly the amusement her youth, she now
employed with advantage. In the morning she prepared him cooling draughts, and
made him drink potions made from the juice of the most agreeable and salutary
fruits. For dinner she made him light vegetable soups; in the evening she took
a book from his small but select library, and read till he fell asleep. She
then lay down, without throwing off her clothes, on a sofa in the adjoining
room, and if the patient but stirred she was with him in an instant.

By her unwearied care his health was in a few weeks re-established. He
appeared still, it is true, as formerly, pensive (...) reserved. His
countenance, however, (...) no longer morose and misanthropic. He was silen^
indeed, as before, but his silence seemed to be constrained.

"Go to Jeanette's chamber," said he one morning to Peter, "and lay this pur^on
her table." Peter did as he was desired. Jeanette found the purse, and easily
guessed from whom it came.

"Go to your master's room," said she to Peter, "and lay this purse upon his
table." Peter obeyed, and the purse was sent three times backwards and
forwards, without any farther explanation taking place upon the subject. The
man in gray was at last obliged to put up his purse again in his pocket. In the
evening, as he stood at the window, with his face to the casement, and his back
to Jeanette, he began, contrary to custom, to whistle a tune. Suddenly he
stopped, and without turning round said, in a low hesitating voice: "you take
no money?"

"No!" replied Jeanette. The man in gray continued to whistle, and beat time
with his fingers upon the glass, but said not a word more.

Next day, however, at dinnertime, when Peter began to cover the table, his
master said, "Lay two covers." Peter started, and remained standing in the
middle of his work, like a clock run out, till his master gravely repeated the
order. He then placed the two covers, without saying a word, and thought with
himself that company must be coming. No guest appeared, however, and dinner was
served up.

"Call Jeanette!" -- Jeanette appeared. -- "Sit down, and dine with me."

Jeanette felt the kindness of this behavior. She sat down, and attempted to
eat; but the tears started in her eye, and she could not swallow a morsel. The
man in gray threw a stolen glance at her. "Why do you weep?" said he. Jeanette
rose, and ran out of the room.

"She is a good girl!" muttered the hermit; a smile played round his lips, but
instead of the former severity it was blended with a look of sorrow.

CHAP XX. THE BOWER.
WHEN God pronounced the sublime command, "Let there be light!" he sent beauty
into the world, and there was light. Where is there a dungeon so dreary --
where a heart so overwhelmed with grief, to which the influence of beauty will
not impart light and consolation?

The hermitage of the man in gray by degrees lost its gloomy aspect. A groupe
of tall firs, on the east side of the house, intercepted the passage of the
cheering rays of the morning sun. This was precisely to his mind, as he fled
from the light of the sun, and buried himself in a chamber looking toward the
north, into which scarce a beam of light po^ed in the longest summer day.
Jeanette ^rove him out of this room on pretense of some re^ Peter, in
consequence of a hint from her at ^t, cut down the old firs, and, when the man
in gray awo^e, the sun peeped through his curtains.

Astonished at this visit, he rung the bell. Peter appeared. His master p^inted
to the sun. Peter smiled archly. -- "The firs are gone," said he cheerfully:
"What is become of them?" -- "I newed them down." -- "Who ordered you to do
that?" -- "The girl." The man in gray bowed to the authority, as a loyal old
Frenchman would have done to a disagreeable order announced de par le Roi.

Two hundred paces from the house lay a little hillock, overgrown with thick
bushes and shrubbery. When spring began to open the leaves on the trees,
Jeanette requested the ever obliging Peter to clear the top of the hillock, and
to leave only as much as was necessary to form a bower. The ivy, the jessamine,
and the honey-suckles were arched over a ^urf bank. A gravel walk was formed up
to the spot; the man in gray was invited to take a walk, and at the top of the
hill surprised with an agreeable prospect.

He said nothing; but, when Jeanette retired a few steps to pull a bunch of
May-flowers, he turned round, and nodded to Peter with an inquisitive air.
Peter nodded and winked. Another time, Jeanette privately bought a nightingale
from a country girl. This was a bird rarely seen in this part of the wood,
where only owls screeched and hawks screamed. She hung the sweet singer, in the
evening, under the window of her master's bedroom. The bird began his melodious
song, now in plaintive, now in joyous notes. The man in gray awoke from his
first slumber, listened, wondered, and rejoiced at this unusual visit; and he
even wished that the nightingale might not be a passing guest, but that it
might build a nest in the garden.

When he opened the window next morning, he perceived from whence the serenade
had proceeded. Peter brought up breakfast, and his master had already lifted up
his hand, as usual, to point to the object the appearance of which had excited
his surprise; but he drew back his hand. The question is unnecessary, thought
he: who else can it be but the girl?

Pensive and absent he sat down to the tea-table, and stirred the tea round and
round with the spoon, to melt the sugar which he had forgot to put in. --
"Jeanette!" said he in a low voice. -- "Jeanette!" repeated he a little louder.
-- "Jeanette!" exclaimed he the third time, with some degree of vehemence.

Jeanette, in the kitchen just by, heard her name called, and immediately
appeared. "Did you call?"

The man in gray was visibly embarrassed, "I^ -- No. Go, my child -- go."
Jeanette withdrew, and felt an emotion of pleasure; for it was the first time
he had called her child. It was anxiety to obtain this endearing appellation
which had animated all her exertions, and every day seemed more and more to
promise her complete success. Since the period when she had so disinterestedly
refused the fee which her medical care had earned, she commonly dined at table
with her master. Without her knowledge, he sent Peter into the next village, to
hire a peasant girl to assist her. He no longer suffered her to do any work
that had the appearance of drudgery. In the evening she participated in his
hours of reading and with the most kind address she contrived to supersede some
of his former favorite authors. Zimmerman's Solitude, ^oung's Night Thoughts,
and books of this description, were exchanged for Montaigne's Essays, and the
Travels of Anacharsis the younger. Sometimes even he condescended to listen to
the humorous adventures of Gil Blas. In a word, after the lapse of a
twelvemonth, he as little resembled the man in gray of the last ye^ as the bare
rose-bush which you bring out of the cellar resembles the rose-bush that in a
few weeks displays its foliage, and spreads its blossoms to the sun.

He was conscious of this change, and his heart opened to tender sensations.
How dear Jeanette had become to him, and what might be the consequence of the
attachment, he had never reflected; and an opportunity alone was wanting to
apprise him of the true nature of his feelings.

Since the bower on the top of the hillock had been reared, he had, in a great
measure, deserted his former favorite spot, the turf bank under the oak-tree.
He often stole, well pleased, through the fields, and hied by the winding path
to the top of the hill, where an unconfined prospect no longer, as formerly,
was disagreeable.

One day, as he was approaching the bower with silent steps, he thought he
heard an unusual noise. He listened, and he imagined he heard some one sob. By
a sudden turn he entered the bower, and discovered Jeanette in tears. She had
been thinking of William, and her tears flowed to absence and to love. She
started up, and endeavored to force a smile. The man in gray, however, looked
her keenly in the face. "Jeanette," said he, "you weep!" She could not answer.
-- "Are you still unhappy?"

"Alas! No! I am as happy as I can ever be upon earth."

"And yet these tears?" -- "They flow to the remembrance of the past."

"Perhaps, too, the hopes of future bliss in store?"

"I hope for nothing but the continuance of your favor toward me." -- A long
pause followed. With faltering voice the man in gray again proceeded: "Are you
married?"

"No." -- "Have you a lover?" -- "I had one!" -- "Is he dead?" -- "Heaven
forbid!" -- "Is he unfaithful?" -- "O! no^ How is it possible that he could be
so?" -- "Yet you have renounced all hope?" -- "Because fate has divided us for
ever!"

"How so?" -- "Because -- forgive me -- I cannot explain myself -- but I must
never see him more! I never will!"

"You never will?"

"While God enables me to retain the sentiments of honor and virtue!"

"Do you mean this seriously?" -- "I should hate myself if I thought
differently; I should despise myself if I could act differently." -- A pause
ensued. The man in gray seized Jeanette's hand with emotion, led her to the
turf bank, and said with tender accents: "My good child, I entreat your
confidence; tell me the cause of your unhapness!"

"Were you to know that, you would expel me from this solitude, the only asylum
which is now left me."

"With you, then, I should banish the happiness of my life." And a violent glow
rushed to his cheeks, as if he had been ashamed of this involuntary confession.
"Speak without apprehension," continued he in a more calm and soothing tone.
"Perhaps I have hitherto appeared to you unfeeling* We Dutchmen are reputed
cold as the fogs in which we live. But my sorrows too were chiefly the sorrows
of the heart! Speak, and fear not that your confidence will be abused, or that
your sufferings will be unpitied."

Jeanette at last yielded, and from a very natural bashfulness related -- not
her own but William's story; how he had been received as the son of a poor
porter into her father's house; how love had arisen out of childish affection;
how when he became a schoolmaster he had solicited her hand, and in grief on
account of the disappointment of his wishes had enlisted; how he had so nobly
sacrificed himself for his friend; how he had bravely fought, and had been
promoted by his merit. ^e pretended that she could not bear the thought of
confining the generous youth's advancement (...) career of f^ an indiscreet
marriage. "We have at last ag^, said she, "to consider one another as brother
and sister, and nothing in the world is capable of diverting me from this
resolution."

The man in gray saw nothing in ^s narrative which could justify the fear which
Jeanette had expressed of being banished from his protection. He guessed that
there must be some mystery unrevealed, and in vain he solicited the timorous
girl to make a full disclosure. In spite of the repugnance which his heart felt
to such a task, he made several attempts to convince her (...) ^e was guided by
a false delicacy; offered to contribute his advice and assistance to effect a
union between her and William, but all in vain! She remained immovable, and
entreated him, as he valued her peace, not to mention William's name in her
presence. He was obliged to give this promise, and he gave it without
reluctance.

They now separated, and went home in silence. Both remained immersed in
thought, and supper was carried from table untouched. The man in gray went to
bed, but he never closed his eyes; he was deaf to the melody of the nightingale
under his window; and, still lost in waking dreams, the morning sun called him
from his pillow.

CHAP XXI. SLIGHTED LOVE.
THE following day ^ssed in tranquillity. Jeanette had recovered her usual
serenity, but something seemed to brood in the soul of the man in gray.

"Let us take a walk, dear Jeanette!" said he in the evening. They went up in
silence to the hill, and sat down, as the preceding day, upon the turf bank
before they exchanged a word. A long pause followed. Jeanette looked round with
embarrassment, and twisted the leaves which hung down from the arching
honeysuckles. The unerring penetration which is inseparable from a female mind
in cases of this nature enabled her to anticipate the scene which was
impending. The man in gray sat with his head reclining upon his breast, and his
heart seemed laboring to be delivered from a heavy burden. "Jeanette!" said he
at last, "do you still continue in the sentiments which you expressed
yesterday?" -- "I shall never entertain any other." -- Then you renounce your
William?"

Jeanette with a sigh: "I have already renounced him forever!"

The man in gray, with saltering voice, and drawing figures in the sand with
his cane, continued: "Will you marry me?"

Jeanette started. A question so abrupt she had not anticipated. She gazed at
the man in gray with a look which testified some feeling of horror, an emotion
quite foreign to the sentiments which he had hitherto inspired.

"Yesterday," proceeded he visibly relieved, "you honored me with your
confidence, and it is just that I should return it. My history you shall hear
in a few words. -- I am a Dutchman, and my name is Van Shipper. My father was a
rich merchant, who loved money beyond every thing in the world. The little
cultivation which my mind has received, I owe to my residence in foreign
countries, and to the perusal of good books.

"When I returned home, I had the misfortune to fall in love with a young lady
of great beauty. I wished to make her my wife, but durst not gratify my desire
for fear of offending my father. The threat of disinheriting me, added fuel to
the flame. I endeavored to persuade her to elope with me, and would have
sacrificed for her every expectation of present fortune. Before, however, my
plan could be accomplished, a German coxcomb brought the pest of sentimental
cant into her family, and she became faithless.

"I now exchanged love to the fair sex for love to my country. I became what
was called a patriot, and was banished. A person of the name of Fag^l, whom I
had once saved from being drowned at Baden, was my most violent persecutor. I
should have forgotten the worthless fellow, but that the name of my dog daily
reminds me of him. A reward was offered for my apprehension. My father was
dead. I ventured to go secretly as far as Amsterdam, and lived some weeks
concealed in the house of my mother. There I made arrangements for remitting my
property out of the country. I had already safely transferred one half of it,
when I learnt that I was betrayed by my own mother. Party spirit and fanaticism
trample upon the feelings of nature. I was on the point of being arrested; I
fled, and trusted the other half of my property with my own brother, by whom I
have been cheated of it. Thus did fate dissolve the bands of love, friendship,
and nature. I remained alone in the world, and in vain opened my arms to catch
to my heart a being of congenial disposition. I then withdrew into this
solitude, accompanied by a single domestic, whose stupidity seemed a pledge for
his honesty.

"What I have been able to save from the wreck of my fortune is far more than I
spend, but still less than my heart requires. Since I have known you, the past
seems a dream, and the future begins to smile upon me. I cannot live without
you. A man like me of eight-and-thirty, rough and forbidding withal, can scarce
venture to pretend to your love. If, however, you are serious in your
resolution to spend your life in this sequestered solitude, why not as my wife?
as my close united friend and companion? -- You have restored confidence in
humanity to my breast, if you consent to confer happiness and tranquillity upon
me, say the transporting yes!

"You are silent? -- You tremble? -- Do I guess your sentiments? -- The heart
can love but once! -- No, dear Jeanette, you are mistaken. Try only to make a
human being happy, and you will soon conceive an attachment to your own work.
-- Come, then! accept the hand of an honest man, and let me bless the hour
which brought you to this wood!"

Jeanette, trembling and blushing, heard only one half of his narration, and of
the apostrophe at the end nothing at all. An hundred times had she secretly
lamented that the day before she had not been more candid; that she had not
discovered all, even at the risk of being turned once more into the wide world.
The man in gray, indeed, was agreeable to her, but the sentiment he inspired
was not akin to the tender passion; his pleasing qualities were not those
which are rewarded with love^ ^d she really felt for him, however, what he felt
for her, and she felt for William, she was incapable of imposing upon him an
innocence which resided only in her pure soul. She opened her mouth to make a
full confession, but her tongue refused its office, and shame closed her lips.

The man in gray looked in her face with penetrating eyes; he read confusion
and anxiety, but no repugnance. This observation gave him courage, and he
became more pressing. At length, with faltering accents, Jeanette entreated
permission to give him her answer in writing. "When?" exclaimed he eagerly. --
"Tomorrow," said the wretched girl, and hastened away. He was about to follow
her -- She turned round "For goodness sake leave me alone!" -- He withdrew. She
plunged into the recesses of the wood, where she wandered till it was dark,
considering with herself in what terms she should couch her confession. The
attachment of the man in gray flattered her; the loss of it was inevitable, and
it was painful. Yet to lose his esteem -- the thought was intolerable! -- "But
it must be so! Better to suffer what I have merited; better to sink to the
situation of a despised woman, than to deceive a worthy man who is my
benefactor."

Having finished her soliloquies with this determination, she returned to the
hermitage. She did not make her appearance in the parlour before Mr. Van
Shipper, whom she heard pacing through the room. She prepared supper as
expeditiously as she could, and retired to her closet.

Peter covered the table, and laid only one cover. His master pointed to it,
and said: "Why?" -- "The girl does not sup." -- "Where is she?" -- "She is in
her room." -- "What is she doing?" -- "I cannot tell." -- "How does she look?"
-- "She has been weeping." -- The man in gray redoubled his strides. Peter
placed the dishes on the table, took his station with his towel under his arm
behind the chair, and coughed several times to make his master perceive that
supper was waiting. When he found that neither coughing nor stamping the ground
produced the effect, he at last took the freedom to say: "Supper is cooling."
This hint, however, he was obliged to repeat three times before Mr. Van Shipper
could be so far roused from his reverie as to say peevishly: "I don't choose
any supper!" Nine years had Peter lived with his master in this solitude, and
never had been treated by him in this manner. It was no wonder, then, that this
first ebullition of passion made a strong impression on the d^ll good hearted
creature. He began to weep. "Good master!" said he sobbing, "how am I to blame
because you cannot eat?"

Mr. Van Shipper immediately recollected himself. "Go!" said he, with softened
voice, as he clapped him on the shoulder, "go, good Peter! Be not offended with
me, I am ill." Peter carried the dishes back to the kitchen, but his appetite
was gone also.

The man in gray continued for two hours to pace backwards and forwards in the
room. He was at last so fatigued that his knees trembled, but he found it
impossible either to sit down or go to bed. He burned with curiosity to know
whether Jeanette was asleep. He slipped softly through the court, from which he
could have a view of her window, which was on the ground floor. There was light
in the room. He approached the window, and found the curtain half open. He saw
Jeanette writing at a table; often she laid down the pen to wipe her eyes. This
picture haunted him in his bed-room, and was not very well calculated to
procure him found repose

The morning sun found Jeanette still at the desk. She had now finished her
story; she revised what she had written, sealed it with trembling hand, and
called Peter. The man in gray shuddered when he heard her voice. He stopped his
breath to listen. Peter now opens the door of Jeanette's room -- he returns,
and every step he advanced, the heart of the anxious expectant beat more
violently. The door opened; he saw a letter in Peter's hand, and the last drops
of blood vanished from his cheeks. Trembling he broke the seal; a mist obscured
his eyes.

Jeanette, when she had removed this burden from her breast, went with
lightened heart to perform her usual occupations in the kitchen. She ordered
the fire to be kindled, assisted the maid to gather vegetables in the garden,
and, as she prepared dinner, listened with beating heart when she heard the
least noise in the adjoining room.

After the lapse of an hour, the door opened. Mr. Van Shipper came into the
kitchen with Jeanette's letter in his hand. The poor girl, covered with
blushes, durst not look up. The greens dropped from her trembling hands, and
the big tears trickled down her cheeks. -- "Jeanette!" said the man in gray --
"thus do I destroy all remembrance of this confession." He threw the letter
into the fire.

Jeanette sobbed. Mr. Van Shipper gave the maid a hint to withdraw. "Look at
me, dear girl," said he, and seized her trembling hand. She looked up with
timid aspect, her eyes bathed in tears. -- "I am now acquainted with every fold
of your heart. -- The expression is improper, your heart has no for* Forget
what you have suffered, forgive the spoiler of your innocence, I have forgiven
him. You have escaped from the share into which your virtue was once betrayed;
you are saved, and your heart is unpolluted. I have known women destitute of
every good quality, women in whose breasts envy and malevolence overflowed, who
would sneer disdainfully at a poor fallen sister, because she no longer
possessed the trivial thing which alone they stamped with the name of virtue.
Comfort yourself then, dear Jeanette; the letter is burnt, and with it all
memory of the past is extinguished. Never shall a word, or even the most remote
allusion, remind you of what you have suffered. Once more I solicit your heart
and hand. -- You are silent. May I send Peter to the next village for the
parson?"

Alas! poor Jeanette was in a cruel situation. On the one side her benefactor,
a gentleman animated by most generous love, who nobly overlooked her fault, and
offered her tranquillity and abundance. -- On the other side, William! -- She
had indeed renounced him, but she was not to blame because a spark of hope
still glimmered in her breast; she was unable to extinguish it. Could she, in
this situation, give her hand to another man? -- Were William then to make his
appearance, still faithful, and overflowing with love, alas! must she not be
unspeakably wretched? Must she not render her generous husband wretched
likewise? -- No! she could not pronounce the word that must eternally separate
her from William. It cost floods of tears, and a long struggle between love and
gratitude; but love prevailed, and she pronounced an irrevocable refusal.

The man in gray was too noble to press her farther, not a reproach escaped his
lips, he was silent, and locked up his grief in his heart. To his former morose
and austere deportment succeeded a profound melancholy. He spoke less than
usual, was absent when he was addressed, wandered the whole day in the wood,
and tossed himself, all night long, sleepless on his pillow. Scarcely did he
take sufficient nourishment to supply the bare means of existence. Jeanette saw
that a secret sorrow consumed him, his cheeks grew paler and paler, his eyes
grew more hollow -- her heart bled.

CHAP. XXII. THE WIDOW.
THE sorrows of the heart have this in common with corporeal sufferings, that
they render us indifferent to life. The man in gray felt himself easiest, in
proportion as he perceived his strength decay, and his state of health promise
him a speedy period to his griefs. There was one thing indeed which still lay
heavy on his heart, and he hastened to settle his last business with the world.

One morning he retired, as usual, into the wood, but did not return at his
accustomed hour to dinner. Jeanette became uneasy; night came, but he did not
appear. She waited all night long, but the man in gray still remained absent.

Peter wept, and Jeanette could not rest a moment for anxiety. She traversed
the wood for a mile round, cried the man in grey's name a thousand times, but
in vain. -- Quite exhausted, she returned home at noon, ard hoped that during
her absence he might have returned; but her hopes were disappointed. She now
felt that the man in gray was dearer to her than she had suspected. She
reproached herself most bitterly for her ingratitude, and Peter's cries drove
her almost to despair. In the afternoon she renewed her ^arch, with cries and
lamentations. She examined every bush, and trembled every moment lest she
should find the lifeless corpse of her benefactor. -- She found it not. --
Almost worn out, she threw herself under a tree, and resigned herself to the
dictates of the most violent grief.

"What is the matter with you, Jeanette?" said the well-known voice beside her.
She hastily looked up, and the man in gray stood before her. "God be praised!"
cried she with folded hands, while a flood of tears accompanied her words. She
raised herself on her knees, and embraced his legs. "God be praised! you are
alive!"

"My good girl, did you doubt that?"

"O! I have been frightened to death!"

"I am sorry for that. I did not know that you took so warm an interest in my
life. I thank you for it. It is a cordial drop in the cup of my sorrows! -- Be
easy, rise, night approaches, let us return home."

Jeanette rose, and tottered to his arm. She was strongly inclined to ask why
he had stolen away so privately? Where and how he had spent the two days he had
been absent? As he himself, however, said nothing on the subject, she did not
venture to put the question.

Peter came to meet his master, with his eyes red and swollen, kissed his hand
with sobs, and in the evening sang, in a very audible voice, in his room,
"Praised be the Lord, etc."

A few days after this occurrence, the man in gray fell sick. He himself
refused to take any notice of it, and insisted that he was very well. But
whence that unusual flush upon your cheeks? Whence this want of sleep and
appetite? Whence these shivering fits which agitate your whole frame? Alas!
poor man in gray, in vain you endeavor to conceal the violent fever which
rages in your veins!

Jeanette, alarmed and distracted, pressed him to accept her assistance, him
who with joy saw himself at the period of his thorny pilgrimage. Every morning
she prepared, with the fondest care and the most tender anxiety, the medicines,
which he took from her hands with complacency and with thanks. He placed them
on the table, however, and allowed them to remain untouched. In vain did the
faithful Peter entreat leave to call a physician from the next town. "You are
strange children," would he reply with a smile -- "I am quite well." Never had
he been more serene or more affable than now; he even sometimes indulged a
joke. This pierced Jeanette to the heart. Bitter reproaches would have affected
her less than the silent anxiety which he discovered to conceal his sorrow.

He continued these exertions till at last nature was too powerful to be
resisted. He was obliged to confine himself to bed. His strength seemed to have
sustained a rapid decay; his health in a few hours was so much altered for the
worse, that Jeanette began to be seriously apprehensive for his life. She stood
by his bedside, and seized his burning hand; big tears trickled down her
cheeks; she anxiously counted his feverish pulse; her heaving bosom sympathized
with the short, quick breathing of the patient; in his eyes the fever glowed,
in hers the tears sparkled.

Her grateful heart was cruelly torn. Without knowing well what she did, she
suddenly pressed her lips to his burning hand. He made an attempt to prevent
her. "What do you mean?" said he in a low voice. "Do not embitter my last
moments."

"My benefactor!" cried Jeanette with extreme emotion. "No! you shall not die!
I should be the most ungrateful wretch in nature if I could endure this sight."
-- She kneeled by his bedside. -- "My benefactor!" said she with the utmost
eagerness, "if the thought of seeing yourself united to a faithful, dutiful
wife can now cheer you, live still -- I am yours."

These words made a strong impression on the sick man. For a long time he
remained silent. At last, he tenderly pressed her hand, and, notwithstanding
his bod^ weakness, said with great animation: "My good girl! I can perceive
what passes in your breast. A generous feeling has extorted from you an offer
which your heart disclaims. The sight of my sufferings you consider as a
reproach; you would sacrifice your own repose to shield yourself from it. Of
such a state of your feelings I ought not to avail myself, nor would I accept
the offer you make, did not my own sensations now tell me -- that you hazard
nothing. On the contrary, I flatter myself with the hope of establishing the
happiness of your life on a more solid foundation, and turning the compassion
you have shown to your own advantage. Yes, I will die as your husband. -- Rise,
dear Jeanette, and, if you are serious, hasten to call the parson of the
village. If he cannot unite our hearts, he can at least join our hands. You
shall beat my name till you change it with the consent of your heart. And even
then -- surely, dear Jeanette -- you will not forget the unfortunate man who
acted so honorably toward you!"

Jeanette could not speak. She retired in tears, and ordered Peter to go to the
village for the parson. About noon he arrived. Jeanette was more dead than
alive. The man in gray seemed for a moment to gain new strength. He raised
himself in bed, propped up by pillows. The bride's hand trembled! his was firm
and steady. The yes which she pronounced was scarcely audible; his was manly
and unembarrassed. The priest spoke the blessing, the bride rushed out of the
room, and lay for several hours insensible on the floor of her chamber.

Meanwhile the sick man had a long private conversation with the parson. When
Jeanette had recovered a little, and dried up her tears, she returned as
collected as possible to the patient's room, and found him weaker than in the
morning. With unwearied care she exerted all her medical skill, and exhausted
all her recipes. "You have now," said she, "conferred upon me an endearing
interest in your life. Will you then reject the assistance of that hand which
is your own, and which so anxiously would contribute to your relief?"

"Heaven forbid!" said the sick man with a smile: "on the marriage-day we must
refuse the bride nothing. Give me, my dear wife, give me whatever you think
proper; I am ready to swallow every thing."

He kept his word, and took one spoonful after another; though it was easy to
perceive that he did it merely from complaisance, and expected no farther
relief. Toward night he became visibly weaker. Jeanette and the parson sat by
his bedside. The latter spoke to him consolation drawn from religious views;
Jeanette could only weep. Her tears the sick man repaid with a grateful squeeze
by the hand. To the parson he replied, "I have ever endeavored to act as
became an honest man, and God will deal graciously with me!"

At midnight his breath became shorter. Sometimes it stopped altogether. In
dumb anguish his wife hung over his pale countenance. A cold sweat covered his
brow -- her trembling hand was going to wipe it off. Suddenly he seized it with
a kind of convulsion, and laid it upon his eyes -- his throat rattled -- he
uttered a groan -- and expired.

Doux noeuds de la reconnoissance!
C'est par vous que des l'enfance
Le coeur a jamais sut lie;
La voix du ^ang, de la nature,
N'est rien qu'un languissant murmr,
Pres de la voix de l'amitie. Sweet bond of gratitude, it is thou that bindest
the infant heart to what it loves. The voice of blood and of nature is feeble
in comparison of the powerful dictates of friendship.

Jeanette's grief was without bounds. Had William died in her arms she could
not have felt a more sincere sorrow. She lay in a paroxysm of grief over the
dead body. The house rang with Peter's lamentations.

In vain the clergyman preached comfort. She heard not what he said, till he
announced to her the last wish of the deceased, that she should immediately
leave this solitude, and reside in the parson's house until the first
transports of her grief were over, and her affairs were arranged. She was
removed from the body almost by force; in a state of speechless stupefaction
she placed herself in the carriage, and allowed them to carry her wherever they
thought proper.

The parson committed her to the care of his wife, an honest good-hearted
woman, and returned next day, in order to superintend the burial. Two or three
weeks elapsed before Jeanette recovered spirits enough to pay any attention to
what was passing around her; and during this period she had never once thought
of William. She now learnt how Mr. Van Shipper had spent the two days of
absence in which she had suffered so much anxiety on his account. He had been
at the neighboring town with a notary, where he formally made his last will.
Jeanette was nominated heiress of his whole property, consisting of thirty
thousand ducats, under the single condition of providing for honest Peter till
his death, in such a manner as to enable him to spend his life agreeably in any
way he thought best.

When this was announced to her, Jeanette wept bitterly. Such a disinterested
proof of hopeless love, at a time when she did not yet bear the name of his
wife, tore her heart afresh. "Where is Peter?" said she with emotion. Peter
immediately appeared, for he had been in the house ever since his master's
burial; and had been kept out of the way, that Jeanette's wounds might not, by
seeing him, be opened anew.

Bathed in tears, Jeanette presented him her hand, which Peter kissed with
sobs. "We shall never part, good Peter," said she with faltering voice; "I will
provide for you as if you were my brother."

"Alas!" said the honest fellow, you are generous -- I know it -- but my good
master -- I shall never forget him!"

A few months Jeanette continued in the house of the worthy parson; and
willingly would she there have fixed her abode, but she saw that his house was
too small to accommodate her longer. She, therefore, was obliged to think of
another asylum.

The war, which raged in the adjoining districts, made residence in the country
very insecure and unpleasant, especially for a woman. She resolved, therefore,
after she had rewarded the parson's kindness as far as it could be rewarded by
a present, to retire into a garrison town with her property. She there bought a
house, and lived reti^ ^though on a very respectable footing, under the name of
Mrs. Van Shipper.

CHAP. XXIII. THE SIEGE.
FOR more than a year she had heard no intelligence of William. The man in gray
indeed received the Hamburgh newspapers, and Jeanette never failed, on the
accounts of any battle, to read with great anxiety the lists of the killed and
wounded. Fortunately she never found William's name among the number; her
prayers seemed to have made him invulnerable. But among those, too, who had
distinguished themselves in a particular manne^, she likewise sought in vain
for this beloved name* and often secretly cursed his unlucky stars, which
denied him an opportunity of acquiring fresh laurels.

Now, when a young, rich, and independent widow, it occurred to her an hundred
times a day: "Where is William? Does he still love me?" To the last question
her heart ever replied, Yes; but the first nobody could so readily answer, for
the flames of war still raged around, and the country where she resided, to
William was a hostile land.

Could she but find some person to send in search of him -- not to renew their
old long-forgotten correspondence -- no, God forbid! her heart never confessed
such a design! -- but only to inquire whether he was alive? A sister surely may
enquire, without impropriety, after the life of a brother. -- Who can tell too
in what circumstances he may be placed? Whether he is not laboring under the
weight of poverty? -- Besides, she is still deep in his debt. Once did he pinch
himself in the necessaries of life, to save for her the half of his pay. It was
indeed but a few crowns. The heart, however, does not calculate by crowns, and,
in short, it was the half! Ought she not now to share her property with him? --
O! yes, yes! Could she but find him! Had she but some discreet, prudent,
faithful person to send in search of him! Why, such a one is Peter. He is
faithful and discreet; but is he prudent too? Could it be said of him that he
was wise as the serpent and harmless as the dove? Yet what extraordinary wisdom
was necessary to inquire for such a person, whose name was such a thing; to
travel as a pedlar through the country where the hostile armies lay; to inquire
from regiment to regiment, for a certain officer, till he was found; and then
to tell him these words: -- "Your sister Jeanette sends you her compliments;
she lives in R***." This is the whole mystery, and surely Peter is sufficiently
qualified for the task. To be sure, he may very probably give himself a great
deal of useless trouble; he will often expose the name of Mrs. Van Shipper to
the jests of the young ensigns and lieutenants; bu^ where is the harm of that?
Who knows Mrs. Van Shipper? Who knows her connections with William? -- It is
worth a trial!

Peter received two hundred ducats for the expenses of his journey, was obliged
to get his lesson by heart, and was dispatched with the injunction, "that he
must find out the gentleman, though he should be obliged to follow him to the
extremities of the Russian empire!"

He had now been away two months. Jeanette counted every minute, in anxious
expectation of his return. During his absence she secluded herself from the
world, and lived alone in the joyful hope of finding William alive and
faithful. -- Alive, that was very right -- but why faithful? -- Had she not
renounced him? What if, during their separation, he had found a young,
beautiful, and rich lady, with whom he had indissolubly united his fate? Ought
not Jeanette to rejoice that he had thus fortified the weakness of her heart,
that he had secured her more firmly against the danger of a relapse? -- She
formerly had considered herself unworthy of him -- had her situation since been
changed? Wealth could not restore her lost reputation.

No, no! By fidelity she understood only the faithful affection of a brother;
to this she was still permitted to lay claim!

Enough! We shall not call her to a too rigorous account for the feelings by
which she is actuated, but boldly declare that none of my fair readers will be
the first to censure her conduct.

Two months had she waited in vain. The theater of war approached nearer and
nearer, and she was soon obliged to renounce the hope of her messenger's
return, as the fortress of R*** was suddenly invested, and immediately besieged
in form. No human being was permitted either to enter or quit the place. Spies,
indeed, might always contrive to make their way, but honest Peter was not
formed for a spy.

The inhabitants of R*** had little desire to see their houses reduced to ashes
by the enemy's bombs; they presented petition after petition to the commandant,
entreating him to surrender the fortress. The gallant officer, however, knew
his duty: and as he was wearied at last with their importunities, he swore to
tuck up the first man who spoke of surrender, upon a tree, on the ram^arts.
This threat produced its effect; the citizens were obliged to be silent, and
endured want and terror with secret murmurs.

The works of the besiegers were daily brought nearer and nearer to the walls.
What the besieged with great difficulty destroyed in a week, was often
repaired, with incredible activity in the space of a night. The people began,
at last, to be as much habituated to the thunder of cannon as to the ringing of
bells upon a Sunday. The enemy, however, had yet done little injury to the
fortifications, nor was there any immediate danger of scarcity. The place was
repeatedly summoned. An officer, who one day came for this purpose, with a flag
of truce, to the gates, was taken to the commandant with his eyes hood-winked.

Jeanette lived in the street through which he was to pass; she heard a noise,
and went to the window. -- Ha! among ten thousand she would have known him to
be William! -- A white handkerchief indeed covered his eyes, and part of his
nose; but his mouth, his hair, his gait, his size! -- She would have known him
among ten thousand! -- She screamed aloud, and stretched her arms out at the
window. Fortunately the noise of the crowd drowned her shrieks; and as every
eye was fixed on the stranger, her extraordinary agitation remained unobserved.

With anxious beating heart she waited his return, to be thoroughly convinced
of the truth of her observation. Half an hour elapsed. Jeanette walked through
the room with hasty steps, and a magic force irresistibly attracted her to the
window. At last he came. -- O! yes, it was he! At an immense distance she
recognized him! -- The unfeeling wretches led him past. -- He is so near --
every muscle bounds toward him. -- Alas! she dares not call him -- she cannot
detain him -- he disappears from her sight, and she sinks insensible upon the
sofa.

When she recovered her senses, she recollected to have observed a cross
hanging at his button-hole. "Noble William!" exclaimed she, "gallantly have
thou behaved, though the lying gazettes have passed over your deeds in
silence!" -- This cross flattered Jeanette's vanity not a little. A woman who
dotes, thinks herself honored in the man she loves. Her eagerness to clasp her
brave brother in her arms is redoubled. Her thoughts every moment wandered to
the enemy's camp to William: and we must confess, that since his appearance she
had been a disloyal citizen; for, had it been in her power, the garrison would,
right or wrong, have been surrendered.

She could not conceal her joy whenever she heard that a new battery began to
play, that the place was more closely invested on all sides, and that all
succors were cut off. When the commandant found it necessary, to prevent a
scarcity, to diminish the allowance of bread, and a general murmur arose among
the inhabitants, Jeanette alone remained tranquil and unconcerned, as she
considered it as a proof that the place would speedily be given up; in
expectation of which she would willingly have lived upon an ounce a day. Such
is the character of the best of men! The passion of love for our country
excepted, every other passion renders us selfish, and extinguishes our feeling
for the good of the whole.

Yet the fulfillment of her hopes was not so near as she had expected. In
proportion as the scarcity increased, the obstinate courage of the commandant
was confirmed; and to the last summons, in which he was threatened with a
storm, he gave the indignant answer, that he would bury himself under the ruins
of the fortress. The enemy began seriously to make preparations for a storm,
and the besieged remained day and night upon the walls, ready to oppose the
most vigorous resistance.

One rainy September night, the thunder of cannon awaked the citizens from
their first sleep. The enemy unexpectedly carried their threats into execution,
and with wild shouts attacked the fortifications. The din in the streets, the
wailing of women, and the cries of children, the thunder of cannon, the distant
shouts of the combatants, the bombs in the air, which gleamed a feeble light
upon the horrid scene below -- every thing was combined that could shake the
firmest courage. But Jeanette scarcely retained any sense of her own danger,
she saw nothing but William, besmeared with blood; she lay on her knees, and
prayed for William.

Several hours victory remained doubtful, till day broke, and with it the cry
rose from every quarter, that the enemy were in town! -- All that were able to
fly took to flight. People concealed themselves in churches and cloisters, in
cellars and garrets. Like a rushing torrent the enemy's legions poured along
the streets, the doors were every where broken open, every merchant's shop and
every considerable house plundered. Children were torn from their mother's
breasts, and stuck upon pikes; chaste matrons and innocent virgins were
violated in presence of their husbands and fathers. In vain the officers
endeavored to stem the fury of their troops; the bands of subordination were
dissolved, and the voice of command was lost in the dreadful confusion.

A troop of these wild rioters broke likewise into Jeanette's house. She lay on
her knees in prayer. The avaricious robbers fell first upon the silver plate,
and broke and plundered every thing of value. At the sight of the lovely
supplicant, however, a new passion arose in their savage breasts. They flew
upon their prey with brutal violence. The poor victim maintained an unequal
struggle with her executioners -- and alas! she had been undone if her screams
had not brought a humane deliverer to her assistance. A young officer entered,
seized the brutal miscreant by the hair, and with his drawn sword threatened to
pierce his heart. The firm tone with which he spoke, and the sight of the sword
at his breast, compelled the ruffian to abandon his prey; one after another
stole away with the booty, and left Jeanette alone with her deliverer.

She awoke from the swoon into which she had sunk. With timid looks she eyed
her deliverer, and hoped in him to recognize her William. It was not he. A
young man of a noble appearance stood before her, and congratulated himself on
being the instrument of her deliverance.

Her senses were still confused. She could only utter broken sentences. With
tears of gratitude in her eye, she pulled a valuable ring from her finger,
which she presented to the generous stranger. He declined it with politeness:
"Would you," said he, "deprive the action I have performed of the little merit
which it must likewise divide with accident?" He remained to protect her till
the first alarm was over, and tranquillity was restored in the town. He then
left her, with the promise as soon as possible to renew his visit; and Jeanette
recollected too late that she ought at least to have asked him for his (...)
William's name, on the co^ was an hu^ (...) ^s on her tongue, and o^ (...)
bashful feeling ^acy prevented her from (...) inquiry for him.

CHAP. XXIV. CONSTANCY REWARDED.
WHEN Jeanette had a little recovered from her terror and alarm, she spent the
remainder of the day at the window, and reviewed the enemy's officers, who now
passed in crowds. She trembled whenever she saw a figure which in size and air
bore any resemblance to her beloved brother. Often she thought she descried him
at a distance. "That is he! that is he!" whispered her heart. He came nearer,
but it was not William.

"O! why must I be indebted to a stranger for my deliverance? Why did not
fortune and love bring him to his sister's house? -- Or -- Almighty God! Should
he be dead! -- His courage must certainly have hurried him too far! -- Sure he
was the first to lead the assailants! -- Alas! he knew not that here his
Jeanette by upon her knees imploring guardian angels for her safety!"

Her soul thus (...) between hope and fear. Longer than till the promised visit
of the young officer she was determined not to endure this dreadful suspense;
and she resolved immediately to ask intelligence of William.

"O! that the stranger would come! Why does he tarry so long? Why did I indulge
this unseasonable delicacy? Perhaps, now, I might have lain in William's arms!"

Patience, dear Jeanette! Look down the street; there comes your deliverer. You
may recognize him by his elegant form, and his fine blue eye. Now he salutes
you kindly -- now he knocks at the door -- the maid opens -- hear thou not
his foot upon the stair? Why do you tremble? Have you not already prepared
yourself to put the question?

The officer entered. Jeanette welcomed him with politeness, but he allowed her
no time to finish her compliment. "Madam," said he, "you were so good this
morning as to offer me a testimony of your gratitude. However little claim my
small service may have upon you, I feel myself at present compelled to employ
your kindness."

Jeanette misunderstood him, and seized the ring which she had upon her finger.
The officer instantly waved with his hand, as much as to say that she was
mistaken.

"No! it is not that which I come to ask. I take the liberty to request another
favor, which perhaps may occasion you inconvenience. I have a friend who is
dearer to me than life. He has been dangerously wounded in storming the town.
In the first moments of confusion he was carried to a house, where he is
destitute of every accommodation; and the number of the wounded renders it
impossible to tend him with sufficient care. If your house were large enough to
receive him, you would not only recompense the service I was fortunate enough
to render you, but make me eternally your debtor; since every thing you can do
for my friend, I shall consider more than all the treasures you could heap on
me!"

At these words the tear started in his eye. Jeanette was affected. She hastily
replied: "And if I had but this single apartment, I would sleep on the floor
till your friend is out of danger. Here he shall want for nothing. May I ask
your friend's name?"

"Captain Von Eichenwald."

"And yours?"

"Lieutenant Perlstadt."

"Lose not a moment then, Sir, to make arrangements for bringing your friend
here. This house and all I possess belong to you."

The officer kissed her hand with gratitude, and ^low down stairs.

Again she felt herself ashamed to inquire for William. But was this the moment
for such an inquiry? The friend of a man to whom she was indebted for the
preservation of her honor lay helpless in the hospital, and his life, perhaps
depended upon a single minute. What c^ generous young man, who spoke of his
friend with tears in his eyes, have thought of her unseasonable curiosity? No;
she could not blame herself for having this time postponed the feelings of love
to the sacred duties of gratitude. She immediately gave orders to prepare the
best apartment in her house for the reception of the expected guest, and in
half an hour four grenadiers brought the wounded officer down the street upon a
litter.

Jeanette threw a compassionate glance at the death-pale countenance of the
young officer, who lay motionless with his eyes closed, and seemed insensible
of what was passing. His friend accompanied the litter, and watched every step
of the bearers with anxiety, and warned them of every stone that lay in the way.

"But, gracious God! what a resemblance -- this Captain Eichenwald and
Willliam! -- It is he himself! -- Impossible! -- It is he! -- No! no! -- My
God! what a cruel deception!"

He was now brought into the house, where, that he might be least disturbed, he
was laid in a room upon the ground floor. Jeanette was going down stairs, but
she was not able to reach the door; her knees trembled; she was obliged to sit
down. She was quite alone. In vain she called the maid, and a boy she had hired
in Peter's room. Both of them had been attracted by curiosity to the ^bby to
see the wounded officer brought in.

Alas! what cruel anxiety she suffered! With what painful, impotent struggles
she exerted all the power of her mind to animate and put in motion her agitated
frame! -- "What if it were William, and I cannot quit this spot -- am confined
here -- and perhaps he requires my aid -- or perhaps the dreadful moment is at
hand when he will no longer stand in need of human assistance! -- O God! he
dies, and I shall never see him more!" -- She made a second effort to go out,
but terror had completely deprived her of the use of her limbs.

Peace, peace, poor Jeanette? Why art thou so ingenious to torture thyself?
What is Captain Eichenwald to thee? -- Can a slight resemblance to William so
violently discompose your spirits, and enervate your body? -- Perhaps, too,
your imagination deceived you. The person who thinks he sees spirits glide in
every corner, and stalk abroad at night, will, in the end, really come to see
specter.

Thus did reason whisper consolation to her when anxiety allowed her to exert
her understanding. But reason communicated as little firmness to Jeanette's
mind as an evening zephyr could restore serenity to the stormy sea. Anxiety and
terror were visibly painted in every feature of her countenance when Lieutenant
Perlstadt entered the room to return her his thanks. At the first glance he
perceived that she labored under some extraordinary emotion. "Heavens, madam!
what is the matter? You appear agitated?"

"And I am so indeed! -- Tell me, Sir -- repeat to me once more your friend's
name?"

"Captain Eichenwald."

"Are you sure?"

"Quite sure; but how" --

"Now I am easy. -- Forgive me, Sir -- a strange caprice of nature -- an
accidental resemblance -- I had a brother in your service -- his name was
Meadows."

"Is it possible! Madam -- this Captain Eichenwald -- and that Meadows -- but
he had no sister" --

JEANETTE (with extreme emotion) -- "Proceed, Sir, for heaven's sake proceed!
What do you tell me?"

" Are the same person!"

He uttered these words so abruptly and inconsiderately, that he had not time
to catch Jeanette in his arms as she dropped senseless to the ground.
Assistance was called, and she was laid on a bed. Perlstadt, the confidante of
William's heart, suddenly guessed who Jeanette must be, and bitterly reproached
himself for his want of consideration. He sat down beside her, held her hand in
his, besprinkled her with hartshorn, rubbed her temples, and listened with
trembling anxiety till she again began to breathe.

At length Jeanette opened her eyes. "Does he yet live?" were her first words.

"Compose yourself, madam," said Frederick with friendly anxiety; "if my
conjectures do not deceive me -- if it be really Jeanette Jerome whom I see" --

"I am she," interrupted Jeanette.

"Why then! every thing will go well. That name will save the life of my
friend."

"Allow me to go to him."

"What is it you ask? The sudden joy would kill him. He must previously be
prepared."

"Are his wounds dangerous?"

"The first dressing has not yet been taken away, but the surgeon gives us
great hopes."

"Does he yet love me?"

"Can you ask such a question?"

"But how comes this strange name?"

"Captain Meadows one day stormed an abbatis, and took possession of an oak
wood, Eichenwald.
from which with matchless courage, he drove an enemy three times superior in
number. The consequence of this achievement procured us a victory. To reward
his gallantry, the king conferred upon him, what nature had long before
bestowed, nobility, and called him in memory of the exploit Von Eichenwald."

Jeanette would have listened for hours together to the speaker, for William
was the subject; but it occurred to her how indispensible Frederick was at his
friend's bedside. Abruptly she drove him out o^ room to inquire whether her
beloved wanted any thing; whether he yet exhibited symptoms of convalescence;
whether the removal had not affected him; whether he found himself commodious
in his new apartment. Scarce was he gone when she called him back; for there
still was something which she had forgot.

Frederick brought her the welcome intelligence that William had slept well,
and now she could not resist the desire she felt at least to see him as he
slept. She pulled off her shoes, and stole softly to his chamber door; she
listened through the keyhole; joy, grief, hope, melancholy -- all these
feelings combined, drew tears from her eyes. Frederick was obliged to bring her
away with a friendly violence, that her sobs might not disturb the patient.

Several weeks elapsed before Frederick durst venture to communicate to his
friend the joyful intelligence. He did it with the greatest care and prudence,
and suffered him only by degrees to infer at last that he was under the same
roof with his beloved. Yet, perhaps, the joy wou^^ have been too much for the
invalid, if it had not been damped by the name of Van Shipper.

"Mrs. Van Shipper! And was it possible she could give her hand to another
man?" -- This moderated his raptures, and even made him melancholy.

Frederick guessed what passed in his soul, and banished his gloomy, jealous
apprehensions by a narrative of Jeanette's fortune. William heard every word
with the most anxious curiosity. O! his fond heart received with welcome the
flattering consolation from the lips of his friend! His beloved stood
justified. Scarcely could he wait the moment when he should be permitted to
press her to his breast. He cursed the surgeon, who prohibited him in the
strictest manner ^pose himself to any violent mental agitation.

The wished-for hour at length arrived -- the door flew open -- Jeanette lay in
his arms. -- Their feelings were too powerful for utterance; feelings, which no
tongue can speak, no pencil describe. In delightful raptures William sat on the
sofa. In his right hand he held his faithful mistress; in his left, the friend
to whom he owed the preservation of her honor. "I am the most fortunate man on
earth!" He could say ^o more.

A few weeks after he heard with indifference that the king had appointed him a
major. How could he now rejoice at such in event? Tomorrow was his
wedding day! And on this joyful, important day did Peter return to his mistress
with disconsolate looks, to inform her, that notwithstanding all his inquiries
Lieutenant Meadows was not to be found.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE CONSTANT LOVER; OR, William AND Ieanette. A TALE. VOL. II.
CHAP I. THE PRISONERS.
IS the love of war a natural propensity, like the love of dancing? Does the
Supreme Being supply mankind with life and strength merely for his amusement,
as the English feed their gamecocks? -- Or is war the child of hunger, like the
ravage of the hawk? Or does it arise from the craving appetite of the rulers of
^tions?

A great philosopher, and therefore no friend of mine (since creatures who are
guided only by categorical imperatives assimilate as ill with friendship as the
cedars of Lebanon with a bean-stalk) maintains that this insignificant planet,
the existence of which our neighbor Jupiter never once suspects, was formed to
be the scene of war of all against all. Good men are averse to acknowledge such
cruel theories. Good men are more inclined to adopt the observation, that from
the elephant down to the polypus, the instinct of love awakes in the spring in
every living creature, breathes lif^ ^d sensibility into millions of beings,
and when ^ter approaches again expires. If however, the propensity to kill
reverses this order; if it awakes in the spring only to destroy, the business
of the soldier is at variance with the course of nature. Love alone should take
the field, and the May-dew should mingle with the tears of fondness to render
every grain of powder useless which is destined to destroy the existence of any
being capable of the tender passion.

Such were the reflections which William indulged when, after the lapse of a
happy winter, he received the unwelcome order to hold himself in readiness to
march, to envelope the first genial rays of the sun in clouds of smoke, and to
tread the rising seed deep in the bosom of the earth. For five months he had
now experienced, that wh^ most ardent imagination conceives of the joy^
first-love falls infinitely short of the inexhaustible felicity of domestic
content; that if the imagination of the enamoured youth lends him the fiery
chariot of the prophet to soar into visionary heavens, sober reality brings him
down to earth and to humanity, but lays him on a bed of roses. His intoxication
was now gone; he enjoyed the flame, however, which formerly had been exposed to
every puff of wind, and threatened at last to consume the rich fuel by which it
was fed. Now, indeed, it resembled the lamp which has been discovered at
Portici^; enclosed in the pure crystal lamp of marriage, it burnt with a mild
and eternal light.

Large cities, in one respect, resemble a retired cottage; you may live in them
just as you please; nobody troubles himself how the happy recluse spends his
time. If you allow the great to enjoy their feasts, their routs, and their
card-parties undisturbed, they will permit you, with a contemptuous smile at
your singularity, to remain happy at home. William had fully availed himself of
this permission. A fond accomplished wife, a proved friend, a simple yet
plentiful table, a glass of good wine, and a superfluous guinea for a brother
in distress -- such were his pleasures; and he who requires more for the
happiness of life, is indeed to be pitied, were he even possessed of the wealth
for which he sighs.

Wishes rarely abandon even the happiest breast. But William belonged to that
class of the peculiar favorites of destiny, who feel no other wish but "that
every thing may continue as it now is;" who wish to lose nothing of what they
enjoy, and covet nothing more. The king had presented him with a small estate
in the country. "God send the king peace!" would he often exclaim, "that I may
retire from the army to enjoy what his bounty has bestowed, and what love will
adorn." The country round it is delightful, and the neighborhood inhabited by
old proud nobility, who would not condescend to visit new-raised merit. What
transporting prospects! Love, friendship, a country life, and no company.

The roses on Jeanette's cheeks were now indeed a little faded, and the usual
luster of her eye was obscured; but the happy husband rejoiced at the symptoms,
and anxiously longed for the pledge of faithful love. Ambition was asleep in
his breast. Willingly would he have taken the laurel from his brow to deck the
cradle of his son.

Never, therefore, was an order to march more unwelcome than that which William
had received. Several days he concealed the disagreeable intelligence from his
wife, now become doubly dear to him. The penetrating eye of love, however, soon
discovered his anxiety; Jeanette had long trembled at the thought of a new
separation; she endeavored to arm herself with firmness, and speak to William
that comfort which she herself so much required. She concealed her tears, and
wept only in the silence of the night when William seemed to be asleep at her
side. If her sobs waked him from his slumbers, she imputed her agitation to an
unpleasant dream.

His tenderness would almost have induced him, at the opening of the campaign
to quit the service; but Jeanette opposed this sacrifice. "It shall not be
scornfully said of you that you lost your warlike ardor in my arms; never shall
it be said that you was ungrateful to your sovereign. Go to the field -- be
courageous, but not foolhardy; remember your duty, but remember too the
helpless innocent whom yet you have not seen. When you return, he will bound to
you with cries of fondness from my breast. When you have fulfilled the demands
of duty, ungird your sword, and let our boy play with your arms while you
repose upon my bosom."

Thus did she conceal her anxiety and her grief under a feigned heroism, while
the moment of separation was still at some distance. When, however, the Sunday
of the last week arrived, and William's regiment for the last time marched in
procession to church, her courage disappeared, and she trembled like a
condemned criminal as she tied William's belt over his shoulder. He went to
church -- and anxiety and dovotion prompted her likewise to go thither. During
the sermon she had frequently, unobserved, wiped away the falling tear; but
when the chaplain of the regiment began to offer up a solemn prayer for the
success of their arms, when he blessed the assembled warriors, and the tear
dropped upon the whiskers of the old grenadiers, she hid her face in her muff,
and prayed in speechless grief.

With what warmth did her heart repeat the words of the preaches: "Permit me, O
God! to see all those who are now before thee, once more assembled in this
place; let not one of them be missing; and in thy temple let us hear the
triumphant voice of gratitude, not the complaint of the widow, and the wailing
of the orphan!"

She returned home quite exhausted. Her courage had fled. In two days the
regiment was to march. Every hour she heard the dreadful note of preparation
under her window. Baggage and stores were continually passing through the
streets, and the dull sound of the cannon rattled along. Every thing was alive;
every thing was in motion, while she lay weeping before a trunk packing up her
husband's linen. She had prepared bandages and lint in case he should be
wounded, and twenty times informed his servant where he would find every thing
the moment it was wanted.

After this melancholy task was performed, she wandered disconsolate from room
to room, and fixed her sorrowful eyes on the empty spot where William's camp
bed had stood, now on the bare wall where William's pistols were used to hang.
When the morning of separation arrived, and William had stolen early from her
side to drown in bustle and activity the agony of separation, she threw herself
into a carriage, and drove on for half a mile to a cottage, where she was to
bid her husband farewell.

A thick cloud of dust announced the approach of the troops. One regiment after
another marched past. Women and children pressed with cries of sorrow between
the ranks; here a weeping grenadier led a little girl by the hand, while the
pregnant mother walked sobbing beside them; here a lusty boy carried his
father's musket; here a rough, blunt soldier shook his aged mother's hand;
there another embraced his wife, who clung in tears round his neck. Young
fellows, who had no attachments, laughed and made merry, waving their hats
adorned with green leaves. Here and there pedlars and hucksters offered their
wares to sell. Many drank to drown care, and tears trickled into the glass.

Jeanette saw nothing that passed. Her heart beat, her breath was irregular,
her eyes were inflamed. She gazed with fixed attention toward the gate from
which the troops still continued to pour. The well-known uniform of William's
regiment now glanced in her view. William rode carelessly on at the head of his
battalion. The once fiery steed paced along with sober steps. The reins had
unperceived dropped upon the horse's neck. When William reached the cottage, he
leaped from his horse, and Jeanette from the carriage. He flew to her pale as
death, and she sunk down in his arms. He kneeled by her side, pressed his cold
lips to hers, which glowed with feverish heat, left the marks of his tears on
her cheek, sprung hastily up, and mounted his steed. Jeanette lay insensible.
When she recovered, the distant drum sounded in her ear. She rose, looked down
the valley, and saw the last clouds of dust driving in the wind.

She quitted her attendants, retired into a neighboring thicket, fell upon her
knees, and prayed. Spare, ye sceptres! spare the sorrowful heart this comfort
in affliction! which, if it does not heal the wound, protects it against the
violence of external assaults. Happy the mortal who is confident in prayer!
Tranquillity and hope are the rewards of his pious conviction. Early in the
morning when she awoke, late in the evening when she retired to rest, Jeanette
revived herself with this cordial balsam. It strengthened her in the heavy hour
of her delivery, and banished every melancholy presage concerning her husband's
fate.

Alas! his regiment was but too soon engaged in a severe action between the
advanced posts. William fought by the side of his friend, and was surrounded.
He saw his gallant comrades fall around him, and, overpowered by numbers, was
at last obliged to yield. He and Frederick were taken prisoners. After being
plundered by the enemy's hussars, they were conducted to the camp. There,
indeed, they were treated with respect, but closely watched; and in a few days
they were sent off, with a number of other prisoners, into the interio^ of
France.

CHAP. II. THE BRUNETTE.
WANT and sorrow accompanied William in his captivity. One consolation only was
left him. He was not separated from his friend, whose ear and heart were ever
open to his sighs, and who listened to the eternal monotony of his complaints
with unwearied attention. Often had Frederick formerly laughed at him, as an
enamoured enthusiast, and teased him with his raillery, telling him that
marriage was fain to keep itself warm by the embe^ which the flame of love left
behind, and that eve^ th^^e it would often extinguish when they began to glow.
Now, however, he acknowledged that Love did not always extinguish his torch
when Hymen lighted his, since never had William doted on his wife with such
fond affection. The flame of first desire, which the soft gales* of undisturbed
possession blow invisibly from heart to heart, was now awakened by the regret
of separation. He thought only of Jeanette. He spoke only of her; no privations
affected him, no object could engage his curiosity. Plundered and stripped of the
most urgent necessaries, he leapt for joy when in a corner of his pocket he
found a small ink-horn and a silver pen, which had escaped the avarice of the
hussars. He now daily wrote a letter, at every place where the escort stopped,
when he could find even a stone by the road-side to serve as a table. When
others ate or slept, his heart was awake. Grief, the pain of separation, the
fondest consolation, the most glowing hopes of meeting, he painted in his
letters with ihe most ardent enthusiasm; and with what grateful rapture did he
press to his breast the good-natured corporal, who promised to forward his
first letter!

After a long and fatiguing journey, they at last arrived at the place of their
destination, a little town in Guienne. Here they received permission to go
about at large on their parole of honor. They ^urst not avail themselves much
of this indulgence, as the deluded people hated every foreigner, as the slave
of despotism, and thought themselves justified, with savage ferocity to seize
the slightest pretext to insult or even to murder men whom they considered as
tools hired for their subjugation.

During the day, therefore, William and Frederick seldom left their sorry
habitation. Commonly they stole out in the twilight, strolled through the
blooming fields, stretched themselves on (...) ^anks of the Garonne, or at
night sought the (...) hut of some peasant, who entertained them ^h milk,
honey, and fruit.

One evening they accidentally met with a German book; and as they had so long
been deprived of the pleasure of reading, they congratulated themselves on the
feast that awaited them next morning. The first rays of the sun found the two
friends already in the fields. The unclouded sky and the dewy grass seemed to
threaten a warm day, and they sought, therefore, at a little distance from the
town, a shady thicket which lay on the brow of a hill. There they found a
delightful retired spot, and stretched themselves under an olive tree. William
pulled the book out of his pocket, and Frederick lay carelessly on the grass.

They had not been here above two hours when a wild din from the neighboring
village struck their ears. They were alarmed, and hesitated whether they should
leave their retreat, or conceal themselves deeper in the wood. The last might
appear suspicious; they remained, therefore, where they were, resolved to
return to the town as soon as the road should be clear, for it passed directly
by the village church, from the steeple of which proceeded the alarm which had
roused their apprehension.

As they listened, and lost themselves in conjectures respecting the cause of
the tumult, they suddenly heard a rustling in the thicket at a little distance.
It seemed as if a flying roe rushed past them. It came nearer -- again it
seemed to recede -- sometimes on the right, sometimes on the left -- the
irregular breathing of a person exhausted with running apprised them that some
one was at hand. The two friends held in their breath, and anxiously looked
toward the place from which the sound seemed nearer and nearer to approach.

"Here (...) are!" exclaimed hastily and in a feeble voice (...) ^rown girl,
with flowing hair and disordered (...), while with eager anxiety, and
occasionally ^g behind, she broke upon the astonished stran^^rs.

"Fly! fly!" stuttered she with a voice scarcely articulate, "they are coming,
they are in pursuit of you. -- You will be found here -- and you are gone!"

" How? Why? What is the matter?"

The girl was exhausted and could not answer, she only pointed with her finger
to the footpath; and then the strangers still hesitated, she ran before them*
pointed and folded her hands in the attitude of entreaty. William and Frederick
at last f^owed her, without knowing why or whither. Their swift conductor soon
brought them to a fisherman's empty hut. Here she sank down on the grass, and
exclaimed: "I can do no more!"

Her full bosom heaved with violent agitation; the blood forsook her cheeks.
Yet now and then she struggled to hold in her breath, turned toward the
village to listen, and again panted more violently. The two friends stood
before her, and knew not what to think of this extraordinary incident. They
gave her time to recover herself. Frederick lighted upon a wooden dish in the
hut, which he filled with water and gave her. She drank a few drops, and bathed
her cheeks, to cool the glowing heat. When at last she recovered the use of her
tongue, she told them in broken incoherent sentences:

"Some ill-inclined persons have last night cut down the tree of liberty in our
^llage. The whole village is in an uproar. The yo^g men have taken arms, and
are in search of the ^etrators, and if taken they will be put to death. -- You
have been observed, for some weeks past, to s^lk about in this neighborhood;
it is suspected ^at you are the culprits."

"We!" exclaimed the two frie^ in amazement.

"I believe you are not," proceeded the girl, "you appear to be men of honor;
and even were you guilty, I could see nobody murdered. My Philip, too, is in
the mob; he has his sword, and swears to put you to death. I tremble yet to
think of his dreadful oaths -- and if he sheds blood I can no more love him.
This morning, very early, as I was feeding my pigeons, I saw you pass by the
village, and stroll into this thicket; the cow-head likewise saw you, and gave
the information. Now they are about to surrou^ (...), and will not rest till
you are found (...) I run to ^e innocent blood, and (...) guardian angels that
with their help (...) ^tely meet you, and they have graciously heard my prayer!
-- Haste! endeavor to gain the town by a circuitous way, for here you are not
safe. I would accompany you with all my heart, but I can go no farther!

"If you follow this footpath, it will carry you into the road to Montauban;
then leave our village on your left hand, and after making a circuit of a few
miles you may in the twilight return to town."

"But we are innocent," said William.

"We have never even seen your tree of liberty," pursued Frederick.

"That will avail you nothing," returned the girl hastily. "You will be
murdered -- you are strangers -- you are not French citizens (this she said
with some degree of solemnity.) Nobody will demand satisfaction for your lives.
Fly! fly! Heard you not the voices in the thicket? -- In a few minutes it will
be too late!"

William and Frederick soon perceived that in spite of their innocence, their
lives were in danger, and that they had not a moment to lose. They thanked
their ^^^erous deliverer, and flew down the pathway which she had pointed out.
It soon brought them into an unknown road where they stopped a little to take
breath, and to confirm the observation which has so long been made by
travelers in every part of the world, that women are every where more
courteous, more gentle, more benevolent, and more humane toward strangers than
men.

CHAP. III. THE COFFIN.
AS they had now left the dreadful village a good way behind, the fugatives
considered themselves safe, rested a few minutes, and then slowly pursued their
way, blessing the generous girl who, notwithstanding her pride in the title of
a French citizen, had so kindly apprised them of their danger. They soon
perceived, however, that the enthusiastic spirit, like a raging lioness, had
thrown the whole country round into alarm and apprehension by its wild roar.
They found, that in our times the cutting down of a tree of liberty can excite
the same fury, which two hundred years ago the destruction of a cross, or two
thousand years ago the violation of a sacred oak, would have occasioned.

When Alcibiades demolished the statue of Mercury, the Athenians raged just
like the new men of France about their tree of Liberty. On the right and on the
left, before and behind the fugitives, the sullen sound of bells was heard in
all the villages. They redoubled their speed. The road led to a hill, which
they endeavored to reach; but, alas! under the brow of the hill lay a village,
from which the confused noise of shouts and the rattling of arms proceeded.
Hastily they wheeled round, ran rapidly down the hill, directly back again, and
perceived, at a distance, a cloud of dust, which warn-them that their pursuers
were at hand.

They now flew over hedges and ditches across the fields; sometimes they
thought of concealing themselves in the standing corn; sometimes they thought
of hiding themselves in a farmer's hayloft; but a loud-mouthed cur or a bawling
infant frightened them away. They now knew not whither they went, ran through
brooks and morasses, without reflection. They heard the alarm all around, and
at last they arrived, without suspecting it, at the road they had left.

The danger every moment increased. The fields round were covered with their
pursuers; before and behind, clouds of dust rolled; the bells rang from every
steeple, and the shouts of men and the barking of dogs broke on them from every
quarter.

"I can go no farther!" said William. "Heaven protect my wife and child! Here
will I die!"

He sunk down under a tree. Frederick summoned up all his strength, climbed the
tree, and viewed the country around.

"I see a country house," said he, "not two thousand paces distant. Belong to
whom it may, the owner will surely protect us at least from the fury of the
mob. If he is a man of honor, he will deliver us into the hands of the civil
power, but not permit us -- even should he consider us guilty -- to be murdered
like wild beasts by a frantic rabble."

He came down. William rose, and they exerted every effort to gain the
country house. In a romantic valley, through which a branch of the Garonne
rolled meandering, lay a solitary habitation, shaded by lofty elms, on the
north side bounded by a thick grove, which stretched down to the banks of the
river. The fugitives arrived, without interruption, at the iron gate that
bounded the front lawn, which was tastefully ornamented with flower-beds. They
sound the doors shut and barred. William boldly took a stone, and knocked loud
at the iron wicket. The grove reechoed the sound, but no dog barked, no living
creature stirred. They called. Nobody answered. The house appeared to be empty.
A number of broken windows confirmed the supposition. The railing was too high
for them to climb over, and too strong for them to break. The moments were
precious. William and Frederick hastened to the other side of the grove, there
to look for a place where they might wait the shades of night.

The grove was likewise surrounded by a pretty high wall, but time had here and
there loosened the stones; and fear lent them wings, for the voices of their
pursuer^ already resounded through the valley. A gloomy thicket of tall pines
received them in its shade. Here they listened a few moments; and as the whole
grove seemed to be inhabited by the feathered creation, as the linnets and
bullfinches hopped as fearlessly about them as if they had never seen a human
form, they ventured to penetrate deeper into its recesses.

They soon perceived that a little walk, in the style of the English gardens,
skirted round the whole of the grove; but the grass that grew thick through the
gravel, which was here and there broken up by the rain, and not repaired,
seemed to prove that it was long since it had been trod by human foot.
Courageously the two friends advanced, intending, if possible, to take
possession of some empty corner of the house; when Frederick suddenly stopped,
as William pulled him by the coat and pointed, with a mixture of fear and
surprise, to the mark of a lady's foot in a molehill.

It was now plain that this must have happened yesterday or the day before,
consequently the house with the broken windows was not altogether uninhabited,
and the fugitives remained irresolute in new embarrassment and apprehension. In
spite of their dangerous situation (for the voice of their pursuers still
sounded more terrible in the valley) their feelings, on perceiving the prints
of the foot were very different from those which Robinson Crusoe had
experienced on a similar occasion. They could not cease to contemplate with
pleasure the mark, which was that of an elegant foot; and William thought, that
if it was possible that Jeanette could be here, it must have been made by hers.
For a moment fear gave place to softer emotions. So feels the traveller, who,
surrounded by the murky shades of night, suddenly descries at a distance a
friendly light.

What a powerful effect does an inch more or less produce upon the senses of
^en, through them on the imagination, and so on upon the understanding! Had the
mark covered the whole of the molehill, the idea of beauty, and with it of
harmless goodness, would not have associated with the feelings of our
fugitives. Perhaps, alarmed at the appearance, they might have again made their
retreat over the walls. A creature, however, that had such elegant feet, seemed
so little calculated to inspire terror, that they were inclined to wish rather
than to avoid a meeting.

With more caution and circumspection they now pursued the winding way, which
appeared to lead to the banks of the river. The murmuring of the stream soon
convinced them that they were right; and after descending the footpath, winding
through a thick shrubbery, down a gentle declivity, they commanded a prospect
of the water. They observed a little island, on which was built, with singular
art and taste, a grotto, surrounded with weeping willows, which bended their
branches to the stream. A little drawbridge led to the island. This secret
recess appeared a secure asylum, and they redoubled their steps to reach the
bridge. Silently they passed over, and drew it up behind them. Silently, and
with some anxiety, they approached the avenue to the grotto. Frederick was a
few steps before, as William was detained fixing the bridge. When William had
finished, and was running up to overtake him, he saw his friend suddenly turn
round, his face pale and his knees trembling. He laid his finger on his mouth,
waved his hand, and by his gestures signified that William should approach
without noise.

William obeyed, and threw a fearful glance toward the grotto, which was
lighted by a window in the roof. Two coffins lay close together, covered with
black, and without any ornament. Upon one of the coffins lay a female figure,
in profound grief, her back toward them, and her head leaning upon her hand.
She seemed to be asleep, or to be lost in grief -- they did not hear her
breathe.

Dreadfully shocked at this spectacle, the two friends stood motionless, and
conversed only by doubtful looks. They waited long to see whether this solemn
figure would turn round. As not the least movement betrayed the appearance of
life, and they saw a beetle crawling on her white neck, without attracting her
attention, Frederick began to think that she must be in a swoon, and ventured
to advance a few steps nearer. His foot trod upon some dry leaves: they rustled
-- the figure rose up. Heavens! what a creature! with every quality of an angel
but fearlessness!

Fair as a lily, with long flowing black hair, an eye mild as the evening star
surrounded with light clouds, her bosom negligently covered, whose dazzling
whiteness was heightened by the contrast of her black robe, a tall elegant
form, a hand which seemed formed to wipe away the tears of love, a foot which
the fugitives easily recognized to be that which had left the mark in the grove
-- Such did the lovely stranger stand before them, in the first bloom of her
charms. Had not her full bosom anxiously heaved -- had not her white hand
trembled, they would have dropped on their knees before her, as a superior
being. Frederick stood speechless, with his eyes riveted to this celestial
figure. William endeavored to speak, but it was only in broken sentences. The
stranger first broke silence.

"Who are you? -- What do you want? -- Why have you intruded upon this
sanctuary of my grief? Would you rob me even of these dear remains?"

At these words she hastily threw the lid from one of the coffins, and
discovered the corpse of an old man, whose head was severed from his body. This
shocking spectacle occasioned a long pause, during which the young lady gazed
at the corpse with folded hands, and shed a tender tear. Frederick was unable
to speak, nor did he attempt to reply. William collected himself as well as he
could, and in soothing accents began to relate the accident which had brought
them here. He begged for an asylum for a few hours, till they could elude their
pursuers. The uproar which every moment grew louder and louder, testified the
truth of his story.

As William spoke, the young lady's attention was involuntarily fixed by his
figure and discourse. When he had finished, her looks fluctuated doubtfully
between him and his companion. She had not made any answer, when a wild mob was
heard thundering at the iron gate, and another round the walls of the grove.

"What can I do to assist you?" said she: "Where can I conceal you? -- Every
corner of the grove is well known to these monsters. From its most secret
recesses they dragged my aged father, and cruelly murdered him!" She burst into
tears, and seemed anew to be quite engrossed with her grief, till a noise at
the gate louder than before, announced that the mob had burst it open.

"They come!" said William. Frederick did not seem to hear them. "They come!"
repeated the lady with anxiety. "It is too late to take you to the desolate
mansion -- there you would be -- but no -- it is too late. Fly! fly! I cannot
see you murdered!"

The frantic rabble now rushed through the garden in crowds. Nothing remained
for the fugitives but to plunge in the river; but it was deep, and neither of
them could swim. "Ha!" exclaimed William, "for what an inglorious death has
fate reserved me!" -- Frederick said nothing. He gazed at the young lady, and
seemed to be utterly insensible.

The young mourner walked up and down, wringing her hands. She looked
compassionately at the strangers, and appeared to struggle with a thought which
she sometimes reluctantly dismissed, and again benevolently cherished. William
saw what passed in her soul. He threw himself at her feet: "If this angel form
can give the least pledge of humanity, save an unfortunate being, who has left
in his own land, other helpless creatures dependent on him!"

"Humanity!" repeated the lady, "Alas! that was denied to me!"

Suddenly the whole grove resounded with the voices of men, and on all sides
the shouts of frenzy were heard. It rushed like a whirlwind througn the trees,
and the frightened birds forsook their nests. The mob had already discovered
the path which led to the grotto; numbers had reached the bridge, and began to
cut down with their scythes the pulleys by which it was drawn up. A glow
overspread the young lady's cheeks; the mild luster of her eye kindled into
fire. She threw herself on the coffin. Anxiety lent her strength; she lifted
out the dead body and laid it on the mossy bank.

"Stranger! conceal yourself here," said she, pointing to the coffin. William
sprang into it, and in a moment the lid was replaced. She now opened the second
coffin. It was empty. She made a sign to Frederick, which she was thrice
obliged to repeat before he understood. At last he threw himself into the
coffin, bu^ with an air which seemed to show that he only obeyed her commands.
She shut the lid upon him, and at this moment the steps of their pursuers
thundered over the bridge.

The young lady threw herself down between the two coffins, with an arm
extended over each, and in this posture she awaited the arrival of the mob. --
They came. -- Men armed with scythes, sickles, swords and muskets, surrounded
the entry into the ^rotto; but suddenly the foremost stood still, a^
^^understruck, and kept back those behind, (...) ^ith gaping mouths, gazed over
their should^*

*What do you want!" said the lady to them with firm voice. "Is it not enough
that you have murdered my father? Would you also deprive me of a bur^nsome
existence? -- If so, you are welcome! -- Come in! come in! -- Dye your arms in
the blood of an innocent orphan! -- Murder me on the corpse of my father!"

The peasants looked at one another doubtfully. The contrast between the beauty
of the lady and the bloody corpse, together with their disappointed
expectations, made a powerful impression on the rough sons of nature. The wild
clamor was succeeded by a death-like silence. "Come, friends!" at last said one
of them, "they are not here!"

"You may be perfectly easy, miss," said another, "tell us only where the
villains have fled."

"Whom do you mean?" pursued the lady. "Since that old man fell under your
weapons, no human foot has entered this solitude. If you mean to insult -- if
you mean to delight yourselves with the sight of a murdered man, come nearer!
See how placidly he smiles; he has forgiven his murderers. Come in, and touch
those cold hands, of whose blessing you have deprived me!"

At these words she seized the hand of the corpse, and held it out to them. The
peasants were shocked, and started back. The hindermost disappeared; the crowd
dispersed, and the last went away with fearful looks. "They are not here!"
cried they as they crossed the bridge. "They are not here!" they sounded
through the grove. The noise gradually subsided, and before a quarter of an
hour elapsed, the birds had again taken possession of their nests, and a gloomy
silence of the solitude.

CHAP. IV. THE CAVERN.
SHOULD any of my sarcastic readers be inclined to laugh at the circumstance of
a young beautiful lady, in the height of grief, taking the mutilated corpse of
her father out of the coffin, in order to put a handsome young man into it, let
them recollect the widow of Ephesus, who, from much more questionable motives,
hung the body of her departed husband upon the gallow*

BABET -- for it is now time to discover the name of this lovely guardian angel
-- Babet was the daughter of a nobleman, who had the misfortune to be rich, and
to be a man of worth and honor. Of course he was obnoxious to the party now in
power. They resolved to get rid of him in the usual manner; that is to say,
they denounced him as an aristocrat; he became a marked man; and the people,
ever ready for such deeds, undertook the execution of the sentence. Two of his
sons were murdered. The third fled, as was said, to America, there to weep in
company with young La Fayette.

The old man himself chose the most retired of all his estates, and thought to
escape persecution by a voluntary seclusion. In vain, however! -- Party fury
traced him to this harmless retreat, tore him from the arms of his only
daughter, and hurried him to the scaffold.

Babet, in the sixteenth year of her age, had been educated in a cloister; and
when the destroying angel, called Liberty, burst those holy cells, she returned
to the bosom of her family. While she lived immured within the w^lls of the
cloister, except the old blind gardener, she had never seen the face of man;
and, except a favorite cat, had never loved any thing. When she became
acquainted with her worthy father, and her sprightly brothers, she loved them
with her whole soul, and their sentiments and modes of thinking became hers;
for women rarely choose their own opinions, they are formed by the company in
which they live. They commonly love with great constancy; but if they ever
change their attachments, they likewise change their principles.

Babet was a decided royalist. The death of her father and brothers at first
made her quite delirious* and still nourished by the solitude in which she
lived, and the ^eadful objects to which she was habituated, her grief bordered
upon lunacy. She conversed only with the corpse of her father, she slept on the
moss bank in the grotto, ate only the fruits which the trees a^cidentally
presented; never went beyond the limits of the gloomy grove, was deserted by
the officious servants of her former prosperity, and even dismissed the few who
offered to share her danger and her poverty.

Her inflamed imagination had inspired her with a superstitious idea, which she
neither could nor wished to drive from her mind. Having dreamed that on the
anniversary of her father's birthday, which was to happen in a few weeks, she
would be united to her father and brothers by a stroke of lightning, she was
firmly convinced that the dream would be realised; for which reason she had
prepared an empty coffin to receive her. This firm belief rendered her
indifferent to what passed around her. She smiled when any attempt was made to
amuse her, and wistfully shook her head when she was advised to collect the
remains of her estates in different provinces, which were left a prey to rapine.

In this temper of mind the two friends found her; and on seeing them, nature,
for the first time, resumed her rights, and bound her to life with new and
tender ties. A young lady, who, till now, seemed to be abandoned by God and the
world, who had no relation, no friend to whom she could fly; a young, helpless,
insulated creature, could not but feel herself in a new element when she saw
herself the deliverer of two handsome, generous young men. When Babet opened
the coffin, she felt something as if she saw her brother rise from it. She was
no longer without support. She had purchased at the risk of her life, perhaps
of her honor, two grateful protectors.

The young men lay at her feet, pressed their glowing lips to her hand, and
uttered soothing words of gratitude. A new and delightful feeling diffused
itself through that breast, which, till now, had heaved only with sighs. She
looked down upon the creatures with complacency; she wished to complete the
work of their deliverance; she forgot her father's corpse, and she even forgot
to reproach herself for her negligence.

"Follow me!" said she. "Your persecutors and mine might repent their having
been surprised and overcome by a feeling of humanity; they might suddenly
return. Follow me into the mansion, which they have dismantled. I will conduct
you to a cavern, which, for many weeks, served my father as a secure retreat.
Alas! he would have lived still had he not left it!"

Babet went out of the grotto. Frederick and William followed her; the former
like a person intoxicated; the latter had recovered the perfect exercise of his
faculties With politeness and tender concern he conv^d with their fair guide as
she hastily walked on ^fore them, and he contrived to introduce so many refined
and elegant compliments on her beauty and beneficence, that Babet by degrees,
was brought down from her converse with spirits to an intercourse with kindred
mortals. She possessed so much consideration, as to avoid every open and
exposed place of the garden, and to steal along between high hedges till she
brought her guests safe through many a winding alley to the backdoor of the
desolate habitation.

Here they mounted a winding staircase, passed through a small antichamber,
and went into the kitchen; where an old footman and a young servant girl lay
trembling on their knees, emploring all the saints in the calendar for help*
When the frantic mob broke into the garden, they thought that the rabble had
come to destroy the last frail shoot of the old stem, and gave up their
mistress for lost. When they heard footsteps on the stair, they imagined that
their own hour was come, and were pronouncing their last prayer. At the sight
of Babet their terrors were changed into the wildest transports. They sprang
up, leaped and sung around her, and it was a longtime before she could make the
footman understand that she wanted the key of the subterraneous cavern. He then
ran to find it, sought it over the whole house from the garret to the cellar,
and at last found it in her own pocket.

Babet now conducted the strangers into her father's closet. Here she took a
lighted lamp, opened a concealed door in the tapestry, and descended a narrow
staircase, which, through many windings, terminated in a spacious vault. She
fought and found an iron crow, which accident seemed to have left in a corner.
She gave it to William, and desired him, as she pointed out the place in the
wall, to remove the stones, which were but newly built up, and were but weakly
fastened.

He did as he was desired. An iron dooor appeared, so small that a person could
hardly push through. Babet touched a concealed spring. The door flew open, and
they entered a spacious cavern, which was furnished only with a few necessary
articles of furniture, a straw bed, and a mattress.

"Here you may remain quiet and easy till nightfall. Meanwhile I will dispatch
a person to reconnoitre the road, and to bring intelligence. When all is safe,
I myself will return and liberate you from this confinement. My servant, in the
mean time, shall bring you bread and fruit for your refreshment. Except such
scanty fare I have nothing to offer. The plunderers have robbed me of every
thing. Meanwhile, replace the stone in the wall, and shut the iron door; you
may then sleep in peace till I awake you."

She disappeared. A few minutes after old Antony brought a light and a basket
of fruit. The two friends were then left alone. Frederick threw himself on the
straw-bed, and hid his face; while William employed himself, in silence, in
rebuilding the stones which formed the false wall that concealed the secret
door.

CHAP. V. THE TREASURE.
WHEN Cupid steals from his mother a handful of flax to make a love-net, the
moment which the cunning rogue chooses to spread the flax on the enchanted
spindle will decide the fort^ne of the enterprise, since on the first twist and
pull it will depend whether the thread will ultimately be rough or smooth,
coarse or fine.

To speak without metaphor, it is of the utmost importance for a lady who
wishes to captivate a man she has never seen before, to choose a situat^ and to
improve it with address, in which she can display all her female charms in the
most seducing light. The observation is applicable both to the charms of body
and of mind. Take a stranger into the habitation of a divinity at the moment
when she gives her waiting-maid a box on the ear -- carry him then to the hut
of a gentle creature, who, if you please, is deformed with freckles and the
marks of the smallpox, he finds her employed in feeding a poor old man, or
clothing a naked orphan -- rely upon it the mortal will triumph over the
divinity.

After this commonplace remark, (for, alas! there is nothing new to be said
under the sun, and Kant's great discoveries, when closely considered, turn out
nothing but new words;) the reader will think it very natural that Frederick's
heart, in which no damsel had yet been able to kindle a spark, suddenly burst
out into a flame.

Consider only how many things combined to heighten the force of Babet's
charms. The agitation of mind in which Frederick arrived before the entry to
the grotto, and in which Babet appeared to him like a star in a gloomy night,
when perhaps in a more calm temper she might have seemed to his impartial
glance like a t^per at noonday -- besides the grief in which she was plunged,
her helplessness, which, with youth and beauty, makes a most powerful
impression; and last of all, the magnanimity with which she had exposed herself
to save the life of two strangers -- the romantic expedient she employed,
which, in a critical moment, could have occurred to none but a woman -- truly!
though her eyes had not been half so brilliant, though her bosom had not been
half so round and white, though the print of her foot in the molehill had been
as large again, Frederick, who was not, like his friend, protected by the aegis
of honorable love, would not have failed to be as deeply wounded as he was.

He now lay upon the straw-bed, and shut his eyes to avoid the inquisitive
looks of his companion. It was not that he wished to conceal any thing from the
friend of his heart, but that he himself yet knew not what was the matter with
him, or what exactly he had to communicate. That something extraordinary had
befallen him he indeed was well aware; but he felt like a blind man, who, being
couched for the cataract, does not venture to open his eyes, and spends some
time in voluntary darkness.

William stood before him, and looked at the sick man with a gentle smile
diffused over his countenance. At last he broke the mysterious silence with
these words:

"The adventure seems to have greatly affected you?"

FREDERICK. -- Very much.


WILLIAM. -- You like the young lady?


FREDERICK (with a serious smile) -- Like her*


WILLIAM. -- As you never liked before?


FREDERICK. -- Never.


WILLIAM. -- Why do you shut your eyes?


FREDERICK. -- Because she is gone.


WILLIAM (after a pause). -- I am afraid you are in love.


FREDERICK (turning aside). -- Good William, be kind enough to leave me at
present to my reflections.


William, who knew well that there are moments when a man would rather choose
to be whipped than to be teased with questions -- for the blows you may bear
with stoical fortitude, but the questions you are compelled to answer --
politely withdrew, and began to think of some amusement from the persecution of
some spiders, which in a vault generally find a most secure abode. He walked
backwards and forwards, whistled, sang, examined the furniture, and surveyed
the inhabitants, which consisted of toads and beetles.

At last, having found a rusty nail, idleness suggested to him the amusement so
natural in inns and prisons, of scrawling his name on the wall. For this
purpose he took a view of the wall, and pitched upon the largest square stone,
which was distinguished from the rest by some degree of coloring mingled with
its gray hue. He took a chair to stand upon, which seemed to have been
manufactured in the time of Henry IV. and with the lamp, now quite superfluous
to his dreaming companion, in his left hand, the rusty nail in his right, he
mounted up to immortalize his name in this subterraneous retreat.

But what was his astonishment when he held up the lamp and saw an inscription
engraved upon the stone? It was clear that it had been formerly employed for
the purpose he had intended, a circumstance which had made it whiter and more
conspicuous than any of the rest. The characters were feeble, and in some
places scarcely legible. With considerable exertion, however, William made out
the following:

" Dearest Babet! If thy innocence at last can find no asylum but this; if you
are robbed of all, you will find, under this straw-bed, a proof that, even in
his most dreary hours, thy father still remembered and cared for thee."

William instantly communicated the discovery to Frederick, but Frederick
seemed to treat it with indifference. -- "What, don't you hear?" said William.
"Rise, probably beneath that straw a treasure lies concealed."

"What is the treasure to us?" said Frederick, and never stirred.

"But it belongs to our guardian angel -- to our generous deliverer!"

Scarce had William finished this remonstrance, when Frederick was on his feet,
carefully turning over the straw. They found a place where the earth seemed
loose. They employed the nail to dig it up, and in a few minutes they pulled
out a casket, which was filled with articles of value. Transported at this
accident, which enabled them to testify their gratitude to their generous
hostess, they expected the coming night with redoubled impatience. Almost as
much as in the discovery of the jewels seemed Frederick to rejoice in the
discovery of the name of Babet; for he did nothing but repeat this harmonious
name, sometimes aloud, sometimes quite low, in tender and melting tones.

CHAP. VI. THE VISIONARY.
ABOUT midnight, gliding softly, like a benignant spirit, the lovely form of
their protectress approached. A gentle touch pressed the spring, the iron door
flew open, and Babet entered. -- "You are not yet safe," said she; "the
neighborhood swarms with drunken blood-thirsty murderers. You must remain here
till tomorrow night, when, in all probability, tired of the tedious fruitless
search, the peasants shall have returned to their occupations. In the mean
time, indeed, yo^ ^ill be exposed to want and inconvenience, for I have nothing
with which to entertain you. Scarcity, with good welcome, is your only cheer."
At these words she laid on the table a few eggs, and a piece of black bread.

"Two hens," said she with a melancholy smile -- "two hens are, God knows, all
that has escaped the general ravage and plunder. Alas! formerly our courtyard
swarmed with poultry, for I delighted to feed them. -- Now I have nothing to
feed my favorite hens, but they are still alive, and I could not have the heart
to kill them. -- You must be content with the eggs. -- I am almost sorry to rob
them of these."

"How fortunate is my friend," said William, with a generous sacrifice of his
own accidental merit -- "how fortunate is my friend, that he can repay this
benevolent kindness! While I was asleep he found a treasure which will place
you, fair Babet, in a more comfortable situation than that in which you now
live."

Frederick stood beside him, and presented the casket. Babet looked with
doubtful astonishment, now at her guests, now at the well-known casket, the
appearance of which in the hands of strangers, as well as the mention of her
name, seemed equally unaccountable. William took hold of the lamp, led Babet to
the stone, mounted on the chair, and read her father's testament*

Scarcely had the tender girl recognized the traces of that honored hand, no
sooner had she heard the words "dearest Babet," than she dropped upon her
knees, burst into tears, and raised her hands to the sacred stone. She received
the casket as a relick, and pressed it with respect to her lips. "Honored
father," cried she, "thou know that I no longer stand in need of this
provision"!

(...) ^ow turned round to the two friends: "You have made strong professions
of your gratitude. If indeed I have any claim to your thanks, it is in your
power to discharge the obligation."

"Speak!" said William, while his friend's eyes sparkled with eagerness; and it
was easy to read in them that he hoped it would at least demand the hazard of
his life.

"You will soon return to your native country," continued Babet, "and there it
is my request that you would endeavor to obtain intelligence of the Chevalier
Belloy. He fled to America -- perhaps he is still alive!" -- She said this with
such warmth of feeling, her eye seemed to glance to heaven so ardent a prayer
for the life of the Chevalier, that Frederick was greatly agitated. But he was
soon relieved from his anxiety when the lovely creature proceeded: "He is my
brother -- now my only brother! -- To him belongs these jewels; they may enable
him perhaps again to re-establish the splendour of his house -- for him I commit
them to your care. Leave no means untried to discover the place of his abode --
promise me this -- swear it!"

She held out her hand to them at once, to receive their oaths. William pressed
it with firmness, but his friend was deprived of his consciousness when her
fingers touched him. He trembled and hesi^ted Had Babet been vain or
suspicious, she would have known him to be a lover, or suspected him to be a
knave. -- She continued with composure:

"If all your pains and inquiries are in vain, if my Philip has likewise gone
before me, I bequeath this casket to you. Share its contents, be beneficent,
and remember me!"

When William observed that she was silent, and fixed her tearful eyes upon the
ground, he took the liberty to represent to her that she was still very young,
and stood more in need of a provision* than a brother, who could every where
obtain ^ subsistence in foreign military service. He entreated her to think of
the desolation that now prevailed in the abode of her ancestors, he reminded
^er of the complaint of want which but a few moments before, she had mentioned,
and advised her to fly from a country where a villain might remain unpunished,
but no nobleman could live in safety. "Such a flight," added he, "is difficult,
and without money almost impossible."

Babet had listened to him with silence; and with a sorrowful smile, "Yes," said
she with a look of wild enthusiasm, "I will fly! -- not fly -- but depart in
triumph -- and that is possible -- it is quite easy, without money. -- You do
not know, "proceeded she with a secret horror, while her eye sparkled
benignantly, "you know not, that in ten days I shall be with my father!" She
looked to heaven with revere^al awe and devotion.

William asked her if she was ill, that she felt herself so near death?

"O no!" replied she, "God deals very graciously with me; he takes me out of
this world without sickness." (She continued in a low and solemn voice) "In ten
days, toward evening, a violent storm will take place; the wicked men around
shall tremble, but I shall rejoice. -- Then will the lightning strike upon the
turret which stands there by the water side. I shall stand under the turret,
and stretch out my hands. Then shall the angel of God descend from a cloud, and
transport me to the eternal throne; there shall I again behold my relations in
glory!"

As she spoke this, she betrayed an enthusiastic rapture, and appeared herself
to be transporte^ with ecstasy. William gazad at her with astonishment, and
began to think that her mind was disordered. He soon perceived that her
monastic education and her early misfortunes had given her a tincture of
superstitious enthusiasm. Se told them, that after her father's death, deprived
of her reason, she wandered through the grove day and night in wild despair,
without sleep or refreshment. One morning she had sunk, exhausted, into a
profound slumber, and in a dream God had revealed to her that her deliverance
^as at hand.

"Since that moment," pursued she, "I have been in full possession of my
senses; my sorrow has become more placid. I have prepared a coffin to receive
my body, and an angel is destined to receive my spirit. Congratulate me, the
hour is not far distant!"

With secret compassion William listened to the visionary maid; Frederick
turned round, and dropped a silent tear. William was too well acquainted with
mankind to know that argument and reason would here be fruitless. He rather
appeared to have no doubt of the prophetic dream. He put the casket in his
pocket, and promised punctually to fulfill her commands. By degrees he
endeavored to awaken other images in her soul, to withdraw her attention from
that single object on which she incessantly gazed. He continued to give the
conversation a direction toward indifferent topics, and even to matters
connected with Babet's family. He made her talk of her brothers, their person,
their character, the regiments in which they had served, and the visits they
had formerly paid her in the cloister.

From this he naturally passed to inquiries concerning the monastic system of
education. He affected to be more unacquainted with it than he really was. He
inquired after the mode of life, the plan of instruction, the connections and
friendship to which such a scene gave rise.

At first Babet seemed to answer with reluctance; but, by degrees, so many
scenes were recalled to her remembrance, so many youthful incidents occurred to
her fancy, that at last, if she was not talkative, she took part in the
conversation. She related many anecdotes; and, at last, she felt a pleasure in
relating them. In a word, the charming vivacity which gradually displayed
itself in her whole conduct, clearly showed that she was formed for
cheerfulness, not for melancholy, and that solitary grief alone could have
produced so violent an effect upon her temper.

She was astonished when morning dawned, was vexed at her dissipation, as she
called it, bashfully apologized, and took her leave, to allow her guests to
enjoy repose. William threw himself on the straw. He soon dropped into a placid
slumber, while Frederick paced through the cavern, standing still occasionally
on the spot which Babet's foot had consecrated.

CHAP. VII. THE RIGHTS OF NATURE.
IT has an hundred times been said that flattery is a poison. Well! be it so;
but does it follow that it ought never to be employed? Do not the physicians
prescribe poisons for the most desperate diseases? -- Is not, for example,
Belladonna considered an excellent remedy for a cancer? -- And is not a deep
rooted grief more dangerous than this cruel malady?

Such were William's reflections when be awoke, after a few hours sleep; and on
them he formed the design to beguile the sorrow of his benefactress by
well-directed flattery. Really there are no means so well calculated to
withdraw men from serious or gloomy objects, as this balsam properly applied.
You must be careful, however, not to betray the design. It must not be a
visible esse^ it must be an invisible perfume. It must not descend in showers
like the atmosphere of our earth, but, like that of the moon, it must distill in
dew. Oh! there is not a sage in the universe who could withstand the effect of
this soothing anodyne.

When Babet returned, about noon, and brought with her, for the entertainment
of her guests, what nature in the ravaged garden still offered unsolicited,
William began to play his part. He could not calculate indeed upon the
assistance of his friend, for the man who truly loves cannot flatter. He
summoned all his knowledge of the human heart, and all his experience. What he
had often seen in the world, and had treated only with contempt, he now
endeavored to imitate. Pity and gratitude communicated an irresistible force to
his words, and an ardor before which Babet's coldness began to melt. Sometimes
he was able to extort a smile from her; and when she detected herself in it, a
stolen sigh seemed to ask forgiveness of her father's spirit. Before two hours
had elapsed, William's flattering tongue had so far succeeded, that the lovely
mourner sat down to table with her guests and shared the fruits she had
provided.

Day flew rapidly away. Babet with regret saw evening approach, for she had
insensibly acquired a taste for society. Her eye often dwelt with particular
complacency on William, who principally supported the conversation. His
unembarrassed heart allowed him to display all his amiable qualities, while
Frederick sat dreaming by his side, and, for fear of saying something silly,
chose to be silent.

When the shades of night began to close round, Babet sent the girl and the
footman out, different ways, to learn whether the tempest, which had raged so
violently, was yet allayed. Both returned like ^oah's pigeons with the
olive branch. However satisfactory this intelligence might be, it was received
with welcome by nobody but William, who was extremely anxious to return to
town, because he was afraid that he and his companion might be missed, and
considered as deserters.

His friend was not at present affected by these considerations. He wished to
see the villa as thickly surrounded by murderers, as the nightly traveller in
some regions of Africa sees himself surrounded by moving fires, for he felt
courage to defend Babet against a host; and he found that it was in such
moments alone that he could testify to her his love. As no enemy, however, was
to be seen, and as the fields were occupied only by crickets and grasshoppers;
as the owls glided out and in through the broken windows of the mansion, the
two friends prepared for their departure.

Babet was pensive and melancholy when they went away. She accompanied them to
the iron gate, and gave them her hand as they took leave. "Providence above,"
said she, "has brought us together -- be to me as brothers while I continue to
sojourn here below. -- It is but ten days to the wished for hour -- visit your
sister sometimes before she goes ^ence, provided you can do it without danger."

Frederick smiled at the word danger. William promised to come, were it even in
disguise. Frederick smiled at the word disguise. He had kissed Babet's hand. --
She had called him brother. -- Where is the danger? -- Why disguise?

They took their leave. Frederick often stopped to look back, though it was
quite dark. Babet stood at the gate, and listened to the footsteps of her
guests, which sounded through the silent night. She then slowly returned. --
She thought of going to the grotto, to her father's body, yet descended pensive
to the cavern. She threw herself on the bed of straw, to meditate fully on her
approaching death.

Since her acquaintance with William, this idea seemed to have acquired new
charms, for with the solemn image of death she associated the agreeable picture
of her new brother. She resolved, that upon the eventful day he should not
leave her. She saw herself, struck lifeless by the lightning, sink into his
arms -- she thought how he would stretch her body tenderly upon the grass --
how he would kneel beside her -- A tear dropped from his eye on her cold hand
-- and at the thought her cheek glowed -- he impresses a brother's kiss upon
her pallid lips!

Thus were associated with the thoughts of death many delightful images, drawn
by the pencil of purest innocence in the most pleasing colors. Death indeed
still was in the perspective of the picture, but with a fainter light than the
more captivating features. She expected, with a degree of impatience, a second
visit from her guests. She no longer lay unconscious on her father's coffin,
but sat upon it wistfully, and listened to the murmur of the waters which
dashed on the banks of the little Island. The nightingale sung in the grove,
and she blamed herself beause his melody gave her pleasure. The servant brought
her a pigeon for dinner. She chid him for supposing she could be hungry; and
when he was gone, she ate first one wing, then another, then the whole pigeon.

A soft and secret melancholy sometimes drove her from the grotto to the house,
from the windows of which she had a view of the road, both on the right and
left. She walked up and down through the empty apartment, and sometimes threw a
stolen glance on the shattered looking-glass.

Meanwhile, poor Frederick, ill at heart, stalked about like a spectre, and
must have bled to death of the deep wound he had received, had not his friend,
with unwearied attention, poured into it the balm of hope. As the words of
(...) are to a lover sacred as holy writ, Frederick, notwithstanding his
excellent understanding, was not disinclined to believe that really in ten days
a stroke of lightning would tear Babet from him; and William was obliged to
laugh him out of this conceit, since to reason him out of it was impossible.

Even although, perhaps, Babet should be saved from the dreaded lightning,
would she be disposed to forget her grief in his arms? The hope appeared too
bold, for true love would make even a Narcissus modest! William, who coolly
considered the situation of affairs, endeavored to remove every doubt, and to
convince the timid lover that Babet's youthful innocence, her destitute
situation, and the unoccupied state of her heart, would enable him to secure
her affection. He encouraged him, at least, to make his eyes the interpreters
of his heart, and not to appear ever before her with downcast looks. Frederick
promised every thing, but did not keep his word; for first love embarrasses
every motion, because it is ever fearful to offend.

They received a very agreeable piece of intelligence on their return to town.
The persons who had cut down the tree of liberty, had been taken in another
village, and condemned to an ignominious punishment. The two friends,
therefore, were enabled, without danger, to continue their little excursions,
and Frederick wished to avail himself of this liberty, though a circumstance in
itself very indifferent, to prevail upon William to pay Babet a second visit
the following day. William, however, more cool than his friend, was afraid that
the enthusiastic girl might be displeased, and thought it better to wait till
the day after.

Frederick cursed the coldness of his companion, stood the whole day che^rless
at the window, and wondered to see the people pursuing their occupations so
coolly. When it was scarce midnight, he roused William, who lay fast asleep,
and maintained that it was already daybreak. It was but the declining moon,
which shot a feeble ray into their apartment.

At last the eastern horizon was overspread with purple clouds, and before the
first rays of the sun peeped through the gray twilight, the two friends were
already in the street. The doors were all shut, and their footsteps alone
resounded along the empty pavement. They had this time loaded their pockets
with all kinds of provisions, and hoped to prevail upon their benefactress to
partake of a frugal meal. William meditated, as he walked along, how he should
tempt her from the gloomy grotto, where the terrific objects it contained
furnished fresh food for her grief. His care, however, was unnecessary; for
when the travelers arrived at the iron gate, they saw Babet sitting under a
lime-tree on the lawn, feeding her two hens with crumbs of bread.

The ^vely creature blushed modestly, and bade them kindly welcome. William
secretly made the agreeable remark that her hair was dressed with some degree
of care, and that her bosom was more studiously covered than it was the first
time they saw her.

They all sat down under the lime-tree. The conversation of the little circle,
indeed, was constrained. They seemed to be afraid to display any symptoms of
joy. The lovely dreamer was somewhat hurt to perceive that all allusion to her
affliction was carefully avoided, and she herself likewise forbore to mention
it. William exerted every effort in his power to animate the conversation, and
he sometimes succeeded. Babet appeared to feel his anxiety with gratitude, and
repaid his exertions by many kind looks. In a word, her natural feelings for
the pleasures of life awoke. She again resumed an interest in what passed
around her. Of Frederick's love, however, she entertained no suspicion. A more
experienced girl would have guessed, from his vacant stare, his embarrassment
when she spoke to him, the blush upon his cheeks when her eye met his, what
passed in his heart. But Babet, educated in the seclusion of a cloister, never
suspected the power of her charms.

The day passed in the utmost harmony. Babet led her guests through the fields,
the meadows, and gardens, pointed out and described to them all its former
beauties, every place that was now destroyed. She dwelt with a melancholy
pleasure on every spot which had been the favorite of her father, and said,
that if she were not so well convinced of her speedy death, she could not
endure the melancholy prospect of these scenes, but would fly from her country.

William seized this opportunity to descant on the charms of his native land,
and to declare with what cordial welcome she would there be received. He
lamented that fate denied him the pleasure of being her deliverer. He ventured
even to express the wish that his prayers might avert the fatal lightning.

He then watched her countenance unobserved, to see whether she betrayed any
dislike at such an idea; and he had the satisfaction to perceive that, though
she was silent, her downcast looks testified seriousness, not displeasure.
Contented with his first success, he broke off the conversation, and left to
her own imagination to complete the sketch in solitude.

When evening began to spread its shades, the party separated, with the promise
of seeing each other daily till the fatal hour arrived. Poor Frederick's heart
was more deeply pierced than ever, for Babet, in a few hours, with sisterly
solicitude, developed the whole charms of her soul; and an innocence, which
Gessner's pencil alone could pourtray, diffused round her personal cha^ the
glory of an angel.

William's hopes were new sanguine. He calculated upon still more decisive
effects from his exertions during the nine days which remained. Babet flew to
the grotto -- for the first time she found it inspire her with a degree of
horror. -- She was astonished to feel a secret disgust -- and returned in dee^
meditation to the lime-tree.

CHAP. VIII. THE SPECTRE.
REVIEWERS and undertakers resemble each other in this, that they both perform
their respective functions for hire; the latter are paid to mourn, the former
to abuse. Both of them are engaged indeed in precisely the same occupation,
that of making hired criticisms, the latter upon men who are carried to the
grave; the former upon books, which people are at perfect liberty, if they
please, to carry to the same place.

Should any body observe that this remark is very unseasonable upon the present
occasion, I have two answers ready. First, I follow the example of Cato, who,
whatever subject might have been discussed in the senate, always concluded his
speech with: Coeterum puto Carthaginem esse delen^ag^; and the authority of
this great example must be the more conclusive for my justification, as the
republic of letters would evidently gain a great deal more by the extermination
of Reviewers than Rome could do by the destruction of Carthage.

Secondly, this remark is not quite so foreign from the purpose as on the first
glance might be imagined; for this true history now is at that very period
which gives the Prometheuses among the reviewers an opportunity to surpass the
work of the gods. Babet, will they say, the rapt enthusiast, that scarce seemed
to touch the earth, now too easily admits of consolation, and forgets the
murder of her father and brothers, as soon as if merely her lap-dog had torn
her handkerchief. There is no consistency in the character!

Very well, gentlemen! It is a pity, however, that mother Nature cares as
little for your sage rulers as a lam^kin in the meads would care for a
dancing master, who should prescribe how he ought to skip. The celebrated Mr.
Huber (I had almost forgot to add, author of the Secret Tribunal) somewhere
observes, that "Brutus is the most consistent character in the history of the
world." Although such a remark is advanced only because it sounds
extraordinary, it follows, from this hyper-critic's own confession, that there
are very few consistent characters in the history of the world. The author of
the world, we all know, is dame Nature; and if she exhausted her powers on
Brutus, Babet may justly hope to be forgiven.

We heartily acknowledge, therefore, that the good young lady, in consequence
of the repeated visits of her new brothers, discovered in the last ten days of
her life a quite different temper of mind from that which she had displayed
when she rejected the casket, with contempt of all terrestrial things. She was
now attached to life by secret wishes.

Three days had Babet, according to her calculation, still to live. On the
first she confessed that she had too precipitately prayed for death; on the
second she even ventured to think that God too hastily had granted her prayer;
and on the third she trembled for the succeeding morn.

As soon as William observed this favorable disposition, he began to suggest
doubts of the fulfillment of the prophetic dream. He repeated a number of
examples of dreams which had never been fulfilled. He explained as well as he
could (for who can perfectly explain it?) the effect of the state of the blood,
or excessive agitation of the corporeal organs, upon the mind of the sleeper.
Babet did not understand him; but she listened with respect, and secretly
wished he might be right.

She had insensibly conceived a strong attachment to William; with this
attachment was connected a sisterly confidence, and in their walks she clung to
his side with as little constraint as if he had been one of the nuns with whom
she used to walk in the gardens of the convent. Frederick, on the contrary,
seemed only the moon, which borrowed a feeble ray from the friendly sun. She
esteemed him likewise, but it was more with a feeling of friendship. How could
it be otherwise? Love had veiled all his splendid and amiable qualities in the
mist of reserve.

When, on the evening before the awful day, they separated with beating hearts,
the lovely Babet, with trembling voice, entreated her friends to return very
early next day, that she might not be utterly deserted in her last hour.
William promised for both; and as the sultry evening really portended a storm,
they scarce went an hundred yards from Babet's house, to be nearer at hand, and
took up their lodgings at an inn.

A lover, as all the world knows, is ever in extremes. He is in raptures or in
despair; he is dumb or talkative; and when in the humor to speak, his subject
is so inexhaustible, that he commonly spares the hearer the trouble of an
answer; and a tree or a man, therefore, are often equally his confidantes. That
Frederick, in the silence of night, in the sleepless hours, should dwell upon
the charms of his beloved; that he should descant with all his eloquence on
Babet's beauty and innocence, was quite as natural as that William, who could
hope to hear nothing new on this subject, should fall asleep. Receiving no
answer to his questions, and hearing his companion breathe louder than before,
the orator at length perceived that he was uttering his complaints to the bare
walls. He was unwilling to disturb his friend's slumber; he rose, went out, and
groped his way in the dark along the road.

As during the last ten days he had formed an acquaintance with every stone and
tree which stood or lay in the road to Babet's house, it was not difficult for
him, in spite of the darkness which surrounded him, to find the well-known path
to the abode of his beloved, without stumbling or knocking his head against a
post. He arrived safe at the iron gate, and through the rails contemplated with
sighs the broken windows, from which a solitary lamp shed a feeble light. He
walked backwards and forwards, breathed lengthened sighs, and in the silence of
night repeated, sometimes aloud, sometimes in a low voice, the name of Babet.

Alas! he knew not what agonising tortures he had occasioned his beloved by
this nocturnal excursion. The timorous maiden had stood at the window ever s^
her friends had left her, gazing at the gloomy clouds, which gathered in the
west, and seemed to carry in their bosom the arrow of death. The distant
lightning increased her apprehension -- her heart trembled as often as the
flash burst from the cloud!

But what were her feelings when, by this horrid light, she suddenly saw a
figure walking backwards and forwards at the iron gate! -- when she heard
profound sighs, and distinctly heard her name pronounced!

My father's ghost! -- The idea struck horror through her whole frame, and her
teeth chattered. -- "The ghost of my father summons me hence! -- My dream was
no idle phantom of the brain! -- My last hour approaches! -- The spirits of the
dead are ready to receive me!"

She dropped down upon her knees, and attempted to pray; but she fell senseless
upon the floor. Frederick, unconscious of the mischief he had done, had now
finished his romantic excursion; for the light streaks which appeared in the
east announced the coming day. He returned and awaked his friend. With the
first dawn of the morning they were at the door.

They ascended the stair without noise and found the servants still buried in
sleep. They imagined that Babet was likewise in bed. William opened the door of
her room as carefully as a mother who is fearful of disturbing the slumbers of
her sick child. Frederick stood behind him, and threw a timid glance over his
shoulders. The maid lay stretched upon the door.

"She is asleep," whispered William, and was about to retire. But Frederick,
with ill presaging alarm, advanced nearer, took her hand, found it cold as
clay, and screamed, "She is dead! -- The terrors of imagination have killed
her!" William endeavored without success, to moderate the transports of his
grief. He ran through the room like a person frantic and exclaimed in agonizing
despair: "She is gone! -- Is there now a compassionate thunderbolt reserved for
me!" With wild cries he threw himself on the supposed corpse -- with frantic
grief he sprang up to look for some weapon to put an end to his miserable
existence. William begged and threatened -- sometimes with tenderness,
sometimes with anger -- in vain! Frederick, heard him not -- till at last his
friend seized him forcibly in his arms, and shouted in his ear: Man! are you
mad? -- She is not dead! -- her heart beats still!"

Frederick now threw himself down transported beside his beloved, laid his
trembling hand upon her heart, felt it beat, and to the most violent grief
succeeded the most immoderate expressions of joy. He pressed William to his
breast -- embraced the old footman -- he wept, and shouted. He never thought of
applying the proper means to recover her from the swoon -- it was enough that
she was alive -- her heart beat, he thanked heaven with enthusiasm!

Meanwhile, William had roused the servant. Cold spring water was the only
cordial with which she could supply him. He sprinkled Babet's face, rubbed her
arms and temples, and in a few minutes she opened her eyes.

She looked round wildly, and eagerly pressed William's hand. "I thank you,"
said she, "for having come so early. -- Soon, very soon, and my death-hour
knells." William led her to the windows, pointed out to her the beauties of the
blushing morn, remarked how the black clouds dispersed, how the thick most
formed an ocean in the valley, all indications of a pleasant day. The blushing
morn, however, had no charms for Babet. Her eye gazed wildly at the iron gate
-- there was the place where the spectre stalked -- thence issued the dismal
groans -- thence it had called the name of Babet. In vain did William endeavor
to amuse her mind, and to withdraw her attention from the object on which it
dwelt. "Leave me, said she, "I must die -- too sure this day I die -- My
father's ghost has appeared to me -- his warning summons has roused me from my
sinful hopes. -- I go to prepare for death."

Without farther explanation respecting the nature of the apparition, she
retired into an adjoining room to pray. Astonished and chagrined, William
looked at her, and cursed the demon that, with some new phantasy of a
disordered imagination, had blasted the fruits of his exertions. In vain the
two friends endeavored to gather from the domestics, whether, since last
night, any thing extraordinary had occurred. They knew of nothing. Babet had
ordered them to go to bed, and they obeyed without opposition, for it was no
new thing for their mistress not to undress at all. William could now no longer
conceal the impression which the circumstance made upon his mind. He dreaded
not indeed any miracle of nature; but he dreaded the wonderful effects of
imagination, which, so often governed by phantoms of its own creation, silences
the feeble voice of reason. In a word, he dreaded not Babet's death, but, what
is worse than* death -- madness. He endeavored, as well as he could, to conceal
these melancholy thoughts from his friend, who walked about with tottering
steps and folded hands, in visible agitation. Sometimes he stood gazing at the
door through which she had disappeared. Sometimes he stopped short, looked at
him wistfully, as if to seek consolation in his eye.

After the lapse of an hour Babet returned to the room, and a supernatural
serenity sat majestic upon her brow. She spoke little, answered shortly, and
seemed afraid to drop a single word that could indicate a doubt of her
approaching death -- as if she feared to lose that composure and resignation
she had prayed from heaven.

The conversation was very constrained. Of dreams, apparitions, and dying, the
brothers would not talk, and the sister would ^ear of nothing else. They walked
up and down together, almost in silence. From Frederick's breast heaved long
heavy sighs, as if he himself had been condemned to die. Babet walked about in
still meditation, not a breath, not a footstep was heard. Spirits skim along
the earth -- and Babet was already almost disembodied.

William, from time to time, went to the window, and failed not always to
observe, that the morning was delightful and serene, that not a threating cloud
hung on the horizon. The visionary maid however, heard his remarks with
indifference, for the voice of the spectre still vibrated in her ear.

CHAP. IX. THE STORM.
WHEN the sun had advanced far toward the meridian, and an oppressive heat
announced the highest influence of his reign; when his burning rays penetrated
through the unshaded windows into the apartment, Babet herself proposed a walk
in the grove. It was not, indeed, in order to refresh herself in the cooling
shade; for she would have been ashamed, when at the very verge of the world of
spirits, to have expressed any corporeal inconvenience. She wished unobserved
to approach the turret which her dream had pointed out as the termination of
her pilgrimage, and the humanity which still adhered to her, taught her the
tender delicacy of concealing this circumstance from her anxious friends.

William seized the proffered plan of amusement, slight as it was. They went
out; and the good-hearted William, whose suspicions had wandered into a wrong
track, studiously endeavored to conduct her far from the little island and the
hideous grotto. Babet observed it, and said with a smile: "Why this anxiety? --
Why should I now with to visit the melancholy remains of my father, since in a
few hours I shall see him in glory?"

William sighed softly at her invincible credulity, and Frederick sorrowfully
broke the twigs as he passed along from every bush. At last the sultry noonday
heat compelled them to seek the most shady place of the grove, where a gravel
foot-path led to a solitary hermitage which received only a feeble light
through a little window, round which ivy and wild hopes were entwined.

Here a mossy bank invited them to rest from their fatigue. Babet seated
herself between her two brothers; and William, who found that it was important
to talk, be the subject what it might, in order to divert the attention of the
visionary, took up the most indifferent topics. He descanted upon the beauty of
the butterfly, and the industry of the ant. At last, a coat of arms, which was
pointed on one of the panes, afforded matter for along and interesting
conversation. Among many other useless things, Babet in the cloister had
likewise learnt heraldry. The artful William, who really understood little of
the subject, affected to be more ignorant than he really was, and with
exemplary patience led her to explain all the mummery of crests, supporters,
etc. When upon a critical occasion it is important to withdraw the mind from
some ruling object, the most trifling means are not to be despised, since by
the association of ideas they awaken they produce the happiest effects. Babet
exhausted the science she had acquired in the cloister on the arms of her
female friends, whose images recurred to her mind as she dwelt upon topics with
which they were connected, or renewed the faded recollection of past scenes.
Insensibly the subject withdrew her from the gloomy contemplation of death. Who
knows how far William might have succeeded, for two hours had thus clapsed,
when suddenly the noise of the distant thunder struck alarm into the little
party!

Babet grew pale -- the blood forsook Frederick's cheeks -- even William was
disconcerted, and secretly repined at fortune, which seemed resolved still
farther to prove the poor superstitious maid. All three sprang up, and hastened
to the door. The horizon was overcast, the wind howled through the trees, the
croaking ravens flew to their nests, and the birds flattered about in alarm.

Babet folded her trembling hands: "Follow me!" said she with faltering voice;
"leave me not!"

Frederick was so confounded and agitated by what he saw, and what he felt,
that he knew not what he did. "Would to God!" said he as he seized Babet's
hand, and pressed it eagerly, "would to God I could die with you!" -- She
started, and gazed at him wildly. She then gently disengaged herself, and flew
so rapidly through the thick bushes, that the two friends could hardly follow
her. The storm approached nearer and nearer, the big drops fell, the wind
whistled, and the rustling leaves were shaken from the trees.

^reathless ran Babet through a meadow, which the river formed into a
peninsula, at the extremity of which stood the ruins of the old tower, under
the nodding walls of which she resolved to bury herself. William followed her
close, and overtook her just as she sunk down exhausted upon a stone, and
stretched out her arms to Heaven to receive the angel of death.

Her brothers kneeled by her side. With terror and the agitation of her rapid
race her breast was like to burst. William looked round* and perceived that in
this dangerous situation accident might very easily realize Babet's prophetic
dream; for the turret was surrounded by tall oaks, whose tops defied the
tempest, and seemed boldly to tempt the lightning down. But it would have been
in vain to mention this danger. The luckless Babet was already almost in the
agonies of death.

The black cloud hung directly over their head -- the thunder pealed tremendous
-- the lightning darted quicker and more vivid -- the wind suddenly died away
-- the rain ceased -- a sullen silence reigned over the sullen landscape -- a
sultry breeze tainted every flower -- death seemed to hang the threatening
clouds in maffy chains over their heads -- Babet breathed languid -- the luster
of her eye was faded -- Hark! the lightning crashes upon the turret, shivers
the wall, the ruins roll into the river, and the earth trembles.

" Jesu Maria!" cried a voice from the midst of the ruins. -- Babet lay
lifeless on the ground -- the hail descended in torrents -- Frederick was
motionless -- William lifted Babet, who lay senseless, covered her with his
great coat, and turned toward the ruins, from whence the voice had issued. He
saw, and shuddered. -- Through the gaping wall, between stones which still
separated and tumbled down, appeared the figure of a young man as if rising out
of the grave. Pale and haggard, covered only with a few rags, he gazed wildly
it the strangers, and advanced in silence like a spectre.

"Who art thou?" cried William. The spectre answered not. The rain beat on his
uncovered head; he visibly trembled, and endeavored to hide his naked limbs.
Roused by William's summons, his friend turned round, and gazed at the figure,
which inspired a mingled feeling of compassion and fear. He sprang up, advanced
hastily toward the apparition, and cried in a rougher voice, "Who are you?
What do you want?"

"Spare me!" said the young man with trembling voice; "you see that God has now
spared me. -- I beheld from the turret how you kneeled* by the side of this
virtuous maid. -- Happy for me that you prize her so much! My Babet will pray
for me!"

" Your Babet?" cried Frederick starting back, and eyeing the figure with
doubtful penetrating looks, and reluctantly perceived in him an handsome young
man, whom want and misery had worn to the bone.

" Your Babet!" repeated William with curiosity.

" My Babet!" said the young man somewhat more firmly, and advanced
uninterrupted to the lifeless maid, kneeled beside her, and endeavored to warm
her cold hands between his. Frederick stood gazing speechless -- an indignant
feeling darted through his heart. He felt as if the odious wish arose in his
mind that Babet might never awake.

Meanwhile the stormy clouds had spent their fury, the thunder now rolled at a
greater distance, a soft shower revived the earth, the flowers again reared
their heads, the birds began to twitter; with the birds and the flowers Babet
also awoke, and found herself -- in the arms of her brother.

His countenance was the first object which met her half-opened eyes; it was
not extraordinary, therefore, that her imagination, assailed by dreams and by
realities, should fancy that she awoke in L^ysium. She thought herself
deceased, and transported to the abodes of the blessed.

"My brother Philip!" said she in feeble accents, "has death again united us?
-- Where is our father? -- Why comes he not to receive his daughter?"

When he heard the unsuspicious name of brother, peace returned to Frederick's
breast. The youth, against whom he thought he had felt an emotion of hatred,
suddenly became dear to him -- he was Babet's brother!

It was a long time before Babet could persuade herself that she was really
alive; the supposed spirit of her brother before her supported the deception,
which was not in any degree removed by the presence of her friends, for she
believed that they too had been killed by the lightning. The youth, by
lengthened misery and continual danger, from which he had not yet escaped, was
weakened both in mind and body; he still considered the strangers as pursuers,
who thirsted for his blood. In Frederick's bosom, joy on Babet's recovery
struggled with the apprehension of what might be the consequence of her having
found a brother, who might perhaps disapprove his love. These doubts kept him
pensive and silent.

William was the only one who, in a few minutes, recovered his presence of
mind. He observed that this place, drenched with rain, and the melancholy
prospect of the ruins, was not calculated for receiving mutual explanations. He
made a sign to his friend to lead the exhausted Babet home, while he himself
supported her tottering brother. The way was long through the dripping grove.
Whenever a drop from the branches fell upon Babet's hand or cheeks, the poor
maid started* (...) gazed at every tree or bush with a certain va^ant smile,
which showed how feebly her reason yet struggled with the delusions of
imagination.

Frederick's eyes hung upon her with anxious solicitude; her arm lay in his; he
trembled like the aspen-tree, whose overhanging leaves cooled the glow of his
cheeks; it was the most painful journey he had ever performed. He thought he
should never be able to reach its termination; he looked toward the house, and
yet wished that it were miles distant.

William was examined with keenness and apprehension by his haggard companion.
The nearer they approached the mansion house, the more his hollow eye testified
suspicion and uneasiness. Often he was on the point of running away, and
probably he would have yielded to this impulse had he felt himself strong
enough to escape from two vigorous pursuers. He trembled as he entered the
house, and his confidence did not return till on the stair he met the faithful
old footman, who threw himself at his feet with shouts or joy.

They at last reached Babet's apartment, where the brother and sister viewed
every thing around them with looks of wildness and surprise. William prescribed
for them refreshment and repose, medicines of powerful virtue even for diseased
minds.

CHAP. X. THE SEPARATION.
CHEVALIER BELLOY, the same whom his sister imagined to be on his way to
America, had seen his father and brother murdered by his side, and had
withdrawn himself from the fury of his persecutors by taking an asylum among
some inaccessible ruins, which in the amusements of his boyish days had been
thoroughly explored, and were perfectly familiar to him. Here he ventured for
many weeks only to creep out with the owls, to gather wild roots and fruits for
his subsistence. At first he supposed that the whole mansion was destroyed, and
that his sister too had fallen a prey to the rage of his sanguinary
persecutors, till one day, through the chink of his retreat, he saw her in deep
sorrow walking at the foot of the tower.

He was on the point of running down to throw himself into her arms, when he
was deterred by a dread of the loud expressions of her sudden joy. He did not
know who might be in the neighborhood; whether she might not be a prisoner.
Had he not reason to dread spies and ambush in every thicket? -- The sorrowful
Babet again retired from the tower; and though in a few days after want and
affection had overcome all his scruples, and he was determined to come forth in
spite of every danger, the lovely form never again appeared to his view.

At last, when he had no longer any means of supporting his existence, he
resolved in despair to quit his retreat, and again throw himself into his
sister's arms, or expose himself to the daggers of his blood-thirsty murderers.
He had for this purpose fixed upon the day when the roots he had collected by
moonlight were exhausted, and he had no longer any means of supporting his
wretched existence.

This, however, was the very day when our fugitives had been driven into the
grotto by the wild rabble, who filled the garden, the grove, and the whole
neighborhood with their frantic shouts. Philip thought he was betrayed, that
this careful search, this roar of the wild beasts for prey was directed against
him. More than once, indeed, the tower had been surrounded by the raging mob;
the boldest of them ventured into the tower, and clambered over the moss-grown
ruins. As the only access to Philip's retreat was by a small opening, before
which he had piled up the stones in artful disorder, he escaped their search.

As, however, nothing appeared more certain than that he was the object of
their pursuit, his fears were redoubled, and in the first days which succeeded
this incident, he did not even trust his life to the friendly darkness of
night, but resigned himself a prey to the most pressing hunger and thirst, till
he was almost too much reduced to be able to quit the place of his retreat*

Meanwhile he sometimes saw his sister in the neighborhood of the tower, and
rejoiced to see her safe. Now, however, she appeared to be attended by two
strangers, whose suspicious presence prevented him from discovering himself,
more especially as the deep grief which Babet's features bore, gave him reason
to apprehend that her attendants were no friends but guards.

When first in the obscurity of night he ventured out to allay his thirst in a
neighboring pond, despair drove him into the court of his father's house; and
had he found the door open, he would in spite of all danger have penetrated to
his sister's chamber; but all was fast. Should he make a noise, should he knock
at the door, must he not meet the suspicious strangers whom he daily saw
wandering in the garden? Irresolute he walked about till the first cock-crow
chased him back to his ruins.

Yet longer to endure this accumulation of misery was beyond the strength of a
young man reared in the lap of prosperity, on whom every joy of life had shed
its gentlest influence, and whom the winds of Heaven had never visited too
roughly, Want and despair unfolded that courage which* effeminacy and
profusion, had weakened: for all our virtues and vices are the offspring of
natural or artificial wants. He had formed an irrevocable determination the
ensuing night to force his way into his father's house, and, if it was
possessed by murderers, to die in his sister's arms. The tempest anticipated
the execution of his design, sprang open his dungeon, and accidentally threw
him into the hands of friends.

Such was the story which he communicated when refreshment had recovered him
from the first stupefaction of returning sensibility. The discovery that
William and Frederick were prisoners of war inspired him with confidence. Their
blue coats, which he had hitherto mistaken for the uniform of the national
guard, he no longer viewed with abhorrence, These men had fought for his
rights; they were of his political faith, and could not betray him. When
similar necessities and similar principles form a point of union among men, the
most suspicious souls soon cordially fraternise.

The clouds which had obscured Babet's mind now began to disperse. She felt
that she was alive, and appeared to be pleased at the feeling. William, who
anxiously observed every change of her countenance, now ventured more directly
to pronounce the prophetic dream to be a delusion of the imagination; and to
refute his opinion, she recapitulated the story of the apparition of her
father, and the awful summons, with the minutest circumstances. When she led
her friends to the window, to show them the place at the gate where the spectre
had walked and sighed, Frederick blushed, and stammered out the confession,
that he was the figure which had occasioned her so much uneasiness, and he
respectfully begged her forgiveness for having sighed so loud.

Babet's joy at this discovery served to conceal the ingenuous shame which
glowed in her cheeks, on hearing Frederick's confession. His romantic nocturnal
excursion recalled to her mind the uncommon eagerness with which, at the door
of the hermitage, he had expressed the wish that he might die with her.
Inexperienced as she was in the tender passion, she yet would have sworn that
this was love -- and the roses on her cheeks changed into the deepest scarlet.

Philip, who had long known that passion, guessed what passed in the heart of
the stranger. The conquest his sister had made seemed to give him pleasure, as
in his own destitute and unsettled situation he was unable to afford her
protection^; and he rejoiced at the prospect of her honor being secured, in a
union with a man of worth. That the modest, backward Frederick was no seducer
his own experience convinced him, for at the first glance he discovered a man
unhackneyed in the ways of vice. The same evening, too, William completely
removed every doubt, by availing himself of a favorable opportunity to
acquaint him with the pure and honorable passion of his friend.

"Is he a nobleman?" was the only question which the prejudices of this
Frenchman of the old school suggested; and when William, by an evasion, had
satisfied him upon that subject, he joyfully gave his consent to the proposal,
that, as soon as an exchange of prisoners took place, Babet should accompany
Frederick as his bride.

The bashful lover meanwhile had remained alone with the object of his wishes,
but his courage had ceased with the tempest. He allowed the favorable
opportunity of completing in the evening what he had begun in the morning, to
escape. They both sat in profound silence -- both fixed their eyes on the
ground -- Frederick because he had already said too much, and Babet because she
had heard too much to remain longer doubtful of the situation of his heart.

In the delightful feeling of having escaped the dangers by which they were
threatened, the little party spent, in friendly confidence and harmony, the
remainder of a day which had begun with such unfavorable auspices. They now
began to consult what was to be done with Philip. Babet insisted that he should
take refuge in the inaccessible cavern till the republican tempest had spent
its fury. Even Philip himself was at first inclined to this proposal. When he
was informed, however, of the treasure which had been found, and saw the casket
full of diamonds, with the value of which he acquainted the inexperienced
company, he suddenly changed his resolution.

He was too generous, indeed, or rather too thoughtless, notwithstanding
Babet's entreaties, to take more than a small proportion of his father's
bequest. He would not, as he said, diminish the little dowry of his sister, as
the three rings which he appropriated to himself were fully sufficient to carry
him out of the territories of France. He then proposed to equip himself in a
manner suitable to his rank, hasten to the army of the Prince of Conde, and
never again set his foot on the soil of his ungrateful country, till he came
back to reclaim his paternal inheritance with armed hand. "Thy sat, my dear
Babet," said he with a significant smile, "I commit to these brave men. They
are noblemen, they are soldiers, and I rely upon them with confidence. To them
I transfer the father's authority and the brother's duties, which fortune now
denies me an opportunity to exercise. Under their protection leave this
desolate mansion, as soon as they invite you to fly to a more safe and
agreeable retreat."

In vain Babet labored to prevail upon him to prefer the security of the
cavern to an unsafe flight; in vain she offered, since he was not to be
diverted from his resolution, to accompany him and share every danger. He urged
so many plausible and powerful reasons against this proposal, and William,
although he did not altogether approve the thoughtlessness with which the
Chevalier entrusted the happiness of his sister in the hands of men whom he had
never before seen, supported him so ably, that Babet was at last obliged to
yield.

The old servant procured his young master the dress of a peasant. They cut off
his hair, changed his fair complexion into a sunburned olive, and equipped in
large wooden shoes, accompanied by the faithful old footman, who knew every bye
road and footpath: the inconsiderate youth at midnight took leave of his
weeping sister. He first took the road to Montauban, where he expected the
assistance of a steady friend to enable him to proceed on his journey.

After his departure, the little society he had left behind lived more than a
month in great concord and tranquillity. Frederick enjoyed many delightful
hours, but it was only in seeing his beloved; for as often as William either
seriously or with raillery reproached him with his timidity, and often as he
himself formed the heroic resolution this day to open his heart, and to entreat
from Babet's lips the decision of his fate, yet he continued to return at night
to town as undecided as he had come, and communicated only to the trees the
secret which he ought to have confided to the ear of his mistress. -- We can
indeed offer but one apology for this conduct. Babet carefully avoided being
alone with him, and a declaration of love, even in presence of the best friend,
is, God knows why, a very unpleasant task.

Matters, however, could not long remain in this state. It was improper that a
young lady of sixteen should receive daily visits from two young officers. In
the present situation of the country, indeed, nobody paid any attention to
their conduct, and the new marriage code justified many things which formerly
would have attracted censure. But Babet herself felt the doubtful nature of her
situation, her tender sensibility revolted at it, and her helplessness alone
led her to suppress the dictates of her trembling delicacy. To this likewise
was added, the general report of a speedy exchange of prisoners, an event which
might daily take place. A sudden departure then must render the favorable issue
of Frederick's declaration still more doubtful; for experience tells us, that
it is easier to obtain a lady's consent, when there is the prospect of a long
courtship, and when she has time to think of her new situation. Precipitation
might ruin all.

This and much more did William daily urge to his bashful friend; nor was
Frederick insensible of the justice of his remonstrances, but he wanted courage
to obey his own conviction. One day, as they were walking slowly home in the
dusk of the evening, William bethought himself of endeavoring to give new
effect to his solicitations, by suggesting something, the mere possibility of
which is sufficient to drive a lover to despair. "What," said he, "if by your
procrastination the chastity and innocence of your mistress should be exposed
to danger? What, if a horde of frantic persons, hurried on by some criminal
ebullition -- a circumstance indeed which cannot be foreseen, but which, in the
present frenzy of the people, may always be apprehended -- should again burst
into Babet's house? The first time, the ghastly sight of her father's corpse
allayed their fury, but what now will protect her from their brutal outrage?"

Frederick stopped, stared wildly around and trembled.

"Who," proceeded William, "who will answer that even now, while we are walking
quietly here" --

"For heaven's sake, no more!" cried Frederick with trembling lips, "you have
succeeded, here is my hand. -- Sure as these planets revolve over our heads --
sure as a God is enthroned above these planets, tomorrow shall I tell her all!"

William received the hand and promise of his friend. In order to facilitate
this bold attempt, he resolved to remain at home next day, under pretense of
indisposition. Frederick hurried on before him, immers^d in thought. He
imagined himself at the feet of his mistress, sought words to express his
passion, and found that either Babet's language (...), or he had made but (...)
in the French tongue.

(...) habitation, scarcely (...) ^umber, and Frederick (...) the sweet dre^ms
(...) heard at the (...). A b^nd of (...) of troops (...). William started from
his sleep, r^bbed his eyes, and asked what was the matter.

An officer of the national guard, who was by trade a butcher, told him
roughly, that the number of prisoners of war in this little town was by far too
great; that symptoms of disorder had been observed, and the municipality had
therefore thought proper to transfer the half of their guests to the next
department. Lieutenant Perlstadt was among the latter, and therefore he would
be so good as to follow him immediately.

Frederick was confounded. William collected himself, and expressed a hope that
at least they would not separate him from his friend, but send them together to
the same place.

"To separate such friendship," pursued the officer bluntly, "is the very
object the municipality have in view." He begged them to make haste, as he had
many other prisoners to call out of their beds. "On account of the temper of
the people," added he, "who hate all foreigners, you may consider yourselves
indebted to the magistrates for giving orders that you should be sent out of
the town by night."

William easily saw that all kind of opposition would here be fruitless,
Frederick was too much stupefied by the order to be able to make any
preparation for his departure. William packed up the few necessaries which
belonged to his friend, and whispered in his ear: "Be easy! I will speak to
Babet tomorrow upon your affair."

Frederick embraced William, and took leave in silence. -- Silently he walked
along the streets, surrounded by grenadiers. At the gate he found the troop of
his companions already assembled; he joined them without saying a word, and a
sigh first relieved the oppression of his breast, when, in the stillness of
night, the detachment fi^ed past Babet's house.

CHAP. XI. THE FEVER.
THE lovely mourner did not hear with perfect indifference of the departure of
her lover. Besides that a young man who dotes upon a woman with his whole soul
must ever have a claim to some consideration, even with the most inflexible
beauty, Babet really felt a cordial regard for Frederick; and who knows how far
this feeling which she indulged without distrust might have carried her, had
not William's presence, unconsciously to both of them, extinguished every
softer emotion of his friend?

The sorrow she felt at Frederick's departure was rather sympathy with
William's grief; nay, we must confess that this feeling was instantly blended
with a sensation of secret joy, because in future she should enjoy William's
company without the constraint which the penetrating eye of a lover imposed.
Yet let it not be supposed that her mind distinctly avowed this thought. No; it
was only an obscure feeling which she never properly explained to herself, and
which, perhaps, she did not exactly understand.

With the most childish unembarrassment she laid her hand in his during their
walks, or she clung to him when the cold harvest wind rustled through the
trees; or she would allow him to carry her over a ditch; or eagerly snatched
the glass from his hand when he was overheated, and was about to swallow a
hasty draught. -- In a word, she gave him involuntarily so many proofs of her
innocent attachment, and the sparks of love diffused so many new charms over
her enchanting form, that it required the infinite affection he bore Jeanette,
and the pure friendship he entertained for Frederick, to enable him to avoid
the dangerous influence of a passion, which it would have been criminal to
indulge.

Never, perhaps, had his constancy sustained a severer trial. Better acquainted
than Babet with the wandering of the human heart, he ventured to examine the
state of his feelings; he could not but perceive that the beauty and innocence
of this maid powerfully interested him, he trembled when he contemplated the
precipice on which he stood, and resolved, the better to avoid the danger, to
hasten the discovery which he had promised to communicate of his friend's
attachment.

He was not deterred from the performance of his promise by observing that
Babet avoided all conversation upon this subject; that she endeavored to
interrupt what she could not altogether shun. He declared to her with warmth
and importunity, that it was in her power to make his friend happy, and at the
same time to confer the greatest happiness upon himself. Babet had but one
answer to all that William urged so eloquently in favor of the absent lover.

"But do I love him?" said she blushing, while she peeped through the veil over
her long silken eye-lashes. "But do I love him?" repeated she with glowing
cheeks, as she darted a glance at the more fortunate advocate, which told him
what he durst not suppose. In a word, the suitor was obliged to content himself
with the equivocal answer: that she would leave her resolution to be formed by
time, that she would not studiously resist his wishes, but would heartily
acknowledge whenever she began to feel any thing more for Frederick than
esteem."

His absence, while William was daily with her, was not very well calculated
indeed to effect so favorable an alteration. And why then did not William
modestly decline his visits, when he but too distinctly perceived that his
intercourse with Babet would be fatal to his friend? -- Two sophistical
reasons, backed by vanity, prevented this necessary step. "She is quite alone,"
thought she, "she has no protector but me. I cannot venture to abandon the
young helpless orphan to chance. And besides, the interest of my friend! Must I
not rather redouble my visits, to talk to her daily of his accomplishments, and
thus by degrees animate her heart to love?"

Alas! all this might have perfectly succeeded, had he only apprised her of the
secret that he was married; that he was united to an amiable wife, and was now
perhaps a father. But we must here confess a weakness in our hero -- a weakness
which he had in common with three-fourths of his sex Although unquestionably he
laid no claim to Babet's love, yet he secretly felt himself so flattered by it,
that such a discovery daily became more unpleasant. Often the decisive word
hovered upon his lips; but one of Babet's ingenious glances again overthrew his
resolution; and though he did not use the smallest effort to cherish the flame,
it was high treason to friendship and to love not to extinguish it. Far be it
from us, therefore, to attempt to justify our hero's foible, who, in this
instance, allowed himself to be governed by his vanity.

(...) did not attempt to justify himself at the bar of (...) conscience. He
bitterly reproached his own conduct, and daily procrastinated with honest but
(...) ^solutions, till a good angel came seasonably to his relief.

One evening when he entered his apartment in profound meditation, he found a
letter from Jeanette lying upon the table. He blushed, pressed the well known
characters to his lips, and hastily broke the seal. She informed him of her
happy delivery, described the beauty of the lovely boy, her maternal
transports, her anxiety to see the beloved father. All was tenderness and love.
Not a trace of jealousy was to be found in the whole letter; every line
discovered the fondest confidence, which rejected the most distant thought of
the possibility of infidelity. Ha! this generosity touched him to the quick. A
tear started in his eye; he raised his eyes, and secretly swore to God and his
conscience to appear before Babet next day with this letter in his hand.

And indeed this time he would have kept his word, but the caprice of fortune
was not yet weary of embittering his cup of life. In the morning William awoke
in a strong fever, which had been occasioned by a cold he had caught in coming
home one wet harvest evening. At first he paid no attention to it. He attempted
to rise and put on his clothes, but scarcely had he left his bed, when the
fever attacked him more violently. One shivering fit succeeded another, and
again compelled him to return to bed.

There was but one physician in the town, who combined with William's
impatience to increa^e a slight indisposition. On the fifth day he felt his
strength so impaired by a profusion of drugs, that he began to fear he should
never more revisit his native land.

When Babet had for somedays expected in vain a visit from her friend, she sent
a peasant boy to the town to inquire after him. The news of the danger in which
the man she secretly loved was placed, plunged her into ^spe^able anxiety. An
hundred times she was on the point of flying to his bed side, and an hundred
times her female modesty withheld her. She now felt, and for the first time
acknowledged to herself, how much she was attached to William. She now saw that
it was on his account that life had acquired new charms. Two or three times a
day she sent the boy to town to bring her tidings of his health. The impatience
with which she expected his return, the inquisitive anxiety with which she ran
to meet him, indubitably testified the warmth of her attachment.

William's illness, though not dangerous, was very lingering. It left a languor
and debility behind, which prevented him from going abroad. In a few weeks he
again walked through the room, but he could not mount the stair, and durst not
venture to expose himself to the bleak autumn winds. He always sent, however,
the most flattering accounts to his anxious friend, and was so accustomed to
the appearance of the little messenger, that at the hour when the latter used
to arrive he stood at the window, and expected him with impatience.

All at once the boy failed to come at the usual hour. He came not in the
morning; he did not appear in the evening. This surprised William the first
day; the second it gave him uneasiness; the third his anxiety was extremely
painful; and on the fourth he could no longer endure the tortures of suspense.
He threw on his great-coat, supported himself on a crutch, and slowly bent his
way along the well-known road.

When he saw at a distance Babet's habitation, his heart beat; but he carried
his talisman, Jeanette's letter, in his bosom, and it was the anxiety of
friendship alone which caused his agitation. Expectation redoubled his strength
and his speed. He entered the gate with inquisitive looks; he went through the
desolate court; he ascended the stair, found all the doors open, and all the
apartments empty. Not a trace was to be seen of Babet or her servant; not a
sound announced the presence of a human being.

"Perhaps," thought he, "some new tumult has compelled her to take refuge in
the cavern." He endeavored to grope his way in the dark down to the dungeon,
and to find the place where the entrance of the cavern was guarded by loose
stones. He found it, and whispered softly -- then louder and louder: "Babet! It
is I! it is your friend!" -- In vain, all was silent.

"Perhaps," did hope again suggest, "solitude has renewed her enthusiastic
turn. Perhaps I shall find her in the grotto." -- With much difficulty he
succeeded in finding his way back through the dark winding passages. He went to
the garden, traversed the grove through the leafless trees, went softly over
the bridge, stood before the door of the grotto, and saw nothing but the
picture of desolation.

"My God," exclaimed he, "what can have become of the helpless creature?" --
With exhausted strength he pryed round the whole neighborhood, visited the
hermitage, searched the ruins of the tower, through which he clambered, calling
every where the name of Babet -- but in vain.

One time the murmur of the stream deceived his ear; again the buz of a
grasshopper in the neighboring thicket. Still he hoped to clasp Babet; but his
hopes deceived him, and every moment his strength decreased. At last he sunk
down exhausted under the lime tree on the lawn, and fell into a kind of
unconscious stupor. "Is there then no compassionate mortal at hand, who can
give me some intelligence of her? -- Would I could but see the little
messenger?" -- In vain; his vows were unheard, and the approaching night
obliged him at last to think of returning home without being able to form one
probable conjecture respecting Babet, to cheer him on his solitary way.

Distracted by gloomy presages, tortured by the thought of the despair into
which his friend would be plunged by the intelligence, he proceeded on to the
town in sorrowful plight, his head reclining on his breast, when he met a
peasant boy chanting merrily, " Allons, erfans de la patrie!" The sound roused
him from his reverie. He looked up -- it was the little messenger. "Ha!" cried
he hastily, "what has become of the lady, who for some weeks past sent you
daily to inquire for me?"

"The lady?" said the boy carelessly, "I don't know. Three days ago she engaged
me to come to her, as usual, the following day. When I went, however, she was
gone; I found nobody at all in the house."

The boy could tell him nothing more. Tired of importunate questions, he took
off his hat, again began to sing, and went his way.

CHAP. XII. THE CONFLAGRATION.
BABET's sudden elopement made so violent an impression upon William, that his
illness became more serious than ever, and he would not perhaps have escaped a
dangerous relapse, if he had leisure to dwell upon his situation, and had
followed the advice of his physician, who ordered him to keep his bed; for
nothing, perhaps, tends more to confirm sickness than such a regimen. He now
forgot his own health, and made incessant inquiries after Babet in all the
neighboring country; traversed every road, and searched avery village, to
discover some traces of her. Thus the fresh air and exercise superseded the
physician, and completely cured the patient without farther prescription.

His conscience now became uneasy, and smarted severely at the least touch. To
the blame which he justly had incurred, his ingenuous sensibility added a new
charge, which preyed upon him no less acutely. When after long inquiry and
reflection William could discover no other reason for Babet's mysterious
flight, vanity at last whispered him, that she had fled from him to seek that
cure from the soothing hand of time, which his coldness had apprised her that
she could not expect from love.

Alas! had he but told her sooner that he was married, this would never have
happened. If a traveller ignorant of his way comes to a thick gloomy wood, and
finds an high road, he proceeds with caution; even a foot-path may induce him
to go on; but if there is neither beaten track nor pathway, he returns. So is
it with the labyrinth of Love, in which Cupid's bye roads abound, but through
which, too, the great high road of Hymen leads. If the latter is shut, some
Werter seeks a forbidden path; a virtuous maid turns quick and flies, however
sweetly Love's groves and nightingales may entice. -- Babet would have overcome
her passion, she now had been the bride of his friend, had not childish vanity
-- Alas! how he blushed for his weakness! -- and be assured, the worst kind of
shame is that which surprises us when there is none to witness its effects.

Where now was he to inquire for Babet? -- Where obtain intelligence of her? --
It was dangerous to inquire after her with too much anxiety. The steps of the
prisoners were watched with jealousy; their conversation and their conduct were
marked. Babet's family was obnoxious; the warm interest he expressed for her
might excite suspicion of a secret connection, and at this time a secret
connection was always considered a conspiracy.

He durst venture, therefore, only to put indirect questions, or endeavor by
some artifice to discover what he sought; but the unsatisfactory answers which
he thus obtained, afforded him no light in his darkness. He at last was silent,
and expected from accident a clue to the mystery.

In order, if possible, to put himself in the way of such a discovery, he
wandered about from morning till night through all the villages in the
neighborhood, and failed not from time to time to visit Babet's habitation,
which he still found desolate and forlorn.

One evening he wandered weary with his search through a village, returning
cheerless home with still renewed disappointment. Scarcely had he got through
the village, when suddenly he heard a cry of Fire! He looked back, and saw a
cottage in flames, which spread so rapidly, that before William could reach the
spot, the neighboring houses were in a blaze. The inhabitants flocked together
from all quarters; every thing that could be rescued from the flames was saved,
and William vigorously contributed his assistance to carry off whatever he
could reach. Sometimes he bore a chest upon his shoulders, which anxiety alone
enabled him to carry; now he tottered under heavy bundles of linen; and again,
to recover himself, stood at the well to supply water. The flames continued to
rage, the fire gained ground, those who endeavored to extinguish it shouted,
the unfortunate proprietors lamented their fate, and the fire bell rang.

A piercing cry suddenly burst through the dreadful noise, and struck William's
ear. He made his way to the place from which the voice of woe proceeded, and
saw a young woman rolling herself on the ground in the agonies of despair. She
had been in the fields at work when the fire broke out; she ran breathless to
the spot, and found her cottage in flames. She had left a sucking infant in the
cradle, and a boy of eight years old to watch his little sister. Neither of
them was any where to be found; the flames prevented all access to the cottage,
and the roof every moment threatened to fall in.

The woman lay on the ground, tearing her hair, and uttering such bitter cries
as cut the hearts of the bystanders. "My children! my children! -- My Antony!
my little Babet!" -- William could not sustain this cruel spectacle. Without
consideration -- for the ^llest reflection would, on the present occasion, have
deterred him from the rash deed -- he plunged into the flames.

The spectators shuddered -- the mother raised herself on her knees, and
stretched her hands to heaven in the attitude of prayer. She could not speak --
she only cried, and God heard her cries! -- With the screaming boy in one hand,
and the sleeping babe in the other, their deliverer returned in half a minute,
and, almost suffocated with dust and smoke, dropped senseless at the feet of
the weeping mother.

Her joy expressed itself in the wildest transports. She pressed the children
warmly to her breast -- laughed, wept, and prayed -- crept to William, kissed
his feet, bathed him in tears, blessed him! -- Then she raised the little
suckling to Heaven, and ordered the boy to fold his hands, and pray for his
benefactor. The old men stood round -- tears hung on their gray eye-lashes;
they pulled off their caps when William again opened his eyes, and gazed at him
with respect as a superior being.

The flames were at last extinguished; no lives were lost; William was the only
person who had sustained much injury, and lay unable to crawl home. "Generous
stranger," said the woman, "willingly would I carry you to my cottage, but I
have none to offer you!" -- "Come to mine, come to mine," cried an hundred
voices. They contended for the honor of entertaining the stranger, who had so
magnanimously risked his life. An old man at last obtained the preference,
because his house was nearest. William was removed to it with the utmost
tenderness, and every thing was provided that could contribute to remove the
pain, or conduce to his refreshment.

The grateful woman watched all the first night beside him. She sat with the
babe at her breast by his bedside, and offered secret prayers to Heaven for
his recovery. They had applied to his wound a salve composed of olive oil and
sweet cream, mixed with some white lead, a remedy which so greatly assuaged the
pain, that about midnight he fell asleep, and next morning when the day was
well advanced he awoke, greatly strengthened and ^efreshed.

To what delightful sensations does he awake, whose first reflections are on
the good action he performed the day before! Delightful sensations! -- The
happy mother sat before him, and smiled with ineffable benignity. She held out
to him the little Babet, as if she would have said: "See there that lovely
innocent; to thee she owes her life!" The dear name of Babet awakened in his
mind a train of agreeable ideas, which perhaps yesterday, when the mother
expressed her agonising grief, had unconsciously assisted to compel him to the
rash attempt. He now learned that the husband and brother of the young woman
served in the national guard; that they had lately been ordered on an
expedition, from which they were daily expected to return; and that, reduced to
poverty by the conflagration, they would feel nothing so poignantly as their
inability to testify their gratitude.

William was so unweariedly tended with the most anxious care, that in a few
days he was in a situation to quit the house of his benevolent host. He was
followed with blessings from every quarter. The young woman accompanied him out
of the village; and when he was about to leave her, she attempted to kiss his
hand. She entreated him with tears not to forget her, but as often as his walks
were in this direction to call at her house, and taste the joys of the noble
action he had performed.

He promised to visit her again, shook her heartily by the hand, and,
accompanied by the delightful feeling of having been the benefactor of an
honest family, which he considered r^ (...) enough, he walked light and
cheerily home.

CHAP. XIII. THE PASSPORT.
WHILE all this was passing upon the agitated theater of French liberty, Nature
had set free a little captive, who had long been expected with anxiety.
Jeanette was delivered of a boy -- lovely as a May Day would I say, were all
Maydays lovely. To use a comparison more precise, the little William was lovely
as every mother considers her firstborn son. Jeanette, as is usual with
mothers, thought him very sensible at the end of fourteen days. She alone saw
him laugh, she alone saw in his scarce visible nose the counter part of the
hawk nose of her husband. She remarked that he already knew her, that he
stretched out his hands to her -- In a word, the boy was just such a prodigy as
the whole world is peopled with, if we were to believe what mothers tell us.

Poor Jeanette's joy at the birth of her boy was greatly embittered by the
intelligence of William's captivity. It was some consolation to her, indeed,
that his life was no longer exposed to the swords and bullets of the enemy, and
that she might now hear or read of battles without trembling. But yet was not
her beloved exposed to a thousand dangers, which perhaps it might be more
difficult to parry than the grenadier's bayonet in the open field? Did he not
live in a country were vague suspicion passed for convicted guilt, and where
the people at once pronounced and executed the sentence? -- But, should his
prudence and discretion elude the ever weakful jealousy of his foes, might he
not be sick? -- A new climate, anxiety, ennui, every thing which can affect the
health, may lay him on a sick bed, and who then is to care for him? -- Who
watch and tend him? -- Who give him his medicines at the proper moment? -- Paid
hirelings! who with pleasure would see him die, in order to rob the deceased
stranger! -- Has he not a wife whom love and duty call to his aid? -- The
journey is dangerous, but do love and duty shrink from any difficulties? -- The
journey is attended with many obstacles and hardships, but is love acquainted
with trifles like these? -- Did William weigh all these considerations when he
came from the camp to Munster? -- But the mother must leave her newborn child
-- Alas! that indeed is the hardest condition of all! -- The little sweet
creature is so infinitely dear to her! almost as dear as his father! -- Her
heart is distracted, but at length decides for him -- him who by his unbounded
love has acquired a right to every sacrifice.

Jeanette made every arrangement which maternal anxiety could suggest for the
most careful treatment of her child. She committed him to the superintendance
of a clergyman's widow, who was her friend and neighbor. She left him in the
hands of a nurse, an honest country woman who loved the boy as her own child.
The moment of separation was dreadful, but she tore herself away, and obeyed
the dictates of the most sacred duty. Accompanied only by the faithful Peter,
she set out on her journey, and arrived safe at Paris, at this period the
theater of Robespierre's enormities.

She had taken the precaution to feign herself poor, and Peter appeared a
perfect sans culotte. She accordingly enjoyed the most enviable advantage which
could be possessed at this moment, that of remaining unnoticed. Hitherto a
guardian angel seemed to have guided her steps, but no difficulties increased
upon her which it was difficult for an helpless woman to surmount. She remained
several weeks in Paris before she could learn to whom she ought to apply for a
passport, to carry her safe through the interior of France. She was sent from
one office to another, and no where was she treated with the respect due to her
sex. Here a tailor gave himself airs, there she was exposed to the vulgar jests
of a peruke-maker, dressed out with the tri-coloured cockade; here she was
hooted by a secretary, and there imposed upon by a clerk. Those who treated her
best, advised her not to excite suspicion by too much importunity, and bade her
be patient till tomorrow.

Judge of the situation of a poor helpless woman, who alone in the midst of
this huge Golgotha unacquainted with the dangers by which she was surrounded,
trod every moment on the brink of a precipice, knew nothing of the forms it was
necessary to observe, and among a million of pretended philanthropists, could
not find a single good man, who showed a real principle of humanity and
friendship. Think of the misery of a woman who longed, with the most glowing
impatience, to be again united to her husband; who every morning left her
lodgings with renewed hopes that now she should attain the object and reward of
her fond perseverence, when she returned home again in the evening weary and
forlorn. Thus did several weeks elapse, and the sickness of hope disappointed,
began at length to give place to despair.

One morning, when she had wandered from street to street, and from office to
office, and had every where in vain sought humanity under the red cap,
exhausted with fatigue, she lost herself in the garden of the Thuilleries, sunk
down upon a bench, and, without regarding the company passing by, bitterly wept
her fate. Many stopped and gazed at her a moment. Many, accustomed to the daily
spectacle of misery, passed carelessly along. Nobody asked, "Poor woman, what
is the matter with you?"

A beautiful woman, elegantly dressed in the Grecian style, now came down one
of the walks. Jeanette did not observe her. The lady observed Jeanette with
sympathy, did not stop indeed, but frequently looked back. After passing on a
little she returned, repassed the mourner, and whispered* "Do not weep, my
child! To shed tears is a crime here!"

Jeanette looked up. -- Scarce had she time to observe the benignant profile of
the lovely stranger; but the features were so blended with humanity and
kindness, that they instantly inspired the poor outcast with confidence. She
started up, followed the lady, and eagerly exclaimed: "Ah! madam, pity a poor
helpless stranger!"

The angelic creature turned timorously round, and said eagerly: "Not here! not
here! -- Come in the evening to the Rue St. Hanore, and inquire at number 27,
for Theresa Cabarrus. The present Madame Tall^on.


She disappeared, but her words remained deep in Jeanette's memory. With
impatience she expected the evening; hope lent her wings; with serene
confidence she appeared before the amiable Theresa.

"Forgive me, Madam," said the gentle creature, "forgive me for seeming this
morning to treat you with harshness; but you know not how dangerous it is in
this place to show compassion for the unfortunate. Here we are alone. Impart to
me your distress. Your figure, and the expression of grief on your countenance,
have inspired me with the wish to be of service to you. I have a little
influence. Speak freely."

Alas! such accents! such kind attentive goodness were now strange to
Jeanette's ear and heart. She burst into tears, but they were tears of
melancholy pleasure. The artless narrative of her simple tale affected Theresa.
She detained the amiable wife, to whom she felt herself attracted, to supper,
and set down to write a note. She then entertained her guest with the most
unconstrained cheerfulness, and carefully avoided touching upon any chord which
did not found in unison with innocent gaiety. Jeanette, animated with new
hopes, forgot the sorrows by which she was oppressed. What Theresa said was so
kind and so elegantly expressed, that even a woman was compelled to yield her
whole attention. The few hours which elapsed till supper flew rapidly and
pleasantly away. They sat down to table -- and when Jeanette lifted her cover
she found a passport in the plate.

CHAP. XIV. THE MAYOR.
THE happy pilgrim breathed silent blessings over her guardian angel when she
saw the barrier of Paris shut behind her. Engrossed with delightful
contemplations she lolled in the corner of her chaise. The most enchanting
landscapes passed unnoticed. She never stopped at any stage. Twenty times a day
indeed was Jeanette obliged to show her passport; but it was immediately
returned to her with sulky looks, because the most dexterous inquisitor could
find no error in it.

The anxious wife, hastening to her beloved husband, allowed herself neither
repose nor refreshment; the third day had dawned, when a restless slumber
overpowered her for a few moments. A large town now presented itself to their
view, where she resolved to stop till next morning, to recruit her exhausted
strength.

As she entered the gate she heard a noise in the neighboring streets, to which
at first she paid no attention. When she came near the marketplace, however,
she saw an immense crowd of people, who ^locked together from all quarters. She
was now alarmed; for all she had read and heard of the wild ebullitions of
popular fury suddenly recurred to her mind.

Alas! in a luckless hour she had entered within the walls of the town. It
would be supersluous to relate how the tumult arose. The people resemble the
sand in the desert, which at first whirled round by the gentle breeze in little
volumes, is by degrees agitated deeper and deeper, till it swells into a
sweeping torrent which overwhelms every thing it meets, tears the trees up by
the roots, and buries men and houses in destruction.

Some Jacobin had been preaching up the plundering system of an equal division
of property, and collected the journeymen, and porters, and servants, by the
force of their arms to carry it into effect. The enfuriated people assembled in
crowds to murder a source of rich people, and share their inheritance under the
banner of liberty.

When Jeanette entered the town, the people were entertaining themselves with
that spectacle with which they had so often been glutted since the 9th
Thermidor, that of bloody heads carried in procession upon pikes. The carriage
was suddenly caught in the crowd, and could move neither backward nor forward.
Jeanette trembled and grew pale when she perceived the frantic rabble, who,
instead of the former images of saints and consecrated banners, carried in
triumph the bloody ensigns of human heads which they had cut off.

Peter sat on the coach-box, and gazed with open mouth and looks of horror. The
lofty box made the poor fellow, against his will, a prominent object. When the
sanguinary rout came up, one of the standard-bearers thought proper to practice
the cruel jest of clapping the goary head to Peter's nose, and insisted on his
kissing it. As Peter did not understand a word of French, and therefore did not
know what they required him to do, the natural disgust which such a spectacle
inspired, taught him to turn away the bloody head with both his hands. But the
greater reluctance he expressed, and the more he protested, in German, against
this violence, the more obstinate the people became, and with frantic shouts
insisted that he should obey.

Jeanette dropped down senseless. Her faithful servant was torn from the box,
kicked and abused in the most cruel manner. Peter must have fallen a sacrifice
to their fury, if the attention of the miscreants had not been withdrawn from
the footman to his mistress in the carriage. "This way, brothers!" cried one of
them in a brutal tone, "here is an Austrian lady, who cannot stand the sight of
royalist blood." They broke open the carriage, pulled out the unconscious
victim, searched her pockets, plundered her of her money, took her passport,
tore it to pieces, and scattered it in the air.

Already a thousand voices thundered her doom, and a savage monster, with an ax
in his hand, offered to undertake the office of her executioner. Most
seasonably, at this moment, a young man, of a genteel appearance, followed by a
detachment of the national guard, made his way through the crowd, and, in the
name of the law, enjoined tranquillity. This command, enforced by threatening
bayonets, procured respect, and rescued the victim. The people dispersed with
murmurs.

When Jeanette opened her eyes, she found herself, surrounded by soldiers, in
the arms of a young man, who gazed at her with complacency. He announced
himself as the mayor of the town, and so politely congratulated himself on his
good fortune in being her deliverer, that Jeanette immediately recognized him
to be an elegant, accomplished man. -- "Take courage, madam," said he with
respectful interest, "the danger is over. Have the goodness to allow me to
conduct you to my house. My wife and I will do every thing in our power to give
you a better opinion of our town."

The mention of a wife redoubled Jeanette's confidence; she accepted his offer
with thanks; he assisted her into the carriage, which the guard surrounded, and
he himself followed on foot. Poor Peter was so beaten and bruised, that he was
not able to mount the coach-box, but was obliged to be led by two grenadiers.
He had, at last, found out what they wished him to do, and in whimpering voice
cursed the horrible proposal. "Were there never," said he to his conductors,
"another woman for me in the world but here, and were she the fairest that ever
was seen, I should not come for her to your country, and be forced to kiss
bloody heads." The soldiers looked at him and laughed, for they did not
understand what he said -- Every body knows, but the circumstance has never
been explained, even by Kant, that an ignorant man always laughs when he does
not understand a thing. -- The mayor's lady welcomed the stranger with polite
hospitality. She was ushered into an elegant apartment, which was furnished
with every convenience; the table was covered with all kinds of refreshments.
They pressed her earnestly to partake of them; but when she assured them that
she wanted nothing but repose, they politely withdrew and left her alone.

Her first care was to thank God on her knees for her deliverance. She threw
herself on the bed, which was adorned with silken curtains, that formed an
agreeable shade. She fell asleep, and did not awake till the evening, greatly
refreshed. Scarcely had a little noise she made announced that she was awake,
when the mistress of the house drew aside the curtains, kindly inquired how she
did, and invited her to supper in the family circle.

Jeanette appeared in full splendor of youthful beauty. The roses which terror
had chased from her cheeks, bloomed afresh. Refreshing sleep, and a delightful
dream of having met with her husband, had kindled a delicate fire in her eye.
Every body complimented her, all pressed round her, every one endeavored to say
something civil, and Beaublanc himself (for that was the mayor's name)
distinguished himself by his assiduity, conversed with her in the most
agreeable manner, and strove to anticipate her most trivial wishes.

Jeanette would have forgot herself in this pleasing society, if her anxiety to
see William had not been much more powerful than the charms of any kind of
amusement. Immediately after supper she entreated her deliverer to send for
post horses, as she wished to pursue her journey, even by night. Her request
seemed to throw him into some confusion. He represented to her the necessity of
repose; he called a physician, who happened to be in company, to give weight to
his remonstrance; and when nothing could shake the impatience of the anxious
wife to be gone, he exaggerated the dangers to which she exposed herself, as
the people still swarmed disorderly round the house; he promised her next day
to take precautions for her safety. All was in vain. Jeanette persevered in her
resolution to set off immediately.

Beaublanc at last was obliged to acquiesce, and begged to see her passport,
which his duty required him to examine. Jeanette hastily put her hand in her
pocket -- but how great was her terror when she found neither passport nor
money, and was obliged to bring out her hand empty! -- "Ah! God!" exclaimed
she, turning pale as ashes -- "Ah! God!" -- She could say no more -- her knees
shook, and she was forced to sit down.

The mayor seemed to receive the news of this unfortunate accident with feigned
concern, and a secret joy was painted in his countenance. He comforted her with
the utmost kindness, and promised to write immediately to Paris, giving a
faithful statement of the accident, and immediately procure her a new passport.
He assured her likewise that she need not be under any uneasiness respecting
money, for he should consider himself happy in being permitted to lend her. He
entreated her, during the short delay, to consider his house as her own, and in
the mean time to announce to her husband her speedy arrival.

She listened to all he said in silent stupor, and could only express her
thanks in broken sentences.

The proposals, indeed, were the most agreeable which, in her situation, could
be made; and since fortune had resolved to make her the object of its caprice,
it was happy that she had found a house were she could remain with comfort and
with respectability, and await a more favorable turn of her affairs. She
yielded, therefore, to the necessity of circumstances, and with tears entreated
the mayor to hasten his proffered assistance.

He repeated the consolatory assurance, promised this very evening to dispatch
a courier to Paris, and in the mean time enjoined his domestics to do every
thing to render the agreeable stranger as happy as her situation would admit.
"My example," added he, "will teach you how to conduct yourselves."

Alas! this last was the only point in which he kept his word. Beaublanc
belonged to that class of good weak men who are irresistibly attracted by new
charms. He was married to an amiable woman, with whom before his marriage he
had carried on a long and romantic courtship, and encountered a thousand
obstacles before he attained the object of his wishes. He loved her still, his
heart was hers, but his licentiousness she was not able to restrain. Many a
tear she wept in secret; sometimes a tender reproach escaped her, which the
young man felt indeed, but it produced no other effect but to render him more
guarded in his intrigues, and more secret in his infidelities. When he was
detected, he threw himself at her feet, clasped her knees, wept, entreated,
called himself a wretched licentious profligate, and could not conceive, when
he possessed so amiable a wife, how he could have any taste for other charms.
In a word, he never ceased till she tenderly forgave him.

After these occasions succeeded an interval of domestic happiness for two or
three months, during which his wife was satisfied with his conduct, and he was
satisfied with himself; for after such occurrences he seriously endeavored to
correct his bad habits, but all his resolution vanished if a new beauty fell in
his way. In a word, he resembled a needle, which turns steadily to its pole so
long as it is not attracted by some new and more powerful magnet.

Jeanette's appearance happened just in one of these intervals of domestic
tranquillity, during which Beaublanc had been the best husband in the world, and
when he had solemnly promised after his last error never to wander again. Who
could have suspected that he should thus accidentally meet with a woman like
Jeanette? who seemed as if formed by an adverse fate on purpose to triumph over
his firmest resolutions. When he rescued her from the fury of the populace;
when she lay senseless in his arms, and her half-covered bosom beat against
his; when her lily cheeks touched his, and his mouth received the first breath
which reanimated her lips -- ah! his heart was gone! -- His attention, his
hospitality, his humane exertions sp^ang from a source which his experienced
wife easily discovered. These suspicions which had been but too often
justified, awaked. She trembled, and concealed her apprehension, too patient to
cry Fire on perceiving the first sparks, and too generous to revenge the
inconstancy of her husband on an innocent stranger.

During the first day she consoled herself in the expectation of the speedy
departure of her guest; but when the disagreeable accident of the loss of the
passport was mentioned, when she discovered the secret joy of her husband, and
saw herself compelled to entertain so dangerous a rival in the house for
several weeks, her only hope was in the character of the stranger, whose
dignified manners and modest reserve inspired her with confidence that the
licentious views of her husband would here be disappointed.

She was not mistaken. It was some time before Jeanette perceived the unwelcome
triumph of her charms; and when she could no longer doubt the fact, it caused
her the most cruel vexation. Her situation became more painful than ever. What
could she now do? -- Was she to ^ease with importunities the man who had saved
her life, and given her a secure asylum in his house? -- But he had not yet
made any express declaration of his passion. His looks only spoke what he felt;
a thousand little attentions betrayed the state of his heart. It was possible
that he struggled with himself, that he endeavored to extinguish his rising
attachment, and in this case he deserved pity rather than reproach. How happy
would she have been to have aided his struggling virtue by a sudden slight! but
whither could she fly, without money, and without a passport?

Should she confide the secret to her kind hostess? Ought she to awaken the
jealousy of an unsuspecting wife; and, as a reward for her sisterly attention,
plant a dagger in her heart? No! She rather chose to be silent, to conceal her
anguish, to throw a veil over her grief, and resolved as much as possible to
avoid the company of Beaublanc, and to wait the arrival of her passport in
solitude, which she took every opportunity to indulge. She contrived many
pretexts for spending the forenoon in her own apartment. In the afternoon she
was going to write to William, or an headache furnished her with an apology,
or she walked with her hostess in the garden. Often too unwelcome guests
detained the mayor, so that he found but little opportunity to enjoy the
company of his new love.

The conduct which Jeanette observed was indeed perfectly well calculated to
keep Beaublanc at a distance; but it could have little effect in repressing his
passion, since perpetual obstacles only inflamed him the more, and drove him to
despair. The more his wife felt herself indebted to the delicate and discreet
conduct of the generous stranger, the more expedients did Beaublanc contrive to
prolong Jeanette's stay, in the hope that a favorable opportunity would at
last lead to the accomplishment of his wishes.

For the attainment of his object he was not very scrupulous about the means he
employed. A month had elapsed, the new passport had really arrived, but
Beaublanc concealed it. During this period Jeanette had written eight letters
to her husband; but Beaublanc had suppressed them, and his jealousy delighted
to observe the anguish of the wife, who considered William's silence as an ill
presage. He himself undertook to make inquiries in the place where William
resided, but only to communicate to her equivocal intelligence. Sometimes he
gave the anxious wife reason to suspect the death of her husband; sometimes he
told her of a prisoner of war answering his description who had married a rich
heiress.

With regard to the passport, it was easier to mislead her unsuspecting
confidence; for what could be more natural than in the revolutionary confusion
which now prevailed in Paris that such a tri^^e should be forgotten? -- A
letter to Theresa remained unanswered. Theresa and William were silent
precisely for the same reason.

The poor forlorn Jeanette, separated from all she loved and honored, trembling
for the life of her husband, of her child, wept bitter tears in secret. As
Beaublanc had now completely laid aside the mask, as he became more pressing,
and did not hesitate eve^ to offend her tender ear with his ardent passion, her
sorrows reached the highest pitch.

She endeavored by raillery and remonstrance, by severity and by mildness, to
recall him to the path of reason and of duty, but in vain. He remained unmoved
by her tears, deaf to her representations, and callous to the silent grief of
his wife. He was at no pains to conceal the hope that William might be dead. He
labored to render her familiar with this frightful idea. He insinuated how
easy it would be for him, according to the present marriage code of France, to
procure a separation from his wife. He dropped hints of his wealth, his
consequence, the splendid life which he could enable a wife whom he loved to
enjoy. In a word, he left no arts unemployed which could shake Jeanette's
conjugal fidelity. Her passions he likewise endeavored to engage by the display
of an elegant figure which was animated and adorned by the glow of love; and he
exerted himself to give it new charms by the most tasteful display of dress.

It is unnecessary to assure the reader that all his arts were bassled, and
fell harmless from Jeanette's heart, like a blunt arrow from a mail of steel.
Not a foul drop ever mingled in the pure fountain of her feelings. Never once
did her vanity listen with compl^cency to his passion, and even the certainty
of William's death would have produced no alteration in her sentiments. But
this did not at all contribute to render her situation less wretched. She was
dependent upon a man who labored to obtain his criminal object at every risk;
who, as appeared, did not even shrink from the commission of a crime if it
promised to conduct him to his wishes; for he had now gone so far as to throw
out menaces, and to drop hints at which her virtue trembled. And if indeed his
uncontrouled passion should prompt him to acts of violence -- alas! what
guardian divinity would then protect the helpless Jeanette!

CHAP. XV. THE CONSTITUTIONAL PRIEST.
HAPPY for thee, William, that you never suspected the sorrows to which thy
poor Jeanette was doomed! You imagined that your faithful wife was safe at home
with the dear boy at her breast. You saw her in imagination sitting with
maternal fondness by the cradle of her son, and you thought that anxiety alone
for his father could sometimes dash a drop of melancholy into this cup of joy.
Letters full of delightful hope you wrote her every week, which would
contribute to moderate that anxiety. Poor easy William! she received them not.

That man should be so short sighted! that hills and valleys should interpose
between the sorrows of the mistress and the sympathy of the lover; that perhaps
a mother, a wife languishes in want and misery, while the son or husband walks
abroad unconscious and unconcerned; that two souls closely united in congenial
sen^iments should never, when separa^ed by the smallest distance, discover by
some slight anxiety or secret horror the sufferings in which the lover or the
friend is involved! -- Alas! shall I say that it is well, or that it is ill for
man that it should be thus ordered?

After Babet disappeared, and his friend was torn from him, William's most
delightful dreams now hung undivided upon his native land, on his beloved
Jeanette, the object of his most ardent wishes. Engrossed with these
contemplations, he strolled in harvest through the fading flowers; or, when the
bustle of industry offered him unwelcome amusement, he plunged into the shady
recesses of a wood, or stole among the bulrushes which skirted a murmuring
brook. The hope of again finding Babet daily decreased, like the bank which the
str^m every moment washes and sweeps away.

One day the morning had issued from the chambers of the e^st wrapped in a veil
of thick mises, but the sun had withdrawn the clouds from the face of day, as a
youthful husband by his caresses prevails upon his wife t^ lay aside her veil
-- William stood earlier (...) shall upon a little hillock near the town, (...)
meditations, which the landscape around and (...) view of the flitting clouds
had inspired. He thought of the birth of man, and the first dawn of life; how
often the cradle of a king is adorned by the beams of morn, while before it is
noon the throne is involved in clouds and tempests; how often darkness and
mists cover the poor man's cradle, while the caprice of fortune prepares for
the obscure child a serene and joyful evening. His own example recurred to his
mind, and with the last traces of the parting clouds his gratitude mounted up
to heaven.

The temper of his soul was now so sublimated that it sought for kindred
objects, and he therefore resolved this day to ascend to the top of a hill,
which he had long marked out as the boundary of his excursions. The way to it
was through the village, the inhabitants of which, since the conflagration,
loved him with brotherly affection. He wished to pass on unobserved; but the
little boy he had saved came running after him, and pulling him by the coat,
said: "Mother is coming too; she cannot run so fast." William stopped, and
waited till the young woman came up with the most cordial expressions of joy,
and held out to him her smiling infant. She kindly complained that he had quite
forgot her; the boy had daily asked for him, and she had been much grieved at
his absence. A thousand times she had thanked God for the deliverance of her
children, but she had lamented that she had not an opportunity to express her
gratitude to the angel whom God had sent. She then informed him that she now
lived in the house of her father-in-law till her cottage was rebuilt, and
begged him to be so good as come and partake of a rural breakfast. She was so
pressing, she so eagerly wished in this way to show her kindness, that it was
impossible for him to refuse.

He was conducted to a neat, clean house, where he was cordially received by an
old man with silver gray locks. Every body was employed in the house; they ran
backwards and forwards, sought the whitest cloth, the clearest glasses, the
finest plates. They brought out honey, butter, milk, and fruits; and every eye
sparkled with joy when the welcome guest seemed to eat with appetite. They
appeared delighted that their efforts had succeeded in pleasing their
benefactor.

The young woman told him that during his absence her husband and brother had
been at home, and heard of his noble deed, and both of them intended to come to
town to thank him, but the calls of service prevented them. "Yesterday," added
the weeping wife, "they were sent off in search of aristocrats, and God knows
when they will return."

At the latest, however, she hoped they would be home on Saturday, and William
was obliged to promise solemnly to repeat his visit next Sunday.

After he had eat and drank a great deal from pure complaisance, he told the
good people his intention to walk to the top of the hill, which began gradually
to ascend just at the back of the village. He inquired which road he ought to
take. They told him it was several miles to the top; first, he must cross a
bridge, then he would come to a sheep-cot, then he must quit the road, and
ascend by the left hand way. The ascent was steep and difficult. They advised
him to provide himself with refreshments, and insisted on filling his pockets
with fruit. William, however, refused, as he wished to be as light as possible;
and said, if necessary, that he should find milk at the sheep-cot to which he
was directed. The young woman, however, represented the inhabitants to be rough
unobliging people, and desired him to observe a small house, not far from the
sheep-cot. "There," said she, "lives our constitutional priest, a good,
kind-hearted man; call there if you want refreshment. He receives every body
with welcome."

William thanked her, and went away with the resolution to call no where unless
he was compelled by some unforeseen accident. He easily found the road which
had been pointed out to him, lay on the top of the hill, and enjoyed the
delightful prospect into the fertile valley below, through which the river
rolled along, in a thousand meanders. He traced out Babet's deserted
habitation, the sight of which banished the serenity of his soul. He resolved
to look at it no more, and his eyes still recurred to it. The landscape lost
its charms, he sunk into a melancholy mood, and did not observe that twilight
began to approach.

He started up. The shades of night already covered the valley. A gray streak
of the setting sun still glittered on the summits of the rocks. He hastily
descended the foot-path, and night thickened fast around. Too much
precipitation might lead him astray. He began, therefore, to walk more slowly,
and to examine the path, since, if he lost it, he must be compelled to pass the
cold harvest night in the open air in this solitude, which after his late
illness, might be attended with danger.

He was extremely happy, therefore, after wandering several hours through
unbeaten tracks, to reach a fold belonging to the sheep-cot. Recollecting the
advice of his friends, however, he did not call, but directed his steps to the
abode of the priest, whose white-washed walls glittered through the shade at
the distance of a few hundred paces. Here he resolved to beg a night's lodging,
as it began to rain, and the darkness became every moment thicker.

As no light appeared through the windows, he began to fear that there was
nobody at home, and was about to ring the bell, when the screams of ^ female
voice struck his ear. The sound seemed (...) proceed from a back house or
cellar, and William distinctly heard the words " Help! help!"

He now pulled the bell with violence several times. He endeavored to open the
house-door, but it was locked. He attempted to get over the wall round the
court, but it was too high. The screams still continued, and cut him to the
heart. He ran anxiously as fast as he could round the whole place, hovering
like a hen over a pond where her foster ducklings swim. He reached a garden
fenced with a thick hedge. He was not deterred by the thorns, continued to make
his way through, and hastened to the place from which the cries proceeded.

He came to a backdoor, which appeared but ill secured; he struck it with his
foot, and it flew open. He entered, stumbled, and fell. An iron shovel lay in
his way: he rose, seized the shovel, for some obscure feeling told him that
here arms were necessary. The shrieks had changed into moan^ of lamentations;
he followed the sound, which soon brought him to the door of a room. It was
shut; he thund^red at it with his fist. A man's voice cried, " Who is there?"

"Open," cried William. -- They refused. -- "Open, or I will break open the
door!" -- They still refused. William threw himself with all his force against
the door, and drove it from its hinges.

At this moment the light in the room was extinguished, and William received a
violent blow on the shoulder, which probably was aimed at his head. He easily
could discern the figure that had struck the blow. He lifted up his shovel, and
struck so violent a blow at the shadow, that the latter cried, "Jesu Maria!"
and dropped to the ground.

At the same time another figure slipped past him out at the door. He now
remained thunderstruck in this extraordinary situation; here at his feet a man
whom probably he had mortally wounded, a few steps from him a low voice of
lamentation continued to moan; utter darkness prevailed, and the whole house
was utterly unknown. He groped round the place from which the sound proceeded,
struck against a bed, and found a person whom by the dress he supposed to be a
lady.

"Who is here?" said he. Groans were the only answer. He was almost inclined to
join in unison with these groans, for the pain in his shoulder was very
violent. Without light, however, he could neither assist himself nor others.
But where was he to find it? -- Where was the kitchen, in which, perhaps, the
fire was still alive in the embers? He went out, groped along the wall, creeped
through the whole house, sometimes found the doors open, sometimes shut, but no
where was he sought. He now was unable to find the way back to the mysterious
chamber, and had resolved to wait on the stair till morning, when he heard keys
turning, and a door sling open with great noise. A number of voices sounded
through the passage, and a gleam of light was seen at a distance.

Conscious of his innocence, he went fearless to meet the party, and found a
number of half-naked peasants, who, armed with all kinds of weapons, pressed
in, led by an ugly old woman with a lanthorn. -- "There is the robber," cried
the woman when she saw William. He had thrown down the shovel; the peasants
seized him quite defenseless, and tied his hands behind his back.

In vain he protested his innocence, in vain he attempted to relate the
accident which had brought him to the house; the old beldame bore him down. "He
meant to rob my good master, your worthy pastor!" cried she with shrill voice.
"Who knows but he may have already murdered him? His niece, the villain first
gagged; by God's mercy I contrived to escape in the dark."

The accusation was so monstrous, that William was amazed, and viewed the woman
with looks or contempt. She ran on before with the lanthorn, the crowd followed
with William bound in the middle. They entered the room -- William looked
round, and was confounded. -- On the bed lay a beautiful young lady gagged with
a handkerchief -- It was Babet! -- On the ground lay weltering in his blood a
thick-headed priest -- It was Jeanette's ravisher!

CHAP. XVI. A CRITICAL SITUATION.
NATURE is so fruitful in surprising incidents, that the most creative
imagination cannot surpass her works. The reader should not, therefore,
pronounce this history improbable because it is surprising. We live in times
when it would be matter of no great wonder to see the Emperor of China, like
Dionysius of old, turn schoolmaster. Why then should we wonder to find a priest
in his vocation? But he was a convicted child-murderer! -- Why, what then? --
When the innocent and virtuous La Fayette languishes in a dungeon, is it matter
of surprise that an infamous miscreant should be at large? As long as the
former is found not improbable, the latter must be allowed to pass for ever
natural. -- The whole affair too hangs so simply together, that it is very easy
to solve the mystery.

The priest, as the reader will remember, in the first volume of this history
was withdrawn from the civil power, and shut up in a cloister. This, however,
was done only pro forma, to remove him from the view of the good believers, who
might have taken offense at his little mischievous tricks. His more tolerant
brethren took no offense at the matter, but chastised him as the Spartans used
to chastise a boy who happened to steal clumsily. After a short confinement,
they gave him money for his expenses, and sent him about his business. He chose
France as the place of his retreat, where, according to the spirit of the
priesthood, he took a share in every thing, accommodated himself to the spirit
of the time, practiced the easy art of ingratiating himself with the people,
was one of the first who, without scruple, took the famous constitutional oath,
recommended himself to the people in power, and, in the most natural way
imaginable, insinuated himself into the confidence of an unsuspecting
congregation, who chose him their pastor, and settled upon him a considerable
income and a comfortable house, from which a worthy old man, whose conscience
revolted from the oath, was driven naked and helpless.

Here he played his part with more prudence and success than in Germany. He
took into his house an (...) procuress, who in better times, had resided in the
capital, and had been the confid^nte of several distinguished characters. The
fall of the great (...) likewise involved her fortunes, as the st^m which
levels the oak destroys the cobwebs among its leaves. She left the country, was
almost starved; she returned, narrowly escaped the guillotine, and saved
herself by taking refuge under the wings of a constitutional priest. Here she
again had an opportunity to exercise her tal^nt^; and she gave her protector so
many proofs of them, that he dropped the design of marrying her which he had
first conceived, and employed her hellish art in corrupting the innocence of
the country girls, till Babet's charms captivated his foul passions.

That very day when William was attacked by the fever, and Babet expected her
friend under the lime-tree on the lawn, accident brought the priest this way.
He saw the lovely maid, as she lay careleslly on the bench, her head reclining
on her snow white hand, while her auburn locks waved round her bosom, and her
elegant foot played in the sand. This was more than sufficient to inflame his
passions. He approached, with that soft, simpering air which he had ever at
command, as a courtier his smile. "Those mourning weeds," said he, "tell me
that you are in grief, and my office justifies me in intruding upon you with an
offer of consolation."

He sat down beside her, and talked to her a jargon for which we Germans ought
to have a word, since the thing may likewise be found among the priests of our
country. Babet, educated in a cloister, was accustomed to consider these wolves
in sheep's clothing as a superior class of beings. She received him with
respect and confidence. She rejoiced once more to see a priest, whose consoling
conversation she had been so long denied. She willingly gave him permission to
visit her daily. She even begged him to come, and, on the very first interview,
joyfully offered him one of her diamonds to say masses for the souls of her
father and brother.

The priest soon found what an unsuspicious creature chance had thrown in his
way. The very next visit he discovered all Babet's secrets of every kind; he
learnt the flight of her brother, her attachment to William, the treasure she
had concealed in the casket; he discovered all, and bounded with joy, like
Satan in Klopstock's Messiah. Any attempt, indeed, to change Babet's childish
confidence into love, was not very likely to succeed, as she was much too
innocent to understand what he meant. When he gazed at her with glowing
passion, she considered his ardour to be paternal kindness; and when he pressed
her hand, she kissed his respectfully. To give her any opportunity of
discovering the foul corruption of his heart was dangerous: her innocence might
be alarmed, and she might take offense.

Under pretense of placing her in safety, he proposed to take her home to his
house, as his niece. He represented to her the danger to which she was daily
exposed in this solitary habitation; the impropriety of a young lady, quite
deserted, living thus without protection. He then displayed the advantages of
the undisturbed tranquillity she might enjoy at his house, the security with
which she could there, unknown and unpersecuted, indulge her grief, and perform
the duties of devotion.

His arguments made an impression upon Babet, but they were not attended with
all the effect which she expected. The image of her friend was too deeply
engraved upon her heart; she must see him and consult with him before she
finally adopted a resolution by which they would be separated. She did not,
therefore, absolutely refuse the paternal offer of the priest, as she called
it, but postponed her decision till William's recovery.

Such a delay and such consultation were not consistent with the priest's plan.
He dreaded the return of this dangerous prisoner, and saw the necessity of
accomplishing his purpose before the arrival of this friend opposed a new
obstacle to his success. One evening, therefore, when Babet informed him with
joy, that she had received the most favorable accounts of the convalescence of
her friend, and that she expected to see him in a few days, he conceived a
diabolical artifice for the completion of his design. At midnight somebody
knocked at Babet'^ door: the maid went down, and received (...) hand, a l^t^e^,
which she car^ (...). It contained the following (...) and scarce legible
manner.

"Dearest sister! Fate, whose hand lies heavy upon o^ (...), is not yet weary
of persecuting me. Our frontiers are too closely watched to allow me to escape;
our faithful servant has been murdered, and I am a wretched fugitive. Of what I
took with me from my father's inheritance, I have partly been robbed, and part
I have been obliged to ^ll, to support my wretched existence. Now despair is my
only companion, and death my only hope! -- Yet I tremble to die by the hands of
the executioner! -- I languish in this neighborhood, but dare not venture to
enter our mansion. I am pursued and traced, spies watch for me in every
quarter. -- If you love your only brother, grant his last wish, to see you once
more before he falls under the sword of his persecutors. Tomorrow night, at
twelve o'clock, a faithful confidante of mine will expect you at the gate. --
If you have courage and love for me, follow her; she will bring you to the arms
of your affectionate brother,

"PHILIP CHEVALIER DE BELLOY."


Babet trembled as she read this letter. Tears started in her eyes, sisterly
affection glowed in her breast. Without the least suspicion she instantly
resolved to trust herself with the expected messenger, to put the casket into
her pocket, to give her unfortunate brother the half of its contents, and by
her tender consolation perhaps save him from self-murder.

She had never seen the handwriting of the Chevalier; but though she had been
acquainted with it, yet would not the slightest suspicion have arisen in her
guileless heart. With anxious impatience she waited the day, and, with tender
anxiety, the night. The priest visited her as usual. He hoped she would impart
to him what had happened, and the resolution she had taken; but she was silent.
It was not her own secret; the care of her brother's safety sealed her lips.

The cunning seducer, however, easily perceived that she labored under the
pressure of secret anxiety, and in her agitation he guessed the success of his
villainy. In the evening he went away with an air such as the celebrated
Catharine de Medicis might have assumed, when, for the last time, she visited
the unfortunate Coligni. He drew himself up squat in the middle of his net,
like a malignant spider, to be ready to spring out on the harmless insect for
which he had spread it.

He was no sooner gone than Babet began to pack up her casket; and after a warm
prayer to her guardian saints, in the obscurity of night, accompanied by her
faithful servant, the tripped through the court, listened, till she heard a
slight noise and coughing at the gate. It was the procur^ss we have mentioned,
who, like a rattle-snake, opened her jaws to swallow the fascinated bird.

Whither Babet thought she followed, and to what place she was really
conducted, we already know.

CHAP. XVII. LOVE AND GRATITUDE.
AS starts with horror the youth who thinks he is about to kiss the rosy lips
of beauty, and suddenly beholds the cancerous cheek of corruption, so did Babet
shudder in wild dismay, when she saw the villain she had begun to respect as a
second father, unmasked at her feet. For the first two or three hours she could
neither speak, sigh, nor weep. She was first obliged to reflect on the
possibility of such a baseness, before she could complain or reproach The
priest was obliged to confess his shameful purpose before she could comprehend
what he meant. When she understood his design, however, from impotent
resentment she rose, at once, to the height of unspeakable contempt. Her
innocence was so intimately blended with the whole of what constituted herself,
that she felt that it could be torn from her only with her life. This feeling
inspired her with a discretion and courage far beyond her years and strength.
While the hours of night slowly glided by, she remained obstinately dumb, and
not a motion of her eye betrayed the smallest interest in what passed around.
She paid no attention either to the disgusting talk of the priest, or the
wretched consolations of the procuress. She sat in a kind of ^rance till
morning dawned. When it was day, and she heard at a little distance the
shepherd's pipe, she suddenly started up, ran to the window, threw it open, and
cried: "Help! help!"

The priest and his female Satan were alarmed at this unexpected movement. They
pulled at the struggling maid, who clung with her nails to the window shutters,
and cried with all her might. At last they dis^ngaged her by force, and hur^ied
her into a remote apartment. Here the villain threatened to gag her if she
again was so childish, as he called it, as to act in this manner. A smile of
the most profound contempt was her only answer.

Her cries, mean while, had really assembled the shepherd, who were easily
satisfied with the story that their priest, whose virtue they never suspected,
had, from motives of humanity, taken a lunatic niece into his house, whose
disordered understanding he hoped to be able to re-establish. The priest
desired the honest peasants to inform their neighbors of this circumstance,
that they might not again be alarmed by her cries. Thus every suspicion was
obviated. The helpless maid was (...) in the hands of her spoiler; for she was
soon deprived of the company of her faithful servant, whom they removed out of
the way, by confining her fast in a dark ce^lar.

The priest left none of his helli^h arts untried to habituate the mind of
Babet to the thoughts of vice. Sometimes he descended to every kind of
flattery, and again he endeavored to alarm her with the basest threats. On the
one side he painted to her a life of voluptuousness, if she would consent to
live with him as his mistress or his wife, and on the other, an ignominious
death, should he give her up as a royalist to the existing authorities. But
neither his threats nor his flattery could produce the smallest effect on the
pure innocence of the angelic (...).

The experienced procuress endeavored to inflame her mind by lascivious
descriptions, but their pollutions could not stain the mirror of her soul. It
was impossible for the wretch to return, even in thought, to the period when
she was innoc^; the stories she repeated to Babet were u^ mysteries; and when
she impudently persisted, Babet shut her ear against her conversation, by a
(...) and servent prayer.

The priest began at length to perceive that force alone could enable him to
succeed in his infamous design, and he pro^s^d to the poor victim, with
horrible impreca^s, that he was resolved to have recourse to that ^p^lient, if
she persisted any longer in scorning hi^. She had now no other hope lest but in
the protection of a higher power. "God of the fatherless and orphan!" did she
exclaim in secret prayer, "have thou deprived me of every aid? -- H^ thou
denied me every instrument of saving my innocence by a voluntary death? -- On
thy strong arm do I alone depend! -- Thou will appear to me in the moment of my
highest need!"

And he did appear -- her protecting angel veiled himself in the form of a
friend. William appeared at her bedside, as her innocence was on the point of
being overpowered. -- With the deliverance of Babet's honor just Providence too
connected Jeanette's revenge, and the merited punishment for the murder of her
child. The priest breathed out his foul spirit, and the last influence which
hell exercised over the dying reprobate was to dictate the false declaration
that William was a robber, a murderer. -- Thus did he descend to the other
world; the hand of his murdered child seized him, and led him dismayed to the
tribunal of an offended Judge.

But his villainous accusation remained behind. Every thing testified against
William; the words of the deceased, the cries of the procuress, the broken
door, the gagged maid, and lastly his own confusion; for the sight of his
suffering benefactress on the one hand, and of the detested betrayer of his
wife on the other, had struck him dumb with astonishment. Nothing declared in
his favor but the voice of Babet, and she was considered our of her senses.

The shepherds, who were attached to the hypocritical priJst, loaded William
with curses, and almost sacrificed his life to the first dictates of their
resentment. It was now clear day when they conducted him, his hands fast bound,
down the hill, and took the road to the town. They told every person they met
that this wretched stranger was a disguised royalist, who had murdered a worthy
constitutional priest. He was followed by the curses of every traveller, and
every boy abused and maltreated him.

Only in the village where William's friends lived did things assume a
different appearance. They crowded round the prisoner, were amazed at the
enormity of the charge, doubted the truth of the story, and expressed their
sorrow for his situation. The woman where children he had saved came running
up, made her way through the pikes, loudly protested his innocence, thr^w
herself in the way of his con^s, and would (...) allow them to proceed. William
was obliged to comfort her; he entreated her (...) ^ave him to his fate, and to
trust to the justice of God.

"Me you cannot save," whispered ^e ^ly, "but save, at least, the h^p^ (...)
wh^ (...) is con^d in the house of the infamous parson. She is not mad; she
will tell you all."

Th^se words were a mystery to the good woman, but she reflected on them.
William was ^orn away. N^ ^r^ly ^ss compassion accompanied him, ^ut a number of
sto^t young (...) armed ^selves, and hastened to (...) guard, in order to
defend him from (...) of the people. (...) town. A^ the sho^s and hi^s of the
people ^e was thrown into prison, into which not a (...) p^netra^e -- but day
(...) into (...). He had saved Babet and revenged Jeanette, and he contemplated
death with tranquillity.

How indeed could I elo^ ^e future with hope? Even had he appeared in^ of the
crime with which he was charged, the (...) demanded a sacrifice. They shouted
^ay and (...) round the walls of the prison, and demanded his execution. It was
decided. Very little attention was paid to legal formalities, and his trial was
only postponed a few days, because the fate of a number of emigrants e^ the
executioner. He availed himself of this interval to write down his
justification with a pencil. He took leave of his wife, and beque^thed his
blessings to his child. He then pitched on one of the guards who daily attended
him in his (...) whose ^g^omy appeared to promise most humanity, and whom he
had often observed viewing him with compassionate looks. He conjured him to
forward that paper. "I have nothing to offer you," said he, "but if you have a
wife and child -- "

"I have a wife and child," said the national guard with emotion. He was going
to say some^ more, but he checked himself, took the paper (...) ^ew.

(...) solemn hour at last arrived. On the (...) of the third day, William was
carried be^ (...) judges. All the circumstances testified ^gly against him.
What he urged in his defense appeared an inconsistent incredible story, and
after a short hearing he was condemned to death. The next day was appointed for
his execution.

He lay on his bed of straw, with the invaluable consciousness of having never
in the course of his life, been guilty of a dishonorable action. He prayed --
but not for himself -- he prayed for his wife and child. -- At midnight he fell
into a placid slumber.

The rattling of keys suddenly awaked him. Two soldiers of the national guard
entered with a dark lanthorn. William started up, and thought the awful moment
was come. In one of the soldiers he recognized the man to whom he had entrusted
the last proof of his love for Jeanette. "I am glad," said William, "that you
have been chosen to attend me on this occasion. Be witness of my death, and
announce to my wife that I have met it, if not with perfect tranquillity, at
least with firmness."

"Be silent, and follow us," said the soldiers, as he raised up his chains to
allow him to walk more easily. William followed in silence. They led him
through a gloomy passage, which he never before had trod. They reached an open
court. The stars glimmered over their heads. William wondered to find that it
was yet night. They came to a little door, which stood open. When William went
out, he heard the trampling of horses, and soon distinguished a carriage and
four. The soldiers assisted him to mount, and took their seats beside him.

Away they drove, full speed. William knew not what they meant to do with him.
He asked, but they gave him no answer, and the rattling of the carriage drowned
his words. The moon rose. William looked round in the open fields -- he thought
it was all a dream.

After they had proceeded about a mile, they came to the highway, and the
carriage suddenly stopped. They obliged him to dismount. When he touched the
ground, some person kissed his hand, and bathed it with tears. William looked
round -- it was the young woman whose children he had saved. -- The two
soldiers were her husband and brother.

The husband now pressed him to his heart. "You saved my children from the
flames," said he with tears -- "I have delivered you from an unmerited death --
that was but the duty of a man, now shall I reward you."

William followed him in silent astonishment; the young woman led him by the
hand. A few steps farther something white glittered behind a tree -- a female
figure now rushed into his arms. -- It was Babet! -- Another woman came up,
with tottering steps, and seemed scarce able to walk. -- Babet pulled her
friend along, the stranger stretched out her arms -- the moon beamed upon her
countenance -- through the silence of night he heard his name pronounced -- it
was Jeanette!

CHAP. XVIII. THE GRANDMOTHER.
IF the author should anticipate objections, and begin this chapter with the
observation that "probability is really nothing more than the feasibility or
possibility of a thing," it would seem to infer that he himself entertained
doubts of the probability of this true history. As every thing which happened,
however, is pourtrayed to his fancy in the clearest light, and he hopes with
the assistance of the muses to sketch it to the reader in no less lively
colors, he shall take the liberty, merely to enhance his consequence, to
remind the reader that Dubos and Breitenger, Marmountel and Schelegel, are the
examples he has followed; and that all these gentlemen have shown him that it
is quite conceivable and possible that William, Babet, Jeanette, and the worthy
peasants should all meet at daybreak on the read to Limoges, although the
former escaped from his dungeon, and, what is still more difficult, the latter
must have eluded the vigilance of a lover. Were the author doubtful of his
cause, he would entrench himself behind the example of celebrated poets. The
works of many distinguished writers are full of things which no man, with all
the inclination in the world, can consider probable. It does not however
require this foreign aid to justify the incidents of this history; for the
simplest statement will immediately bring down the reader from the fairy fields
of the wonderful into the region of the uncommon, but at the same time very
possible,

Gratitude impelled the honest peasants, in contempt of every danger, to
attempt William's deliverance. Their situation as soldiers of the national
guard, assisted however with Babet's diamonds, afforded them ready means for
the attainment of their purpose. While the husband began the undertaking, the
wife, accompanied by her brother, went to the house of the deceased parson, to
discover the meaning of William's mysterious request. At first, however, they
found none but the old procuress, who was busy in packing up all the movables,
in order to transfer them to some place of safety. When asked whether there was
not a mad girl in the house, she replied, that the poor creature had made her
escape. Some degree of confusion, which still lurked behind her unblushing
impudence, excited suspicion. The keys were demanded, which she refused.

The woman and her brother agreed to separate, and traverse the whole house
from top to bottom, and at every door they found shut to call aloud, to
ascertain whether any prisoner would answer. This resolution they immediately
carried into effect. The one went up stairs; the other down. In a few minutes
they returned, and they had found more than they sought. "Above, there," said
the sister, "I heard the voice of complaint." "And below, there," replied the
brother, "I heard the sound of groans in the cellar."

The procuress was now aware of her danger. The honest soldier overtook her
just as she was stealing out at the garden-door. She had left behind the heavy
and bulky part of the spoil, and contented herself with a small bundle, from
which the soldier pulled out a suspicious-looking casket. "To the right about,
mistress!" said he in a stern voice, seizing her roughly by the arm: "Give me
the keys, or I shall plunge you into the pond."

This pond, which was but a few steps distant, and the threatening aspect of
the young man, whose flaming eyes promised that he would keep his word,
compelled the old serpent to be more compliant. She offered to exchange the
keys for the casket; but this was refused, in case any body should be found who
had a better claim to it. This hard condition produced a fruitless refusal. The
soldier advanced a few paces nearer the pond, and the keys were delivered up.

Joyfully the young woman ascended the stair, and her brother hastily went down
to the cellar. The former liberated the languishing Babet, and the latter
brought out the half-starved maidservant. While mutual explanations were going
on, and Babet, to the astonishment of the peasants, related her unfortunate
story, the old beldame took the opportunity of their confusion to make her
escape. She made off without the booty of the casket, but provided with
accomplishments by which she every where earned a subsistence, till at last,
under Carrier's administration at Nantz, she again rose to be a woman of
consequence.

Babet was unable to give any satisfactory account of her fate till she heard
that William was alive, and that hopes were entertained of his deliverance.
With joy she offered the contents of her casket to contribute to that object,
an offer which, in case of necessity, they promised to accept. She accompanied
her deliverers to their rural hut, there to await the result of the dangerous
enterprise, and to pray for the (...) of her friend.

We (...) ^e^t (...) Jeanette in a very critical situation; and if it is
considered what in these times a mayor might have ^d with impu^ity, we must be
^d for her ^ate. Besides her own grief, that of an amiable young woman likewise
lay heavy upon her heart for Beaublanc's wife could no longer conceal that the
new infidelity of her husband was no secret to her. She indeed was perfectly
conscious to herself that Jeanette's conduct was entirely unexceptionable. The
fair stranger, however, still was the destroyer of her peace, and she could not
love her. She showed her all the attentions which her misfortunes and the
duties of hospitality demanded; but the cordial kindness which seasons all
these attentions it was not in her power to display. A cold politeness was all
she could bestow, which to noble minds is not less galling than open hate.

They at last only met at table; they saluted each other coldly; they talked
only of the most indifferent subjects, and both were glad when the dessert was
introduced. Beaublanc himself played a very awkward part. The more he felt the
impropriety of his conduct, the more he endeavored, as men usually do, to
justify it to himself by imputing it to causes in which he was not to blame.
The cold behavior of his wife he did not overlook, and he reproached her for it
when they were alone. She answered him only with tears, which still more
displeased him. In a word, the part which the different persons had to support
was now become so serious, that a melancholy catastrophe was justly to be
apprehended, when a beneficent deus ex machina appeared upon the stage.

One evening Jeanette heard a carriage drive up to the door, to which at first
she paid no attention. When immediately on his arrival, however, she heard the
whole house in motion; when she heard baggage brought up stairs, and
Beaublanc's children skipping about in great joy, she asked the servant who
brought her a light, whether any company was come? -- "Our master's
grandmother," said the man.

The news was very agreeable to Jeanette, partly because she hoped that
Beaublanc in presence of his grandmother would be more attentive to his wife,
partly because, in a company of persons who are intimately acquainted with each
other's affairs, a stranger is always welcome, because it gives some relief to
the conversation. Jeanette, therefore, when summoned to supper, went down with
more ease and courage then she had done for several weeks. She saw upon the
sopha a venerable matron, who rose on her entrance, and, with that amiable
frankness which age is entitled to display, came to meet her. Beaublanc
presented the old lady to her with the words "My grandmother, madame Jerome."

"Madame Jerome!" stammered Jeanette, and grew pale. -- "Madame Jerome!" she
repeated with an earnestness which struck the company.

"You appear to know that name," said the lady; "I flatter myself that it is
not disagreeable to you."

"Disagreeable! No. Jerome was my father's name."

Beaublanc appeared surprised. The old lady started. With visible anxiety she
rubbed her hands, and said: "you are a German?"

"My father," continued Jeanette, "was a Frenchman, who had left his country
for more than twenty years."

"His surname?"

"Joseph Aim."

"Great God!" exclaimed the old lady -- her knees shook -- she sunk in
Beaublanc's arms. In a word, we need no longer conceal what the reader must
have anticipated: she was Jeanette's grandmother, and the mayor was Jeanette's
cousin german.

Extravagance and irregular conduct had formerly irritated the old lady against
her son; she banished him from her presence, and by her severity compelled him
to seek his fortune in foreign countries. Necessity -- the great master which
leads its pupils either to virtue, or drives them to despair -- had reclaimed
the prodigal to the path of order and of industry. He did not choose, however,
to communicate any intelligence of himself to his mother till he had
accumulated as much property as should enable him to dispense with all
assistance from his relations, in order that she might have no foundation for
thinking that he only ^g^ repentance for the sake of her money. When this
moment arrived, he wrote the most tender and affecting letters. A series of
years however, had elapsed; his family had experienced various vi^issitudes.
From Picardy, where they formerly resided, they had, on account of accidents
unconnected with the history, gone to reside in (...) do; his letters,
therefore, never reached the place of their destination.

His fruitless expectation of an answer from his mother long embitt^red his
domestic happiness. He could ascribe her silence only to two causes: either his
mother was irreconci^ble, or she was dead. The former his heart disclaimed; he
wept over her therefore, as no more, and ceased to write.

Madame Jerome, on the other hand, had long since forgotten her resentment; for
the resentment of a mother is like a flake of snow in the month of May. She
reproached herself bitterly for her harshness. In the sleepless hours of night
she wept her lost son; she saw him wandering in the world poor and abandoned.
With what joy would she have called him back! but in what region of the globe
was she to seek him? -- With what anxiety did she expect some filial
application from him! But he was silent. -- How often did she invite him by
public advertisements in the newspapers to return! They never reached him. Was
it possible that he, who, in spite of his levity and wildness, was so
affectionate toward her, could remain so long silent? -- Ah! no! he is dead!
he has fallen a sacrifice to his mother's unnatural severity!

This reproach, which incessantly preyed on her maternal heart, threw a gloom
over her evening of life -- and now to be so delightfully awaked from this
disagreeable dream! True, indeed, her Joseph was gone! -- but he had lived
happily, and he had left behind a youthful representative, who fondly called
her Mother; a being of her own flesh and blood, and of whom she had reason to
be proud.

Every thing in the house now assumed a quite different aspect. B^aublanc
ceased to be an object of dread, since his c^nsanguinity dictated to him n^w
du^ies, and so presence of his grandmother imposed upon him a salutary
restraint. He was ashamed when he reflected that madame Jerome had a right to
say to him: "Baptiste, remember with what a^ you su^d to obtain your wife;
think what I did and sacrificed to enable you to succeed." He trembled to think
that his wife might complain of his conduct, and in what light he must then
appear to a mother, to whom he was indebted for so many favors; one, too, whom
amidst all his errors he had ever continued to love with filial a^tion.

Jeanette at l^st completed his reformation by a step which was now easy for
her, since she considered ^eaublanc as her cousin, and was secure in the
protection of her grandmother. She sought what formerly she had so carefully
avoided, an opportunity of being alone with him. She even led the conversation
to a circumstance which she formerly did not wish to seem to perceive, his
passion for her. She then spoke with such interest to his heart; she painted
the sorrow of his wife and her own with such truth and feeling; she mingled
such cordial assurances of friendship and gratitude with her delicate
reproaches, that he threw himself at her feet quite overcome, and with tears of
the most sincere repentance entreated her to forget his improper conduct.

The first moments of repentance derive a peculiar strength from that virtue
which is ever ready to unite in the bands of cordial affection, when it
observes the least advances to amendment. Beaublanc felt in himself a spirit
which animated him with a serene joy, to which he had long been a stranger. He
was happy to feel that it cost him no pangs to prepare what was necessary for
Jeanette's departure. A few days, indeed, she was obliged to spend with her
new-discovered grandmother; but the good old lady was too considerate to
require more than a few day^* under the condition however that Jeanette, with
her husband and child, should visit her as soon as the troubles of the republic
allowed her to do it with safety.

Doubly reimbursed by liberal presents for all she had lost by the violence of
the populace; furnished with passports which perfectly secured her safety, with
the delightful idea of having re-established the domestic felicity of her
amiable hostess, she proceeded on her journey to Guienne.

CHAP. XIX. THE PLOT IS UNFOLDED.
HOW delightful are the feelings of the traveller who, after, a long* absence,
discovers at a distance the lofty spires of a city, in which reside those on
whom his heart hangs with fondness! N^w ^gitated with alarm, now animated with
hope, he feels the sweetest elation of joy. Every peasant he meets returning
from the market, every citizen going out when his work is finished to his
cabbage garden, he is inclined to ask: "Know you into whose embraces I am
hastening! -- Is he happy and well?"

How peevish he feels at every crooked turning of the road! how he curses the
phlegm of the postillion, who, so near the end of his journey, stops to fa^^en
his stirrup, or to take a glass of beer at some obscure inn! He whose whole
being is absorbed in the idea of meeting those he loves, is insensible to
hunger and thirst. Now the whip cracks and the horse^ fly along, the carriage
rolls down the hill, and the soul far outstrips its speed. O severe trial of
patience! A tract of heavy sand yet remains to pass* and the horses again move
slowly on. (...) si^s, and with both his hands seizes the (...) door, pushes it
on as if to assist its rapi^. Every moment he thrusts his head out at the
window to measure the extent of the sand, which seems to stretch to infinity
like the deserts of Sa^a.

Such were the feelings which agitated Jeanette's breast when she approached
the town in which she expected to find her husband. At last she reached the
gate, and had a new delay to encount^r. Her passport must be examined. It
availed nothing here that nature had written the passport of virtue and
innocence upon her brow; this might have availed her only on the banks of the
Ohio, or Hudson's Bay. Captious objections were advanced; her person was to be
compared with the description. Formalities and ceremonies of every kind were to
be observed. Here an officer of the municipality thought he discharged his duty
well in proportion to the time he consumed; there an officer of police thought
that the color of her eyes did not exactly correspond with the original.

Every thing was at last adjusted, passport and baggage were stamped with the
seal of liberty. The postillion slowly mounted his horse, and, looking back,
inquired where madame chose to alight.

"At the first good inn," replied Jeanette hastily* and the carriage rolled
heavily through the streets. The principal streets were full of men; the
windows were likewise crowded with spectators. -- Jeanette saw nobody; she
looked only for William's face. The people seemed in great agitation; the words
murder and guillotine were re-echoed through the mob. -- Jeanette was quite
ina^tentive to every thing; she had no ears but for William's voice* with a
light spring she jumped out of the carriage when it stopped at the gate of an
inn. A gossiping hostess conducted her up stairs, and immediately began to
entertain her with the news of the day. She told her that a prisoner of war, an
officer had murdered a constitutional priest, and violated his niece; that he
had been thrown into prison, and probably in a short time would receive his
deserts under the guillotine.

Jeanette started at the words prisoner of war, but instantly laid aside her
fear when she heard the nature of the crime of which he was accused. "He has
dined at my table," said the prattling hostess; "he appeared so quiet,
well-behaved a young man, that I would not have scrupled to have trusted him
either with my strong box or my daughter. But still waters are deep -- Brave he
may be, as he wears a cross, and they call him major."

Jeanette stood petrified, and the blood forsook her cheeks. -- "A cross? --
Major? -- What is his name?"

Alas! he had a very hard German name; the hostess could not pronounce it. "But
how did he look?" -- She described his person, feature for feature. It was easy
to see that William had sat for the picture. From Jeanette's pale lips dropped
the name of Eichenwald! and -- "Right!" interrupted the hostess -- "Right!
Eichenwald is the very name!"

Poor Jeanette sunk to the ground; night obscured her eyes; her pulse at her
heart ceased to beat, and a convulsive movement of her lips was the only
symptom of life. The hostess in terrible alarm, invoking all the saints to her
aid, contributed all the assistance in her power. "Ah! my God! Ah! poor
madame!" she repeated an hundred times, and tears of sympathy burst from her
eyes when she heard that the lady before her was the wife of the unfortunate
prisoner.

She immediately shut the door, that the populace might not hear of the
discovery, and confound innocence with guilt. But Jeanette became delirious:
she insisted on going out -- she would throw herself at the feet of the judges
-- in the public marketplace protest the innocence of her husband. -- The
good-natured hostess was obliged to detain her by force; was obliged to stifle
her cries by shutting the windows, and repeat to her a thousand times that her
interference would only accelerate the fate of her husband. When at last
Jeanette's strength was exhausted; when she lay breathless on the sopha, and
her tears, which passion had suppressed, began to steal slowly down her cheeks,
she began to listen to the consolation of the hostess.

"I fain would believe," said the kind-hearted old woman, "that he is not
guilty of the shocking crime; I wish to believe it because you love him so
well; and truly I have a good opinion of him myself, for many a day has he sat
so^erly and quietly at my table; but of what avail is his innocence? Alas!
madame, innocence does nothing for us nowadays. Either appearances are
against him, or he has powerful enemies; nothing but money can save him."

Jeanette ha^t^ly pointed to her coffe^.

"I understand you," proceeded the hostess; "you have money; you will sacrifice
all?"

Jeanette n^dded assent, and her feeble tongue in vain attempted to pronounce
the word "all."

"Make yourself easy therefore a while; I shall put on my cloak, and mingle in
the crowd, to hear what is the state of matters. If he is innocent, that God
who protected Daniel in the lion's den will not forsake him, and will discover
us means for his deliverance."

With these w^ds she went out, and l^st Jeanette in the most ^mising tor^ur^s.
The first evening the hostess (...) succeed in discovering any thing favorable
to the prison^. Jeanette's situation bordered on phrenzy; a f^ver preyed upon
her frame, and in the mo^ing she was delirious. The hostess never stirred from
her bedside; as soon as it was day she committed her to the care of her
daughter, and hastened out on an errand of humanity to seek the balm of hope.

About noon she returned with a soldier of the national guard, whom she brought
with a mysterious ^ir to Jeanette's bedside. "This brave man," whispered she
to the patient, "is one of your husband's guards." -- Jeanette rose, and
hastily seized the stranger's hand. Her eyes were hot and inflamed, but tears
refused to flow.

"Madame," said the soldier, "your situation would affect me had I no other
motive to venture my life for your husband." -- Jeanette made a signal to the
hostess to reach the chest, which stood at the foot of the bed. She opened it,
and it was full of money. With a melancholy, affecting look of entreaty, she
presented it to the soldier, who rejected it with some displeasure.

"Madame," said he with the accents of offended generosity, "your husband threw
himself into the flames to save my children. I hope that is enough to induce
you to shut up your strong box. Here is my hand, I shall save your husband's
life, or die with him."

Jeanette attempted to kiss his hand; tears of gratitude again rushed to her
eyes; a servent look to heaven spoke her thanks to God and her deliverer. When
the beams of hope, like an electrical shock, restored her the use of her
tongue, and she again was able to speak, she pressed upon the generous soldier
as much as was necessary for the payment of all expenses; but he insisted that
he alone must answer these, should it cost him his last sixpence.

She now asked pen and ink to write a note to her husband to announce her
arrival, and communicate to him consolation in his dungeon. The soldier,
however, refused to carry the letter. He would not even undertake to inform the
prisoner of Jeanette's arrival, because it was to be feared that his joy might
betray him.

"Patience!" said the generous young man, "patience till tomorrow, or the day
after; by that time it will be decided. Meanwhile this good woman will bring
you as soon as it is night to the village where I reside. There you may remain
in tranquillity in my house, and wait the result."

"In tranquillity!" sighed Jeanette.

The soldier endeavored to raise her spirits, informed the hostess which way
she should take, and hastened back to his post to avoid suspicion. Regardless
of her fever and her weakness, Jeanette prepared for her departure; and when
night spread its shades over the earth, she set out in company with her worthy
hostess, and about midnight reached the young woman's cottage. She was received
as the wife of her benefactor, and in Babet she found a sister.

What passed in the heart of the lovely maid when she so suddenly saw the wife
of her beloved appear, those who are acquainted with the human heart may
conceive. Her attachment, however, was too pure and innocent to permit the
smallest feeling of jealousy. She saw only William's danger; she forgot her
wi^hes, her dreams, and clung to a being who prayed as fervently as herself for
his deliverance.

God heard the prayers of these kindred spirits. On the evening of the third
day they received a message, to repair at midnight to a rend^zvous on the road
to Limoges. Trembling they s^t out -- Silently they kneeled on the grass, and
started at every rustling of the leaves. Their hearts beat high when they heard
at a distance the sound of a carriage. -- When it came nearer and nearer --
when it stopped -- the young woman flew like lightning to the road -- Babet
hastened after her -- and Jeanette tottered between hope and fear till she
could go no farther, and sunk into the arms of her husband.

CHAP. XX. THE FLIGHT.
THE reader will not be greatly surprised that our hero, at the scene before
him, which seemed altogether so miraculous, began to think whether his head was
not separated from his body, and those he saw were not the visionary shades of
Elysium hovering round him: -- The explanation of the mystery, however, upon a
public and well frequented road, might be dangerous. The brave soldier roused
William from his dream, and led him into the thicket, where a large open cart
waited for them, furnished with every thing that was necessary to facilitate
their flight.

In ten minutes William was freed from his irons. Instead of his uniform, he
put on a coarse frock, and his hair he tied up under a red cap. Jeanette and
Babet were likewise obliged to bind up their waving locks in a less conspicuous
form. Coarse handkerchiefs concealed want their fashionable corsset^ threatened
to betray; short clumsy coats disguised the g^ces of their person, and
monstrous wooden shoes covered their elegant feet.

Already Jeanette and Babet had taken leave of their kind hostess, with tears.
William had assisted them into the carriage, and was himself about to follow,
when an unexpected discovery changed his resolution, and almost determined him
voluntarily to return to his prison. Till now it had never occurred to him, in
the slutter of spirits into which he had been thrown, to inquire who was his
conductor; and for the first time he was fully aware of the extent of the
sacrifice which gratitude had led the worthy rustics to make.

The soldier had retired a few steps with his wife. William saw how anxiously
she clung round his neck; he heard her sob, and ask when she should see him
again: -- He heard her husband comforting her in broken accents; he heard him
blessing her and his children, promising to return as soon as he could venture
it without risk of his life. -- The poor woman could not tear herself away; she
still hung upon him to take her last embrace, till her husband whispered her:
"Think of the fire, and our duty!" -- She then let him go.

"God protect you!" said he, and went away. -- His wife remained standing and
wringing her hands. "No!" cried William with emotion -- "No! I cannot purchase
my life at such a price. If my deliverance must render you an helpless
fugitive, your wife a widow, and your children orphans, I should a thousand
times rather return to my cell, and meet death tomorrow."

These words diffused terror through the whole party. Babet and Jeanette rose
up from their seats, the soldier stopped, his wife immediately dried up her
tears, and stifled her sighs. -- "What do you mean?" began the soldier in firm
voice. "Take your place quietly in the carriage. The step which puts my life in
danger cannot be recalled. Suppose even that you were to return to your prison,
it might now be more difficult to get into it unobserved than it was to get
out. You must already be missed. If not, you cannot reach the town before
daybreak; and then it must be just as fatal to your guard, whether you really
escaped, or only attempted it by his connivance. Away then, without losing a
moment! My wife and child I commit to the protection of God and my brother, who
was not present with me on the post, and consequently has nothing to answer
for. I will conduct you to the frontiers, and there remain till the tyrant of
my country it overthrown, which sooner or later must happen, as I know the
temper of my comrades. Justice will then have time to breathe again, and it
will no longer be reckoned criminal to obey the dictates of gratitude and
humanity. -- Away then, and God be with us!"

He seized the reins, and leaped into the saddle. William, though his alarms
were not banished, was convinced by his arguments, that now to recede would
nothing diminish the dangers to which the gallant fellow was exposed; he
resigned himself to necessity, seated himself by Jeanette's side, and the
carriage drove on.

Had I ^ouvet's pen to paint the danger of this flight, the description would
answer the fearful expectation of the reader. Often would he remain breathless
with anxiety, and stretch every fiber of attention. -- Five nights they
traveled through unfrequented roads, known only to their guide. During the day
they concealed themselves in woods and deep retired valleys among the
mountains. Twice did the harness break in passing over the rocks. On the third
night they lost their way, and at dawn saw, with terror and astonishment, the
lofty spires of a large town at a little distance; and as they suddenly turned
the horses to shun this danger, one of them dropped down dead.

The courage of the men and the firmness of the women at last overcame all
dangers. The morning sun of the fifth day dawned as they entered the frontiers
of Switzerland. In vain Jeanette opened her purse, and Babet her casket, to
supply their generous guide, at least with what was necessary to secure him
from want during his exile. "I can work," said he -- "Industry and honesty are
welcome every where. If you would alleviate the pain ^tion from my family, give
me nothing, in order that while I follow my labor, I may have the consoling
reflection that I have done well."

About noon, William with his fair companions reached a town, where they
resolved to recruit themselves after the many difficulties they had
encountered. There their hearts, for the first time, opened to easy
unembarrassed conversation. Fear no longer sealed their lips, no dangers now
obliterated the remembrance of the past, or clouded their hopes of the future.

Jeanette had now an opportunity to inquire with cordial sympathy the history
of her husband's friend; and William availed himself of this occasion to
relate, in Babet's presence, the state of his heart. He gained this advantage
by the step, that he was not obliged to address himself to Babet, and she could
blush in silence, as the looks of her friend were too delicate to dwell on her
ingenuous shame.

He now painted Frederick's passion in the most glowing colors, expatiated
with eloquence on all the amiable qualites which the reserve of his friend had
rendered him incapable of displaying, and concluded with the ardent wish (which
he addressed to heaven, and not to Babet) that the lovely creature might one
day reward the first love of a man of honor by a mutual attachment.

Babet was silent, and fixed her eyes on the ground. What really passed in her
heart it is impossible for us to unfold. All that she heard, however, connected
with the impossibility of possessing the man who had made the first impression
on her heart, and now spoke so warmly for another, combined too with her
helpless situation in a foreign land, produced no disadvantageous impression on
her mind to Frederick's pretensions.

William now was silent, and left the rest to his wife, to whom he made a
significant sign to second the wishes of Babet, convinced that in such cases a
woman is the best agent that can be employed.

CHAP. XXI. THE TYRANNY OF HONOR.
TWO days had now elapsed. Repose and anxiety to see her child had armed
Jeanette with new strength. For some days past she had observed a cloud on
William's brow, the cause of which she was unable to explain; and she hoped, by
a speedy departure, to restore his wonted serenity. She entreated him,
therefore, to make preparations to set out next morning, and he promised to
comply.

This promise indeed appeared to cost him some pain. He seemed reluctantly to
make preparations for the journey; and the evening previous to their intended
departure he was uncommonly pensive; melancholy clouded his open countenance.
Jeanette's eye dwelt upon him with anxious looks; but as she could not devise
the reason, and he studiously evaded her inquiries, she contented herself in
the expectation that time would unravel the mystery, and banish her uneasy
apprehensions with the thoughts of soon seeing her infant.

The morning came. Jeanette awoke, but William was gone. On the day of their
departure so many things were to be arranged, that at first she was not
surprised. She leaped out of bed, and went into the adjoining room, to awake
Babet, and began very busily to pack up her baggage.

Breakfast was brought up, and with it the waiter delivered her a sealed
letter. She glanced over it, and turned pal^ -- the address was William's
handwriting. With trembling hands she hastily broke the seal, and read as
follows:

"My dearest wife! it is not in my power to return with you. I am bound by my
word of honor, and I must perform it. For the sake of my comrades who still
remain in captivity, I must not abuse the indulgence for which we pledged our
honor. Be easy, however. I do not intend to deliver myself up to the frantic
deluded people. There are still in France men of worth, who will protect me
till the expected exchange takes place. Be not offended at the step I have thus
taken. I am indeed a husband and a father, but I am likewise a citizen and a
soldier. I cannot appear in my native land as a dishonored runaway. I cannot
enjoy happiness in your arms if I violate my word. If my joyful presages do not
deceive me, we shall soon meet again. Proceed in your journey -- may it be
happy! Carry my blessing to our child. I leave you far from the theater of war,
and your road home is quite secure. You have an amiable companion, a faithful
servant, and more money than you will require. I am easy therefore. Proceed on
your journey, then, this very day. Every thing is ready. Forbear all fruitless
attempts to discover me. When you receive this letter I shall be upon the
territories of France. Take the shortest way home -- do not plunge yourself
into new dangers; think of our deserted child. Heaven guide you, and shorten
our separation!"

To see a thunderbolt from the unclouded sky suddenly shiver to pieces the
lofty oak by his side, would less astonish the affrighted traveller than this
letter amazed Jeanette. Pale and trembling she handed the letter to Babet. "Ah!
William, William, what have thou done? -- You are going to a land where the
laws of nations afford no protection -- to a land where noble sentiments are
despised, where the few who yet are animated by principles of humanity, must
bend under the iron rod of tyranny; and can I then be easy? -- A thousand
dangers have I defied -- through difficulties innumerable, through frightful
precipices did I press to find thee -- yet again you abandon me! -- Ah!
William, what have thou done?"

Thus did she lament under the heavy load of her anguish, and was inaccessible
to the cold consolations of her friend. Her spirits quite exhausted, unable to
turn her attention to any object, she did unconsciously whatever she was
desired; consented, without being sensible of what she did, to Babet's request
that they should leave this melancholy spot. She followed her into the
carriage, seated herself in silence, and neither asked nor cared whither they
were going.

When she began again to breathe her native air, when they passed the frontiers
of Germany, Babet succeeded in rousing her from her stupor, by reminding her of
her child. At last, when they had advanced within a day's journey of the place
of their destination, the feelings of the wife yielded to those of the mother;
her imagination painted the little smiling William stretching out his arms to
her. She calculated in idea how much he had grown; she heard the new words he
had learnt to lisp, and rejoiced in the thought that in spite of her long
absence he would still know his mother.

It was evening when they reached a little town only two short stages from the
object of her tender anxiety. As they had pursued their journey day and night
without repose, the wearied Babet here wished to enjoy a few hours sleep; and
in this wish she was confirmed by the representations of the landlord, who told
them that there was a wood in their way, through which it was very unsafe to
pass. "A desperate band," said he, "consisting of German deserters, Dutch
run-aways, and French refugees, have collected here, and render traveling very
dangerous. The neighborhood of the frontiers favor their designs. Dreadful
stories of robbery and murder are circulated, which perhaps may be exaggerated,
but yet are terrible enough if you believe only one half of them. Government,
it is said, however, is making preparations to put an end to the disorder, and
a strong party of soldiers is to be sent to surround the wood, and hunt the
robbers from their retreats." Whether the detachment had yet arrived, whether
the attempt had yet been made to clear the wood, and with what success, the
landlord could not tell, and he thought it very dangerous, for the travelers
to proceed, especially by night.

The tim^rous Babet agreed with the host, and (...) of William's recommendation
to expose herself to no new dangers. Maternal anxiety, however, overcame every
apprehension; for a mother's love knows no fear. Jeanette had formed to herself
so delightful an idea of embracing, (...) daybreak, her sleeping babe -- ^t
was clear ^oon-sight -- and the host himself had confessed that ^tions were
taken by government for the safety of travelers. Rumor too magnified the
danger; the wood was already cle^red of its desp^rate inhabitants, and such
frightful tales were commonly circulated, like stories of apparitions, to
frighten the timorous. In a word, her maternal anxiety overcame the fears of
her friend, and, lighted by the rising moon, they proceeded on their journey.

Their confidence was increased, when at the distance of half a mile from the
fatal wood they met a traveller on horseback, who had rode through it
unmolested, and who communicated to them the agreeable intelligence, that in
the morning two companies of gr^^^diers had been drawn out, and had invested
the wood on every side.

CHAP. XXII. THE ROBBERS.
IT would be an interesting subject for the curious in the phenomena of the
human mind, to investigate why the soul expands itself in open and luminous
situations, and the flame of courage burns then more bright; why, on the
contrary, in the gloomy recesses of rocky cliff, or the obscurity of a shaggy
wood, the breast seems contracted, and the frame is agitated by an involuntary
horror.

As long as the road stretched through cultivated fields, and here and there
the village dog was heard to bark, the travelers felt no apprehension. When
the ^a^^l wood, however, blacker and blacker, skirted the horizon before them;
when they began to enter upon it, and the solitary trees gradually thickened
into an impenetrable grove, through which the beams of the moon could not pass,
they began to conceive some degree of alarm. An anxious silence prevailed in
the carriage -- every accidental rustling among the leaves, every deceitful
shadow of the trees, struck them with dismay.

At little intervals the wood sometimes opened, and displayed little spots, on
which the gentle light of the moon sh^^e unclouded. They breathed more freely
when they came to such places. After they for near an hour had been tortured by
secret terror, Babet first ventured to whisper to her friend the agreeable hope
that probably they should very (...) ^h the extremity of the wood. Hardly had
she said this, however, when a shrill whistle from a thicket on their left hand
sounded so frightfully through the silence of night, that they started up. The
signal was repeated at a little distance before them in the same shri^l note,
and immediately they heard the trampling of horses, and the sound of human
voices.

"God protect us!" said the postillion, and crossed himself. In trembling
broken accents Jeanette endeavored to comfort her companion with the hope that
perhaps it was the grenadiers who were in search of the robbers, and who
guarded the road. But at this moment a shot which levelled the post-boy
confirmed all their fears. The carriage was surrounded, and the ladies screamed
for help. One of the robbers mounted upon a stately charger advanced to the
door with a pistol in his hand; he spoke to them in French, and ordered them,
as they prized their lives, to observe a strict silence. One of his companions
pulled down Peter from the coach-box; another leaped into the saddle, and drove
the carriage into the wood. The robbers surrounded it on all sides; two of them
stood behind, and one rode before, to guide it through the rough, unformed path.

Scarcely had they advanced two hundred paces, when the carriage struck
violently against some f^lled timber, and broke the axle-tree. The robbers
swore; the ladies trembled; nothing remained to be done but to take the animate
as well as inanimate booty out of the carriage, and leave it. This the robbers
instantly resolved to do; twenty hands were employed in removing the baggage;
and the person on horseback, who appeared the commander of the gang, came up
and politely requested the ladies to dismount. They were obliged to obey.

He immediately quitted them again to superintend his companions, and to hasten
the business. Jeanette and Babet sat down upon the mossy stump of a tree, and
were obliged to look on and see their little property thrown about and
plundered. Most of it was heaped upon poor Peter's shoulders, and when he
groaned under the burden, they stimulated him with lashes. In a very few
minutes the robbers had emptied the carriage, and shaken the lining to see
whether any thing was concealed.

They immediately put the cav^l^ade in motion, and the ladies at first believed
that the robbers would content themselves with the booty, and leave them behind
in the wood, as nobody seemed to take any concern about them. Their situation
was so distressing, that the frightful alternative of remaining alone in the
heart of the pathless wood seemed preferable, and Jeanette in secret breathed a
fervent prayer that they might be left; for a mother can find her way through a
wilderness to her child. Of this wretched hope, however, they were deprived.
Two saddled horses were brought, and a signal was made that they should mount
and follow the rest of the party as fast as possible.

They declined with abundance of tears, and both declared that they had never
in their lives been on horseback; that they would rather follow on foot; but
their entreaties were fruitless. A dozen of rude fellows surrounded them, and
with coarse jests promised to take care and keep them from falling. When the
ladies still refused, they seized them rudely, and placed them on horseback by
force.

At this moment a volley of musket shot poured in among them* the balls
whistled about Jeanette's ^ars. Two of the robbers who stood beside her fell
dead; others severely wounded crept away deeper into the thicket.

The whole wood seemed suddenly to be animated. Thundering cries resounded
through the trees. " This way! this way!' cried a man on horseback, who cut his
way through the bushes with his sabre. Behind him grenadiers' caps glanced in
the light of the moon.

The robbers who had gone before, threw down their booty when they heard the
firing, seized their arms, and assembled courageously round their leader, who
boldly advanced to meet the soldiers. A furious engagement began, which was
rendered still more dreadful by the darkness of the night, and the narrow space
within which the combatants were confined. Jeanette and her companion were
almost as much exposed to danger as those engaged. They attempted to fly, but
on all sides they were surrounded by the sanguinary conflict. Balls struck the
trees by their side, and wounded men dropped down at their feet.

The robbers exceeded the soldiers in number, and the latter began to retreat,
still maintaining a running fight. By this movement the ladies were involved in
the middle of the crowd. The officer who commanded them was wounded. His horse
received a shot, and reeled -- he leaped to the ground just beside Babet, who
lay trembling on her knees, and with a sigh stammered the words, "I can do no
more!"

"My God!" exclaimed Babet as she wrung her hands, and threw her tearful eyes
to heaven. At these words, the wounded man looked up, screamed "Babet! Babet!"
and plunged anew into the battle. That sweet name seemed instantaneously to
have closed his wounds, and manned his arms with supernatural strength. ^is
sword slashed destruction among the rob^ers, an^ at last he reached their
valiant leader, with whom he maintained an unequal combat. He was on foot; the
latter was on horseback. He was exhausted with loss of blood, his antagonist
was unhurt; he attacked him however with undaunted courage, and disputed every
inch of ground with the captain of the robbers, whose horse and undiminished
vigor gave him every advantage.

Alas! he was again driven back to Babet's feet -- covered with new wounds he
sunk down beside her, and exclaimed, "Here will I die with pleasure!" -- The
stranger was bending forwards to cleave his head, when the sight of Babet again
seemed to be endued with an inexplicable charm. "Babet!" cried the robber, and
his uplifted arm dropped nerveless. "Babet!" repeated he; then leaped hastily
from his horse, seized the kneeling maid, and hurried her through the crowd
deeper into the thicket. The officer lay unable to move, or to make the least
opposition to this attempt.

CHAP. XXIII. THE DELIVERER.
SCARCELY had Babet thus, without her consent, quitted the spot where robbers
and soldiers contended with equal courage and doubtful fortune, when the scene
suddenly changed. An officer at the head of twenty hussars started suddenly
from the thicket, fell like thunder upon the robbers, and in a moment decided
the victory. All that were able to fly took to slight. The place was (...) with
killed and wounded. Those who (...) attempt to (...) ^re taken prisoners, were
bound.

The officer leaped from his horse, hastily traversed the field of battle,
found Jeanette, who lay senseless under an oak, and threw himself down beside
her. -- She sighed -- she opened her eyes, and found herself in William's arms!

Astonishment and joy deprived her of speech. She could not ask what miracle
had sent her husband as her deliverer. She could only feel an unspeakable joy,
and this feeling venting itself in tears, she hung on his neck and wept.

The groans of a wounded man attracted his attention, and roused William from
the delightful transports into which he was thrown. He looked round, saw a man
lying weltering in his blood -- looked again -- started with affright -- and
sunk down overpowered with grief by the side of the sufferer. -- It was
Frederick -- his friend, who knew him not; for the night of death sat heavy on
his eyes.

"Help! help!" cried William with great emotion, and pulled ou^ his
handkerchief to bind up the wounds, which bl^d violently. Jeanette, too, came
up and uttered a piercing shriek, when she recognized the pale countenance of
the gallant youth.

The soldiers desisted from the pursuit of the robbers, returned, and hastily
made up two litters of twigs; gently placed the wounded man upon the one, and
the exhausted Jeanette upon the other, and bore them with cautious steps
through the wood. The hussars drove the prisoners before them. William rode
slowly beside the litters, and a thousand conflicting emotions agitated his
breast. When he looked at the wife he had saved from such danger, he was filled
with a melancholy joy; but when he turned to his dying friend, and heard
Jeanette's lamentations for the lost Babet his pleasure in being the deliverer
of his wife was cruelly embittered.

At daybreak they reached the extremity of the wood, and with it a village;
where, though destitute of every accommodation, they were obliged to remain,
for the wounded man could not endure to be moved any farther. William
immediately dispatched a hussar to the next town to call surgeons. They came
about noon, and to William's unspeakable joy declared that none of his friend's
wounds were mortal. They pledged themselves for his recovery, and said, that
the only dangerous circumstance was the weakness which the loss of so much
blood ha^ occasioned.

The parson of the parish, a benevolent old man, now came to the inn, and with
the kindest hospitality made an offer of his house for the accommodation of the
patient. The offer was gratefully accepted, and Frederick, after the first
dressing was taken off, with permission of the surgeon was removed. The good
old man prepared the best and quietest room in the house for his reception; and
with the most tender anxiety produced whatever his kitchen, his cellar, and his
little domestic medicine chest could furnish.

In the evening Frederick again became perfectly sensible. He could not speak,
however, but he smiled complacently when he saw his friend sitting at his
bedside. He smiled, too, when he saw Jeanette busied going backwards and
forwards; and his eye glanced with looks of anxiety round the room, as if he
still sought another object. William understood this look, and with a
significant gesture asked his wife, whether Babet was yet asleep: Jeanette
nodded assent, but she was forced to turn aside to conceal the rising tear.
This little deception produced an happy effect upon Frederick; he seemed to be
perfectly satisfied, and soon after fell asleep.

By the fatigues of her journey, and the terrors she had sustained the
preceding night, Jeanette was so exhausted that she was scarce able to move.
William was almost as much worn out; but he resolved this night to watch by his
friend's bedside, and insisted that his wife should return and enjoy the
repose she so much required in the adjoining room. One of the surgeons likewise
remained with Frederick. As the patient, however, seemed to sleep quietly, the
surgeon fell asleep also. William continued awake; and the remembrance of all
his wonderful adventures furnished his mind with such copious subject of
meditation, as enabled him to resist the attacks of sleep.

A little after midnight he heard repeated knocks at the door; but as the room
where the sick man lodged was at the back of the house, and the knocking could
not disturb the repose of his friend, he took no further notice of it. In a
short time, however, his attention was attracted by the noise increasing, by
the sound of people passing and repassing, and talking at a distance. Not long
after, some one stepped up to the door of the room, and knocked softly. William
went out, and found the parson with a light in his hand, who told him that a
beautiful young lady with a casket under her arm had come to his house on foot,
and had called him up to speak with him. As she, however spoke nothing but
French, and he did not understand that language, he had conducted her to his
closet, and taken the liberty to call him as an interpreter. The lady appeared
very uneasy, and was bathed in tears.

William hastened to awake the surgeon, and followed the old man with a
presentiment which did not deceive him; for, when the door opened, Babet flew
into his arms! -- William's unexpected appearance gave her extreme joy a
tinctu^e of wildness. She now considered herself completely saved when she
found herself again under the protection of a beloved friend. She laughed,
wept, sighed, prayed, and for a long time could not utter a coherent sentence.
At last she inquired first for Jeanette -- and then, with visible emotion, for
Frederick, whom, in the confusion of the sight, she had too well recognized
when he dropped at her feet, and his last words, "Here will I die with
pleasure!" still vibrated in her ears.

After William had given her a favorable answer to all her inquiries, and had
somewhat settled her spirits by a composing draught, he expressed a wish to
know by what lucky adventure she had so unexpectedly appeared: -- Babet,
however, laid her fingers on her mouth -- she remained silent -- her eyes lost
their fire -- and, after taking two or three turns through the room, she seized
William's hand, and entreated him never again to distress her with this
question.

William could not comprehend the cause of this refusal; but as she repeated
her entreaty in the most fervent tone, and he was not accustomed to pry into
other people's secrets, he desisted from all inquiry. The parson, too, could
give no clue to the mystery. The servant could only tell that when Babet
knocked, a carriage, surrounded by several men on horseback, stood at a little
distance from the house; and that as soon as the door was opened, and she
admitted, the carriage and the attendants wheeled round, at full gallop took
the way back to the wood.

Next morning the joy of the company was completed by the appearance of honest
Peter, about whom, in the first alarm of the sight, nobody had shown any
concern; and availing himself of this circumstance, he had fled with the
baggage on his back into the th^^kest part of the wood The whole day he had
wandered about the wood, and was almost starved, (...) at last a good-natured
peasant brought him into the road. He then traced out his master, and arrived
just at the moment when, on the removal of the second dressing, the surgeon
gave the most sanguine hopes of Frederick's speedy recovery, and Babet and
Jeanette stood arm in arm by his bedside.

CHAP. XXIV. THE CONCLUSION.
FOR an author to consider all his readers to be persons of the dullest
intellects, and therefore to leave them nothing to anticipate, or to supply,
would be no less absurd and injudicious than it would be in the manager of a
theater, who, after dropping the curtain on the conclusion of a grand scenic
opera, should draw it up once more to exhibit to the spectators the whole
mechanism of the metamorphoses, and to show them every contrivance by which the
various objects were represented.

The narrator of this surprising but true history is convinced that most of his
readers, particularly those of the fair sex, (whom, from his own experience, he
knows to possess a peculiar felicity of conjecture, in proof of which they are
much quicker of comprehension than men) must long since have penetrated into
the contents of the two last ^pt^rs, and anticipated the catastrophe. He (...)
it only (...) ^y, therefore, to mark the (...) ^ry pursued, merely with (...)
in maps use to point out the route of navigators, that the reader may follow
them till he traces our heroes into the haven of Love, constant through every
trial.

That Frederick, soon after his separation from his friend, was exchanged; that
he returned to his regiment, which during the war had suffered very much, and
which, partly to allow it a respite, and partly that it might be recruited to
its full complement, was stationed in its old garrison; that the young hero,
accustomed to activity, undertook the task of clearing the wood of the robbers
by whom it was infested; are circumstances extremely natural, and unnecessary
to be insisted upon.

William's elopement was the effect of, perhaps, too nice a feeling of honor,
and his speedy return was the effect of a proper display of generosity in the
enemy. When he arrived at the headquarters of the general, who was encamped on
the frontiers of Switzerland, he voluntarily surrendered himself as a prisoner
of war, and, with the noble candor which testifies the innocent man, recounted
the story of his flight. The commander in chief did not think it his duty again
to expose the life of the prisoner to the fury of his countrymen, by detaining
him. He joyfully seized the opportunity which his office of intendant of the
exchange of prisoners presented, to rescue William from all farther
inconveniences, and that very evening he gave him liberty to return home.

What use William made of his freedom it is easy to conceive. He flew back to
the place where he had left his faithful Jeanette with the hope of still
finding her there. When he found that she had got the start of him by twenty
miles, he took posthorses, and followed her. Every moment the distance by
which they were separated diminished. The last stage he reached an hour after
her departure, and the timorous host told him how he had warned her not to
proceed; and that in spite of his friendly remonstrances, and Babet's fatigue,
she had resolved to continue her journey.

William trembled to think of the danger in which she was involved by her
maternal anxiety. He hastened to the commandant of the place, an old
fellow-soldier, and requested a strong escort to the next stage. Twenty hussars
immediately received orders to attend him, and he set off fullspeed. The tumult
in the wood reached his ear, and he arrived just in time to save his wife, and
avenge his friend.

The thickest veil concealed the secret of Babet's adventure; and we should
never have been able to penetrate it, if she had not some years after, herself
communicated the mystery in a moment of confidence to her husband. The captain
of the rubbers, who had called her name, seized and carried her off, was her
brother Philip. In his youth spoiled by indulgence, perverted by the prejudices
of birth, he left his country full of chimerical hopes, trusted to the
distinction of his birth, and expected to perform an important part among the
emigrants, for which he was not qualified. He thought himself neglected; he
then joined himself with other discontented persons in the same situation, and
became a robber.

For some time he carried on his depredations cautiously, and with success. But
when his troop was increased by new accessions, he had the hardihood to engage
in some extravagant attempts, which attracted the attention of government, and
involved him in the most serious disasters. He was overpowered, his troop
dispersed, and he had the good fortune to avoid an ignominious death by making
his escape to America.

When in the heat of the battle he recognized his sister on her knees, a spark
of fraternal affection awoke in his breast. He forgot his own danger, and
thought only of carrying the helpless maid to a place of safety. After the
skirmish was over, and the rest of his troop were assembled, he caused her
casket to be sought for, returned it to her, and in person conducted her by
circuitous paths, known to himself alone, to the parson's house; here he
presented her his rugged hand, which she bathed with tears of sorrow to see him
fallen so low. All her sisterly admonitions to divert him from his career of
guilt -- her affecting appeal to her honored father's spirit -- he heard only
in sullen silence.

With a heavy heart, and a determination at least not to divulge her brother's
shame, she resigned him to his fate, and hastened back to the arms of
friendship, in the bosom of a new family; where in person of her husband, the
orphan found a father, brother, and friend.

Love, friendship, virtue, hope, soon restored Frederick to perfect health. On
William's estate the two families now grew and flourished. Harmony,
contentment, and cheerfulness beamed in the looks of their parents, and smiled
in the eyes of their children. The two friends hung up their arms in the hall,
tended their turnips and cabbages, and exclaimed with Voltaire: Ah! (...) ^les
sages
Le (...)


FINIS.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME FIRST.
THE Author's Dedication, Page III Literary Life of the Author, Page V CHAP. I.
The Boy, Page 15 CHAP. II. The First Visit, Page 19 CHAP. III. The Pear Tree,
Page 23 CHAP. IV. The Canary Bird, Page 27 CHAP. V. Love for Love, Page 32
CHAP. VI. The Schoolmaster, Page 38 CHAP. VII. Patience, Page 42 CHAP. VIII.
The Soldier, Page 46 CHAP. IX. A new Character, Page 52 CHAP. X. The Murderer,
Page 57 CHAP. XI. The Priest, Page 63 CHAP. XII. The Prisoner, Page 69 CHAP.
XIII. The Penitent, Page 74 CHAP. XIV. The Ge^ Contest, Page 80 CHAP. XV.
Fortune (...), Page 84 CHAP. XVI. The Meeting and Separation, Page 92 CHAP.
XVII. The Wanderer, Page 100 CHAP. XVIII. The Hum^rist, Page 106 CHAP. XIX.
Improvements, Page 112 CHAP. XX. The Bower, Page 119 CHAP. XXI. Slighted L^ve,
Page 125 CHAP. XXII. The (...), Page 132 CHAP. XXIII. The (...). Page 139 CHAP.
XXIV. C^a^y rewarded, Page 146
CONTENTS OF VOLUME SECOND.
CHAP. I. THE Prisoner, Page 153 CHAP. II. Brunette, Page 159 CHAP. III. The
Coffin, Page 164 CHAP. IV. The Cavern, Page 172 CHAP. V. The Treasure, Page 177
CHAP. VI. The Visionary, Page 181 CHAP. VII. The Rights of Nature, Page 186
CHAP. VIII. The Spectre, Page 193 CHAP. IX. The Storm, Page 200 CHAP. X. The
Separation, Page 207 CHAP. XI. The Fever, Page 216 CHAP. XII. The
Conflagration, Page 222 CHAP. XIII. The Passport, Page 227 CHAP. XIV. The
Mayer, Page 232 CHAP. XV. The Constitutional Priest, Page 242 CHAP. XVI. A
critical Situation, Page 249 CHAP. XVII. Love and Gratitude, Page 254 CHAP.
XVIII. The Grandmother, Page 261 CHAP. XIX. The Pl^ is unfolded, Page 269 CHAP.
XX. The Flight, Page 275 CHAP. XXI. The Tyranny of Honor, Page 279 CHAP. XXII.
The Robbers, Page 283 CHAP. XXIII. The Deliverer, Page 287 CHAP. XXIV. The
Conclusion, Page 292

