CONSTANTIA DE VALMONT. A NOVEL. BY HARRIET LEE.

A woman's story at a winter's fire,
Authorized by her grandame.
SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET.
JULY 24, 1799.

CONSTANTIA DE VALMONT.
On the billows of this world, sometimes we rise
So dangerously high,
We are to heaven too nigh:
When, all in a rage,
Grown hoary with one minute's age,
The very self-same fickle wave
Which the entrancing prospect gave,
Swollen to a mountain -- sinks into a grave.

"WELL, monsieur Dorsain, I have brought you your god-daughter; and a main fine
lass she is grown since last you saw her. Heaven help us! We a' had a deal of
crying on the road -- but fair weather's come at last, you see" -- Such were
the words of Antoine, as he stopped his little garden-cart at the door of a
small cottage on the confines of the marquis de Valmont's estate in Languedoc.
-- "And how does our old dame hold it?" continued he with the same
good-humoured loquacity. "And your neighbor Justine; is she as round, and as
merry as ever? There Is such racketting work at the castle, that a body can
never find time to come among you -- I remember when we used to foot it every
evening under yon elms."

Dorsain shook his gray locks -- "That Is as much as to say our dancing days are
past!" added Antoine, observing it. "More's the pity -- However, we must leave
it to the young ones to supply our places. Come, don't cry, my little maid!
Have buried thy father and mother, to be sure; but God Almighty's a father to
all! -- Be a good girl! pray to him every morning and night, and I warrant
he will not forget thee." Honest Antoine accompanied this rustic summary of
religion and morality with a hearty salute; shook Dorsain by the hand; and,
once more mounting his vehicle, took the path that led him to the great road of
the castle.

Let us now turn to his fellow traveller, whom we have seen consigned with so
little ceremony to the care of Dorsain.

It was a female of about six years of age, lovely enough to have passed for
one of those cherubs whom the wishes of mortals have figured as mediating
spirits between themselves and heaven. Its little rosy and pouting lip seemed
designed by nature to call forth a thousand dimples; its bright eyes, blooming
cheeks, and forehead of a dazzling whiteness, realized the fancied model of the
poet, or the painter; while the soft expression of suspended sorrow, and
infantine curiosity, which had taken possession of its features, gave them the
peculiar charm of interest.

Dorsain, who had thus undertaken a charge which his age and misfortunes might
well have rendered burdensome, was no common character. Singular occurrences in
life had elevated, and occurrences still more singular depressed it; but they
had not deprived him of a just, though uncultivated understanding, a clear and
decided judgment, and that sort of dignity, which, as it is the result of merit
and virtue, may be found in the humblest situation. The small cottage he
inhabited with his wife, an infirm though respectable old woman, made, as we
have already said, a part of the extensive domains of the marquis de Valmont.
The marquis was a man -- whom it is by no means proper to describe in the same
paragraph with monsieur Dorsain: with the deference due, therefore, to' his
character, we begin another.

The marquis de Valmont, it has been said, was a man; let us respect his
feelings, and say he was a nobleman: one, who, having somewhat unexpectedly
succeeded to the family title, had profited by the privileges it bestowed, to
plunge unrestrained into folly and vice. A constant residence at Paris, deep
play, expensive mistresses, and an equipage almost princely, had in a very few
years considerably impaired a noble fortune. It was necessary to retrench: but
little minds do not correct faults -- they only change their complexion; and
the marquis grew proud and oppressive, in proportion as he ceased to be profuse.

At the time that Constantia, for so our little orphan was called, first
inhabited the cottage of Dorsain, monsieur de Valmont was not forty;
unprincipled rather than dissolute; still admired in the metropolis; little
known on an estate which he was just then quitting, after having visited it for
the only time within the course of some years; and blessed in his domestic
society with the amiable additions of a conceited wife and a spoiled son.

"This place is detestable," said madame de Valmont one day to her husband --
"My son has no tutors here, you have no friends, and I have no health; for
Heaven's sake let us return to Paris!" And to Paris they went.

What did the marquis and his son find there? Why, any thing but tutors or
friends: the marchioness was the only one of the three that was successful; not
that she found health, for, to say the truth, she did not at that time want it;
but she certainly found a cure for all complaints, both real and imaginary, by
being deposited within less than five years under a very magnificent monument
in the church of St. Genevieve. The marquis put on his sables in the most
becoming taste -- for he was still handsome. The young chevalier also made his
arrangements: for he had profited enough by his mother's instructions, and the
society in which he lived, to think of commencing petit-maitre at least. Four
years more threw some new traits in his character, and finished his education:
at the expiration of which, both father and son, from some political reasons,
prevailed on themselves, with half a dozen friends, to revisit the
long-forgotten castle of Valmont.

And what is become of Constance? -- Nine years are past -- nine long years in
about as many lines. This is going full speed indeed! Patience, courteous
reader! The ensuing years will perhaps creep a snail's pace. Nature had not
forgotten Constance, nor have we. Tall beyond her age, pure and lovely as the
flowers it was her business to tend -- light of heart and graceful of form,
Constance saw her fifteenth year without having once ceased to be the playful
unconscious character she had first been set down at the cottage of Dorsain.
She had made rapid strides too in her education; she wrote tolerably -- read at
least as well as monsieur le Cure -- understood the whole management of a
garden -- danced like a fairy -- could rear young birds, and spin a merveille.
Let us not dissemble her foibles; she loved the flowers and the birds better
than the spinningwheel, and Dorsain, who indulged her with the two first, much
better than his wise, who would willingly have confined her to the last.

"What a shame yon pretty cot should be suffered to go to ruin!" exclaimed
Constance as she was one day walking with Dorsain -- "Ah, father!" for so she
always called him, "if you and I had the management of it, we would bind up
those honey-suckles that now hang so neglected. Look, how the jeffamine has
even forced its way through that broken shutter! The inside of the casement, I
dare say, is covered with flowers. Well, great folks are much to be pitied!"

"Why?" said Dorsain with an absent air, and fixing his eyes on the cottage
with a profound sigh.

"Because they so seldom know how to enjoy the charming places they possess.
There is Monseigneur, for example -- "

"Let us not talk of him," interrupted Dorsain warmly. A servant in the
marquis's livery at that moment crossed the path.

"Good day, monsieur Dorsain!" -- "Good day, mademoiselle! We are like to have
a busy time of it -- My lord is coming down with a power of gentry to stay six
whole weeks at the castle. The avant-courier is just arrived; and our old
concierge in no small bustle with the preparations. -- Dorsain fixed his eyes
upon Constance, who, busy with the wilderness of sweets her imagination was
reducing to order, attended but little to what was said either of my lord, or
his guests. The cottage indeed she had seen before -- but she happened now for
the first time to view it under the full blaze of a summer's sun; a summer,
too, so unusually luxuriant as to have made the whole country round a garden.
That which adjoined to the building in question, had once been extensive and
beautiful; the clustered trees, shot up into strength and wildness, had gained
in foliage what they had lost in regular grace, and presented a welcome retreat
from the sun; while the shrubs and flowers blew under them with a profusion so
excessive as seemed to mock the hand of culture. "One might be so happy in that
cottage!" sighed the little protegee of Dorsain softly to herself as she went
home -- and this was the first time that imagination had ever presented to her
those shadowy forms of uncreated pleasure, of which not even that can trace the
outline.

Her days, however, passed not now so pleasantly as before; the vicinity of the
marquis induced her venerable protectors to confine her almost constantly to
the house. She had indeed never been accustomed to mingle with the peasantry of
the neighborhood; who, from jealousy, or some other unaccountable motive, kept
at a distance from the cottage of Dorsain; but still she had been permitted
sometimes to walk in the next village, under his care, and sometimes to dance
there upon the green. But the character of the marquis was bad enough; that of
the chevalier, they were told, was still worse -- for he was less a hypocrite;
and both were, by the avowal of all who visited the cottage of Dorsain, bold,
dissolute and haughty. Beings like these were to be dreaded, and therefore to
be shunned. Alas! there was still another danger: nor did it escape the
attention of madame Dorsain, that the companions of the chevalier might be some
of them more engaging than himself.

Constance, however, foresaw nothing of all this; she was heedless and lively.
Well, well, "reflection will come with time!" So say the philosophers of all
ages -- and so said the tenants of monsieur de Valmont. Time came; but he
certainly forgot the predictions of the philosophers, or took a malicious
pleasure in falsifying them; for he neglected to bring reflection in his hand;
and to this neglect only is to be imputed the error of Constance, who, weary of
perpetual confinement, made it a practice to rise with the sun, and enjoy his
earliest beams in the garden of that very cottage we have seen her admire. This
spot, independent of its general claims, inspired a particular interest. It
contained -- not a lover, but a bird's-nest. Wandering there one morning, she
had nearly crushed with her foot, a young and unfledged linnet, that some
accident had dislodged. Anxiously had she sought the brood, and most carefully
had she replaced the little stray. It is so natural to love what we have
served! Constance visited her nursery every day with new delight. The parent
bird from home, she would venture to caress her protegee, place it in her
bosom, and seem willing to communicate to it the tender warmth of her heart.

The sun shone brightly, and the morning dew sparkled to his beams: such was
the employment, and such the feelings of Constance, as she bent toward her
favorite a cheek glowing with beauty, and half concealed by the ringlets which
her attitude threw over it, when a slight noise in the bushes adjoining induced
her to look up: it was caused by a young man of no ungraceful appearance, who,
with a gun in his hand, stood on a bank that commanded the garden, and was
earnestly gazing at her: the fine tinge of youth instantly brightened into a
blush that gave her new charms. The stranger saw he was observed, and pulling
off his hat, addressed to her some common salutations; to which she was about
to reply, when the report of a gun caused her to start, and retreat some paces
back. The young man, who mistook the cause of her flight, which was in fact
much less fear of the gun, than that of being further seen either by him, or
some of the marquis's guests, lightly sprung over the fence by which they were
separated, and endeavored to re-assure her. One versed in the world would
perhaps have found somewhat in the tone with which this was done, that might
have alarmed suspicion, and offended pride: but to both of these Constance was
as much a stranger, as to deceit; and she answered his attentions, therefore,
by an ingenuous avowal of the real source of her terror.

"And what is there in the marquis, or his guests, that should make you fear
their approach?" said the stranger with a smile.

"Their haughtiness -- their arrogance! -- Oh, if you were but to hear half the
stories that are told of them in our cottage!" --

The stranger smiled again. Scandal, he found, was not confined to great towns;
it reigned powerfully enough at Valmont, to attribute to all its inhabitants
the vices of their lord.

"Is that then your cottage?" returned he with some impatience. Constance now
smiled in her turn: how could she possibly avoid it? The young man had to all
appearance the finest and most intelligent eyes in the world; yet it was plain
he made no use of them, when he could suppose she lived under a roof that
looked the image of beautiful desolation. Somewhat of this was perhaps,
unconsciously, conveyed in her answer: and the reply? -- Why, what it was
exactly we cannot tell; but it is highly probable that Constance could; for her
ear had suddenly acquired a retentive power that she had never observed in it
before -- till recollecting she had often learnt a favorite tune merely by
once or twice hearing it: "It is with voices as with musical airs," thought
Constance suddenly, "we unintentionally catch some, and forget others. --
Painting is doubtless a gift of the same nature: -- why may I not have a taste
for that too, since I have often been told that I have one for music? If I may
judge from my feelings, I am sure I have both. Ah, how much may we profit by a
little reflection! -- Madame Dorsain has told me so a thousand times. Well! I
will improve: from this moment I will reflect on every object I see!" And so
saying she fell into a deep reverie upon the only object that she saw no
longer. Without being inspired, however, by those feelings, which had thus
suddenly taught Constance that she was both a painter and musician, we will
endeavor to give a sketch with probably more likeness in it than her
newly-acquired talent could afford.

Sparkling eyes, an animated and intelligent countenance, a form that appeared
more naturally graceful, than artificially polished; an address, familiar
without impertinence, and prepossessing without study; -- such were the
external advantages with which Constantia's new acquaintance was endowed. But,
alas! though nature was so liberal, fortune seemed to have forgotten him: for
while the chevalier de Valmont enjoyed, as it should seem, without deserving
them, every gift of the latter; the former had taken pleasure in scattering her
favors upon one, who, by his own confession, boasted no higher rank than being
of the household. This discovery, however, that pride rendered painful to him
who made it, conveyed no wound to the bosom of Constance, happily ignorant of
those refinements which teach us to annex consequence to situation, and to
blush at paying to nature the dues she alone has a right to demand. Valrive,
nevertheless, whose ideas had been formed in a far different school, made not
this avowal without a degree of anxiety, which slowly subsided when he
perceived that this creature, so naturally polished, so intelligently
beautiful, was yet so little conscious of her pretensions as to regard the
attendant of M. de Valmont with no inconsiderable degree of respect.

We left Constance in a reverie. We might write a good many pages, and find her
there still, I am afraid, had she not unexpectedly found herself at home: but
spiritless, tired, and for the first time ungrateful to honest Antoine, who had
walked from the chateau with a basket of fruit, and flowers, and was
communicating the news of the family.

"Come hither, child," said madame Dorsain as she advanced: "See what a nosegay
our good neighbor has brought us! Here is an employment for you that you
like!" Constantia, without replying, set herself to dress the flower-jars; and
never before were they so ill dressed: yet, amid the profusion of sweets she
heedlessly scattered, her own fair and blooming form might well have been
mistaken for that of Flora herself.

Antoine, who, though old, had not lost the use of his eyes, and who was
besides somewhat elevated with the hospitable glass that had just been pressed
upon him, soon grew most eloquent in her praise.

"Your pretty god-daughter, neighbor Dorsain," said he, "grows too tall and
womanly to stay here. Not but you have had enough of marquisses and great
folks, I trow, to keep her out of their way; and, between you and I, our gentry
don't care much, I believe, to come in yours: but, Heaven help us! the very
servants nowadays are enough to turn one's head -- There Is your fine monsieur
Valrive, now, aping his lord, and strutting about as though he were a lord
himself."

Constantia, who had hitherto been inattentive to the discourse, at the name of
Valrive blushed deeper than the roses she held, and became all ear.

"They say," added Antoine, "that he has made a campaign with the chevalier;
'twas there I suppose he got that scar that wins all the girls' hearts. More
fool they! It Is not always the best head-pieces that get themselves in, or out
of a scrape. -- Why, 'twas but yesterday he would have persuaded me not to clip my
trees, because your English gardens are all the fashion at Paris -- A fine
fellow, indeed, to teach me! -- He has seen more rogueries than battles, I
believe, or he would never have stood so well both with my old and young lord."

Constance had heard but too much: Valrive, before only handsome, had now
acquired the charm of interest. He was brave -- he had been wounded -- he was
even scarred. To all that concerned either the wound or the scar, his young
acquaintance could have listened for ages: but Antoine had already exhausted
that little all in his momentary fit of spleen, and of an hour's long discourse
besides, Constantia heard nothing.

"If he should chance to visit the garden again!" said she, as with an
uncertain step she advanced toward it two mornings after; and, while saying
it, she fixed her eyes full upon him. Upon him? Ah no! upon a form ten thousand
times more winning than that which at first had accidentally engaged them -- a
form over which prepossession had already scattered charms unknown to sober
reality. Both the manners and countenance of Valrive, indeed, far from being
improved, betrayed an embarrassment that took somewhat from his natural grace.
-- In seeing Constance once more appear, he had instantaneously conceived ideas
and hopes, which the sweet ingenuousness of her language immediately dispelled.
She was too artless not to betray that she met him with pleasure, and too
innocent not to prove that she did it without mistrust. Afraid to inspire that
jealous sense of decorum of which she seemed so wholly unconscious, yet,
hitherto, unversed in the language of delicate love, he viewed her with a
mixture of tender admiration and surprise, that insensibly tinctured his mind
with a passion to which it had yet been a stranger.

But an innocent heart, first awakened to sensibility, needs no better
instructor in decorum: and it was from her own, not his, that Constantia began
to suspect she ought to meet him no more.

This idea, essential as it might be to her future good, was productive at the
moment of nothing but evil. It insensibly led her to prolong her stay much
beyond her usual hour -- the burning sun gave her notice of the oversight; and
she was returning homewards with feverish perturbation and haste, when, at the
moment of crossing an open lane that interposed between a thicket of wild limes
and horse-chesnuts, she heard the sound of loud voices, and as suddenly
perceived a party of horsemen, who were advancing almost full speed from the
brow of a gentle declivity. It was too late to retreat; but in the eagerness of
advancing she struck her ancle against the root of a tree, and, overcome at
once with trepidation and acute pain, sunk to the ground. The foremost of the
party, who was now very near, sprung from his horse; and, on perceiving she was
young and handsome, raised her in his arms with an exclamation of mingled
surprise and curiosity. The whole group instantly collected around her: their
eager enquiries -- their free and licentious expressions of admiration -- the
confused sound of their voices, and the passionate looks of the young man who
held her, inspired Constantia both with distrust and alarm. In vain did she
protest that she felt no inconvenience from her accident -- that she was able
to walk home without assistance. No credit was given to the assertion, as
indeed it deserved none; and they eagerly disputed with each other which of
them should have the pleasure of carrying, or at least of assisting her to the
cottage.

"And where, my dear, is your home?" said one of the party, who had surveyed
her some time in silence. Constantia just raised her eyes to the speaker: --
his years, the gracefulness of his person, and the tempered haughtiness of his
manners, at once impressed her with a conviction that he was the marquis. The
young man who still held her was doubtless his son; and she saw herself in one
luckless moment plunged into that circle Dorsain had so anxiously guarded her
against. Nor was this all: -- that venerable and gentle old man, who had
hitherto treated her with so much indulgence, received her from the gay group
with astonishment; and seemed to see in her nothing but a criminal, whom he
knew not whether to upbraid, or to weep over.

"You have been guilty of a most dangerous imprudence!" said he, as he left her
to repose in a solitary chamber over that in which they generally sat --
"Recover your spirits, however -- remove the pain by proper applications, and
all may be well again!"

Alas! Constantia thought otherwise. -- There was a pain in her heart which she
vainly strove to subdue; and while the events of the last hour, perverse as
they had been, faded insensibly from her memory, the preceding ones were deeply
engraven there.

That night, and the next morning, passed in restlessness and suffering; when,
after having been disturbed by various voices that succeeded each other, she
saw madame Dorsain enter her chamber.

"My husband was right," said she, dropping tears as she spoke: "this is no
longer any place for you, Constantia. We have had gentry of all descriptions to
enquire after you. Neither the marquis nor the chevalier, indeed, have been
here -- but that Valrive, who is the confidant of one or both, I suppose, has
done nothing but ask impertinent and troublesome questions. Dry up your eyes,
however, my dearest Constantia!" added she with tenderness, on perceiving the
tears that flowed from them, "we have yet some friends in Dauphine, to whom, in
a few days, we will find means of conveying thee. M. Thuriot is a good man, and
an honest apothecary; he will receive thee kindly for our sakes, and for the
sake of those who are gone! -- Be comforted, my child, there is a providence
that will protect thee?"

Like many other honest people, madame Dorsain did not perceive that she was
comforting herself, instead of the person she talked to; who, indeed, so far
from being consoled, felt the bitterest mortification at not having seen
Valrive, and at having missed in his sympathy the only possible pleasure
chagrin and indisposition would have allowed her to taste.

"He will doubtless come again," said she, as she tried to sleep for the night;
"and tomorrow, sick or well, I will be below." Anxiety and pain, however, kept
her waking till sunrise; and from that time till it had been many hours above
the horizon, a soft and balmy slumber sealed up her eyes. The deep tones of a
man's voice, as they penetrated the thin ceiling under her, first opened them.

"Ah, it is Valrive!" said she, starting up, and hastily beginning to dress
herself. Not at all. It was Antoine, on the contrary, who, in a tone of much
more significance and gravity than he was accustomed to, was detailing a long
story to Dorsain. She listened attentively, but could distinguish nothing
except the names of the chevalier, the marquis, and Valrive, till, the
conversation growing apparently less interesting, the naturally noisy and
loquacious Antoine insensibly raised his voice to a pitch that permitted her to
hear the whole arrangement of her journey to Dauphine.

This cruel blow completed all that had passed. To Dauphine she must go,
however unwillingly, if desired; and in Dauphine she had no probability of ever
meeting Valrive again. Yet to meet him again was so much the first wish of her
heart, that it might well be deemed her only one; and, after many struggles,
she at lenth determined to risk the seeing him once more on the very spot where
they had parted. A thousand doubts, howevery, the cruel offspring of passion,
now harassed her mind. He might not be there. If there, he might think lightly
of her for seeking an interview, or oblige her to think lightly of him by a
mode of conduct she could not approve. Of these doubts, one only was verified.
Valrive, assuredly, was not there; for, in truth, she met him pensively walking
in the path between their former rendezvous and the cottage of Dorsain.

"Ah! are you here?" said she faintly, blushing.

"Where should I be, dearest Constantia!" cried he, eagerly flying to meet her,
"but on that only spot where I could hope to see you? How much did I suffer on
the knowledge of your accident!"

"And how indiscreetly," returned Constantia, "did you address your enquiries!
Do you know that your visit will be the cause of sending me out of the
province?"

It was now Valrive's turn to blush. -- " That visit," said he, hesitating and
looking down, "was not the effect of choice, but of situation -- Blame not me,
therefore, dearest Constantia! who have suffered far more than yourself in the
recollection that you have been seen -- Yes," continued he after a break, "you
have been seen with that admiration you must ever inspire. Your situation from
the very moment became critical -- nay, dangerous; and mine, unfortunately, is
such that I cannot protect you."

"How can I be in any danger," said she innocently, "from those for whom I feel
no regard?"

"Dear, adorable girl!" said Valrive, tenderly kissing her hands, "how does my
heart venerate that pure one which dreams not of allurement but from its own
affections! But there are gross and corrupted minds, my Constantia, capable of
laying other snares than for your heart."

"I should dread the one snare much less than the other," said Constantia with
the same unaffected candor. Valrive looked conscience-struck.

"The first would surely most offend," said he.

"But I should be most grieved by the last," again returned Constance.

"Woe to the man who shall either offend or grieve a mind so pure!" exclaimed
Valrive with enthusiasm. "There is a guardian innocence about thee, dearest
Constantia! that demands no other protector against those who aspire to thy
affections. But you are yet feeble; nor dare I detain you longer -- Promise,
however, to meet me here, at least once again."

Constantia interrupted him, to recount the plan of her intended journey. "I
cannot," said she, "venture abroad again tomorrow morning, lest I should incur
suspicion, and be hurried off abruptly. -- On the morning after -- "

"How unfortunate!" cried Valrive. "The morning after is a national festival.
The marquis entertains his tenants, and my situation obliges me to preside.
Their zeal, it is more than probable, will lead them to the chateau at an early
hour, nor dare I venture to absent myself. Yet I have one plan," added he with
the eagerness of sudden recollection, "that promises us security. The
chevalier, in his rides, has seen this cottage you so much admire, and given
orders to have it refitted. I am entrusted with the directions and, the key --
to you I make over this deposit, and entreat you to meet me there a little
before sunset on the evening of that day -- The tenants and domestics, will be
engaged in dancing on the green, and my absence may for a time pass unnoticed."

Constance started at this proposal. Though yet ignorant of the forms of life,
a painful sense of impropriety flashed across her mind, and betrayed itself on
her countenance. Valrive, who perceived its effects, used all his eloquence to
obviate them. Of eloquence, indeed, nature had given him no inconsiderable
portion; and his fair auditor slowly suffered herself to be persuaded.

The promise and the key were mutually interchanged. Valrive leaped the fence,
and Constance advanced homewards. She was not, however, ten yards from the spot
on which they had conversed, when a rustling among the trees engaged her
attention. She turned her head, and a man who seemed passing through them by
accident, slightly saluted her. He was tall, and of a daring cast of
countenance; but as he pursued not the same path with herself, she paid him
little attention; and, engrossed by her own reflections, eagerly pressed
forward.

That day, and the next, passed in mysterious conferences between Dorsain and
his wife, from which she was excluded. Yet did each direct to her, by turns,
the sad and tender gaze that age so often fixes on unconscious youth, when the
fearful images of the past crowd forward, and stretch their giant shadows over
futurity. On the present now, however, seemed to rest the existence of
Constance, as on the evening of her appointment she surveyed the sweet cot she
was about to enter. The dews already began to exhale a more exquisite odor
from every flower; and the foliage, almost transparent with the setting sun,
sheltered a thousand birds, whose cheerful notes bade him a grateful adieu.
Lively and animated nature seemed to breathe without, and contrasted the
profound stillness that reigned within.

Through the lower apartments, where halfbroken shutters admitted only an
indistinct light, she passed to those above. They appeared to have been once
the seat of elegance and happiness, such as the reposing mind finds delight in
imagining. Curiosity insensibly swelled into interest, and the little heart of
Constance paused on the scene before her, with the same sentiment that rivets
the eye upon a new-made grave.

The chairs and curtains were of green taffeta, elegantly fringed, though faded
by time. A musical instrument, crayons, and rough drawings, all, like the hand
possibly that once guided them, mouldering into dust, by turns arrested her
attention. She touched the instrument; and its discordant tone, as it rang
through the house, first reminded her she was alone. She listened -- paused --
looked through the window for Valrive, and, perceiving no traces of him, passed
to the adjoining room, which, commanding an eastern aspect, was already sombre
with the gray tinge of evening. The recess in which the bed stood was half
shaded by a festoon curtain, the cords of which were broken, and hung down with
an air of disorder, that indeed pervaded every thing around. Stands for flowers
were fixed on each side the dressing-table; and amidst its ornaments carefully
folded in paper, she discovered a quantity of rich auburn hair, the long locks
of which had doubtless been treasured as a sad memento to some heart that had
now ceased to throb over it.

Is it the insignia of death that is most touching? -- Ah no! -- it is the
melancholy memorial of life; -- the painful vacuum -- the affecting desolation
of a scene that presents every dear and familiar object, except that which once
vivified and embellished all!

Depressed by a sensibility that was not unmixed with awe, and alarmed by the
increasing obscurity, Constance began to give up all hope of seeing Valrive,
and thought only of retiring unobserved, and of fastening the cottage door.
With an impression of terror that she had never before felt, she found the door
already fast, and the key no longer there. That it was left in the lock on her
entrance she perfectly recollected, as well as that she had no otherwise closed
the door than by a rustic latch she had thought it prudent to drop. Locked up
it now undoubtedly was; and whether by a hand within or without the house, she
dared hardly venture to examine. The name of Valrive, faintly articulated,
expressed a timid hope that it might be him; but no voice, no step, was heard
in answer -- the same pensive stillness continued to reign around -- and even
the voices of the birds, retiring with the retiring sun, seemed to close up
every thing in silence and gloom. Far as her eye could trace, did Constance
explore through the casement which commanded the garden. From the chamber
window nothing could be seen but the thick and interwoven trees of an adjoining
copse, thot spread their long shade over a reedy pool, from both of which the
cottage was divided by a road.

Terror, which at first had arrested her footsteps, now pressed the idea of the
future so forcibly, that she wandered in breathless expectation over the house,
to find some outlet by which she might quit it. A sudden and indistinct noise
engaged her attention. Her heart told her it was Valrive, and she flew to the
front: but from thence the sound came not, and she was slowly returning, when a
door, that led from the other side of the house, shook, with the evening blast,
upon its hinges, and seemed to require only a very feeble effort to open it.
Even that, however, was unnecessary; for it was opened at the same moment by
two men, who, rushing from the narrow road, attempted to stop her mouth. But
terror rendered that needless; for she sunk insensible in their arms. The rapid
motion of a carriage restored her to recollection, and the name of Valrive,
faintly, and involuntarily, issued from her lips.

"He is not here at present, ma'm'selle," said the ill-looking man who sat by
her -- for the other had taken upon him the office of postillion -- "but have
patience, you will see him very soon, I don't doubt."

" See him!" repeated Constantia in astonishment, "see him! -- Ah, it is not
possible he should be a principal in a scheme like this! -- and an instrument
-- Oh heaven! -- "

To vague and painful surmises, that rested on her lover, only because there
was no other being on whom they could rest, the surly ruffian who watched her
returned no answer. The carriage continued to move with some velocity; nor was
it till night was advancing, that they stopped at a remote cottage, whence
issued an old woman of no very prepossessing appearance; whom one of her
conductors saluted as his mother. With a mixture of more than common
apprehension, from the miserable chamber assigned her, Constance beheld a blaze
of distant fires, and was disturbed by shouts, that by turns rose and died upon
the wind. From the only slumber she had known, she started suddenly at the gray
dawn of morning, roused by a chorus that seemed to burst from beneath; in which
the screams of women, the shrill tones of childhood, and the hoarse rough
voices of men, were discordantly blended -- tumultuous talking ensued, and all
then was silent. While fear still throbbed over her frame, the carriage wheels
were heard, and her conductors appeared at the door. Their manners were not
less surly than before; and as she cast a fearful glance round on quitting the
cottage, she observed that each wore a tri-coloured ribbon in his hat.

Constance was not to learn, that in France there were proud men who oppressed,
and desperate ones who resisted. Among the peasants of the district, and even
upon the estate of the marquis de Valmont, the scenes transacting in Paris had
long been a theme of wonder and admiration; and Dorsain, who had groaned under
the iron hand of aristocracy, listened with no ungracious ear to the story of
its downfall. The young heart of Constantia had early learnt to beat in unison
with all the wise and good, at the idea that every man should in future repose
under his own vine, without fearing that the rude gripe of despotism should
tear away its fruits. Alas! the wise and good were far from foreseeing, that,
while corruption was sapping the foundation of morality, a mad rabble was to
beat down the superstructure; and that nothing was to remain visible, but a
hideous mass of ruin.

It was not till the evening of the second day's journey, that Constance
discovered it was to terminate at a chateau too proudly magnificent, even in
decay, to leave her a doubt of its owner. It was then to the marquis that she
was a victim, and it was by Valrive she had been delivered up. That servile
licentiousness with which she had heard him taxed, was now proved. The people
around her did not even dissemble; and his name, eternally united with that of
his lord in every direction concerning her, inspired hourly a regret that
became almost insupportable, when she recollected all that her venerable
protectors would suffer in her absence. To this regret for some days she wholly
abandoned herself: childish impatience, and unavailing tears, were her only
returns for the domestic attentions of an old woman, in whose charge she
appeared to be placed, and whose manners, if coarse, were not offensive; though
her blunted faculties, and habitual torpidity, left nothing to be expected from
her feelings. Of the golden hopes that might have enlivened them, Constance had
none to offer. She was herself indigent and obscure -- had no friends to
protect her, no wealth to bestow. For the grief she felt on being thus torn
from her relatives, she could awaken a very small portion of sympathy in one
accustomed to vegetative existence; and for the evils she dreaded, she vainly
strove to excite any. But the mind thus compressed within a narrow circle, only
proves its elasticity; that sun, whose parting beams she commanded from her
chamber, and whose lingering light she delighted to trace, often left her in a
state of abstraction, which insensibly matured her intellectual faculties.
Adjoining to her apartment was another filled with books. Curiosity led her to
examine them -- they were covered with dust, but it was, indeed, the sacred
dust of learning and genius, whole treasures of which were buried beneath it:
yet did she open them with indifference; for she was yet ignorant of the charm
of reading; -- that enchanting pleasure, that innocent voluptuousness -- that
atmosphere in which the half-fledged faculties delight to try their little
wings, and soar into a region that grosser spirits know not!

This study soon took possession of her heart, and insensibly meliorated
feelings it could not subdue. Three months elapsed, to her astonishment,
without bringing either the marquis or Valrive -- three months of uniform
solitude and confinement, for which she knew not how to account; when the
castle bell, which rang long and loud one evening, gave the unusual signal of a
guest. The heart of Constantia sunk at the sound, which reverberating through
the halls, and increased by the general stillness, spread far around, till it
sullenly died away upon the cold blasts of autumn.

Her hours of negative tranquillity now vanished at once. Monsieur de Valmont --
for it was he himself who arrived -- assuming, haughty, and observing, inspired
terrors which, while they were remote, she barely guessed at. Hardly deigning
to listen to her, with eyes that wildly ran over her person, he lifted from it
eager glances of curiosity and astonishment, when roused by some energy of
expression which his ideas of her rustic education had left him unprepared for.
Those licentious wishes which might naturally be deemed the motives for his
carrying her off, only betrayed themselves as the habit of his character, not
as impelling him to any particular pursuit: and every day, as it called forth
the latent powers of her mind, awakened in his a perturbation other painful
events alone superseded. Insensibly he learnt to speak, as well as to listen.
The letters he daily received; the distracting variety of emotions they
occasioned, and the insupportable restraint he labored under with every one
beside, induced him, by starts, to betray all that the pride of aristocracy,
and the dread of humiliation, made him secretly groan under. Immured in the
bosom of a remote chateau on the shores of the Mediterranean, Constantia became
informed of the terrible scenes that were passing in the metropolis. The
marquis de Valmont, secretly trembling at his own vassals, self-imprisoned on
an obscure estate, while the more virtuous, or more wise, among his dependants,
were endeavoring to save his lands from pillage and his person from insult,
formed but a very small and inconsiderable part of the vast picture now
presented to her view. She shuddered over the wounds of humanity; she turned
from them to her own individual sufferings with that still more painful and
acute interest self always inspires. Immersed as the mind of monsieur de
Valmont appeared in political considerations, yet there were moments when his
familiarity shocked, and his insolence alarmed her. To escape became the
constant object of all her thoughts. Once beyond the walls of the chateau, she
doubted not of protection -- nay within them, could it have been possible to
gain access to the train of servant* that now filled it, she hoped to discover
some generous heart that would find power to shelter her. Valrive she knew to
be at Paris. Through him those communications reached the marquis, that stole
the color from his cheek, and shot cold thrills through his frame. The young
chevalier was there too; and she had no difficulty in perceiving, that, in
addition to the storm of public calamity which seemed ready to tear up the
lineal honors of his house, Valmont groaned under the pressure of family
dissension. The democratic principles of his son had inspired him with a horror
little short of aversion: and it was rather to Valrive, than to that son, he
committed the care of his safety, and the protection of his rights.

That Valrive had been an instrument in betraying her, Constance had long
ceased to think. The tone of bitter persiflage, with which the marquis had
questioned her concerning him; the inquisitive and earnest glance he had fixed
upon her while he spoke, and the circumstance of his keeping him at Paris, all
conspired to convince her that she might expect every protection from a lover
whose fidelity to his lord gave so honorable a testimony to his character.

The fortunate moment for accelerating her escape, seemed at length to arrive.
-- In taking out some books, she accidentally brushed down a key: it had two
wards, which, though rusted by time, appeared curious; and on applying it to
the locks of the various closets, with which her old-fashioned apartment
abounded, she discovered it to be a master key. This was indeed a discovery!
Nor was it the only one: a stream of light that issued through a crevice whence
she had removed the books, soon led her to perceive a door behind them, to
which her new found treasure belonged. Breathless with joy, and trepidation she
only ventured to try the lock, and, perceiving it opened outward, carefully
concealed the key till some more secure opportunity of using it. Such an
opportunity was not indeed easily found. -- The hour of rest was the only one
on which she could depend; and as she judged her apartment to be at no great
distance from the hall of entrance, she was willing to try that part of the
chateau of which she had some recollection, rather than open a door that
appeared to have been long closed.

The slow and heavy clock of the castle struck eleven, before the footsteps of
the servants ceased to jar through the galleries. To meet with one, she indeed
desired; but the risque of discovery she feared might increase, were the number
extended: for, where each was suspicious of the other, each might be willing
first to prove his duty to his lord, by betraying her. The silence that
prevailed, at length gave her courage; and cautiously introducing her key into
the lock of her apartment, she had the satisfaction to hear that which had been
left in it on the opposite side fall to the ground. The door opened at her
touch; and the light-hearted Constance half breathed out in joyful and
imperfect accents -- "I am free!" -- What, however, was her freedom? In truth,
she looked before her, and hardly knew. The taper she held, cast a faint and
uncertain light upon a spacious staircase, the sides of which, once
magnificently painted with groups of fabulous divinities, retained only
imperfect and pale outlines of figures as large, or even larger than the life.
Though somewhat startled, she had the courage to proceed; and sheltering the
light with her hand, she descended the first slight of stairs. To the great
hall of entrance she was indeed much nearer than she even suspected; for, from
the balustrade of a square gallery, into which she now entered, she looked
immediately upon it: a view, however, that by no means encouraged any nearer
advance; since, had it been peopled by the marquis, and his servants, she would
hardly have felt a less pleasant sensation than presented itself at the cold
groups of marble with which the taste of different owners had enriched it.
Maimed and gigantic figures, some of them exquisite productions of sculpture,
others less remarkable for beauty, than antiquity, seemed starring, with wild
and distorted attitudes -- not into life, for that idea their color precluded,
but into preternatural animation. Involuntarily she drew back at the view; and
striking at the same moment against somewhat that stood near, the clank of
steel rang low and dismally upon her ear. Her blood chilled; and casting her
eyes round, she perceived that the gallery in which she stood was hung with
vast coats of mail, the work of different centuries; various in form, and
presenting, in the long protruded lance, the short sharp spear, and the weighty
battle-axe, all the savage stratagems of military prowess. -- A fear, however,
more immediate and more certain, presented itself at the same moment, when a
bell sounded below, and the door opened of a distant apartment. It was too
plain she had erred in supposing the family retired. Valmont in a nightgown, a
candle in his hand, and passing, as it should seem, to his chamber, advanced
directly toward the gallery. Hardly had she time to extinguish her light, ere
he was near enough to have seen it. The trophy she stood near partly shaded
her, yet her dress caught the eye of the marquis. It was white: her hair hung
loose over her shoulders, nor was the marble she had been viewing more
deathlike than terror had rendered her cheek. She lifted her hand in the
attitude of supplication. It was unnecessary. He distinguished not the
features; but the form -- the outline -- some horrible recollection, that night
and fancy aided, at once struck upon the soul of Valmont, and he sunk lifeless
to the earth. Hardly alive herself, Constance had just time and courage to
snatch the taper he had dropped, nearly extinguished in its fall, and, leaving
it burning, to hasten by its uncertain light to her chamber; where, locking the
door, she concealed the invaluable key in her bosom, and threw herself into
bed. Imperfect but mingled voices quickly assured her that the valet of the
marquis, summoned previously by his bell, had alarmed the household. Silence at
length succeeded. -- Constance counted the long hours of darkness -- nor was it
till encouraged by the return of morn, that she closed her eyes to sleep.

To discover what had passed, was now the great aim of her curiosity. Nor was
that difficult. "That monseigneur had seen the ghost; that he had had a fit in
consequence; and was still indisposed," was intelligence of such magnitude, as
even to unbind the frozen faculties of her old attendant. That Valmont
believed, indeed, from some infirmity of constitution, that he had seen a
ghost, she hardly doubted; but who was the ghost with whom his household seemed
so well acquainted? She made the enquiry, and was somewhat surprised to hear it
was that of a woman, a former marchioness de Valmont, who, clothed in white,
had long wandered over all parts of the chateau, but more especially inhabited
one: -- which, indeed, complaisance to so unwelcome a visitant had induced all
the rest of the family to abandon.

Valmont, however, was ill -- really ill; and while he confined himself to his
chamber, she had opportunity to explore some less public path to escape by,
than that of passing through the hall, and the court. The futility of the
marquis's fears she well knew: and though they so far affected her own mind as
to determine her against a nocturnal expedition, she had no hesitation in
attempting any other.

The hour, therefore, on which she now fixed to execute her project, was when
the servants were at dinner: a ceremony, which, as it immediately succeeded to
that of their lord, secured her, during his indisposition, from the visits of
either. With an anxious heart did she await the bell by which this hour was
announced; and no sooner did its noisy discord cease, than she opened the
secret door, of which she had before only tried the lock. It presented to her
view a long and gloomy corridor, where high circular windows admitted only a
dim light; nor did the season of the year afford a very brilliant one at the
best. Some portraits remained on the walls, either torn or defaced, and the
discolored wainscotting between them showed that others had been removed.

"I wonder if any body ever admired those frightful figures," thought
Constance, as she hastily cast her eye over them, and then, with a piercing
glance, directed it forward. It is probable that the story of the lady in white
occurred to her: but she had known too little of danger to be much accustomed
to fear; nor has the human mind capacity to retain two sentiments equally
forcible. Love and liberty floated before her imagination; and the terrors that
superstition might have kindled, insensibly faded. With a light step did she
trip across the gallery. Two doors presented themselves at the extremity -- she
hesitated, and at length turned toward the left. "What a charming place is a
cottage!' again silently thought our little paisanne, as the key with
difficulty turned in the massy lock. The door creaked on its hinges. She half
started -- it was but half -- She smiled at her own fears -- yet fear she did;
and wistfully cast her eyes on a narrow and winding staircase, of which, with
some tremor, she reached the top. What was her disappointment, to find herself
in the gallery of a chapel, the dreary and desolate appearance of which denoted
it to have long seen no other congregation than that of rats, whose
devastations were indeed sufficiently obvious in the rotten beams, and
worm-eaten chairs! From the window at one end, obscure as it was with dust, and
covered with ivy, she commanded no very narrow view; but it was of a flat and
pathless greensward, interrupted only by clumps of firs, and terminating, as it
approached the coast, in a barren sand. The opposite window looked into the
court of the castle; a court which so seldom opened its hospitable gates, that
the untrodden grass grew high and rank amid the stones. From hence, had she
been discerned by any of the domestics, she could form no hope of relief; or
indeed any hope but that of being mistaken for the supernatural appearance she
had heard described. Anger and disappointment banished every other
recollection. She impatiently descended the stairs, and as impatiently opened
the door she had before neglected. From a long and narrow passage, which she
was to enter down a flight of steps, the close-pent-up air struck upon her a
damp and chilling blast. Its influence communicated to her heart. A nameless
dread seemed at once to fall upon her. Cold dews started on her brow, and a
universal tremor took possession of her frame. Yet impelled by shame, by hope,
perhaps even by a fear of returning, she had crept more than half way through
the passage, when a sound, real or imaginary -- a low and melancholy moan,
seemed to creep along the walls. On the ground sunk the terrified Constance,
hiding her face with her hands, and pouring out a vehement ejaculation to the
Being who alone could protect her. A long and profound silence succeeded.
Constance continued to pray: and can the prayers of the innocent and the pious
be breathed in vain? Speak, ye who have ever known what it was to mingle your
souls with your Creator, through the sweet channels of confidence and adoration!

Constance arose, and looked round her. Her mind had lost half its weakness,
and the place consequently half its gloom. She believed herself sure of having
passed the desolate angle of the castle, and began to hope, that if she had
indeed heard any noise, it was the distant echo of some servant's foot, that
resounded through the offices. The apartment that presented itself was not ill
calculated to confirm this idea: it had indeed no appearance of having been
inhabited for some time past, but it was fitted up with shelves, that gave it
the air of a store-room, and communicated with some other, by a door that was
fastened across with a slight bar of iron. Constance easily removed it; and,
agitated between hope and fear, cautiously lifted up the tapestry on the other
side. The hope, however, vanished at once -- and terror, undescribable,
unresisted terror, seized upon her, when she found herself in a small room, or
rather dungeon, at the further end of which stood a stone coffin; and near it,
as well as sear, and the shadowy light, permitted her to discern, a meagre and
ghastly figure that resembled a man. An agony, to which fainting would have
been a relief, struck upon every sense. Pale, speechless, convulsed, she leaned
against the door-way. The phantom approached -- it touches her hand -- it
speaks -- it is no vision -- it is a human being! or rather, alas! it is the
wreck of a human being, long since, as it should seem, excluded from every
right of humanity.

Why should curiosity be kept in suspense? Reassured by slow degrees, Constance
at length learns, that this creature, whose form is emaciated by suffering --
whose voice is become monotonous, and hardly audible through despair, is no
other than the rightful lord of the castle of Valmont the predecessor of the
present one, and his victim. A gleam of benevolence and gratitude, that shot
across her soul at being made an instrument in the hands of Heaven to assuage,
perhaps to end, misfortunes so intolerable, did more toward recovering the
fortitude of Constance than had been effected by all the efforts of reason.
Sweet and grateful humanities, that thus by starts show man his truest relation
to the Deity! How does your powerful influence brace the feeblest nerves,
dilate the narrowest understanding, and strike that electric fire from the
heart, which at once invigorates the frame!

"I have told you," said monsieur de Valmont, "what I was: -- Have you
patience, and courage, to hear the means by which I became what I am?"

Constance was now all -- and, indeed, more than herself. With a voice,
therefore, of sympathy and fortitude, she requested him to proceed.

"Born," said he, "an only son, and heir to an extensive domain, it was my
misfortune to inherit from my mother a delicate and sickly constitution, that
often afforded little prospect of my reaching maturity. The next heir, who was
my cousin, and nearly of my own age, had fallen under the guardianship of my
father, and was educated with me. We spent our childhood together. I was
sincerely attached to him, and believed my affection requited: it was with
regret, therefore, that I saw him depart at a very early period, to enter into
a military line, from which my ill health excluded me. His profession brought
with it expenses, which his imprudence greatly increased. My father often
refused him supplies; but, as we held a constant correspondence, he had the
address to gain from me, what he could not from my parents. Those parents at
length descended to the grave! Happy, most happy would it have been for the son
they so anxiously reared, had he shared it with them! I was at Paris with my
cousin, when my father died; and, though absorbed in grief, it even then
casually occurred to me, that my newly-acquired honors were not recognized by
him with the pleasure I had a right to expect. I assured him, however, of my
continued regard; supplied him with a large sum of money; and set out for my
chateau in the hope of recovering my health, which the air of Paris ill agreed
with.

"On the sweet moments of my life which succeeded," added he -- pausing, and
sighing deeply, "I could dwell long, did I not fear to exhaust your patience.
Suffice it to say, that it was my sat to meet with a woman, humble indeed in
birth, but who, to a degree of beauty beyond all her sex ever boasted, added
every charm of virtue and prudence. The obscurity of her origin was no
obstacle, in my eyes, to a union which I thought assured me felicity. In a
word, I determined to marry her. My relations were alarmed. Letters,
expostulations, menaces reached me. Even my cousin presumed to interfere, in
terms which at once excited my chagrin and my resentment. I was, however, the
head of my family, and possessed a power of regulating my own actions, which I
exerted. I wrote to him to announce my marriage, and to express at the same
time the sentiments with which his conduct inspired me. It was some time before
I received an answer. One at length was brought me: it was conciliatory and
kind. He apologized for the language, which pride, and the persuasions of
others, had induced him to hold; and finally assured me, that he rejoiced in my
felicity. Ah! how pure, how unalloyed, did my felicity at that moment seem! My
wife and I lived together the life of angels! she gave me hopes of an heir. Her
parents, as well as all my tenants, shared in our pleasures. I was too happy to
be suspicious, or even prudent. In an evil hour I invited my cousin down, and
in a still more evil one he arrived.

"Let me shorten my tale," continued the marquis, laying his hand on his
forehead, and speaking in a low and suffocated voice. "By indirect methods did
this serpent contrive to assemble, in my house and neighborhood, various
hirelings devoted to him. One of them was an apothecary. -- A premature labor
-- A still-born child -- blasted my hopes, and even taught me to tremble for
the object dearest to my heart. Partly by force, and partly by entreaty, did
they prevail on me to leave her apartment -- to leave her to repose; it was,
indeed, an everlasting one! A long time did not elapse, before my cousin
entered mine. For the first time did I look at him with horror and distrust.
Methought I saw a concealed joy sparkle in his eyes, while, with a harsh and
unfeeling tone he pronounced these words: "Prepare yourself for the worst! --
your wife is dead!" I heard no more. He would have detained me; but though
inferior to him in strength at all other times, I was then irresistible.
Furious through despair, I broke from him, and rushed to her apartment. -- Oh,
wife most beloved!" continued Valmont passionately, turning toward the coffin,
"in what a situation did I find thee! Speechless, -- struggling in the arms of
death -- that fair countenance disfigured with livid spots! Merciful Heaven! do
I recollect it, and exist?" --

He paused, as if desirous to collect himself.

"For some hours I ceased to do so. I recovered, however, to every torment of
mind, and of body! to a burning fever! -- to temporary madness! -- to horrors
inspired by suffering, and increased by oppression and barbarity. Some months
elapsed -- I became but too sensible -- and was therefore, as they said,
conveyed to Paris to be cured! -- Oh God! what a cure! -- Shut up from air,
from day, from consolation! from every claim of nature, or of birthright; a
cruel visitation, converted into a constitutional malady." Again he made a
pause -- a long and fearful pause -- while the blood of Constance, she hardly
knew why, receded to her heart. He looked at her fixedly, but with kindness,
and then added, in a flower and more guarded tone, "Let me draw a veil over
events at which my imagination recoils, and which time has nearly effaced from
my memory. It is now near a century that I have been confined in this miserable
dungeon." -- Constance started, and saw at once the affecting truth -- "My
cousin," continued he, not noticing her emotion, "is doubtless long since dead
-- the family honors and estates have passed, probably, into the hands of
strangers, to whom my person as well as my misfortunes are unknown. It has
indeed pleased the Almighty to extend my life in a miraculous manner: but I
have no longer any relatives for whom I could wish to live. My reason, cleared
and purified from its former wanderings, teaches me to desire nothing beyond
these melancholy walls. They at least present me one consolation -- one sweet,
though painful consolation, which I perhaps should not enjoy elsewhere -- It is
the hour of visitation! -- Swear to me an eternal secrecy," continued he,
lowering his voice, "and you shall be a witness of it."

Alas! the terrified Constance, before whose imagination fearful images of
horror began to float, was in no condition to swear, had he waited the
performance of his request: but it vanished from his mind the moment it was
made. His countenance grew suddenly animated -- his eyes sparkled -- he
breathed quick, and, bending forward in the attitude of a person who listens,
he advanced toward the coffin, and threw himself on his knees by the side of
it; where, clasping his hands together, he seemed to lose all recollection in
one visionary idea. -- Constance, whose terrors were suspended in pity, fixed
her streaming eyes upon him. All the charms of youth and health were vanished
from a countenance which, when possessed of them, must have been eminently
handsome. Monsieur de Valmont could not be above forty, yet had sorrow and
suffering scattered "untimely gray" amid the quantity of brown hair that hung
neglected on his shoulders. His large hazel eyes had contracted a languor which
every moment of emotion bespoke foreign to their original expression; and his
stature, noble, graceful, and interesting, demanded that sentiment which rank
so often vainly flatters itself with inspiring.

He continued kneeling. " Now is the moment of escape," thought Constance. She
again looked earnestly at him. His lips moved, but no articulate sounds issued
from them. Trembling, she advanced toward the door by which she had entered,
and once more turned her eyes to the marquis. Large and agonizing drops seemed
forcing their way to his; yet so unconsciously did they fall, that a smile -- a
cold and languid smile -- played round his lip. He bent his head still lower,
as if listening to some imaginary voice; and so perfectly was every sense
absorbed, that Constance no longer hesitated. Her hand is on the door -- she
opens it -- makes but one step into the outer-room, and the barrier is once
more dropped between her and the unfortunate Valmont.

Slowly, and buried in thought, she returned through the corridor. All
visionary terrors had faded from her mind. The image of real misery was before
her eyes, and the acuteness of real suffering wrung her heart. A painful doubt
too had obtruded there. Had she a right to close again the door Heaven had so
singularly destined her to open? Was she to become an accomplice in injustice?
to deny the common blessings of air, and daylight, to one who languished in a
living grave? A sensation like remorse, a painful and oppressive feeling,
seized upon her heart; and hardly were the various motives of prudence and
propriety, which presented themselves, strong enough to prevent her returning
once more to raise the cruel bar she had had so rashly dared to drop.

From a harassed and half sleepless night, where the pale shade of Valmont
still haunted her dreams, she opened her eyes upon more new and extraordinary
realities. After viewing the sufferings of the oppressed, she was now to
witness the heavy retribution that fell on the oppressor.

By a strange concurrence of events, distinction, power, and affluence had
insensibly vanished from the grasp of him, who, to these accumulated losses,
secretly added that of an unsullied conscience. And the possessor of the
inheritance of Valmont, was hardly less an object of commiseration than the man
he had deprived of it.

The communication between the marquis, his son, and Valrive had been finally
out off. The blood that deluged Paris had even swept away all traces of their
existence. -- His titles were annihilated -- his estates were plundered --
himself on the point of being denounced -- and nothing remained for his
personal security but flight.

"You are free," said he to the astonished Constance, as pale and haggard he
traversed her apartment, and imperfectly detailed his situation -- "free to
wander over an accursed country, which I renounce. Return to that wretched old
man whom it was my fate to crush to the humble lot in which he now finds a
security I want. Go!" said he, giving her a handful of assignats with a
wildness and impatience that left him not time to consider the embarrassment of
her situation -- "Go! Let me carry with me the consolation of thinking I have
done one act of justice."

A thousand tumultuous ideas passed across the mind of Constance. To go --
strange and mad as the proposal seemed of plunging her thus abruptly into a
world she knew not, would not have cost her a moment's hesitation. But it was
no longer her own fate only on which she was to decide. The skeleton of
Valmont, neglected, forgotten, perishing with famine, or in the flames to which
she understood the peasants had devoted the castle, presented itself
instantaneously to her imagination.

Is there," said she, while impelled irresistibly by this idea -- "is there no
other prisoner to whom your justice should extend?" -- The marquis started --
"no unhappy relative," she added, trembling excessively as the perceived his
countenance change, "to whom your mercy -- whose claims -- whose misfortunes I
mean -- " The look of the marquis transfixed her -- she already saw "Graves in
his smiles -- death in his bloodless hands;"
for a smile of bitter rage and indignation quivered on his lip.

"You have seen him, then?" said he, commanding his voice -- "You have
doubtless reported the tales of Dorsain, and you have yourself credited the
dreams of insanity and dotage! You mean to propagate them, too! Beware that you
do not prepare a worse fate for -- him you would liberate!"

The pause that preceded the last sentence was lost upon Constance. Half the
speech was inexplicable: the whole scene appeared a vision; and she found
herself alone, she hardly knew how: terror-struck, bewildered, and sensible too
late that she had exposed the imprisoned Valmont to dangers more immediate than
those she would have guarded him against. To release him from his confinement,
and throw him, and herself, on the protection of the domestics, appeared now
indispensable to the safety of both. The disaffection of those domestics the
marquis had already betrayed to her, and she saw her own security in his fears:
yet was it not without perturbation she prepared again to visit a spot she had
quitted with impressions so gloomy. Fear, however, was superfluous; for Valmont
was buried in a profound sleep, which her light and timid step disturbed not.
She paused, and looked round her in silence. The apartment, though not humid,
was cold enough to communicate a shiver to beings who know what it is to enjoy
the fireside comforts: the cheerful hearth, so justly allotted to the household
gods, and within whose magic circle a thousand graceful affections and nameless
courtesies seem to dwell!

The sarcophagus, which was evidently antique, though placed there probably to
cherish a melancholy remembrance, served the unfortunate Valmont as a
resting place. More than half his face was buried in his arm -- cold dews stood
on his brow, and a strong hectic flushed his cheek, while sighs, or starts,
disturbed his respiration. In one of them he awoke --

"You are come again, then!" said he, fixing his eyes on her -- "How did you
vanish? I began to doubt whether you were a human being or some consoling
angel. Why," added he, suddenly changing his tone to extreme asperity -- "why
did you stay away so long, or wherefore are you now returned? Did you fear that
misery was contagious?"

There was something so touching, and so frightful in the embittered
sensibility of his manner, that it overwhelmed the already half-subdued spirits
of Constance, and she burst into tears.

Valmont, born a compound of every gentle and generous affection, felt, though
he could not reason upon such a reply.

"You are very young -- you are very timid," said he, softening his tone. "I
perhaps frighten you! -- Perhaps the recital of my sufferings -- "He paused
with a look of self-distrust his countenance often assumed, and pressing his
hand on his forehead, added, "Yet if you knew how much it relieved me! -- how I
longed to speak to you again! -- "

Constantia wept more abundantly than before. Perhaps there is no sensation of
the human heart more complicated or affecting, than that of knowing it has, by
one tender stroke of symyathy, assuaged a grief it feels itself impotent to
cure.

The interest expressed by her tears tranquillized Valmont; and as soon as she
could trust her voice, she endeavored to explain to him that she was no less a
prisoner than himself.

"The world," said he, after listening to her with the most profound attention,
"is then what I long ago supposed it; a scene of oppression, from the effects
of which no innocence can shelter us. Resolve, like me, never to enter it
again."

"And live -- or rather, I fear, die -- a victim!" said Constance.

"You are then rich!"

"Alas, no!" she replied, with a tone between peevishness and depression.
Valmont, whose imagination, long fixed to one point, had seen nothing in her
confinement but a plan to deprive her of some envied advantage of rank or
fortune, now gazed, as her blushes and tremor heightened her beauty, with a
consciousness of it he had not before felt; and no sooner did his mind catch a
ray of truth, than it became perfectly enlightened. All the warm blood
congealed round his heart, flowed obedient to the voice of humanity; and in the
wild hope of affording protection, he seemed to have forgotten how much he
wanted it.

Steady to honor and to feeling, there was yet one point on which his reason
obstinately wandered -- It was the period during which he had been secluded.
That dismal and solitary period had made an impression which no arguments could
correct -- In vain did she offer every rational one. "Do not," said he,
"attempt to deceive me! I have had nothing to do but to measure and calculate
those hours, which have passed lightly over the heads of the gay and the happy!
Their duration assures me the present marquis de Valmont cannot be my cousin.
Yet will I once more, for your sake, emerge into a world where I shall
doubtless be a stranger. If what you tell me approaches to truth, the same
monarch sits upon the throne. I will appeal to his tribunal -- I will rescue my
inheritance from the hands of spoilers."

"Alas!" said Constance, let us rather appeal to the tribunal of Him before
whom the monarch you speak of has been awfully summoned to appear!"

" Louis Seize is then dead!" said Valmont, starting -- "but his queen -- his
son -- "

"Perished -- crushed -- annihilated -- vanished from the face of the earth" --
would have been the answer of Constance, could she but have looked a little, a
very little, into that fearful future which fancy itself yet hardly ventured to
fully so deep with blood.

"They exist," said she mournfully; "but they are no longer royal. France is a
republic! -- "

" France a republic!" re-echoed Valmont with astonishment. "What is it you
tell me? Ah, I have indeed been buried centuries, if this be truth!"

Constance briefly recited the story of her country.

Valmont listened -- doubted -- listened -- and doubted still.

That, green in youth, she should have seen the gaudiest and gayest flowers of
creation thus blighted; the vast consolidated mass of prejudice and principle
whole ages had accumulated, crumbled at once to dust; systems annihilated that
seemed incorporate with thought itself; -- a whole nation changing, with one
convulsive crisis, its character, its manners, and its laws -- reason more
steady than Valmont's would have grown dizzy with the prospect; and humanity
shuddered at her own errors, whether she calculated the enormous pile of evil
she had destroyed, or that she was perhaps assisting to raise.

Confused voices, which decidedly, though imperfectly, rung through the hollow
arches of the chateau, suspended the attention of Constance and Valmont, even
from the affecting detail by which they were engrossed. The sounds increased
every moment: by degrees they grew mingled with shrieks; with jarring
footsteps, with loud and near-approaching accents. A discharge of muskets was
heard; -- a pause -- a shout -- a fearful interval of tumult ensued, and
Constance had hardly time to tell herself they were at the mercy of a populace,
when a door on the farther side was forcibly burst open, and a confused mass of
people, of all ages and descriptions, rushed in. Of the ferocious kindness of
which he was the object, Valmont comprehended nothing: dragged forth, he hardly
knew how, or why, to the overpowering glare of day, he indeed "Raised his heavy
eyes, and sought the light;
But, having found it, sicken'd at the sight;"
and while the cries of Liberte and la Nation rent the very air, the poor and
solitary blessing of existence seemed mounting toward heaven with them. The
affrighted Constance had only sense enough to perceive that the hands of her
deliverers were died in blood, and that Providence had made the worst passions
of man, awful ministers to correct his worst abuses.

Amid the noisy exultation of the moment, some attempted to pour wine, of which
they had dragged large quantities from the marquis's cellars, down the throat
of him they had liberated. But nature refused: the pulse of life stood still:
the group around gazed on the human ruin: of its sufferings, its wrongs, or its
resentments nothing seemed to remain but dust; yet they continued to wrong, to
suffer, and to resent.

By degrees they grew weary of the trouble of humanity. "La jeaune fille, et
fon pere" for so the rabble termed them, were insensibly deserted for the more
alluring objects of plunder and revenge; and when the feeble flutter of
existence began once more to be visible in Valmont, Constance found herself
still kneeling by him on the greensward, with no other companion than a child
of about ten years of age, who though it had joined the crowd, had not courage
to plunge with it into the long galleries and unknown apartments of the castle.
This succor, feeble as it appeared, was not, however, useless. It was the
means of obtaining water; which, plentifully thrown over Valmont, effected what
the wine could not, and he once more opened his eyes. Their wild and
interesting languor sensibly touched the heart of Constance; and without
attempting explanations, which neither appeared to have strength to bear, she
took advantage of his extreme gentleness and docility to lead him to a cottage,
which the child assured her was inhabited by his mother, at less than half a
league's distance.

This miserable shelter they with great difficulty reached; and, with still
more difficulty, obtained admittance. The woman, who alone remained at home,
regarded them with a sullen and mistrustful air, muttering some phrases to
herself, in which the term aristocrates was alone to be distinguished. Her
countenance, however, cleared on being told by the boy they were prisoners
liberated par ses compatriotes; and, moved by the supplications of Constance,
she showed them one poor apartment, where a flock-bed afforded the now quite
bewildered and exhausted Valmont a temporary stupefaction, rather than repose.

Sad and comfortless, mean time, were the reflections of Constance. The house
was lonely, and on the verge of a wood. She placed a chair by the casement,
and, as the moon rose from behind the dark edges of the trees, prepared herself
thus to pass a long, cold, and dreary night in winter, without any prospect
that the morning would better her situation. She could neither hear of
carriage, horses, or conveyance of any kind, by which she might hope once more
to reach the hospitable roof of Dorsain; though the assignats providentially
given her by the marquis enabled her to offer an ample recompense. That
unfortunate marquis himself continually haunted her imagination -- she saw him
pursued by his own vassals -- agonized, mangled, serving perhaps as a bloody
trophy. It was no dream of fancy and credulity -- it was a horrible picture, of
which the letters of the young chevalier, and Valrive, had described too many
originals; and she even shuddered with doubt, whether the ensuing day might not
realize it, and possibly render both herself and her companion, the helpless
objects of some savage festival.

Reflections like these at length exhausted the energy of her mind, while sad
necessity tranquillized it. Three hours of watching and profound silence, began
to stupify her senses, and drowsiness was sinking into slumber, when a sudden
consciousness made her start, and listen to what was passing below. The voices
of men and the trampling of horses, with a faint idea of having heard a
carriage, at once assailed her. Oh! it was not that only! a name dear and
familiar to her heart, struck at once upon her ear. "Valrive, Valrive,
Valrive," repeated often, and familiarly, in tones that spoke him present,
communicated to every pulse a throb so tumultuous, that hardly had she power to
totter down the dark and narrow staircase that separated her from the room
below. -- A group of common-looking men stood round the kitchen fire, over whom
her eyes fearfully wandered, as she perceived she had attracted theirs, without
being able to trace one likeness to him she sought.

"Monsicur Valrive n'est pas ici," said she, shrinking back --

"Si, si, ma'm'selle!" said one of the group, fixing on her a stare of
surprise. "Valrive, ou est-tu donc?" added he, raising his voice.

"Ma foi, c'est un garetc;cedil;on de bonnes fortunes ce Valrive!" said
another, taking up a candle, and looking confidently in her face. Constance
drew back, and uttered inarticulately she knew not what.

"Valrive! viens, mon ami!" again shouted the first. "On te demand avec
instance;" and with a sneer he pushed forward a person who entered. How did
Constance recoil, when, almost on the point of sinking into his arms for
shelter, she beheld -- not a lover -- not a protector -- not, in short, Valrive
-- but a countenance wholly new to her, or of which she could only have the
faintest recollection, as it once glanced across her on returning from her
favorite cottage; a countenance whose singular hardness even then had offended
her, and which now, lighted up with insolent familiarity, froze her very blood!

"Ah, I have been mistaken!" said she, turning pale, and shrinking from the
embrace he seemed preparing to take. An incredulous shout followed the
sentence; and the man, who seemed piqued by it into additional effrontery,
attempted to seize her hand. With a vehement exclamation of terror and disgust,
again she repulsed him.

"What voice was that?" said a young man, who rushed at the same moment into
the kitchen. Breathless and pale, Constance would have fallen but for his
support; while a thousand joyful emotions overcome her still more than her
fears had done. She had now indeed found her lover -- but it was no longer
Valrive -- no longer a venal dependant, unwilling or unable to protect her --
He was brave -- noble -- he was, in fine, no other than the chevalier de
Valmont! -- or rather, he had been all these; and Constance remembered not that
he was now nothing.

Valmont himself, however, who had had much and sorrowful experience, did not
wholly forget this. Recovered from the emotion of the moment, he spoke with
much gentleness and complacency to the men who had retreated some distance, and
from whose altered demeanor, though not wholly what it would once have been,
she had discovered he was their lord. Then taking a light from the one that
stood nearest him, he conducted her in silence up stairs.

Constance, who, in the transport of this unexpected meeting, had forgotten
every thing else, now struck with his manner, fixed her eyes upon him in
fearful expectation. Unlike the gay and happy lover she had seen him, hardly
would she gave guessed him to have been a lover at all, but from the extreme
emotion that seemed to shake his whole frame. Somewhat, indeed, he said of joy,
and somewhat of tenderness; but it was rather her heart, than her ear, that
caught the sounds. What, however, was her astonishment, when, in a tone and
manner that spoke him fully acquainted with her late imprisonment, he eagerly
questioned her about his father!

In an imperfect voice she detailed a little of what she knew, and a little of
what she feared. -- "It is time," said he in a low tone, and without commenting
upon the story as she concluded it, "to release from this spot, one whom
nothing but persecution and calamity can attend here! -- The means are
fortunately yet in my power -- let me then," added he, tenderly folding her to
his bosom, "communicate somewhat of those happy presentiments to which our
unexpected meeting has given birth!"

Constance was not duped by this semblance of tranquillity. The wretched candle
that lighted them, had shown her a countenance that ill accorded with his
words; and hardly had he quitted her, which he did precipitately on pronouncing
the last sentence, than all the melancholy truth rushed upon her imagination.
Surrounded by beings, who, emancipated from oppression, saw a degraded tyrant
in every one born rich or noble, he was but too much exposed to danger in his
own person, and in that of his father devoted to destruction. -- Under these
melancholy impressions terrible did the moments of his absence seem; and most
insupportable the intrusion of her hostess, who brought a refreshment of wine
and biscuits, she doubted not, by his direction; while the impertinent Valrive
gratified his curiosity, by assisting in the ceremony, and eyeing her with
half-suppressed insolence.

The sound of wheels again attracted her to the casement; and the moon shone
full upon a carriage, near which stood the chevalier, in earnest conversation
with two men. He appeared to be giving them directions, and money -- it was too
plain then that he meant to send her away. -- Without knowing why, she eagerly
opened the casement: -- he saw her, and was almost instantly in the room.

"Constance -- dearest Constance," said he, as he closed the door, "at what a
moment do we meet! -- It is now only for a moment; but, if that in which we are
to meet again ever arrives in this world, how much shall I have to tell you!"

"Whither then are you going?"

"To the chateau," replied he with embarrassment. -- Constance was no longer
mistress of herself -- her terrors, her doubts, her certainties blazed out at
once: but the eloquence of all was ineffectual toward shaking the resolution
of her lover; whose internal conviction of the fate that awaited him veiled
itself under a thousand specious arguments, which though she disbelieved, she
vainly strove to controvert. On the point at length of yielding to his
entreaties, a recollection flashed across her mind, which the agitation of the
moment had driven from it.

"You are yet to learn," said she, stepping back with embarrassment from the
door of the apartment, "that I am not alone."

"And who is your companion?"

"A man -- in whose fate I -- I am so much interested --

"Ah, beware of what you tell me," said her lover, starting wildly -- " there
wants only that!" -- Constance, frightened at the eagerness of his manner,
faltered, and knew not what to say. In the chevalier she saw the most engaging
of human beings, and in Valmont the most unfortunate. But would they view each
other with the same eyes? Grievous had been the confinement of the unhappy
marquis -- long and weary the days of his oppression: but his oppressor was the
father of the chevalier; and by what right could she impart to the man from
whom it might be most necessary to conceal it, a secret confided by insanity,
and rendered sacred by misfortune?

"The moments," said the chevalier with an anguish ill-subdued, as he perceived
the irresolution of her mind, "admit not of our pausing even over that which is
to ascertain the future value of existence! We must part Constantia. Yet if it
is ever permitted me again to grasp the hand which now trembles in mine,
remember it is assianced -- remember, I seal upon it a sacred and inalienable
vow; and should my Constantia live to have a widowed heart, as probably she
will, let me bear into another world the consciousness that I shall, for a time
at least, live in her memory!" Without waiting her answer, and as if he
mistrusted his own fortitude, he would have led her down stairs. Unable to
speak, she pointed in silence to the bed, on which he, for the first time,
noticed Valmont. With tremulous curiosity he snatched up the light, and drew
near. It struck upon the eyes of the marquis: he opened them, looked at
Constance, and, laying her hand upon his burning forehead, closed them again in
silence. The astonished chevalier gazed alternately at both, and hastily
started out of the room. Again, almost as hastily he returned. But Constance,
roused to energy by the distress of the occasion, had already, with her
enfeebled companion, advanced toward the stairs. The hand of her lover
involuntarily, and with a sort of sullen tenderness, received hers. Anxious to
speak, she trembled, doubted, and knew not what to say; nor did one of the
group, as they passed through the kitchen, recollect the extraordinary
spectacle they presented to the eyes of those collected there. The silence
continued till she was in the carriage. An exquisite pain then seemed to seize
suddenly upon her heart: she bent forward to speak. The eyes of the chevalier,
rivetted upon her, had more than sadness -- had more than love in them -- there
was terror -- there was despair! -- Struck with their expression, she clasped
her hands together, almost in the act of springing from the carriage, when the
horses at the same moment began to move, and she was already many paces from
him. -- Silence, darkness, and a long track of woody road succeeded. As
moonlight struck through the breaks, she put her head out of the window, in the
vain hope of once more seeing at least a ray of light from the cottage which
now contained the being to which her heart had most tenderly attached itself.
For a few moments Valmont silently followed the vehicle with his eyes, and
dwelt upon her image; then, burying it in his heart, turned both to blacker
prospects.

Amidst the numberless painful ideas pressing on Constance, that of her own
singular situation now first occurred in its true colors. She viewed it as a
dream. Immured in the chateau, the single sentiment of captivity and sorrow,
absorbing every other, had formed an imaginary connection between herself and
the imprisoned Valmont. But now, that various objects and feelings divided her
attention, she had some difficulty to recollect the force of her former
impressions. Perhaps a latent sense of regret, on reflecting that by means of
the marquis she had added a momentary pang to those already felt by her lover,
contributed to estrange her from the former. But Valmont was not born to be the
object of disgust. A natural eloquence, a low and pleasant voice, a sedateness
of manner that had all the effect of reason with the wildness of fancy, soon
conciliated the interest she was beginning to renounce. Hard indeed must have
been the heart that could have resisted him! The weakness attending so painful
an exertion as that of walking, had brought on a temporary inanity, rather than
slumber, from which, as he slowly recovered, it was nevertheless visible he had
derived refreshment. He began now to dwell upon events, which, while the
torrents rushed by him, he had been unable to comprehend. There was something
so affecting in his imperfect attempts at recollection, in his disjointed
efforts to fix ideas, which, like shadows upon a wall, wavered and played
before the yet unsteady lamp of reason, that Constance insensibly directed her
efforts to the same point. Nor were they unsuccessful. All the objects of
creation, as they began again to be visible to his eyes, resumed their natural
influence over his heart. The long-forgotten image of his home, his native
domain, to which Constance had in general terms assured him their journey was
directed, kindled once more that secret, and inexplicable flame, which ever
burns through the veins when we touch the circle with which our affections
incorporate us.

But a danger new and unexpected now occurred. At the post house, where the
avant-courier dispatched by the chevalier as their guard had already prepared
horses, Constance had the indiscretion to pull out a considerable number of
assignats. The face of the postmaster informed her the horses were already
paid for; but his tongue was not equally sincere. To the mortification of
seeing herself duped, by paying for them again, was added the terror of knowing
that she was in the power of men rapacious enough, under the name of
protectors, to abet the extortion; and in whose inquisitive countenances, as
the lights gleamed upon them, she discovered an expression that conveyed a
terrible pulsation to her heart. She saw too late that the prudence of the
chevalier, in providing for the expenses of her journey, had yet not been
sufficiently watchful to think of cautioning her on the subject: but the
moments spent in irresolution decided themselves, and they once more entered on
a dreary road. The men who still followed them, whether impelled by fear of
danger or some worse motive, she perceived rode nearer the carriage than
before; sometimes talking loudly together; at others joining in the etc;cedil;a
ira, or thundering out the Marseillois hymn. At length " Wished morning came!
and now upon the hills
And distant plains the shepherds fed their flocks:"
But never was rural prospect half so delightful to the eye of an enthusiast,
as that of the towers and buildings of a large city to the now exhausted
Constance. They were not long in reaching it. Her guides conducted her to an
hotel, and her fate at length seemed at a pause.

The chevalier, in whom the distracted state of his country had already matured
a spirit of precaution little congenial to his natural character, had given the
men to whom he had entrusted Constance every charge that might ensure her
safety. They were instructed to take the necessary steps with the police; and
as soon as their depositions had secured a proper passport, by establishing the
certainty that both she and her companion were prisoners liberated in a popular
commotion, one of them was to return with the information to the chevalier. He
obeyed; but previous to his departure presented himself to Constance with the
air of a man, who, conscious of having conferred an important service, comes
rather to demand than to solicit a reward. Though given with liberality, it
satisfied him not; but his comrade, stepping forward, remonstrated with some
warmth on the injustice of expecting a further recompense, while assured of an
ample one on the part of the chevalier; and reminded him at the same time that
the latter waited his return with the greatest impatience.

"Qu'il attend," replied the other in a brutal tone, as he went away: "Chacun a
son tour." Constance felt a pang at her heart. This wretch was to return as one
of the protectors of the chevalier. The relief she herself even might have
experienced in being freed from him, was soon lost in apprehension, when she
perceived that his dismission took from his companion the only check he feared,
because, probably, the only sharer in the plunder he meditated. Equivocal or
insolent answers, as to the probable length of their journey, plunged her
alarm: the journey itself became visibly flower and flower. His rapacity
increasing with her apparent terrors, soon left her little to give, and that
little she was often obiged to share with the bons patriotes, whom he
encouraged to loiter around them. With these people, who were indeed every
thing but what they called themselves, a look might be a crime, and a word
destruction. Every post, every village, became a new scene of danger and delay.
Yet the posts were insensibly passed, the villages were left behind; and after
accumulated fatigue, suffering, and apprehensions, Constance sound, with
unspeakable transport, that she was within a short distance of the chateau de
Valmont.

The transport, however, was momentary. Her guide, whose reverence for the name
of Valmont had been daily diminishing, found nothing as he approached the
domain that should strengthen it; and falling in with some of his acquaintance,
whose business was plunder, he scrupled not to declare to Constance, that both
she and her fellow traveller must find their way on as well as they could; and
that, to secure their own safety, it would be advisable first to part with all
the little wealth that remained to her. Remonstrance was vain; and in silent
terror she complied.

No other alternative now presented itself, but that of exploring a road,
which, fortunately, was not wholly unknown to her. It was already the close of
evening, and frost lay hard upon the ground. She lifted her eyes to the stars
which shone bright above her head, and addressed herself silently through them
to the Deity that bade them shine. Invigorated by hope, and within the circle
of home, she found no difficulty in proceeding: but it was otherwise with
Valmont. A league became to him a distance which his footsteps were as ill able
to trace, as his reason to calculate. Already both began to fail. Hopeless --
helpless, they sat down together, "under the shade of melancholy boughs," when
Constance exclaimed with a start of joy, "Sure I see Thibout!" Thibaut was a
young carpenter of the village. With tumultuous pleasure, she recognized a face
that was familiar to her. The lad, whose goodnature was yet uncorrupted by the
world, greeted her with cordiality, and, though returning from his day's
labor, offered to be of any service to her she might require.

His arm was more steady than that of Constance, and Valmont again crept on;
but nature was fainting within him, and to reach the habitation of Dorsain
appeared wholly impracticable. It was at that moment the recollection of her
oncefavourite cottage glanced across the mind of Constantia. The distance to it
was much less; the shelter, if it still stood, was certain. Even were the door
fast, the strength of Thibaut, a stout lad of eighteen, could easily force it.
To the cottage, therefore, she directed their steps; and to the cottage, after
many a weary step, they came. Yet she saw it not without a strong palpitation.
Her eyes rested there intently, as all the remembrances attached to it passed
across her heart. It afforded indeed shelter, but neither light nor food; and
vehemently recommending the marquis to the care of Thibaut, who engaged to
watch with him during her absence, she pressed forward to the habitation of
Dorsain.

The moon was now rising, and every spot as it opened before her became more
and more interesting. It was here she had parted with the chevalier; at the
foot of that declivity she had the ill fortune to be seen by his father. There,
embosomed in trees, was the roof of Dorsain -- and there, rising full in sight,
the chateau de Valmont. Part of it had been laid in ruins by the peasants;
smoke had disfigured the rest; and the marks of plunder and devastation were
every where visible. "Ah, if such is the fate of grandeur -- "thought Constance
as she directed her eyes eagerly forwards -- Her fears were ill-founded! The
cottage of Dorsain, secure in its poverty, still remained: still did its humble
casement emit a cheerful and far-streaming ray, while all was dark and silent
round the superb chateau.

With a trembling hand Constance tapped softly at the door, and at the same
moment lifted the latch. Two men were sitting by the fire, one of whom
instantly advanced with a taper in his hand: the light shone full upon his
features, and they were those of Dorsain. The joy of both blended in a gush of
tears, and for some moments they wept in silence. Antoine, who had also started
from the chimney-corner, first suspended the tide by his busy enquiries; and
Constance, whose heart, despite of all that engaged it there, flew back to the
suffering Valmont, recited, in as few words as she could, the extraordinary
history of her absence. Dorsain and Antoine listened to her with greedy
attention. Their eyes, their ears, their very souls seemed absorbed in the
narrative.

"Que le bon Dieu soit love!" exclaimed the latter, ere she had well finished;
while the quivering lips and pale countenance of Dorsain showed him incapable
of articulating a syllable. "Et le pauvre Thuriot! Comme il s'en rejouira! Ah,
savez-vous, ma'm'selle, que c'est votre pere don't il s'agit?" "Thanks be to
God! -- Poor Thuriot! how he will rejoice! Do you know, ma'm'selle, that it is
your father you are talking of?"


"Yes, Constance, it is thy father," added Dorsain, in broken, but joyful
accents; "it was my daughter the generous Valmont raised from obscurity! Oh, if
ever there was an angel upon earth, it was he! That cottage thy little heart
intuitively attached itself to, was the scene of his love and his benefits. We
were too happy, my child! I am afraid we forgot God Almighty, for he sent a
scourge to punish us. Thy mother was the victim; and but for the good Thuriot,
then only a journeyman apothecary, thy little spark of being would never have
been recalled. Ah, in that very cottage were thou born; and there stands thy
poor mother's deathbed!"

The rush was too mighty for Constance. She tottered, turned pale, and sunk to
the ground.

The dreadful, deadly apprehension that had seized upon her heart was
communicated in a look; no words could be added to it: with trembling steps
they flew toward the cottage. Already they approached it; already the reedy
pool behind it became visible by a stream of moonlight, that pierced through
the now leafless branches. A man, who stood stooping over the brink, attracted
their eye. It was Thibaut, who, with a pitcher in his hand, was breaking the
surface of ice to draw water. He advanced to them in haste, but with a
countenance that bade their hearts beat less anxiously.

"He is well?" cried Constance, while yet afar off.

"Ah! Dieu merci! very well now, ma'm'selle." said Thibaut; "but he has been
fearfully bad. To be sure, the mad fit came on him when the moon shone out;
and, would you believe it? he that had not before set a foot to the ground, ran
all over the house like a lapwing? And then he talked, and then he was
convulsed. But I gave him water, and he is gone to sleep!"

As Thibaut spoke, they were already in the chamber, which the moon now fully
illumined. Valmont lay half reclined upon the bed, his face toward the pillow;
the long hair of his wife, which he had found, was treasured in his breast. --
He had indeed slept -- the sleep of death. No longer suffering, no longer
convulsed, no longer a maniac, his soul had rejoined its Creator; there to
claim, and to receive, the glorious recompense due to those who have suffered
without guilt.

" How the world falls to pieces all around,
And leaves us but the ruin of our joys!
What says this transportation of our friends?
It bids us love the place where now they dwell,
And scorn the wretched spot they leave so poor."
A rude coffin constructed by Thibaut, a grave dug within the limits of the
garden, the prayers of the devout, and the tears of the innocent, were all the
funeral rites of the marquis de Valmont. The cure of the village, driven from
his home, had left none to supply his place; and such was the spirit of the
times, that a religious duty, even to dust, was likely to have been deemed a
crime. That dust had once been noble, rich -- Alas! that it was human, too,
would, probably, amid the convulsions of humanity, have been forgotten!

Yet does the weakness of nature blend with its most solemn duties! The grave
of the marquis was a chosen spot. It lay open to the western sun; and the
hillock that marked it, received his last reflected ray, as it glanced from the
windows of the beloved cottage.

"Let us beware, my child," said Dorsain, as he dragged from it the weeping
Constance, "let us beware how we deem that spot unhallowed which receives the
ashes of the good! "It is no longer the breath of a mortal -- It is the
Divinity himself who sanctifies it!"

They were now in the very heart of winter. Nature and man seemed in unison to
desolate the earth. France daily poured forth miserable thousands, to endure
all the severities of the season in foreign countries, while those that
remained at home groaned under the accumulated evils of anarchy and bloodshed.
That she had witnessed them seemed now a frightful vision to Constance, as,
shut up in a lonely cottage, the sole consolation and support of an aged
parent, who, during her absence, had lost his wife, half stunned, she listened
to the distant storm of nature and society. With her, the stream of life now
seemed to stagnate. How wild and irregular is its current! Impelled, at some
periods of it, by strange and irresistible events, we rush forward into action;
and, tossed from thought to thought, imagination knows no scope, and memory no
point. At others, the soul is driven back upon herself; the senses subside into
torpor, " And nothing is but what is not"


Such was now the fate of Constance! -- Week after week rolled heavily away,
and the chevalier appeared not. Already she divined his fate. His last words
recurred to her with all the force of a prediction. She repeated them to
herself every night ere she closed her eyes; and even in sleep, officious
memory still told her of her widowed heart.

Yet for the pure spirits accustomed to look out of themselves, and direct
their view by turns to God and man, a balm will be found even in the hour of
suffering! It was through the medium of her own sorrows, that Constance became
truly alive to the duty of assuaging those of others. The conviction sunk deep
in her heart. All its turbulent feelings harmonized by degrees into a soft and
useful sensibility. The extraordinary convulsions of civil society daily called
upon her to exercise it, and she learned to value, whilst administering them,
the blessings of benevolence, and the consolations of piety.

Though shrinking before the piercing winds of spring, she neglected not to
offer up her first prayers every morning over the grave of her father. Already
the ground, no longer hard with intense frost, began to open itself to her
tears; and to put forth the crocus, the snowdrop, and the few early flowers
with which she had marked it round. It was yet but the gray dawn of morning,
when raising her eyes from the spot they had been fixed on, full of melancholy
recollections, she directed them toward the cottage. Suddenly she perceived a
stream of light issue through its broken shutters. She started, and continued
to gaze more intently. It was no illusion. A light, like the gentle fanning of
a flame, perceptibly shone, and died away. Trembling with curiosity, she drew
nearer. It was not difficult, through the cleft of the shutter, to distinguish
all that was passing within. A young peasant, poorly clad, was standing on the
hearth, by a small pile of chips, to which he had set fire. He seemed pierced
with cold; for he frequently stooped, chafed his hands, and carefully kept up
the little blaze with every remnant of fuel he could collect. Constance had
lately seen but too many of her countrymen plunged in the direst extremes of
suffering, not to feel her compassion awakened. But, oh! how piercing was the
pang that seized upon her heart, when the young man, by a sudden turn, received
the light full on his countenance, and discovered to her the features of the
chevalier! A cry of anguish announced to him that he was observed; and
Constance, Constance, who but a few moments before had wept for the imaginary
death of her lover, suddenly found herself in his arms!

For the joy, the sorrow, the tender agony of that moment, there were no words;
and Valmont himself shed tears as he held her to his bosom.

"It is here, then, that I find you," said he; "here, on the spot where, by a
mystery, to me then inconceivable, you seemed to vanish from me! Nor did
Fortune, beloved Constance! stop there; every good she had ever bestowed seemed
vanishing with you!

It was in the midst of extravagant conjectures -- of fruitless researches --
of burning anxiety for your fate, the unlooked-for intelligence reached me,
that both my own and my father's were on the point of being decided. In vain
had we retreated from the metropolis; its horrors, its suspicions pursued us:
and our very existence was then weighing in that political balance, of which
the bloody scale had long been known to preponderate.

"Insurmountable necessity called me hence; yet, dupe that I was, even at the
moment of departing, it was to the man whose artifices had detained me beyond
my appointment -- whose villainy had made him the ready tool of villainy in
others -- to the profligate instrument of my own follies, as I believed, but in
reality to the spy of my father, that I committed the dearest secret of my
bosom. To Valrive I left the charge of tracing you. Oh, Constance, Constance!
bitter is the pang, when those evils that fall upon us through the corruptions
of others, come with the accumulated weight of our example to justify them!"

Valmont, to whose heart the story of his country was present, made a long
pause, while his eyes swam in tears, and his cheek burned with the shame of
retrospection.

"Views I myself had hardly analyzed," he continued, "united with the
well-founded prejudice you so artlessly betrayed at our first meeting to make
me assume a name that might lull caution to sleep; and I was now not without
hopes that that name, so familiar to your ears, would of itself, should it
reach them, forward a discovery of your concealment.

"With a distracted heart I flew to Paris. How many distracted ones did I find
there! My opinions, which, in the early struggles, had decidedly inclined to
the popular party, still left me friends amidst the faction most adverse to my
father. I had even the good-fortune to be personally beloved by many with whom
I did not wholly accord in politics. Young, fearless, and ready, as they
believed, to stand forth a daring partisan of any leader to whom I should
attach myself, I suddenly became, by a strange fluctuation in my fate, the
object of enthusiasm and applause.

"I had now entered that vortex from which I found it impossible to retreat.
Thousands were daily ingulphed by it before my eyes. Of those that yet floated
on the surface, many touched the fearful point that was to sink them. I was
myself fast approaching to it, for the opinions that had been mine were no
longer those of the multitude. My father, in the interim, in whose heart my
flattering reception had planted an imaginary dagger, reprobated the conduct by
which alone his liberty, or life, was secured. The perfidious Valrive, whom,
with a confidence as misplaced as my own, he had sent after me to Paris, soon
learned to think of raising his fortunes upon the wreck of ours. Though I was
in fact the only bulwark between my father and destruction, yet by a train of
insidious artifices were the feuds between us hourly increased; and while to
him I became suspected of little less than parricide, every engine was set in
motion by a party, to render me really such. Daily receiving from him letters
full of bitter reproach; death before my eyes, and indignation in my heart,
what days, what nights were mine! -- Shall I dare to say, that love itself was
superseded? I began to reconcile myself to your loss. There were moments when I
even deemed it providential. Yes, lovely Constance! when I recollected the
time, the place, the circumstances of our intended meeting -- all that was
wrong in my own character, and all that was charming in yours, I learned too
justly to doubt myself. Oh, let me not lose your regard by the very candor
which shows you how much I deserve it!"

"The hour of mortal trial at length came on. After my duties had struggled
against temptation in almost every shape, it was from Valrive I received the
extraordinary news of your imprisonment; received it at the dreadful crisis
when my father was about to follow you. Too well aware of the licentiousness of
his character, how distracting were my apprehensions! -- Prudence, policy, --
all that had hitherto guided me, vanished into air. I flew to obtain a passport
-- it was denied me. I would at an risque, have quitted Paris without one. The
barriers were closed. In the desperation of my heart I wrote a letter. How it
reached my father I know not: his answer was strange, was enigmatical. He spoke
of you as of one whom he feared; whom he abhorred; and while in the most solemn
terms he re-assured my heart on the point it was most jealously alive to, he
left me impressed with a vague horror as to your future fate. Of this, Valrive
either could not, or would not, inform me; and it was during these moments of
perturbation and rage that he mysteriously insinuated to me the execrable
project of denouncing my father. My blood flowed back with a chill like that of
death; but I had lived amongst savages who called themselves politicians, and
believed I had learnt to dissemble. I therefore rejected his proposal, but
accepted from him a passport obtained under a feigned name from a popular
leader. It was only one hour previous to that on which I should have availed
myself of it, that I received through a friend of the same party an intimation
that it would prove the signal of my fate; that a mandate had been privately
issued to arrest the bearer; and that Valrive, to whom my countenance had
doubtless been more sincere than my words, had, while thus securing me in the
snare, been himself the indirect means of denouncing his lord.

"Why should I recount to you all the horrible perplexities that ensued?
Suffice it to say, that finding it impossible to save my father, I made a
secret oath to die with him. By a strenuous exertion of the credit I had left,
I at length obtained a passport, with permission, as I was not criminated, to
secure for myself all I could of my family estates. The barrier were now open;
and, with a few faithful, though humble, well-wishers who had served in my
regiment, I set out on the memorable journey which was to decide the fate of my
family. Within a few leagues of the chateau, I unexpectedly encountered
Valrive, doubtless eagerly hastening to join the plunderers. The meeting was a
thunderbolt to both of us. He, like myself, had companions, but they were less
numerous, and probably worse armed, for he accosted me with profuse testimonies
of respect. Each was yet to learn what was passing at the chateau. Alas, I
learnt it too soon from you! I had firmness enough to dissemble. I parted with
you -- Oh God! let me not recollect the bitterness of that moment, or the
horrible ones that succeeded it! Doomed to see my own estates a scene of
bloodshed and rapine; an assassin in every vassal, and a spy in every human
face; for three weeks I struggled vainly against evils no courage could guard
me from, no prudence could avert. With the same assiduity that I sought my
father, he sought to conceal himself: it was my fate at last to find him in an
obscure hovel, sick, languishing, disabled; with no other companion than a poor
ecclesiastic nearly under the same circumstances with himself, and no other
guard than the charitable hospitality of an individual, who, though low-born,
and low-bred, still cherished a spark of the Divinity.

"During that period which preceded the day when I followed a parent to the
grave, I had long and melancholy leisure for explanation: I heard with horror
the avowal of crimes, of which I would now willingly bury the recollection. My
father, notwithstanding all the precautions that attended your birth, had long
learnt to doubt whether those crimes had obtained their fruition: a doubt, the
sight of you instantaneously confirmed. Fear soon magnified every danger: our
secret correspondence became known to him: and I learned, with astonishment,
that he tore you from your home, chiefly because he suspected Dorsain and
yourself of influence enough to make his son an accessory in his punishment.

"Heaven was gracious! for it permitted him to live long enough to see that son
acquitted, by his misfortunes, of the imputed guilt; to see him a voluntary
sharer in his parent's sufferings! -- proscribed, impoverished! -- I at length
received his last sigh! -- It was not a painful one, for the bitterness had
been exhausted in those that preceded it. To him, reason had long been but the
instrument of remorse, and life only desirable as a barrier against the dark
chasm of eternity!

"Deeply did I meditate over the obscure grave his fate had allotted him. --
Oh, Constance! there are moments, when the illusions of this world fade into
nothing, and that only is real which is to come!"

"Yes! there are dear and sacred realities, even in this world," cried
Constance, as she cast her eyes on Dorsain, whom tender anxiety had brought in
search of her. "When the virtues of a parent spread a venerable and protecting
shade over youth; when youth is employed, like Valmont's, in assuaging the
sorrows, or sometimes the deathbed, of a parent; these are the realities that
give at once a glory, and a grace, to life!"

Dorsain, who, in the wan countenance of Valmont, at first hardly recognized
the blooming young man he had formerly seen, received him generously to his
heart; and Constance now, with tender emotion, noticed the change in his person.

"From the day I lost my father," said he, "I had no object in life, but to
pursue my way hither. My name was now added to the list of the proscribed, and
I had neither passport nor protection. My journey was necessarily on foot, and
the hazards I encountered made it both circuitous and fatiguing. Conscious that
my person would here be universally known, I thought not of venturing near this
spot till dark: but I had already overtasked my own strength, for it was
midnight ere I arrived; an hour when I feared to alarm you. Immoderate fatigue
compelled me to take a repose which lasted somewhat longer than I intended; and
when I awoke, I found my limbs stiff at once with weariness and cold. I had,
nevertheless, a double incitement to seek you -- justice and love! My father,
well aware of the dangers to which his principles would expose him in a
national contest, had long ago vested large sums of money in foreign banks. To
me in the article of death, he entrusted the securities -- you may well judge,
that I consider them only as a trust. -- I bring with me," continued he
smiling, "memorandums, that will enable my Constance to make a poor man rich,
if her heart remembers the affiance, which in his more prosperous days he
sealed upon her hand!"

Ah! the heart of Constance remembered it well! Her hand again joyfully
confirmed it. Moderately rich in the gifts of fortune, with spirits subdued,
not embittered, by suffering; ennobled by their virtues, and happy in the
exercise of them, Constance, Dorsain, and Valmont, looked on man with
benevolence, and to heaven with veneration: and though driven like our first
parents from their native home, yet did innocence and love still find, amid the
wilderness of life, a spot on which to create their own Eden!

FINIS

