THE LIVES OF MARTIN LUTHER AND JOHN CALVIN. THE TWO GREAT REFORMERS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ROBERT JOHNSON, FOR B. and J. JOHNSON, NO. 147
HIGH STREET. 1799

MARTIN LUTHER, THE GREAT REFORMER.
IN the order of time, we come now to treat of a most wonderful man, whom GOD
raised up in these last ages of the world, to break the chain of superstition
and spiritual slavery, with which the bishops of Rome and their dependents had,
for many centuries, cast over the consciences of all men. He was an instrument
truly prepared for this great work; and yet but a mean and obscure monk, to
show us, that HE, who rules all things, effected himself the important design,
in which the greatest prince upon earth would have undoubtedly failed.

The conduct of the dignified clergy throughout all Europe, had long given
scandal to the world. The bishops were grossly ignorant: They seldom resided in
their dioceses, except to riot at high festivals: And all the effect their
residence could have, was to corrupt others, by their ill example. Nay some of
them could not so much as write, but employed some person, or chaplain who had
attained that accomplishment, to subscribe their names for them. They followed
the courts of princes, and aspired to the greatest offices. The abbets and
monks were wholly given up to luxury and idleness; and it appeared, by the
unmarried state both of the seculars and regulars, that the restraining them
from having wives of their own, made them conclude they had a right to all
other men's. The inferior clergy were no better; and not having places of
retreat to conceal their vices in, as the monks had, they became more public.
In sum; all ranks of churchmen were so universally despised and hated, that the
world was very apt to be possessed with prejudice against their doctrines, for
the sake of the men whose interest it was to support them: And the worship of
God was so defiled with gross superstition, that, without great enquiries, all
men are easily convinced, that the church stood in great need of reformation.
This was much increased when scripture and the books of the fathers were
rendered common by the art of printing, and began to be read, in which the
difference between the former and later ages of the church very evidently
appeared. They found, that a blind superstition came first in the room of true
piety; and when by its means, the wealth and interest of the clergy were highly
advanced, the popes had upon that established their tyranny; under which, not
only the meaner people, but even the crowned heads, had long groaned. All these
things concurred to make way for the advancement of the reformation.

Wickliffe, Huss, Jerome of Prague, and others, had laid the seeds of the
reformation, which Luther nourished with great warmth. The scandalous extolling
of indulgences gave the first occasion to all the contradiction that followed
between Luther and the church of Rome; in which if the corruptions and cruelty
of the clergy had not been so visible and scandalous, so small a matter could
not have produced such a revolution: But any crisis will put ill humors into a
ferment.

As protestants, we are certainly much obliged to Erasmus; yet we are far more
obliged, under God, to those great instruments of the reformation, viz. Luther,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer; Melancthon, Cranmer, and others. The greatest
enemies of Luther cannot deny, but that he had eminent qualities; and history
affords nothing more surprising than what he had done: For a simple monk to be
able to give popery so rude a shock, that there needed but such another
entirely to overthrow the Romish church, is what we cannot sufficiently admire,
and marks the hand of providence conducting the whole. It was said, with
reason, that Erasmus, by his railleries, prepared the way for Luther; and Simon
Fontaine the popish historian, complained, that Erasmus occasionally had done
more mischief than Luther; because Luther only opened the door wider, after
Erasmus had picked the lock, and half opened it. Notwithstanding all this, says
Bail, there must have been eminent gifts in Luther to produce such a
revolution as he has done.

Martin Luther was born at Isleben, a town in the county of Mansfield, in the
circle of Upper Saxony, on the tenth of November, 1483. His father was called
John Luther, or Luder, because he was a refiner of metals; for Luder, in the
German language, has that signification: It is agreed that his business was
about the mines; and that he was the chief magistrate of the city of Mansfield.
His mother's name was Margaret Lindeman, who was remarkable for her piety.

When Martin Luther was fourteen years of age, he was sent to the public school
of Magdeburg, where he continued one year, and was then removed to that of
Eysenach, where he studied four years. The circumstances of his parents were at
that time so very low, and so insufficient to maintain him, that he was forced,
as Melchior Adam relates, to live by begging his bread. When he had finished
his grammar studies, he was sent to the famous school at Eysenach in Thuringia,
for the sake of being among his mother's relations, where he applied himself
very diligently to his books for four years, and began to discover all that
force and strength of parts; that accuteness and penetration, that warm and
rapid eloquence, which afterward were attended with such amazing success. In
the year 1501, he was entered at the university of Erford or Erfurt, in
Thuringia where he went through a course of philosophy, and was admitted master
of arts, in 1503, being then twenty years old. He was soon after made professor
of physic, and ethics: But he chiefly applied himself to the study of the civil
law, and intended to advance himself to the bar, from which he was diverted by
an uncommon accident. As he was walking in the fields with a friend, he was
struck by a thunderbolt, which threw him to the ground, and killed his
companion: Whereupon Luther resolved to withdraw from the world, and enter into
the order of the hermits of St. Augustine. He made his profession in the
monastry of Erfurt, where he took priest's orders, and celebrated his first
mass in the year 1507.

It is reported, that there was an old man in this monastry, with whom Luther
had several conferences upon many theological subjects, particularly concerning
the article of remission of sins. This article was explained by the old monk to
Luther, That it was the express commandment of God, that every man should
believe his sins to be forgiven him in Christ. Luther found this interpretation
was confirmed by the testimony of St. Bernard, who says. 'That man is freely
justified by faith.' He then perceived the meaning of St. Paul, when (...), We
are justified by faith.' He consulted the expositions of many writers upon that
apostle, and saw through the vanity of those interpretations, which he had read
before the schoolmen. He compared the sayings and examples of the prophets, and
apostles.

In 1508, the university of Wittenburg, in the duchy of Saxony, was established
under the direction of Staupitius, whose good opinion of Luther occasioned him
to send for him from Erfurt to Wittenberg, where he taught philosophy; and his
lectures were attended by many wise and learned men. He expounded the logic and
philosophy of Aristotle, in the schools; and began to examine the old theology,
in the churches.

In the year 1512, he was sent to Rome, to take up some controversies which
happened among his order; and he conducted himself so well as to obtain the
character of a prudent man. In short, he succeeded in his business; for which
he was made doctor and professor of divinity, upon his return to Wittenberg. At
Rome he saw the pope and court, and had an opportunity also of observing the
manners of the clergy; whose hasty, superficial, and impious way of celebrating
mass, he has severely noted. "I performed mass, says he, at Rome; I saw it also
performed by others, but in such a manner, that I never think of it without the
utmost horror." He often spoke afterward of his journey to Rome, and used to
say that He would not but have made it for a thousand florins. A monkish poet
himself, upon the view of the barefaced iniquity of the popes pretended holy
city, could not help singing: If you would live righteously, keep clear of
Rome: For though her priests can license every thing else, they allow of
nothing good.

After this, he began to expound the epistle to the Romans, and the Psalms;
where he showed the difference between the law and the gospel. He refuted the
error that was then predominant in schools and sermons; that men may merit
remission of sins by their own proper works. As John Baptist demonstrated the
Lamb of God which took away the sins of the world: So Luther, shining in the
church as a bright star after an obscure sky, expressly showed, that sins are
freely remitted for the love of the Son of God, and that we ought faithfully to
embrace this bountiful gift.

His life was correspondent to his profession and these happy beginnings of
such important matter, procured him great authority. However, he attempted no
alteration in the ceremonies of religion, and interfered in no doubtful
opinions: But contented himself with opening and declaring the doctrine of
repentance, o^ remission of sins, of faith, and of true comfort in times of
adversity. His doctrine was generally approved by the learned, who conceived
high pleasure to behold Jesus Christ, the prophets, and apostles, to emerge
into the light out of darkness: whereby they began to understand the difference
between the law and the gospel, between spiritual righteousness and civil
things. Erasmus revived learning while Luther was teaching divinity at
Wittenberg. The former brought the monks barbarous and sophistical doctrine
into contempt by his elegant work; which induced Luther to study the Greek and
Hebrew languages, that, by drawing the doctrine from the very fountains, he
might pass his judgment with more authority.

The first opportunity that this great man had of unfolding to the view of a
blinded and deluded age, the truth, which had struck his astonished sight, was
offered by a Dominican, whose name was John Tetzel. This bold and enterprising
monk had been chosen, on account of his uncommon impudence, by Albert
archbishop of Mentz and Magdeburg, to preach and proclaim, in Germany, those
famous indulgences of Leo X. which administered the remission of all sins,
past, present and to come, however enormous their nature, to those who were
rich enough to purchase them. The frontless monk executed this iniquitous
commission not only with matchless insolence, indecency, and fraud, but even
carried his impiety so far as to derogate from the all-sufficient power and
influence of the merits of Christ. In describing the efficacy of these
indulgences, Tetzel said among other enormities, that even had any one ravished
the mother of God, he (Tetzel) had wherewithal to efface his guilt. He also
boasted, that he had saved more souls from hell by those INDULGENCES, than ST.
PETER had converted to Christianity by his preaching. At this, Luther unable to
smother his just indignation, raised his warning voice, and in ninety-five
propositions, maintained publicly at Wittenburg, on the 30th of September, in
the year 1517, censured the extravagant extortion of these questors, and
plainly pointed out the Roman pontiff as a partaker of their guilt, since he
suffered the people to be seduced, by such delusions, from placing their
principal confidence in Christ, the only proper object of their trust. This was
the commencement and foundation of that memorable rupture and revolution in the
church, which humbled the grandeur of the lordly pontiffs, and eclipsed so
great a part of their glory.

This debate between Luther and Tetzel was, at first, a matter of no great
moment, and might have been terminated with the utmost facility, had Leo X.
been disposed to follow the healing method which common prudence must have
naturally pointed out on such an occasion. For after all, this was no more than
a private dispute between two monks, concerning the extent of the pope's power
with respect to the remission of sin. Luther confessed that the Roman pontiff
was clothed with the power of remitting the human punishments inflicted upon
transgressors, i. e. the punishments denounced by the church, and its visible
head the bishop of Rome; but he strenuously denied that his power extended to
the remission of the divine punishments allotted to offenders, either in this
present, or in a future state; affirming, on the contrary, that these
punishments could only be removed by the merits of Christ. The doctrine of
Tetzel was, indeed, directly opposite to the sentiments of Luther; for this
senseless or designing monk asserted, that all punishments, present and future,
human and divine, were submitted to the authority of the Roman pontiff, and
came within the reach of his absolving power.

The sentiments of Luther were received with applause by the greatest part of
Germany, which had long groaned under the avarice of the pontiffs, and the
extortions of their tax-gatherers, and had murmered grievously against the
various stratagems that were daily put in practice, with the most frontless
impudence, ^o flecce the rich, and to grind the faces of the poor. But the
votaries of Rome were filled with horror, when they were informed of the
opinions propagated by the Saxon reformer; more especially the Dominicans, who
looked upon their order as insulted and attacked in the person of Tetzel. The
alarm of controversy was therefore founded, and Tetzel himself appeared
immediately in the field against Luther, whose sentiments he pretended to
refute in two academical discourses, which he pronounced on occasion of his
promotion to the degree of doctor of divinity. In the year following two famous
Dominicans, Sylvester de Prierio and Hogstrat, the former a native of Italy,
and the latter a German, rose up also against the adventurous reformer, and
attacked him at Cologn with the utmost vehemence and ardour. Their example was
soon followed by another formidable champion, named Eckius, a celebrated
professor of divinity at Ingolstadt, and one of the most zeajous supporters of
the Dominican order. Luther stood firm against these united adversaries, and
was neither vanquished by their argnments, nor daunted by their talents and
reputation: but answered their objections and refuted their reasonings with the
greatest strength of evidence, and a becoming spirit of resolution and
perseverance. At the same time, however, he addressed himself by letters,
written in the most submissive and respectful terms, to the Roman pontiff and
to several of the bishops, showing them the uprightness of his intentions, as
well as the justice of his cause, and declaring his readiness to change his
sentiments, as soon as he should see them fairly proved to be erroneous.

At first, Leo X. beheld this controversy with indifference and contempt; but,
being informed by the emperor Maximilian I not only of its importance, but also
of the fatal divisions it was likely to produce in Germany, he summoned Luther
to appear before him at Rome, and there to plead the cause which he had
undertaken to maintain. This papal summons was superseded by Frederick the
wise, elector of Saxony, who pretended, that the cause of Luther belonged to
the jurisdiction of a German tribunal, and that it was to be decided by the
ecclesiastical laws of the empire. The pontiff yielded to the remonstrances of
this prudent and magnanimous prince, and ordered Luther to justify his
intentions and doctrines before cardinal Cajetan, who was, at this time, legate
at the diet of Augsburg. In this first step the court of Rome gave a specimen
of that temerity and imprudence with which all its negociations, in this
weighty affair, were afterward conducted. For, instead of reconciling, nothing
could tend more to inflame matters than the choice of Cajetan, a Dominican,
and, consequently, the declared enemy of Luther, and friend of Tetzel, as judge
and arbitrator in this nice and perilous controversy.

Luther, however, repaired to Augsburg, in the month of October 1518, and
conferred, at three different meetings, with Cajetan himself, concerning the
points in debate. But had he even been disposed to yield to the court of Rome,
this imperious legate was, of all others, the most improper to encourage him in
the execution of such a purpose. The high spirit of Luther was not to be tamed
by the arrogant dictates of mere authority: such, however, were the only
methods of persuasion employed by the haughty cardinal. He, in an overbearing
tone, desired Luther to renounce his opinions, without ^even attempting to
prove them erroneous, and insisted, with importunity, on his confessing humbly
his fault, and submitting respectfully to the judgment of the Roman pontiff.
The Saxon reformer could not think of yielding to terms so unreasonable in
themselves and so despotically proposed; so that the conferrence was absolutely
without effect. For Luther, finding his adversary and judge inaccessible to
reason and argument, left Ausb^rg all of a sudden, after having appealed from
the present decisions of the pontiff to those which he should pronounce, when
better informed; and, in this step, he seemed yet to respect the dignity and
authority of the bishop of Rome. But Leo X. on the other hand, let loose the
reins to ambition and despotism, and carried things to the utmost extremity;
for, in the month of November, this same year, he published a special edict,
commanding his spiritual subjects to acknowledge his power of delivering from
all the punishments due to sin and transgression of every kind. As soon as
Luther received information of this inconsiderate and violent measure, he
perceived, plainly, that it would be impossible for him to bring the court of
Rome to any reasonable terms; he therefore repaired to Writtenburg, and, on the
28th of November, appealed from the pontiff to a general council.

In the mean time, the Roman pontiff became sensible of the imprudence he had
been guilty of in entrusting Cajetan with such a commission, and endeavored to
mend the matter by employing a man of more candor and impartiallity, and
better acquainted with business, in order to suppress the rebellion of Luther,
and to engage that reformer to submission and obedience. This new legate was
Charles Miltitz, a Saxon knight, who belonged to the court of Leo X. and whose
lay-character exposed him less to the prejudices that arise from a spirit of
party, than if he had been clothed with the splendid purple, or the monastic
frock. He was also a person of great prudence, penetration, and dexterity, and
every way qualified for the execution of such a nice and critical commission as
this was. Leo, therefore, sent him into Saxony to present to Frederick the
golden consecrated rose (which the pontiffs are used to bestow, as a peculiar
mark of distinction, on those princes, for whom they have, or think proper to
profess, an uncommon friendship and esteem), and to treat with Luther, not only
about finishing his controversy with Tetzel, but also concerning the methods of
bringing about a reconciliation between him and the court of Rome. Nor, indeed,
were the negociations of this prudent minister entirely unsuccessful; for in
his first conference with Luther, at Altenburg, in the year 1519, he carried
matters so far as to persuade him to write a submissive letter to Leo X.
promising to observe a profound silence upon the matters in debate, provided
that the same obligation should be imposed upon his adversaries. This same year
in the month of October, Miltitz had a second conference with Luther in the
castle of Leibenwerd, and a third the year following, at Lichtenberg. These
meetings, which were reciprocally conducted with moderation and decency, gave
great hopes of an approaching reconciliation; nor were these hopes ill founded.
But the violent proceedings of the enemies of Luther, and the arrogant spirit,
as well as unaccountable imprudence, of the court of Rome, blasted these fair
expectations, and kindled anew the flames of discord.

Tetzel, on the other hand, burdened with the iniquities of Rome, tormented
with a consciousness of his own injustice and extortions, stung with the
approbrious censures of the new legate, and seeing himself equally despised and
abhorred by both parties, died of grief and despair

Had the court of Rome been prudent enough to have accepted of the submission
made by Luther, they would have almost nipped in the bud the cause of the
reformation, or would at least, have considerably retarded its growth and
progress.

One of the circumstances that contributed principally, at least by its
consequences, to render the embassy of Miltitz ineffectual for the restoration
of peace, was a famous controversy of an incidental nature that was carried on
at Leipsic, some weeks successively, in the year 1519. A doctor named Eckius,
who was one of the most eminent and zealous champions in the papal cause,
happened to differ widely from Carlostadt, the colleague and companion of
Luther, in his sentiments concerning Free Will. The first conflict was between
Carlostadt and Eckius concerning the powers and freedom of the human will; it
was carried on in the castle of Pleissenburg, in presence of a numerous and
splendid audience, and was followed by a dispute between Luther and Eckius
concerning the authority and supermacy of the Roman pontiff. This latter
controversy, which the present situation of affairs rendered singularly nice
and critical, was left undecided. Hoffman, at that time rector of the
university of Leipsic, and who had been also appointed judge of the arguments
alleged on both sides, refused to declare to whom the victory belonged; so
that the decision of this matter was referred to the universities of Paris and
Erfurt.

Among the spectators of this ecclesiastical combat was Philip Melancthon, at
that time, professor of Greek at Wittenburg, who had not, as yet, been involved
in these divisions (as indeed the mildness of his temper and his elegant taste
for polite literature rendered him averse from disputes of this nature), though
he was the intimate friend of Luther, and approved his design of delivering the
pure and primitive science of theology from the darkness and subtility of
scholastic jargon.

In the mean time, the religious dissensions in Germany increased, instead of
diminishing. For while Miltitz was treating with Luther in Saxony, in such a
mild and prudent manner as offered the fairest prospect of an approaching
acccommodation, Eckius, inflamed with resentment and fury on account of his
defeat at Leipsic, repaired with the utmost precipitation to Rome, to
accomplish, as he imagined, the ruin of Luther. There, entering into a league
with the Dominicans, who were in high credit at the papal court, and more
especially with their two zealous patrons, De Prierio and Cajetan, he earnestly
entreated Leo X. to level the thunder of his anathemas at the head of Luther,
and to exclude him from the communion of the church. The Dominicans, desirous
of revenging the affront that, in their opinion, their whole order had received
by Luther's treatment of their brother Tetzel, and their patron Cajetan,
seconded the furious efforts of Eckius against the Saxon reformer, and used
their utmost endeavors to have his request granted. The pontiff, overcome by
the importunity of these pernicious counselors, imprudently issued out a bull
against Luther, dated the 15th of June, 1520, in which forty-one pretended
heresies, extracted from his writings, were solemnly condemned, his writings
ordered to be publicly burnt, and in which he was again summoned, on pain of
excommunication, to confess and retract his pretended errors within the space
of sixty days, and to cast himself upon the clemency and mercy of the pontiff.

As soon as the account of this rash sentence, pronounced from the papal chair,
was brought to Luther, he thought it was high time to consult both his present
defense and future security; and the first step he took for this purpose, was
the renewal of his appeal from the sentence of the Roman pontiff, to the more
respectable decision of a general council. But as he foresaw that this appeal
would be treated with contempt at the court of Rome, and that when the time
prescribed for his recantation was elapsed, the thunder of excommunication
would be levelled at his devoted head, he judged it prudent to withdraw himself
voluntarily from the communion of the church of Rome, before he was obliged to
leave it by force; and thus to render this new bull of ejection a blow in the
air, an exercise of authority without any object to act upon. At the same time,
he was resolved to execute this wise resolution in a public manner, that his
voluntary retreat from the communion of a corrupt and superstitious church
might be universally known, before the lordly pontiff had prepared his ghostly
thunder. With this view, on the 10th of December, in the year 1520, he had a
pile of wood erected without the walls of the Wittenburg city, and there, in
presence of a prodigious multitude of people of all ranks and orders, he
committed to the flames both the bull that had been published against him, and
the decretals and cannons relating to the pope's supreme jurisdiction. By this
he declared to the world, that he was no longer a subject to the Roman pontiff;
and that, of consequence, the sentence of excommunication against him, which
was daily expected from Rome, was entirely superfluous and insignificant. It is
not improbable, that Luther was directed, in this critical measure, by persons
well skilled in the law, who are generally dextrous in furnishing a perplexed
client with nice distinctions and plausible evasions. Be that as it may, he
separated himself only from the church of Rome, which considers the pope as
infallible, and not from the church, considered in a more extensive sense; for
he submitted to the decision of the universal church, when that decision should
be given in a general council lawfully assembled. When this judicious
distinction is considered, it will not appear at all surprising, that many,
even of the Roman catholics, who weighed matters with a certain degree of
impartiality and wisdom, and were zealous for the maintenance of the liberties
of Germany, justified this bold resolution of Luther. In less than a month
after this noble and important step had been taken by the Saxon reformer, a
second bull was issued out against him, on the 6th of January, 1521, by which
he was expelled from the communion of the church, for having insulted the
majesty, and disowned the supremacy, of the Roman pontiff.

Such iniquitous laws, enacted against the person and doctrine of Luther,
produced an effect different from what was expected by the imperious pontiff.
Instead of intimidating this bold reformer, they led him to form the project of
founding a church upon principles entirely opposite to those of Rome, and to
establish, in it, a system of doctrine and ecclesiastical discipline, agreeable
to the spirit and precepts of the gospel of truth. This, indeed, was the only
resource Luther had left him; for to submit to the orders of a cruel and
insolent enemy, would have been the greatest degree of imprudence imaginable;
and to embrace, anew, errors that he had rejected with a just iudignation, and
exposed with the clearest evidence, would have discovered a want of integrity
and principle, worthy only of the most abandoned profligate. From this time,
therefore, he applied himself to the pursuit of the truth with still more
assiduity and fervor than he had formerly done; nor did he only review with
attention, and confirm by new arguments, what he had hitherto taught, but went
much beyond it, and made vigorous attacks upon the main strong-hold of popery,
the power and jurisdiction of the Roman pontiff, which he overturned from its
very foundation. In this noble undertaking he was seconded by many learned and
pious men, in various parts of Europe; by those of the professors of the
acadamy of Wittenburg, who had adopted his principles; and in a more especial
manner by the celebrated Melancthon. And as the fame of Luther's wisdom and
Melancthon's learning had filled that acadamy with an incredible number of
students, who flocked to it from all parts, this happy circumstance propagated
the principles of the reformation with an amazing rapidity through all the
countries of Europe.

Not long after the commencement of these divisions, Maximilian I. had departed
this life, and his grandson Charles V. king of Spain, had succeeded him in the
empire in the year 1519. Leo X. seized this new occasion of venting and
executing his vengeance, by putting the new emperor in mind of his character as
advocate and defender of the church, and demanding the exemplary punishment of
Luther, who had rebelled against its sacred laws and institutions. On the other
hand, Frederick the Wise employed his credit with Charles to prevent the
publication of any unjust edict against this reformer, and to have his cause
tried by the canons of the Germanic church, and the laws of the empire. This
request was so much the more likely to be granted, that Charles was under much
greater obligations to Frederick, than to any other of the German princes, as
it was chiefly by his zealous and important services that he had been raised to
the empire, in opposition to the pretensions of such a formidable rival as
Francis I. king of France. The emperor was sensible of his obligations to the
worthy elector, and was entirely disposed to satisfy his demands. That,
however, he might do this without displeasing the Roman pontiff, he resolved
that Luther should be called before the council, that was to be assembled at
Worms in the year 1521, and that his cause should be there publicly heard,
before any final sentence should be pronounced against him. When some of his
friends, informed of the violent designs of the Roman court, and alarmed by the
bull that had been published against him by the rash pontiff, advised him not
to expose his person at the diet of Worms, notwithstanding the imperial
safe conduct (which, in a similar case, had not been sufficient to protect John
Huss and Jerome of Prague from the perfidy and curelty of their enemies), he
answered with his usual intrepedity, that were he obliged to encounter at Worms
as many devils as there were tiles upon the houses of that city, this would not
deter him from his fixed purpose of appearing there; that fear, in his case,
could be only a suggestion of Satan, who apprehended the approaching ruin of
his kingdom, and who was willing to avoid a public defeat before such a grand
assembly as the diet of Worms.

Luther, therefore, appeared at Worms, secured against the violence of his
enemies by a safe conduct from the emperor, and, on the 17th of April, and the
day following, pleaded his cause before that grand assembly with the utmost
resolution and presence of mind. The united power of threatenings and entreaties
were employed to conquer the firmness of his purpose, to engage him to renounce
the propositions he had hitherto maintained, and to bend him to a submission to
the Roman pontiff. But he refused all this with a noble obstinacy, and declared
solemnly, that he would neither abandon his opinions, nor change his conduct,
until he was previously convinced, by the word of God, or the dictates of right
reason, that his opinions were erroneous, and his conduct unlawful When
therefore neither promises nor threatenings could shake the constancy of this
magnanimous reformer, he obtained, indeed, from the emperor the liberty of
returning, unmolested, to his home; but after his departure from the diet, he
was condemned by the unanimous suffrages both by the emperor and the princes,
and was declared an enemy of the holy Roman empire. Frederick, who law the
storm rising against Luther, used the best precautions to secure him from its
violence. For this purpose he sent three or four persons, in whom he could
confide, to meet him on his return from the diet, in order to conduct him to a
place of safety. These emissaries, disguised by masks, executed their
commission with the utmost secrecy and success. Meeting with Luther, near
Eysenac, they seized him, and carried him into the castle of Wertenburg, not,
as some have imagined upon probable grounds, was this done without the
knowledge of his Imperial majesty. In this retreat, which he called his Patmos,
the Saxon reformer lay concealed during the space of ten months, and emploved
this involuntary leisure in compositions that were afterward useful to the
world.

The active spirit of Luther could not however, long bear this confinement; he
therefore left his Patinos in the month of March, of the year 1522, without the
consent, or even the knowledge, of his patron and protector Frederick, and
repaired to Wittenburg. One of the principal motives that engaged him to take
this bold step, was the information he had received of the inconsiderate
conduct of Carlostadt, and some other friends of the reformation, who had
already excited tumults in Saxony, and were acting in a manner equally
prejudicial to the tranquillity of the state, and the true interests of the
church. Luther opposed the impetuosity of this imprudent reformer with the
utmost fortitude and dignity; and to these prudent admonitions this excellent
reformer added the influence of example, by applying himself with redoubled
industry and zeal, to his German translation of the Holy Scriptures, which he
carried on with expedition and success, with the assistance of some learned and
pious men, whom he consulted in this great and important undertaking. The event
abundantly showed the wisdom of Luther's advice. For the different parts of
this translation, being successively and gradually spread abroad among the
people, produced sudden and almost incredible effects, and exterpated, root and
branch, the erroneous principles and superstitions doctrines of the church of
Rome from the minds of a prodigious number of persons.

While these things were transacting, Leo X. departed this life, and was
succeeded in the pontificate by Adrian VI. a native of Utrecht. This pope, who
had formerly been preceptor to Charles V. and who owed his new dignity to the
good offices of that prince, was a man of probity and candor, who acknowledged
ingeniously that the church labored under the most fatal disorders, and
declared his willingness to apply the remedies that should be judged the most
adapted to heal them. He began his pontificate by sending a legate to the diet,
which was assembled at Nuremberg in 1522. Francis Cheregato, the person who was
entrusted with this commission, had positive orders to demand the speedy and
vigorous execution of the sentence that had been pronounced against Luther and
his followers at the diet of Worms; but, at the same time, he was authorized to
declare that the pontiff was ready to remove the abuses and grievances that had
armed such a formidable enemy against the sea of Rome. The princes of the
empire, encouraged by this declaration on the one hand, and by the absence of
the emperor, who, at this time, resided in Spain, on the other, seized this
opportunity of proposing the summoning a general council in Germany, in order
to deliberate upon the proper methods of bringing about an universal
reformation of the church. They exhibited, at the same time, an hundred
articles, containing the heaviest complaints of the injurious treatment the
Germans had hitherto received from the court of Rome, and, by a public law,
prohibited all innovation in religions matters, until a general council should
decide what was to be done in an affair of such high moment and importance.

The pope Adrian did not long enjoy the pleasure of sitting at the head of the
church. He died in the year 1523, and was succeeded by Clement VII. a man of a
reserved character, and prone to artifice. This pontiff sent to the imperial
diet at Nuremberg, in the year 1524, a cardinal-legate, named Campegius, whose
orders, with respect to the affairs of Luther, breathed nothing but severity
and violence, and who inveighed against the lenity of the German princes in
delaying the execution of the decree of Worms, while he carefully avoided the
smallest mention of the promise Adrian had made to reform the corruptions of a
superstitious church. The emperor seconded the demands of Campegius by the
orders he sent to his minister to insist upon the execution of the sentence
which had been pronounced against Luther and his adherents at the diet of
Worms. The princes of the empire, tired out by these importunities and
remonstrances, changed in appearance the law they had passed, but confirmed it
in reality. For while they promised to observe, as far as was possible, the
edict of Worms, they, at the same time, renewed their demands of a general
council, and left all other matters in dispute to be examined and decided at
the diet that was soon to be assembled at Spire. The pope's legate, on the
other hand, perceiving by these proceedings, that the German princes in general
were no enemies to the reformation, retired to Ratisbon, with the bishops and
those of the princes that adhered to the cause of Rome, and there drew from
them a new declaration, by which they engaged themselves to execute rigorously
the edict of Worms in their respective dominions.

While the efforts of Luther toward the reformation of the church were daily
crowned with growing success, and almost all the nations seemed disposed to
open their eyes upon the light, two unhappy occurrences, one of a foreign, and
the other of a domestic nature, contributed greatly to retard the progress of
this salutary and glorious work. The domestic, or internal incident, was a
controversy concerning the manner in which the body and blood of Christ were
present in the eucharist, that arose among those whom the Roman pontiff had
publicly excluded from the communion of the church, and unhappily produced
among the friends of the good cause the most deplorable animosities and
divisions. Luther and his followers, though they had rejected the monstrous
doctrine of the church of Rome with respect to the transubstatiation, or change
of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, were nevertheless of
opinion, that the partakers of the Lord's supper received, along with the bread
and wine, the real body and blood of Christ. Carlostadt, who was Luther's
colleague, understood the matter quite otherwise, and his doctrine, which was
afterward illustrated and confirmed by Zoinglius with much more ingenuity than
he had proposed it, amounted to this: That the body and blood of Christ were
not really present in the eucharist; and that the bread and wine were no more
than external signs, and symbols, designed to excite in the minds of
Christians, the remembrance of the sufferings and death of the divine Savior,
and of the benefits which arise from it. This opinion was embraced by all the
friends of the reformation in Switzerland, and by a considerable number of its
votaries in Germany. On the other hand, Luther maintained his doctrine, in
relation to this point, with the utmost obstinacy; and hence arose, in the year
1524, a tedious and vehement controversy, which not withstanding the zealous
endeavors that were used to reconcile the contending parties, terminated, at
length in a fatal division between those who had embarked together in the
sacred cause of religion and liberty.

To these intestine divisions were added the horrors of a civil war, which was
the fatal effect of oppression on the one hand, and of enthusiasim on the
other; and, by its unhappy consequences, was prejudicial to the cause and
progress of the reformation. In the year 1525, a prodigious multitude of
seditions fanatics arose like a whirlwind, all of a sudden, in different parts
of Germany, took arms, united their forces, waged war against the laws, the
magistrates, and the empire in general, laid waste the country with fire and
sword, and exhibited daily the most horrid spectacles of unrelenting barbarity.
The greatest part of this furious and formidable mob was composed of peasants
and vassals, who groaned under heavy burdens, and declared they were no longer
able to bear the despotic severity of their chiefs; and hence this sedition was
called the Rustic war, or the war of the peasants. But no sooner had the
enthusiast Munzer put himself at the head of this outrageous rabble, than the
face of things changed entirely, and by the instigation of this man, who had
deceived numbers before this time by his pretended visions and inspirations,
the civil commotions in Saxony and Thuringia were soon directed toward a new
object, and were turned into a religious war. The sentiments, however, of this
seditious and dissolute multitude were greatly divided, and their demands were
very different. Luther, sufficiently defended both his principles and his cause
against this turbulent sect, by the advice he addressed to the princes of the
empire to take arms against them. And, accordingly, in the year 1525, this
odious faction faction was defeated and destroyed, in a pitched battle fought
at Mulhausen; and Munzer, their ringleader, taken, and put to death.

Luther laid aside the friar's habit in October, 1524; and married Catharine de
Bore, a lady of noble descent, who, with eight other nuns, was taken out of the
nunnery at Nimptschen in 1523, and carried to Wittenburg, by Leonard Coppen, of
Torgan. Luther vindicated that action, and intended to marry Catharine to
Glacious minister of Ortamunden, whose person she disliked; and so Luther
married her himself, on the 13th of June, 1525, without consulting his friends:
But Luther says, he took a wife in obedience to his father's command. Luther
was then forty-two, and his wife was twenty-six. He was so far from being
ashamed of entering into the holy state of matrimony, that he exorted the
elector of Mentz, and the grand master of the Teutonic order, to follow his
example; which was done by the latter, notwithstanding, the censure of the
Romanists. This grand master was Albert margrave of Brandenburg, for whom that
part of Prussia which belonged to the Teutonic order was formed into a secular
duty. -- He embraced the Lutheran religion, renounced his vow of celibacy, and
married Anna Maria of Brunswick. He afterward conformed to the Augsburg
confession, and founded an university at Koningsberg, in 1544, that the
protestant religion might be introduced and established in Prussia, and all the
professors were to be Lutherians. In those times, marriage soon became a
recommendation among the reformers, and was a certain proof that they had
abjured popery; for if a converted clergyman did not marry he caused a
suspicion that he had not renounced the doctrine of celibacy.

Luther was very fond of his wife, and used to call her his Catharine. She was
handsome and modest: But he professed himself, that one great reason which
induced him to marry was, to give an example of the doctrine he preached
against celibacy, and to show, that he was not afraid or ashamed to do himself,
what he exorted and enjoined in others.

While the fanatical insurrection raised in Germany, Frederick the wise elector
of saxony, departed this life. This excellent prince, whose character was
distinguished by an uncommon degree of prudence and moderation, had, during his
life, been a sort of mediator between the Roman pontiff and the reformer of
Wittenburg. The elector John, his brother and successor, acted in a quite
different manner. Convinced of the truth of Luther's doctrine, and persuaded
that it must lose ground and be soon suppressed if the despotic authority of
the Roman pontiff remained undisputed and entire, he, without hesitation or
delay, assumed to himself the supremacy in ecclesiastical matters, and founded
and established a church in his dominions, totally different from the church of
Rome, in doctrine, discipline, and government. To bring this new and happy
establishment to as great a degree of perfection as was possible, this resolute
and active prince ordered a body of new laws, relating to the form of
ecclesiastical government, the method of public worship, and other matters of
that nature, to be drawn up by Luther and Melancthon, and promulgated by
heralds throughout his dominions in the year 1527. The illustrious example of
this elecor was followed by all the princes and states of Germany, who
renounced the papal supremacy and jurisdiction; and a like form of worship,
discipline, and government was thus introduced into all the churches, which
dissented from that of Rome. Hence was an open rupture formed between the
German princes, of whom oue party embraced the reformation, and the other
adhered to the superstitions of their forefathers.

Things being reduced to this violent and troubled state, the patrons of popery
gave intimations, that were far from being ambiguous, of their intention to
make war upon the Lutheran party, and to suppress by force a doctrine which
they were incapable of overturning by argument; and this design would certainly
have been put in execution, had not the troubles of Europe disconcerted their
measures. The Lutherans, on the other hand, informed of these hostile
intentions, began also to deliberate upon the most effectual methods of
defending themselves against superstition armed with violence, and formed the
plan of a confederacy that might answer this prudent purpose. In the mean time
the diet assembled at Spire, in the year 1526, at which Ferdinand, the emperors
brother, presided, ended in a manner more favorable to the friends of the
reformation, than they could naturally expect. The emperors ambassadors at this
diet were ordered to use their most earnest endeavors for the suppression of
all farther disputes concerning religion, and to insist upon the rigour-ous
execution of the sentence that had been pronounced at Worms against Luther and
his followers. The greatest part of the German princes opposed this motion with
the utmost resolution, declaring, that they could not execute that sentence,
nor come to any determination with respect to the doctrines by which it had
been occasioned, before the whole matter was submitted to the cognizance of a
general council lawfully assembled; alleging farther, that the decision of
controversies of this kind belonged properly to such a council, and to it
alone. This opinion after long and warm debates, was adopted by a great
majority, and, at length, consented to by the whole assembly.

Nothing could be more favorable to those who had the cause of pure and
genuine Christianity at heart, than a resolution of this nature. For the
emperor was, at this time, so entirely taken up in regulating the troubled
state of his dominions in France, Spain, and Italy, which exhibited, from day
to day, new scenes of perplexity, that, for some years, it was not in his power
to turn his attention to the affairs of Germany in general, and still less to
the state of religion in particular, which was beset with difficulties, that,
to a political prince like Charles, must have appeared peculiarly critical and
dangerous. Besides, had the emperor really been possessed of leisure to form,
or of power to execute, a plan that might terminate, in savor of the Roman
pontiff, the religious disputes which reigned in Germany, it is evident, that
the inclination was wanting, and that Clement VII. who now sat in the papal
chair, had nothing to expect from the good offices of Charles V. For this
pontiff, after the defeat of Francis I. at the battle of Pavia, filled with
uneasy apprehensions of the growing power of the emperor in Italy, entered into
a confederacy with the French and the Venetians against that prince. And this
measure inflamed the resentment and indignation of Charles to such a degree,
that he ab^lished the papal authority in his Spanish dominions, made war upon
the p^pe in Italy, laid siege to Rome in the year 1527, blocked up Clement in
the castle of St. Angelo, and exposed him to the most severe and contumelius
treatment. These critical events, together with the liberty granted by the diet
of Spire, were prudently and industriously improved, by the friends of the
reformation, to the advantage of their cause, and to the augmentation of their
number. In the mean time, Luther and his fellow laborers, particularly those
who were with him at Wittenberg, by their writings, their instructions, their
admonitions and counsels, inspired the timorous with fortitude, dispelled the
doubts of the ignorant, fixed the principles and resolution of the floating and
inconstant, and animated all the friends of genuine Christianity with a spirit
suitable to the grandeur of their undertaking.

But the tranquillity and liberty they enjoyed, in consequence of the
resolutions taken in the first diet of Spare, were not of a long duration. They
were interrupted by a new diet assembled, in the year 1529, in the same place,
by the emperor, after he had appeased the commotions and troubles which had
employed his attention in several parts of Europe, and concluded a treaty of
peace with Clement VII. This prince, having now got rid of the burden that
had, for some time, overwhelmed him, had leisure to direct the affairs of the
church; and this the reformers soon felt, by a disagreeable experience. For the
power, which had been granted by the former diet to every prince, of managing
ecclesiastical matters as they thought proper; until the meeting of a general
council, was now revoked by a majority of votes. This decree was justly
considered as iniquirous and intolerable by the elector of Saxony, the
landgrave of Hesse, and the other members of the diet, who were persuaded of
the necessity of a reformation in the church. Therefore, when the princes and
members now mentioned found that all their arguments and remonstrances against
this unjust decree made no impression upon Ferdinand, nor upon the abettors of
the ancient superstitions, they entered a solemn protest against this decree on
the 19th of April, and appealed to the emperor and to a future council. Hence
arose the denomination of Protestants, which from this period has been given to
those who renounce the superstitious communion of the church of Rome.

The ministers of the churches, which had embraced the sentiments of Luther,
were preparing a new embassy to the emperor, when an account was received of a
design formed by that prince to come into Germany, with a view to terminate, in
the approaching diet at Augsburg, the religious disputes that had produced such
animosities and divisions in the empire. Hitherto, indeed; it was not easy for
the emperor to form a clear idea of the matters in debate, since their was no
regular system as yet composed, of the doctrines embraced by Luther and his
followers, by which their real opinions, and the true causes of their
opposition to the Roman pontiff, night be known with certainty. As, therefore,
it was impossible, without some declaration of this nature, to examine with
accuracy, or decide with equity, a matter of such high importance as that which
gave rise to the divisions between the votaries of Rome. Luther, in compliance
with this order, delivered to the elector, at Torgaw, the seventeen articles,
which had been drawn up and agreed on in the conference at Sulzbach in the year
1529; and hence they were called the Articles of Torgaw. Though these articles
were deemed by Luther a sufficient declaration of the sentiments of the
reformers, yet it was judged proper to enlarge them; and, by a judicious
detail, to give perspicuity to their arguments, and thereby strength to their
cause. It was this consideration that engaged the protestant princes, assembled
at Coburg and Augsburg, to employ Melancthon in extending these articles, in
which important work he showed a due regard to the counsels of Luther, and
expressed his sentiments and doctrine with the greatest elegance and
perspicuity.

Charles V. arrived at Augsburg the 15th of June 1530, and on the 20th, the
diet was opened. As it was unanimously agreed, that the affairs of religion
should be brought upon the carpet before the deliberations relating to the
intended war with the Turks, the protestant members of this great assembly
received from the emperor a formal permission to present to the diet, on the
25th of June, an account of their religious principles and tenets. In
consequence of this, the chancellor of Saxony, read, in the German language, in
presence of the emperor and assembled princes, the famous confession, which has
been since distinguished by the denomination of the Confession of Augsburg. The
princes heard it with the deepest attention and recollection of mind; it
confirmed some in the principles they had embraced, surprised others, and many,
who, before this time, had little or no idea of the religious sentiments of
Luther, were now not only convinced of their innocence, but were moreover,
delighted with their purity and simplicity.

The tenor and contents of the confession of Augsburg are well known. The style
that reigns in it is plain, elegant, grave, and perspicuous, such as becomes
the nature of the subject. The matter was, undoubtedly, supplied by Luther,
who, during the diet, resided Coburg, a town in the neighborhood of Augsburg;
and, even the form it received from the elegant pen of his colleague, was
authorized in consequence of his approbation and advice. This confession
contains twenty-eight chapters, of which the greatest part are employed in
representing, with perspicuity and truth, the religious opinions of the
protestants, and the rest in pointing out the errors and abuses that occasioned
their separation from the church of Rome.

The creatures of the Roman pontiff, who were present at this diet, employed
John Faber, afterward bishop of Vienna, together with Eckius, and another
doctor, named Cochlaeus, to draw up a refutation of this famous confession.
This pretended refutation having been read publicly in the assembly, the
emperor demanded of the protestant members that they would acquiesce in it, and
put an end to their religious debates by an unlimited submission to the
doctri^es and opinions contained in this answer. But this demand was far from
being complied with. The protestants declared, on the contrary, that they were
by no means satisfied with the reply of their adversaries, and earnestly
desired a copy of it, that they might demonstrate more fully its extreme
insufficiency and weakness. This reasonable request was refused by the emperor,
who, on this occasion, as well as on several others, showed more regard to the
importunity of the pope's legate and his party, than to the demands of equity,
candor, and justice.

On the 19th day of November, a severe de^ree was issued out, by the express
order of the emperor, during the absen^e of the chief supporters of the
protestant cause; and, in this decree, every thing was manifestly adapted to
deject the friends of religious liberty, if we except a saint and dubio is
promise of engaging the pope to assemble (in about six months after the
separation of the diet) a general council. The dignity and excellen^e of the
papal religion are extolled, be^ond measure, in this partial decree; a new
de^ree of sever^^^ and force, added to that which had bee^ p^bl^^^ed at Worms
against Luther and his adhe^^^^s; the changes that had been introd^c^d into the
doctrine and discipline of the protestan^ ch^rches, severely censured; and a
solemn or^er addressed to the princes, states, and cities, that had thrown off
the papal yoke, to ret^rn on their duty and their allegiance to Rome, on pain
of mourring the indignation and vengeance of the emperor, as the patron and
protector of the church.

No s^oner were the elector of Saxony and the confederate princes informed of
this deplorable issue of the diet of Aug^burg, than they assembled in ^rder to
deliberate upon the measures that were proper to be taken on this critical
occasion. In the year 1530, and the year following, they met, first at
smalcald, afterward at Frankfort, and formed a solemn alliance and
confederacy, with the intention of defending vigorously their religion and
liberties against the dangers and encroachments with which they were menaced.
Amidst these emotions and preparations, which portended an approaching rupture,
the elector Palatine, and the elector of Mentz, offered their mediation, and
endeavored to reconcile the contending princes.

Many projects of reconciliation were proposed; and after various negociations,
a treaty of peace was concluded at Nuremberg, in the year 1532, between the
emperor and the protestant princes, on the following conditions; that the
latter should furnish a subsidy for carrying on the war against the Turks, and
acknowledge Ferdinand lawful king of the Romans; and that the emperor, on his
part, should abrogate and annul the edicts of Worms and Augsburg, and allow the
Lutherans the free unmolested exercise of their religious doctrine and
discipline, until a rule of faith was fixed either in the free general council
that was to be assembled in the space of six months, or in a diet of the empire.

The religious truce, concluded at Nuremberg, inspired with new vigor and
resolution all the friends of the reformation. It gave strength to the feeble,
and perseverance to the bold. Encouraged by it, those who had been hitherto
only secret enem^es to the Roman pontiff, spurned now his ^oke publicly, and
refused to submit to his imper^ous jurisdiction. This appears from the various
cities and provinces in Germany, which, about this time, boldly enlisted
themselves under the religious standard of Luther.

About the beginning of the year 1527. Luther was attacked by a very severe
illness, which brought him near to his grave. He applied himself to prayer,
made a confession of his faith, and lamented grievously his on worthiness of
martyrdom, which he had so often and so ardently desired. In this situation he
made a will, for he had a son, and his wife was again with child, in which he
recommended his family to the care of heaven: Lord God* says he, I thank thee,
that thou would have me poor on earth and a beggar. I have neither house,
nor land, nor possessions, nor money, to leave. Thou have given me a wife and
children: Take them, I beseech thee, under thy care and preserve them, as thou
have preserved me, He bequeathed his detestation of popery to his friends and
brethren; agreeably to what he often used to say, i. e. Living, I was the
plague of the pope; and dying, I shall be his death.

Luther, from about this period, having laid the great foundation of the
reformation, was chiefly employed in raising and completing the superstructure.
The remainder of his life was spent, in exhorting princes, states, and
universities, to confirm the great work, which had been brought about through
him; and in publishing from time to time such writings, as might encourage,
direct, and assist them in doing it. The emperor threatened temporal punishment
with armies; and the pope eternal pains with bulls and corses; but Luther,
armed with the intrepidity of grace, over and above his own courageous nature,
regarded neither the one nor the other. His friend and assistant Melancthon
could not be so indifferent; for Melancthon had a great deal of softness,
moderation and diffidence in his constitution, which made him very uneasy and
alarmed at these formidable appearances. Hence we find many of Luther's letters
were written on purpose to comfort him under these anxieties: I am (says he in
one of these letters) much weaker than you in private confl^cts, if I may call
those conflicts private, which I have with the devil; but you are much weaker
than me in public. You are all distrust in the public cause; I, on the
contrary, am very confident; because I know it is a just and true cause, the
cause of God and of Christ, which need not tremble or be abashed. But the case
is different with me in my private conflicts, feeling myself a most miserable
sinner, and therefore have great reason to lo^k pale and tremble. Upon this
account it is, that I can be almost an in ^ifferent spectator amidst all the
no^sy th^e us and b^llyings of the papists; f^r if we fall, the kingdom of
Christ falls with us: And if it should fall, I had rather fall with Christ than
stand with Caesar." So again a little farther: "You, Melancthon, cannot bear
these disorders; and labor to have things transacted by reason, and agreeably
to that spirit of calmness and moderation which your philosophy dictates. You
might as well attempt to be mad with reason. Don't you see, that the matter is
entirely out of your power and management, and that even Christ himself forbids
your measures to take place? If the cause be bad, indeed, let us renounce it:
But if it be good, why do we make God a liar, who has promised to support us?
Does he make his promises to the wind, or to his people?

Luther preached his last sermon at Wittenburg on the seventeenth of January,
1546; and, on the twentythird, set out for Isleben, where he was honorable
entertained by the count, who escorted him to his apartments with one hundred
horse. Luther attended the business upon which he came from the twenty-ninth of
January, to the seventeenth of February, when he sickened a little before
supper of his usual illness. This was an oppression of humors in the opening of
the stomach, with which Melancthon, who was with him, had seen him frequently
afflicted. His pain increased, and he went to bed, were he slept till midnight,
when he awaked in such anguish that he found his life was near at an end. He
then prayed in these words: I pray God to preserve the doctrine of his gospel
among us; for the pope and the council of Trent have grievous things in hand.
After which, he said, O heavenly Father, my gracious God, and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, thou God of all consolation, I give thee hearty thanks that
thou have revealed to me thy Son Jesus Christ, whom I believe, whom I profess,
whom I love, whom I glorify, and whom the pope and the multitude of the wicked
do persecute and dishonor. -- I beseech thee Lord Jesus Christ, receive my
soul. O my heavenly Father, though I be taken out of this life, and must lay
down this frail body; yet I certainly know, that I shall live with thee
eternally, and that I cannot be taken out of thy hands. God so loved the world,
etc. Lord, I render up my spirit into, thy hands, and come to thee. Lord, into
thy hands I commend my spirit: Thou, O God of truth, have redeemed me! Albert
count of Mansfield, Melancthon, Justus Jonas, and several other friends,
attended him in his last moments, joining him in prayer, that God would
preserve the doctrine of his gospel among them. Melancthon says of Luther, that
having frequently repeated his prayers, he was called to God, unto whom he so
faithfully commended his spirit, to enjoy, no doubt, the blessed society of the
patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, in the kingdom of God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.

Luther died on the eighteenth of February, 1546, in the sixty-fourth year of
his age. A thousand fables have been invented concerning his death; nor would
his enemies forbear publishing lies on this subject long after he had left this
world. Some have said, that he died suddenly; others that he killed himself;
and some have impudently proceeded so far as to give out that he was taken away
by the devil. Nor are they people of mean figure and credit, who vent these
calumnies, but the most famous writers, as Cochlaeus, Bessaeus, Bozius,
Fabianus, Justinian, and Bellarmine. This, says Bail, reflects on the whole
body of popery; for such fables ought not to pass the press. He was honorably
interred at Wittenberg.

Luther left a widow, three sons, and two daughters. Whilst the troops of
Charles V. were at Wittenberg, in the year 1547, the Spaniards solicited the
emperor to pull down Luther's monument, and wanted to dig up his bones; But the
emperor had more generosity and prudence, than to consent to a procedure so
base and infamous.

His commentary on the epistle to the Galatians, was his favorite work, which
he used to call his wife, his Catharine de Bore.

His favorite doctrine was justification by faith alone, and not by works,
moral, legal, or evangelical: But we must do him the justice to observe, that
he perpetually inculcated the absolute necessity of good works. According to
him, a man is justified only by faith; but he cannot be justified without
works; and where those works are not to be found, there is assuredly no true
faith.

It has also been said of Luther, that it was a great miracle a poor friar
should be able to stand against the pope: It was a greater that he should
prevail: And the greatest of all that he died in peace, as well as Erasmus,
when surrounded by so many enemies.

The doctrine of this eminent divine, and great reformer; was soon extended
through all Germany, Denmark, Sweden, England, and other countries, under
different modifications.

Luther's works were collected after his death, and printed at Wittenberg in
seven volumes folio.

Our serious readers will, perhaps, be pleased with the insertion of some
remarkable sayings and observations of this great man. Erasmus confessed, that
there more solid divinity contained in one leaf of Luther's commentaries, than
could be found in many prolix treatises of schoolmen, and such kind of authors.
Speaking of the pope's using the mass for departed souls, Luther observed, that
he with his mass was not satisfied to thrust himself into all corners of the
earth, but he must needs go tumbling down into the very bosom of hell.

He used to call the indulgence-merchants, purse threshers.

There were many plots laid against his life, which the bloody papists sought
after by all means. Poisen, daggers, pistols, were intended; when fire and
faggot could not be used, through the elector's protection. A Polish Jew was
hired for 2000 crowns to poison him. The plot (says Luther) was discovered to
me by the letters of my friends. He is a doctor of physic, and dares to attempt
any thing; He would go about this business with incredible craft and agility.
He is just now apprehended. -- However, God preserved him from the malice of
his enemies. It shows, however, what papists can attempt (says Melchior Adam);
and if we wanted further proof of it, the words of Alexander, the pope's
legate, are sufficient. Though you Germans (said he), who pay the least of all
people to the Roman see, have shaken of the pope's yoke; yet we will take care,
that ye shall be devoured with civil wars, and perish in your own blood. -- A
pious resolution indeed!

When Luther's bold manner of expressing himself was censured, he replied;
Almost all men condemn my tartness of expression; but I am of your opinion,
(says he to his friend) that God will have the deceits of men thus powerfully
exposed. For I plainly perceive, that those things, which are softly dealt with
in our corrupt age, give people but light concern, and are presently forgotten.
-- If I have exceeded the bounds of moderation, the monstrous turpitude of the
times has transported me. Nor do I transcend the example of Christ, who, having
to do with men of like manners, called them sharply by their own proper names,
such as, an adulterous and perverse generation, a brood of vipers, hypocrites,
children of the devil, who could not escape the damnation of hell. -- Erasmus,
with all his refinement, could own, That God had sent in Luther a sharp
physcian, in consideration of the immensity of the diseases, which had infected
this last age of the world.

Luther caused the Psalms, used in worship, to be translated into German. We
intend (says he to Spalatinus), after the example of the prophets and primitive
father's of the church, to turn the Psalms, for spiritual singing, into the
vulgar tongue for the common people; so that the word of God may remain among
the people even in their singing. Upon this account, we seek for some poets:
And as you possess the copiousness and elegenoe of the German, which you have
greatly cultivated; I would request your assistance in this business. Let the
sense be clear, and as close as possible to the original. To preserve the
sense, when you cannot render word for word, it may be right to use such a
phrase as will most perfectly convey the idea. I confess, I am not sufficiently
qualified myself; and therefore would request you to try how near you can
approach to Heman, Asaph, and Jeduthun.

He used to say of himself and the other ministers; We are only planters and
waterers, in administering the word and sacrament; but the increase is not in
our power.

Concerning our righteousness, he observed; Thou, Lord Jesus, art my
righteousness: but I am altogether sin; Thou have taken what was mine, and have
given me what was thine; thou have taken what thou wast not and have given me
what I had not before.

Respecting ceremonies, he said; I co^demn no ceremonies, but such as oppose or
obscure the gospel.

With regard to human learning, he thus expressed himself; I am persuaded, that
true divinity could not well be supported without the knowledge of letters: Of
this we have sad proof, for while learning was decayed and in ruins, theology
fell too, and lay most wretchedly obscured. I am sure, that the revelation and
manifestation of the word of God would never have been so extensive and
glorious as it is, if preparitorily, like so many John Baptists smoothing the
way, the knowledge of languages and good learning had not risen ^p among us. --
They are most exceedingly mistaken, who imagine, that the knowledge of nature
and true philosophy is of no use to a divine.

He advised, in the case of temptations, in this manner; I would comfort those,
that are tried in their faith and hope toward God, in this way; first, let
them avoid solitariness, keep always in good company, sing the psalmns, and
converse upon the holy scriptures. Secondly, Though it be the most difficult
point to work upon the mind, yet it is the most present remedy, if they can,
through grace, persuade themselves, that these ^^evous thoughts are not their
own, but Satan's; and that, therefore, they should earnestly endeavor to turn
the heart to other objects, and quit these evil suggestions: For to dwell upon
them, or fight with them, or to a^m to overcome them, or to wait for an end of
them; ^s only to irritate and strengthen them, even to perdition, without
relief.

Luther frequently said; That a preacher should take care not to bring three
little sly d^gs^int^ his profession; viz. PRIDE, COVETOUSN^SS, and ENVY. To
which he added to preachers; When you observe the people hear most attentively;
be assured, they will return they more readily. Three things make a divine,
meditation, prayer, and temptation. And three things are to be remembered by a
minister; turnover and over the bible; pray devoutly; and be never above
learning. -- They are the best preachers for the common people, who speak in
the meanest, lowest, humblest, and most simple style.

In private life, Luther was an example of the strictest virtue. At dinner or
supper, he would often dictate matter of preaching to others, or correct the
press; and sometimes amuse himself with music, in which he took great delight.
Though a large man, he was a very moderate eater and drinker, and not at all
delicate in his appetite, for he usually fed upon he simplest diet. He much
delighted in his garden, and was very fond of cultivating it with all kinds of
plants. In short he was never idle.

Though he had not much himself, he very freely bestowed of what he had upon
others. A poor student, asking money of him, he desired his wife to give some,
who excusing herself on account of their poverty; he took up a silver cup and
gave it to the scholar, bidding him to sell it to the goldsmith, and keep the
money f^r his occasions. When a friend sent him two hundred pieces of gold, he
bestowed them all on poor scholars. And when the elector gave him a new gown,
he wrote in answer, That too much was done; for if we receive all in this life,
we shall have nothing to hope for in the next. He took nothing of printers, for
his works, to his own use, saying, It Is true I have no money, but am indeed
poor; yet I deal in this moderate manner with printers, and take nothing from
them for my variety of labors, except sometimes a copy or two. This, I
believe, may be due to me, when other authors, even translators, "for every
sheet have their stipulated price." When he had some money sent him, he wrote
thus to a friend: I have received by Taubenheim an hundred pieces of gold; and
at the same time Schart has sent me fifty; so that I begin to fear, lest God
should give me my portion here. But I solemnly protest, that I would not be
satisfied from HIM: I will either presently return, or get rid of them. For
what is so much money to me? I have given half of it to Prior, and made him
very happy.

He had great tenderness for his family. When he saw Magdalen his eldest
daughter at the point of death, he read to her this passage from the xxvith of
Isaiah: Thy dead man shall live together with my dead body shall they arise:
Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead. Come, my people, enter thou into thy
chambers and shut thy doors about thee: Hide thyself as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast. My daughter, do thou enter (says he)
into thy chamber with peace: I shall soon be with thee; for God will not permit
me to see the judgments, that hang over Germany. And upon this he poured forth
a flood of tears. Yet afterward, when he attended the funeral, he contained
himself, so as not to appear to weep.

Being once asked, Whether we should know each other in heaven? he answered;
How was it with Adam? He had never seen Eve; for when God formed her, he was in
a deep sleep, yet when he a waked and saw her, he did not ask, Who she was? or
from whence she came? but immediately said, that she was flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone. How, then, d^d he know this? Being filled with the Holy
Spirit, and endued with the true knowledge of God, he was able to determine
upon the nat^re of things. -- In like manner, we shall be perfectly renewed
hereafter through Christ; and shall know, with far greater perfection than can
be conceived of here, our dearest relations, and indeed whatever exists; and in
a mode, too, much super^or t^ that (...) Adam (...) paradise.

If we would know what was the ground of this wonderful man's magna^^m^^y, ^t
cannot be better expressed than it is by himself in a letter to Spala^ia^s,
during the diet of Augsburg; That kings, and princes, and people, (says he)
rage against Christ, the Lord's anointed, I esteem a go^d sign, and a much
better one than ^f they flattered. For it follows upon this, that he, who
dwells in heaven, laughs them to scorn. And if our head laugh, I see no
reason why we should weep before the faces of such beings. He does not laugh
for his own sake, but for our's, that we, putting the more tr^^t in h^n, might
despise their empty designs; of so great need is faith, that the cause and
ground of it is not to be perceived without faith. He, who began this work,
began it without our advice and contrivance; he has hitherto protected it; and
has ordered the whole above and beyond our counsels and imaginations. He also,
I make no doubt, will carry on and complete the same, without and above all our
conceptions and cares. I know and am assured of this, for I rest the whole upon
him, who is able to do above all that we can ask or think. Yet our friend
Philip Melancthon will contrive and desire, that God should work according to
and within the compass of his puny notions, that he may have somewhat whereof
to glory. Certainly (he would say) thus and thus it ought to be done; and thus
and thus would I do it.' But this is poor stuff: 'Thus I Philip would do it.'
This (I) is mighty flat. But hear how this reads; I AM THAT I AM, this is his
name JEHOVAH: HE, even HE, will do it. -- But I have done. Be strong in the
Lord, and exhort Melancthon from me, that he aim not to sit in God's throne,
but fight against that innate, that develish implanted ambition of our's, which
would usurp the place of God; for that ambition will never further our cause.
It thrust Adam and Eve out of paradise; and this alone perplexes us, and turns
our feet from the way of peace. We must be men, and not gods. The protestant
champion knew full well where his strength lay -- not in himself, but in his
Sovereign. If deserted by his Covenant head, he felt the deep conviction, that
every reed might make him tremble, and every blast of trial cast him down. He
knew (to use the words of a late writer) that if God changed from his purpose
of saving a man, whenever the man, left to his own will, would change from the
desire of being saved, he must renounce the strongest believer upon earth, in
five minutes after he had ccommitted him to himself. -- But Luther had not so
learned Christ.

Luther's memorable protestation, upon the article of justification, must not
be omitted, and with it we shall close this account of his life. I, Martin
Luther, an unworthy preacher of the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, thus
profess and thus believe; that this article, THAT FAITH ALONE WITHOUT WORKS,
CAN JUSTIFY BEFORE GOD, shall never be overthrown neither by the emperor, nor
by the Turk, nor by the Tartar, nor by the Persian, nor by the pope, with all
his cardinals, bishops, sacrificers, monks, nuns, kings, princes, powers of the
world, nor yet by all the devils in hell. This article shall stand fast,
whether they will or no. This is the true gospel. Jesus Christ redeemed us from
our sins, and he only. This most firm and certain truth is the voice of
scripture, though the world and all the devils rage and roar. If Christ alone
take away our sins, we cannot do this with our works; and as it is impossible
to embrace Christ but by faith, it is, therefore, equally impossible to
apprehend him by works. If then faith alone must apprehend Christ, before works
can follow, the conclusion is irrefragable; that faith alone apprehends him,
before and without the consideration of works: And this is o^r justification
and deliverance from sin. Then, and not till then, good works follow faith, as
its necessary and in^epparable fruit. This is the doctrine I teach; and this
the Holy Spirit and church of the faithful have delivered. In this I will
abide. Amen.

JOHN CALVIN, THE EVANGELIC REFORMER.
THIS eminent reformer was born, on the tenth of July, 1509, at Noyon, a city
of France. His parents enjoyed a decent fortune, and bestowed on him a liberal
education. In all the branches of literature then known, his studies were
attended with the most amazing and rapid success. He was originally designed
for the church, and had actually obtained a benefice; but the light that broke
in upon his religious sentiments, as well as the preference given by his father
to the profession of the law, induced him to give up his ecclesiastical
vocation, which he afterward resumed in a purer church.

Calvin made great progress in the civil law; and pursued his private studies
in the holy Scriptures with equal success. He was incited to the latter by
Melchior Wolmar, who was professor of Greek at Bourges, and secretly a Lutheran.

While Calvin was studying the civil law at Bourges, he preached several
sermons in a neighboring town called Live^ta: But his father died in 1533; on
which account he returned to Paris, in the twenty-third year of his age, with a
resolution to make divinity his principal study. Soon after he came back to
Paris, he became acquainted with all those who professed the reformed religion;
and about this time, he embraced the doctrine of the reformers, and began
publicly to teach it.

Calvin was esteemed in the French congregations, as one of the most able and
best qualified men to teach and defend the doctrine of the reformation, which
had been introduced into that kingdom. His zeal exposed him to various perils,
and the connection he had formed with the friends of the reformation, whom
Francis I. was daily committing to the flames, placed him more than once in
imminent danger, from which he was delivered by the good offices of the queen
of Navarre. To escape the impending storms he returned to Basil, where he
published his Christian Institutions; and prefixed to them that famous
dedication to Francis I. which has attracted the admiration of succeeding ages,
and which was intended to soften the fury of that prince against the
protestants. The Institution are a body of divinity, containing the doctrines
of the Christian religion, in a distinct and easy method. It was published in
1535, and afterward translated into almost all the languages of Europe.

When Calvin had published this book, he made a journey into Italy, to wait on
the duchess of Ferrara, the daughter of Lewis XII. She was a princess of
exemplary piety, and a favourer of the reformation. Calvin met with a very
gracious reception from her: But the duke of Ferrara would not suffer him to
continue long with his duchess; and he returned into France, to settle his
affairs in that kingdom, from whence he prepared to set out for Strasburgh, or
Basil.

The war had left no other passage, but through the duke of Savoy's dominions,
which obliged them to take that course. This seemed a particular direction of
Providence, that designed him for Geneva, where he was kindly entertained by
William Farel, who detained him there, as it were, by an order from above.

Farel was a man of a truly heroic spirit, and used a great many arguments to
prevail with Calvin to stay and assist him at Geneva, rather than proceed any
farther. Calvin was unwilling to continue there, till Farel said to him,
Behold, I declare to you, in the name of Almighty God, that unless you will
here become fellow laborer in the work of the Lord, his curse will be upon
you, for seeking yourself rather than Christ. Peter Viret seconded Farel, and
Calvin then submitted to the judgment of the presbytery and magistrates; by
whose suffrages, together with the consent of the people, he was chosen
preacher, and divinity professor. He complied with the latter, and would have
declined the former; but he was obliged to undertake both functions Calvin
afterward called Farel his fellow laborer, to whom the Genevese owed even
themselves; that he was the father of their liberty; and the founder of their
church.

Hooker has given a full character of Calvin, as head of the Genevan
discipline. A founder it had, whom for mine own part, I think incomparably the
wisest man that ever the French church did enjoy, since it enjoyed him. His
bringing up was in the study of the civil law. Divine knowledge he gathered not
by hearing or reading so much, as by teaching others: For though thousands were
debtors to him, as touching knowledge in that kind; yet he to none, but only to
God, the author of that blessed fountain, the book of life; and of the
admirable dexterity of wit, together with the helps of other learning, which
were his guides; till being occasioned to leave France; he fell at length upon
Geneva, which city the bishop and clergy thereof had a little before forsaken,
as some do affirm; being of likelihood frighted with the people's sudden
attempt, for the abolishment of the popish religion. At the coming of Calvin
thither, the form of their civil regimen was popular, as it continues to this
day; neither king, nor duke, nor noblemen, of any authority or power over them;
but officers chosen by the people, yearly out of themselves, to order all
things with public consent. For spiritual government they had no laws at all
agreed upon; but did what the pastors of their souls by persuasion could win
them unto. Calvin considered how dangerous it was, that the whole estate of
that church should hang still on so slender a thread, as the liking of an
ignorant multitude, if it have power to change whatsoever itself likes.
Wherefore taking unto him two of the other ministers for more countenance of
the action, albeit the rest were all against it, they moved and persuaded the
people to bind themselves by solemn oath, first, never to admit the papacy
amongst them again: and, secondly, to live in obedience unto such orders,
concerning the exercise of their religion, and the form of their ecclesiastical
government, as those their true and faithful ministers of God's word, had,
agreeable to Scripture, set down to that end and purpose, Hence it appears, how
extremely false and unjust the exclamations of the papists against Calvin are,
that he subverted the government, and turned the state of Geneva into
confusion; whereas the truth is, the bishop of Geneva who, like some other
prince-bishops in Germany, claimed the office of ruler, was expelled long
before Calvin's arrival; and as the government was modelled into its democratic
form, previous to his residence, he did not believe that he had any divine
authority to alter the civil constitution, if it had been in his power.

This reformation of doctrines had not removed that corruption of manners which
had prevailed in Geneva; nor that factious spirit which had so much divided the
principal families. Therefore Calvin, assisted by his colleagues Farel and
Caroldus, declared, that as all there remonstrances had proved ineffectuall,
they could not celebrate the holy sacrament while those disorders continued.
They also agreed, that they would no longer submit to the constitutions that
the synod of Bern had made; and they desired to be heard in the synod which was
to be held at Zurick.

The church of Geneva made use of leavened bread in the communion; they had
removed the baptismal fonts out of the churches; and abolished all festivals
except Sundays. But the churches of the canton of Bern disapproved of these
three things; and, by an act made in the synod of Lausanne, required that the
use of unleavened bread, the baptismal fonts, and the festivals should be
re-established in Geneva. These were the regulations with which Calvin refused
to comply.

The syndics of Geneva summoned the people in 1538; and Calvin, Farel, and
Courant, presented themselves before the council, offering to make good their
confession of faith. The Syndics favored the discontented party, and were
catholics in their hearts. The council, under pretense of preserving the
liberties and privileges of the city; and because Calvin and his friends would
not conform to the custom of Bern in celebrating the communion, made an order
to enjoin those three members to leave the city in three days. When this decree
was brought to Calvin he said, Truly, if I had served men, I should have had an
ill reward: But it is well that I have served him, who does always perform to
his servants what he has once promised.

Calvin had no maintenance from the city, and lived at his own expense. He
went to Basil, and from thence to Strasburgh, where Bucer and Capito gave him
every mark of their esteem. He was also caressed by Hedio, and other learned
men, who procured him permission from the magistrates to set up a French
church, of which he became the pastor, and had a competant maintenance allowed
him there. He was also made professor of divinity.

While Calvin was absent from Geneva, cardinal Sadolet wrote an eloquent letter
to the inhabitants of that city, to exhort them to return into the bosom of the
Romish church. Calvin answered that letter in 1539; in which he manifested his
affection for the church of Geneva, and disappointed the views which the bishop
of Carpentras had entertained in his fine artful letter to that state.

The time was now come for establishing the church at Geneva, by recalling
Calvin. The Syndics who had promoted the decree of banishment were dead or
banished; and the people were not before so willing to be rid of their learned
pastor, as now importunate to obtain him again from them who had given him
entertainment, and were unwilling to part with him, if irresistible
solicitations had not been used.

One of the town ministers, who saw in what manner the people were inclined for
the recalling of Calvin, gave him notice of their affection in this sort. The
senate of two hundred being assembled, they all desire Calvin. The next day a
general convocation; they all cry, we will have Calvin, that good and learned
man, the minister of Christ. When Calvin understood this he praised GOD; and
judged it was the call of heaven. He said, It is mavelous in our eyes; for
the stone which the builders refused, was made the head of the corner. In his
absence, he had persuaded them, with whom he was able to prevail, that though
he more approved of common bread to be used in the eucharist; yet they should
rather accept the other, than cause any trouble in the church about it.

The people saw that the name of Calvin increased every day greater abroad; and
that with his same, their infamy was spread, who had ejected him with such
rashness and folly.

He re-entered Geneva, (leaving Brulius to succeed him in the French church at
Strasburgh) on the thirteenth of September, 1541, to the infinite satisfaction
of the people and magistracy; and the first thing he did was to establish a
form of discipline, and a consistorial jurisdiction, with power to exercise
canonical censures and punishments, even to excommunication. This displeased
many, who urged, that it was restoring the Roman tyranny: However, the thing
was executed; and this new cannon passed into a law, in a general assembly of
the people, on the twentieth of November, 1541.

He rightly considered how gross a thing it was for men of his quality, wise
and grave men, to live with such a multitude, and to be tenants at will under
them, as their ministers, both himself and others, had been. For the remedy of
this inconvenience, he gave them plainly to understand, that if he became their
teacher again, they must be content to admit a complete form of discipline,
which both they, and also their pastors, should be solemnly swore to observe
for ever after. Of which discipline the principal parts were these: A standing
ecclesiastical court to be established: perpetual judges in that court to be
their ministers, others of the people annually chosen, twice so many in number
as they, to be judges together with them in the same court: These two sorts to
have the care of all men's manners, power of determining all kind of
ecclesiastical causes, and authority to convent, control, and punish, as far as
with excommunication, whoever they should think worthy, none, either small or
great, excepted.

Both the clergy and laity of Geneva engaged themselves to a perpetual
observance of the new institution made by Calvin, whose inflexible severity, in
maintaining the rights of his consistory, raised him a great many enemies, and
occasioned some disorders in the city. However, he surmounted all opposition,
and also governed the protestants in France, who almost all held the doctrine
of Calvin, and received ministers from Geneva, who presided in their
congregations.

Of all the undertakings of Calvin, there was none that involved him in so much
trouble, or exposed him to such imminent danger, as the plan he had formed,
with such resolution and fortitude, of purging the church by the exclusion of
obstinate and scandalous offenders, and inflicting severe punishments on all
such as violated the laws, enacted by the church, or by the Consistory, which
was its representative. The party at Geneva, which Calvin called the sect of
Libertines (because they defended the licentious customs of ancient times, the
erection of slews, and such like matters, not only by their discourse and their
actions, but even by force of arms), was both numerous and powerful. But the
courage and resolution of this great reformer gained the ascendant, and
triumphed over the opposition of his enemies.

Dupin says, The doctrine of Calvin concerning the sacrament, is not
fundamentally different from that of the Zuing lians; though he uses very
positive words to express the presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.
The expressions which are in Calvin's institutions, and his other writings,
might make us believe, that he did not deny the real and substantial presence
of the body and blood of Christ in the eucharist: Yet, in other places, he
clearly rejects not only transubstantiation, but also his real presence; by
asserting, that the body of Jesus Christ is really and substantially present
only in heaven; and that it is united to us only by faith, after a spiritual
manner, by the incomprehensible working of the Holy Spirit, which joins things
together that are separated by distance of place. These words, this is my body,
ought to be understood after a figurative manner, according to his notion; and
the sign is there put for the thing signified, as when it is said, The rock is
Christ; the lamb is the passover; and circumcision is the covenant. The body
and blood of Jesus Christ are united to us only by virtue and efficacy; and his
flesh, remaining in heaven, infuses life into us from his substance: Lastly,
though the substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ are communicated to
us by the sacrament of the eucharist, they are not really and substantially
present there: And though the body and blood of Christ are there presented, and
offered to all christians, they are not really received, except by the truly
faithful, and not by the unworthy.

Calvin differed not so much from Luther in other points of doctrine. He held
the same principles as to imputed righteousness, and the certainty of our
justification, which he extended to an assurance of eternal salvation. He also
added an impossibility of falling finally from grace; and he asserted the
salvation of the children of believers who die before they have been baptized.
He likewise condemned with more severity than the Lutherians, the invocation of
saints; the worship and use of images; vows; celibacy of priests; fasting;
holy days; sacrifice of the mass; adoration of the eucharist; indulgencies; the
sacraments, except the eucharist and baptism; and, in general, all the rites
and ceremonies of the church, which the Lutherians had not entirely abolished.

The views and projects of this great man were grand and extensive. For he not
only undertook to give strength and vigor to the rising church, by framing the
wisest laws and the most salutary institutions for the maintenance of order and
the advancement of true piety' but even proposed to render Geneva the mother,
the seminary of all the reformed churches, as Wittenberg was of all the
Lutheran communities. He laid a scheme for sending forth from this little
republic, the succors and ministers that were to promote and propagate the
protestant cause through the most distant nations, and aimed at nothing less
than rendering the government, discipline, and doctrine of Geneva the model and
rule of imitation to the reformed churches throughout the world. The
undertaking was certainly great, and worthy of the extensive genious and
capacity of this emminent man; and, great and arduous as it was, it was
executed in part, nay, carried on to a very considerable length, by his
indefatigable assiduity and inextinguishable zeal. It was with this view, that,
by the fame of his learning, as well as by his epistolary solicitations and
encouragements of various kinds, he engaged many persons of rank and fortune,
in France, Italy, and other countries, to leave the places of their nativity,
and to settle at Geneva; while others repaired thither merely out of curiosity
to see a man, whose talents and exploits had rendered him so famous, and to
hear the discourses which he delivered in public. Another circumstance, that
contributed much to the success of his designs, was the establishment of an
academy at Geneva, which the senate of that city founded at his request; and in
which be himself, with his colleague. Theodore Beza, and other divines of
emminent learning and abilities, taught the sciences with the greatest
reputation. In effect, the luster which these great men reflected upon this
infant seminary of learning, spread its fame through the distant nations with
such amazing rapidity, that all who were ambitious of a distinguished progress
in either sacred or profane erudition, repaired to Geneva, and that England,
Scotland, France, Italy, and Germany, seemed to vie with each other in the
numbers of their studious youth, that were incessantly repairing to the new
academy. By these means, and by the ministry of these his disciples. Calvin
enlarged considerably the borders of the reformed church, propagated his
doctrine, and gained proselytes and patrons to his theological system, in
several countries of Europe.

Calvin reduced the power of the magistrate, in religious matters, within
narrow bounds. He declared the church a separate and independent body, endowed
with the power of legislation for itself. He maintained, that it was to be
governed, like the primitive church, only preshyteries and synods, that is, by
assemblies of elders, composed both of the l^rgy and laity; and he lest to the
civil magistrate little else than the privilege of protecting and defending
the church, and providing for what related to its external exigencies and
concerns. Thus this emminent reformer introduced into the republic of Geneva,
and endeavored to introduce into all the reformed churches throughout Europe,
that form of ecclesiastical government, which is called Presbyterian, from its
neither admitting of the institution of bishops, nor of any subordination among
the clergy; and which is founded on this principle, that all ministers of the
gospel are, by the law of God, declared to be equal in rank and authority. In
consequence of this principle, he established at Geneva a consistory, composed
of ruling elders, partly pastors, and partly laymen, and invested this
ecclesiastical body with a high degree of power and authority. He also convened
synods, composed of the ruling elders of different churches, and in these
consistories and synods had laws enacted for the regulation of all matters of a
religious nature; and among other things, restored to its former vigor the
ancient practice of excommunication. All these things were done with the
consent of the greatest part of the senate of Geneva.

The absolute decree of God, with respect to the future and everlasting
condition of the human race, was an essential tenet in the ^reed of Calvin, who
inculcated with zeal the following doctrine: That God in predestinating, from
all eternity, one part of mankind to everlasting happiness, and another to
endless misery, was led to make this distinction by no other motives than his
own GOOD PLEASURE and FREE WILL.

Calvin was intimidated at nothing, and settled the peace of Geneva. It would
be difficult to believe, that in the midst of violent agitations at home, he
could show so much care, as he did, of the churches abroad, in France, England,
Germany, and Poland; and write so many books and letters. But there are
incontestable proofs of it; for he lived in continual action, and almost
constantly with his pen in his hand, even when sickness confined him to his
bed; arising from his zeal for the general good of the churches. He was a man
on whom God had confered extraordinary talents, a great deal of wit, an
exquisite judgment, a faithful memory, an able, indefatigable, and elegant pen;
an extensive knowledge, and a great zeal for the truth. But he could not escape
slander abroad, nor opposition at home.

He was full thirty years old when he married Idolette de Bure, the widow of
John Stordeur, a native of Liege, and an Anabaptist, whom he had converted.

As the reformers married to prove their conversion from the papists, the
latter reproached them, as if they warred against Rome for the same reasons the
Grecians warred against Troy. "Our adversaries, (says Calvin)" pretend we wage
a sort of trojan war for a woman. To say nothing of others at present; they
must allow myself at least to be free from this charge: Since I am more
particularly able, in my own case, to refute this sour lous reflection. For
notwithstanding I was at liberty to have married under the tyranny of the pope,
I voluntarily led a single life for many years.

The ordinary labors of Calvin were these. Every other sabbath he preached
twice. Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, he read his divinity lectures. Thursday
he assisted in the consistory for the exercise of ecclesiastical discipline. On
Friday he read a lecture in exposition of some difficult places in scripture:
Besides his public writings, and private negociations. God so blessed his
ministry that he was applied and resorted to from all parts of the christian
world; some to consult his advice in matters of religion, and others to hear
him preach. This filled the city of Geneva with a great concourse of people:
and besides the established church, there were also churches for the English,
Spaniards, and Italians.

We have in the writings of Calvin, an account, and also a refutation, of a
most per^^cious sect that sprung up in that church, and produced troubles of a
more deplor^ble ^ind than any that happened in our community. This odious sect
which assumed the denominations of libertines and Spiritual Brethren and
sisters, arose in Flanders, was headed by Pockesius, Ruffus, and Quintin, got a
certain footing in France through the favor and protection of Margarett, queen
of Navarre, and sister to Francis I. and found patrons in several of the
reformed churches. Their doctrine, as far as it can be known by the writings of
Calvin and its other antagonists (for these fanatics published no account of
their tenets that is come to my knowledge), amounted to the following
propositions: "That the deity was the sole operating cause in the mind of man,
and the immediate author of all human actions; that, consequently, the
distinction of good and evil, that had been established with respect to these
actions, were false and groundless, and that men could nor, properly speaking,
commit sin; that religion consisted in the union of the spirit, or rational
soul, with the supreme Being; that all those who had attained this happy union,
by sublime contemplation and elevation of mind, were then allowed to indulge,
without exception or restraint, their appetites and passions: that all their
actions and pursuits were then innocent? and that, after the death of the body,
they were to be united to the Deity.

We must not confound, as is frequently done, with these fanatics, another kind
of Libertines, whom Calvin had to combat, and who gave him much trouble and
perplexity during the whole course of his life and ministry, I mean the
libertines of Geneva. These were rather a cabal of rakes than a sect of
fanatics. For they made no pretenses to any religious system, but pleaded only
for the liberty of leading voluptuous and immoral lives.

The opposition that was made to Calvin did not end here. He had contests of
another kind to sustain against those who could not relish his theological
system, and, more especially, his doctrine in relation to eternal and absolute
Decrees. He however executed his plan of discipline with the utmost rigor. He
excluded obstinate offenders from the communion of the church, and even
procured their banishment from the city.

The year 1545 was rendered infamous by that cruel and abominable edict which
the parliment of Aquitain issued against the poor Waldenses, whereby the most
unparalleled barbarities were exercised upon those unhappy people, without any
distinction of age or sex, even to the very burning of their towns. The
Waldenses, or Vaudois, were a sect established by Peter Vaud, or Valdo, a rich
merchant of Lions in France, in 1160, who found out several errors in the
church of Rome, and began a reformation. The clergy excommunicated him, and
persecuted some of his disciples which occasioned them to quit Lions, and fly
into the valies of Piedmont, which have been ever since inhabited by their
descendents, who have adhered to their doctrine.

Calvin was greatly afflicted for the sufferings of the Waldenses, to whom he
had wrote consolatory letters a short time before, and sent them faithful
pastors for instructing them in the gospel precepts. He wrote to the reformed
in France, to convince them they acted in a pernicious manner, who pretended it
was no sin to be present at the popish services, if they kept the true religion
in their hearts. He told them, it was an error condemned by the ancient
fathers: And, because some of them might think him too rigid, he adjoined to
his own the opinions of Melancthon, Bucer, and Martyr: whereby the name of
these Nicodemites became obnoxious; for so they were called, who cloaked their
errors with his example.

When the emperor hold the diet at Ratisbon, in 1541, the necessity of his
affairs compelled him to grant the protestants the INTERIM; that is, a set form
of faith, which might be agreeable to both parties, till a general council
should regulate the points wherein the protestants had abandoned the sentiments
of the Roman church. The emperor wanted to invade the Turkish dominions in
Africa: But he lost half of his army in that fatal expedition, and returned to
Germany, where he renewed his severities against the protestants. Calvin
assisted Melancthon in writing against the Interim; while the emperor and the
king of England were engaged in a war against France, which ended in 1546, and
was soon followed by the deaths of Henry VIII. and Francis I.

The city of Geneva had been infested with the plague, and very unhappy
divisions began there in 1546. Calvin, from the pulpit, exclaimed against the
wickedness of the people, who revived the controversy about their privileges,
and would not suffer their pastors to dispose of the ecclesiastical goods taken
from the Pontificians, as they ought to be. The young people would not suffer
themselves to be deprived of their sports, taverns, and other places of
debauchery. The ministers insisted earnestly upon it, both in the council and
church, threatening the contumacious with excommunication. One of the council
accused Calvin, that he had taught false doctrine for the space of seven years:
But the council committed him to prison, without the solicitation of Calvin,
and enjoined him to perform penance by carrying a torch in his hand through
the city.

Viret's servant received a letter from Calvin: But, instead of carrying it to
his master, as he was directed, he delivered it to the Syndics, who broke it
open, and were not a little displeased at some passages in it, especially where
he told Viret, that the people of Geneva would govern without GOD; and that he
had to do with hypocrites. Calvin was sent for to answer this before them; when
he justified his complaint by the instance of several debauched persons, who
were suffered to scoff at the word of GOD, and scoff at their instructions. He
then left the city.

Calvin, (says a late excellent writer) has been taxed with fierceness and
bigotry: But his meekness and benevolence were as eminent, as the malice of his
traducers is shameless. I shall give one single instance of his modesty and
gentleness. While he was a very young man, disputes run high between Luther and
some other reformers, concerning the manner of Christ's presence in the holy
sacrament. Luther, whose temper was naturally warm and rough, heaped many hard
names on the divines who differed from him on the article of consubstantiation:
and among the rest, Calvin came in for his dividend of abuse. Being informed of
the harsh appellations he received, he meekly replied, in a letter to
Bullinger;" It Is a frequent saving with me, that, if Luther should even call me
a devil, I hold him notwithstanding in such veneration, that I shall always own
him to be an illustrious servant of GOD; who, though he abounds in
extraordinary virtues, is not without considerable imperfections." --
Turretin's opinion of him also deserves attention. 'John Calvin, (says he) was
a man, whose memory will be blesseed in every succeeding age. He instructed and
enlightened, not only the church of Geneva, but also the whole reformed world,
by his immense labors. Insomuch, that all the reformed churches are, in the
gross, frequently called by his name. Thus wrote this candid Arminian, and
therefore an unsuspected evidence of all undue partiality, so late as the year
1734.

When Calvin returned to Geneva, the senate published a decree, empowering the
ministers to require of every family an account of their faith: And they
ordered, that no holyday should be observed but the sabbath.

Calvin, in his writings, every where declares, when he treats of the cause of
sin, that the name of GOD ought not to be mentioned: Because the nature of GOD
is perfectly righteous and just. How rank a calumny is it then, to charge a man
who has so well deserved of the church of GOD, with making GOD the author of
sin: He teaches, on all occasions, that nothing can be without the will of GOD.
He says, the wicked actions of men are so ruled by the secret judgment of GOD,
as that he is no ways accessory to them. The sum of what he teaches is, that
GOD, in a wonderful manner, and by ways unknown to us, directs all things to
whatev e end he pleased. But why GOD wills wha seems to us not suitable to his
nature, he acknowledges to be incomprehensible: And therefore denies that it
should be over curiously searched into; because the judgments of GOD are a vast
abyss, and mysterious beyond our reach, which ought to be adored with awful
reverence. But still he keeps to this principle; that, though the reason of his
council be unknown to us, the praise of righteousness is ever to be given to
GOD; because his will is the supreme rule of equity. Let Calvin himself be
heard against the abuse, which men will attempt in defaming the great doctrine
of predistination. In all our inquiries, (says he in his Institute,) into
predistinatination, let us never fail to begin with effectual calling. Again;
There are some who go on, securely in sin, alleging, that if they are of the
number of elect, their vices will not hinder them from going to heaven. Such
abomoniable language as this is not the holy bleating of Christ's sheep, but,
the impure grunting of swine. For we learn from St. Paul, that we are elected
to this very end, even to holiness and blamelessness of life. Now, if sanctity
of life is the very end, scope, and drift of election itself; it will follow,
that the doctrine of election should awaken and spur us on to sanctification,
instead of furnishing us with a false plea for idleness.

Philibert Bertelier, register of the inferior court of justice at Geneva, had
been suspended from the sacrament by the presbytery, on account of his vicious
life: But he applied to the senate to be absolved; and that body actually
absolved him from the sentence. This was opposed in the name of the presbytery,
by Calvin, who showed, that the Christian magistrate ought to preserve, not to
destroy, the ecclesiastical constitution. The sacrament was to be administered
within two days. When Calvin came to hear what had passed, he soon resolved
what to do, and preached against the contempt of the sacrament. He raised his
voice, lifted up his hands, and said that he would imitate St. Chrysostom: that
he would not oppose force to force, but that he would rather suffer himself to
be massacred, than that his hands should present the holy mysteries to those
who had been judged unworthy of them. This was a thunderbolt, which confounded
the faction of Bertelier; so that it was not thought fit that he should present
himself to the communion. The next day after the sacrament, Calvin, accompanied
by his consistory, desired leave of the senate, and of the council of two
hundred, to speak to the people about this matter, as it concerned the
abrogation of a law made by the people. This made so great an impression on
their minds, that it was resolved the Swiss Cantons should be consulted about
it; and that the decree of the two hundred should be suspended; but that none
should say the ancient regulations had been infringed.

Calvin dispatched letters to some of the principal pastors in the Helvetic
cities; craving earnestly at their hands to respect this affair, as a thing
whereon the whole state of religion and piety in that church so much depended,
that the cause of GOD, and all good men, were inevitably certain to be trampled
under foot, unless those cities, by their good means, might be brought to give
sentence with the ministers of Geneva, when the cause should be brought before
them. The Swiss pastors answered, that they had heard of those consistorial
laws, and acknowledged them to be godly ordinances, drawing toward the
prescript of the word of God; for which cause, they did not think it good for
the church of Geneva, by innovation, to change the same, but rather to keep
them as they were.

The attempts of Michael Servede or Servetus, a Spanish physician, were much
alarming to those who had the cause of true religion at heart. This man, who
has made such a noise in the world, was born at Villa Nueva, in the kingdom of
Arragon, distinguished himself by the superiority of his genius and had made a
considerable progress in various branches of science. In the years 1531 and
1532, he published, in Latin, his Seven books concerning the errors that are
contained in the doctrine of the Trinity, and his two Dialogues on the same
subject, in which he attacked, in the most audacious manner, the sentiments
adopted by far the greatest part of the Christian church, in relation to the
Divine Nature, and a Trinity of persons in the Godhead. Some years after this
he traveled into France, and, after a variety of adventures, settled at Vienne
in Dauphine, where he applied himself, with success, to the practice of physic.
It was here, that, letting loose the reins of his warm and irregular
imagination, he invented that strange system of theology, which was printed, in
a clandestine manner, in the year 1553, under the title of Christianity
restored. The man seemed to be seized with a passion for reforming (in his
w^y), and many things concurred to favor his designs, such as the sire of his
genius, the extent of his learning, the power of his eloquence, the strength of
his resolution, the obstinacy of his temper, and an external appearance, at
least, of piety, that rendered all the rest doubly engaging. Add to all this,
the protection and friendship of many persons of weight, in France, Germany,
and Italy, which Servetus had obtained by his talents and abilities both
natural and acquired; and it will appear that sew innovators have set out with
a better prospect of success. But, notwithstanding these signal advantages, all
his views were totally disappointed by the vigilance and severity of Calvin,
who, when Servetus had escaped from his prison at Vienne, and was passing
through Switzerland, in order to seek refuge in It^ly, caused him to be
apprehended at Geneva, in the year 1553, and had an accusation of blasphemy
brought against him before the council. The issue of this accusation was fatal
to Servetus, who, adhering resolutely to the opinions he had embraced, was, by
a public sentence of the court, declared an obstinate heretic, and, in
consequence thereof, condemned to the flames. For it is observable, that, at
this time, the ancient laws that had been enacted against heretics by the
emperor Frederic II. and had been so frequently renewed after his reign, were
still in vigor at Geneva. It must, however, be acknowledged, that this learned
and ingenious sufferer was worthy of a better fate; though it is certain, on
the other hand, that his f^ults were neither few nor trivial; since it is well
known, that his excessive arrogance was accompanied with a malignant and
contentious spirit, an invincible obstinacy of temper, and a considerable
portion of fanaticism.

The author of the memoirs of literature says, If the religion of protestants
depended on the doctrine and conduct of the reformers, he should take care how
he published his account of Servetus: But as the protestant religion is
entirely ^f unded on holy scripture; so the defaults of the reformers ought not
to have any ill influence on the reformation. The doctrine of nontoleration,
which obtained in the sixteenth century, among some protestants, was that
pernicious error which they had imbibed in the church of Rome: And, I believe,
I can say, without doing any injury to that church, that she is, in a great
measure, answerable for the execution of Servetus. If the Roman catholics had
never put any person to death for the sake of religion; I care say, that
Servetus had never been condemned to die in any protestant ^ity. Let us
remember, that Calvin, and all the magistrates of Geneva, in the year 1553,
were born and bred up in the church of Rome: This is the best apology that can
be made for them.

The number of strangers visibly increased in Geneva; and the English were
all^wed to found a church of their own nation in the city, as the Italians had
done before them in 1551, and the Spaniards some time afterward: But when Q.
Elizabeth came to the throne, and revived the protestant religion, the English
thanked the magistrates for their protection, and returned to their own country.

In 1555, a conspiracy was form^d against the ministers of Geneva: But it was
seasonably discovered, and the conspirators punished; some being beheaded, and
others banished. Calvin went to Bern, and defended himself against Bolsec, who
was banished ^^r accusing him of false doctrine. Calvin regulated the church of
Poland; he comforted the persecuted in England, and encouraged the affl^ected
in France. But, in 1556, a tertian ague seized upon him as he was preaching,
which obliged him to quit the pulpit, and it was rumoured abroad that he was
dead. He recovered, and went to Franckfort to pacify some controversies which
had lately sprung up in the French church.

The number of youth, who came from all parts to study at Geneva, increased so
much, that the old school was not large enough to contain them. The council
therefore resolved to erect a new college for seven classes, and three
professors of Hebrew, Greek, and philosophy; besides divinity lectures, which
Calvin read himself, to whom was joined Theodore Beza, who preached the
following week after Calvin. The statutes of this college were first published
in St. Peter's church, before the magistrates, ministers, and scholars, by
Calvin, who seemed to consecrate so body and profitable a foundation.

On the sixth of February, 1564, Calvin preached his last sermon. He was faint,
thin, and consumptive. He had for ten years together abstained from dinners,
for he was frequently troubled with the headache, which his abstinence only
could cure. By straining his voice, and using of aloes, he brought on the
hemorhoids, which at last proved ulcerous; and he had also a spitting of blood.
When his ague left him, the gout took him in his right leg; then the cholic,
and lastly the stone, which he never perceived till a few months before his
death.

Though he was tormented with so many violent diseases, he never uttered a word
unbecoming a Christian, and so great a divine; only lifting up his eyes to
heaven, he used to say, "How long, Lord!" which was an expression he constantly
used, when he heard of the calamities which afflicted his protestant brethren,
for which he felt more than for any thing that could befall himself. On the
twenty-seventh of March he was carried in his chair to the senate, when he
presented to them a new rector for the school; then uncovered his head, and
thanked them for all their favors, and particularly for their great care of
him in his sickness: For I perceive, (said he), this is the last time I shall
come into this place. His voice failed him as he spoke, and the assembly took
leave of him in tears.

On the second of April, which was Easterday, he was carried to the church,
where Beza edministered to him the sacrament. He made his will on the 25th and
on the 27th died, having, by overmuch study, brought upon him several
distempers. He died in the fifty fourth year of his age, and was buried the
next morning, in the common churchyard of the large palace, according as he
had desired in his will, without any pomp or epitaph.

Burnham, in his Prous Memorials, translates from Melch. Adam, the following
account of his last will and death; he dictated his will to the public notary
of Geneva in these words. I. John Calvin, minister of the word of GOD in the
church of Geneva, being so oppressed and afflicted with diverse diseases, that I
conclude the Lord GOD has appointed shortly to take me out of this world;
therefore have determined to make my last will and testament in this form
following:

First, I give thanks to GOD, that, taking pity on me, whom he created and
placed in this world, he has delivered me out of the deep darkness of
idolatry, into which I was plunged; and has brought me into the light of his
gospel, and made me a partaker of the doctrine of salvation, whereof I was most
unworthy. And he has not only gently and graciously borne with my faults and
sins, for which I deserved to be rejected of him and cast out, but has treated
me with such meekness and mildness, that he has vouchsafed to use my labors
in preaching and publishing the truth of his gospel. And I witness and declare,
that I intend to pass the remainder of my life in the same faith and religion
which he has delivered to me by his gospel; and not to seek any other aid, or
refuge for salvation, than his free adoption; in which alone salvation rests.
And, with my whole heart, I embrace the mercy which he has used toward me for
Jesus Christ's sake; recompensing my faults with the merit of his death and
passion, that satisfaction might be made, by his death for all my sins and
crimes, and the remembrance of them be blotted out. I witness also and declare,
that I humbly beg of him, that being washed and cleansed in the bl^od of that
highest Redeemer, shed for the sins of mankind, I must stand at his
judgment seat, under the image of my Redeemer.

Also I declare, that I have diligently endeavored, acc^rding to the measure
of grace received and the bounty which GOD has used toward me, that I might
preach his word hol^ly and purely, as well in sermons, as in commentaries, and
other writings; and interpret his holy scriptures faithfully.

But, alas! that study and zeal of mine (if worthy so to be called) have been
so remiss and languishing, that, I confess, innumerable things have been
wanting in me to the well performing of my duty. And, unless the unmeasurable
bounty of GOD had been present, my studies had been vain and vanishing. For
which causes, I witness and declare, that I hope for no other help for
salvation than this only; that seeing GOD is the father of mercy. I trust he
has showed himself a father to me, who acknowledge myself a miserable sinner.

As for other things, after my departure out of this life. I would have my body
committed to the earth, in that order and manner which is usual in this church
and city, till the blessed day of resurrection comes etc.

To the four syndics, and all the magistrates, who in a body honored him with
a visit before his death, he spoke to the following effect:

Honored sirs, I give you great thanks that you have done me this honor,
having not deserved it from you, and that you have so often borne with my
infirmities: Which, to me, has always been an argument of your singular
goodness for me.

Touching the doctrine you have heard from me, I take GOD to witness, that I
have not rashly and ungroundedly, but carefully and purely taught the word of
GOD entrusted to me: whose wrath I should otherwise now perceive hanging over
me. But I am certainly assured, that my labors in teaching it have not been
displeasing to him.

And I testify this the more willingly, both before God and yourselves;
because, I doubt not but the devil, according to his custom will raise up
wicked, light, and giddy headed people, to corrupt the sincere doctrine which
you have heard from me.

Then, considering the immeasureable benefits which GOD had confered on that
city, he said; --, I am a very good witness, out of how many great dangers the
hand of GOD has delivered you; Moreover, you see in what estate you now are
Therefore, whether your affairs be prosperous or adverse, let this thing be
always before your eyes, that GOD is he alone who establishes kingdoms and
cities; and therefore will be worshipped by mortal men.

And, continuing his discourse, he showed them at large, the danger of pride
and security; the great dangers they were also in from errors in judgment, and
corruptions in practice.

Then he prayed to GOD for the increase of his gifts and blessings upon them,
and for the safety and welfare of the commonwealth. After which, giving his
hand to each of them, they took their leave; departing full of sorrow, and with
many tears, as from their common father.

April 28. The ministers of Geneva being with him, he spoke thus to them --
Brethren, after my decease stand fast in this work of the Lord, and be not
discouraged; for the Lord will preserve this church and commonwealth against
the threatenings of the enemies. When I came first to this city, the gospel
indeed was preached, but the management of things, with respect to it, was very
troublesome: Many conceiving, that Christianity was nothing more than the
demolishing of images. And there were not a few wicked persons, from whom I
suffered many things. But the Lord our God so strengthened and confirmed me,
who am not naturally bold, that I gave not place to any of their attempts. I
profess, brethren, that I have lived with you in true love and sincere charity;
and thus I now depart from you. If you have found me any way pettish under my
disease, I crave your pardon; and give you very great thanks, that you have so
borne, on your part, the burden imposed on me, in the times of my sickness.

Having thus spoken, he gave his hand to each of them, who then took their
leave, sorrowing and weeping.

A while after, Calvin hearing that Viret, who was eighty years of age, and
sickly, was on his journey to visit him, wrote thus to stay him.

Farewell, my best and sincerest brother: GOD will have you to outlive me in
this world, live mindful of our friendship; for it has been profitable to the
church of GOD here, so the fruit of it tarrieth for us in heaven. I would not
have you weary yourself for my sake. I hardly draw my breath: And I expect
daily when it will wholly fail me. It is enough that I live and die to Christ,
who is gain to his both in life and death. Again farewell." May 11, 1564,

Yet notwithstanding this letter, the good old man came to Geneva; and having
folly confered with Calvin, he returned to Newcome. After which, Calvin passed
his remaining time almost wholly in prayer, with his eyes toward heaven; while
his voice often failed him, by reason of the shortness of his breath.

He died as we observed before, May the 27th, A. D. 1564, aged fifty-four
years, ten mouths, and seventeen days. Beza had but just left him when Calvin
suddenly altered for death. On which a messenger was dispatched after Beza to
bring him back; but though Beza returned presently, Calvin, without a sigh or
groan was fallen asleep in Jesus before Beza could reach him.

He was a man, whose thoughts were lifted up much above the desire of worldly
go^ds, only seeking how he might most and best promote his master's service in
the establishment of his gospel. When he took leave of the people at Strasburg
(as we have mentioned above) to return to Geneva, they would have continued his
freedom of the city, and the revenues of a prebend; which had been assigned
him; The former he accepted but absolutely refused the latter.

When his friends would have dissuaded him in his sickness, from dictating, and
especially from writing, he answered; What; would you have me idle when my Lord
comes?

It is a strong proof of his not having studied to heap up riches, that all his
effects, notwithstanding his library were sold very dear, as scarce amounted to
three hundred crowns; so that he might very justly, as well as elegantly, in
order to wipe off this monstrous calumny, use these words, in the preface to
his Commentary on the Psalms; If I cannot in my life time persuade some people
that I am no hoarder of money, I shall convince them at my death. The senate
certainly can witness for him, that, though his stipend was very small, he was
so far from being unsatisfyed with it, that he positively refused the offer of
increasing it. This is one of the m^st extraordinary victories, the magnaminity
of grace obtains over nature, even in those who are ministere of he gospel.
Such a disinterestedness is a thing so extraordinary, as might make even those,
who cast their eyes beyond the philosophers of ancient Greece, say of him, I
have not 'found so great faith, no not in Israel.'

The works of Calvin, published at Geneva, comprehended twelve volumes in
folio; which the edition of Amsterdam, 1667, has reduced to nine. His
commentaries upon the Bible are the most considerable part of his works: But he
guined most honor by his "Christian Institution," which was wrote in defense
of the protestant religion, and has been always esteemed an incomparable work.
This "institution" has not only appeared in French, but also in High Dutch, Low
Dutch, Italian, Spanish, and English. Calvin intended it as a complete system,
and a fall Idea of theology.

CONCLUSION.
AS the history of particular persons always throws light upon the age in which
they lived; it is presumed, that the preceding Memoirs also, which relate to
eminent men in the church of Christ, from the era of the reformation (and a
great number more might have been produced, if our limits had allowed) not only
discover their own character, but the characters of the several times in which
they appeared. Pessibly, therefore, these accounts, will be not only edifying
to the faith, but instructive to the mind, of our serious readers, and of those
younger persons especially, who wish to be acquainted with our ecclesiastical
history.

The intelligent Christian may perceive, that we have studiously avoided any
undue predilections to any particular party or profession; knowing that the
grace of God is confined to no party, and entailed upon no one profession of
Christianity in the world. These Memoirs, if they prove any thing, abundantly
prove this truth. And though the compiler must naturally have his predilections
and passions, or he would not be a fallen son of fallen Adam; yet he can truly
say, that he has watched over these infirmities of human nature, and has been
above all things desirous, that the glory of God may be seen to triumph over
the narrowness of men, and that the grace of God in his most excellent
servants, may also appear to be one and the same blessing; notwithstanding the
prejudices of birth and education; which do indeed strike the mind with much
stronger impressions, than perhaps any of us are readily apt to imagine.

In reviewing the work, our readers may probable perceive, that some of the
following considerations present themselves to the mind, and that they are
justified by many particular circumstances in these Lives.

The reformation of the Protestant church from popery proceeded chiefly upon,
what are justly enough called, The Doctrines of Grace, in opposition to a
variety of corrupt opinions, and to a greater variety of antiscriptural
superstitions which had been grounded upon them. Those doctrines were not
novelties (as some of the Papists affected to treat them) because they were not
only as ancient as divine revelation itself, but were also maintained more or
less in all ages of the christian church; though, for some centuries before the
reformation, but by comparatively a few scattered persons, who shone as stars
amidst the gloom of darkness which generally pervaded Europe.

The most considerable body of people professing scriptural and unsophisticated
divinity, were the Albigenses in the south of France, and the Waldenses in
Piedmont. The latter name, however, became the general one, upon the great
spread of their doctrine, which was one and the same, after the junction of the
pious Peter Waldo or Valdo, about the year 1170, from whom this appellation was
taken. From these real christians, living for the most part in mountainous and
almost inaccessible places because of their enemies, was derived the primary
root of all the subsequent reformations. Their origin is carried up very high
into the purest ages of the church. It is certain that a Romish council at
Tours in 1163 condemned them as maintainers of an heresy, LONG SINCE sprung up
in the territory of Thoulouse, i. e. among those called Albigenses. "This
sect," says Cave, from Reinerius, (a monkish adversary, who wrote against them
about the year 1254) soon increased to an immense number of followers, and
prevailed every where; and some have affirmed, that it existed in the days of
Pope Sylvester, (i. e. in the year 314) or rather from the Apostolic age
itself, and that there is no country in Europe into which it has not extended
itself. It is not improbable, that they were descendents of those excellent
christians, who wrote from Lions in France the very remarkable Epistle to the
Asian churches, in the second century after Christ.

They continued likewise, as well as spread; for when Luther and the other
reformers appeared in the sixteenth century, the descendants of these
persecuted people (who were called by abundance of nicknames) held a cordial
correspondence with them, astonished on both sides to find the closeness of
their similarity. Hence Gretzer the Jesuit called them, 'the great ancestors of
the Calvinists.' Of the most remarkable individuals, who supported the great
truths of the gospel, with more or less clearness, from the days of the
fathers, several respectable names may be adduced in successive ages; but in
this place we cannot give even their names, though their history deserves the
amplest consideration.

Blessed be God! his truth shall stand to the end of the world, and his gospel
till the last of the redeemed is ready for glory. There is a SPIRITUAL CHURCH,
consisting of Christ's faithful people, and of them only, gathered, perhaps,
out of all denominations; and this church, founded on the everlasting Rock, is
impregnable to every assault of its enemies. No weapon, formed against it, can
prosper. This consideration should afford every true believer great
consolation, under all dark appearances either in visible churches or in the
world. It Is God's cause, and not man's: the arm, therefore, which supports it,
is omnipotent and divine. The LORD of HOSTS is with us (may this church of the
firstborn triumph;) the God of Jacob is our refuge!

And may God, whose goodness extends from age to age, and whose favor is the
life of souls, bless and unite this HOLY CHURCH at all times in spirit and in
truth, that it may be established and prosper upon earth, and that many of all
nations may flow unto it. May discord and every work of the flesh be far
removed from among brethren, and may they love, and study to love more and
more, all of all denominations, who love our lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
May the salvation of the redeemed spread farther and wider by all manner of
holy means; till the kingdoms of the world become the kingdoms of the Lord, and
of his Christ, and till every tongue shall confess with joy, THE LORD GOD
OMNIPOTENT REIGNS! AMEN.

FINIS.

