Laugh and be Fat. OR, AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST MELANCHOLY. CONTAINING A GREAT
VARIETY OF COMICAL INTRIGUES AND FINE STORIES; WITTY EPIGRAMS AND COMICAL
WHIMS; EPITAPHS, HUMOUROUS JESTS, etc.

Written by the most ingenious Authors of the Age.

SALEM: PRINTED AT FAUST's HEAD, Essex-Street. -- 1799.

Laugh and be Fat.
The Parson and the Fowls; or the Maid too cunning for her Master.
A RICH old bachelor, a clergyman in the country, having made choice of a
pretty young maid to his housekeeper, had ordered upon a certain Sunday, a
couple of fowls to be got ready for his dinner, that after he had given his
congregation a little Christian consolation at church, he might come home and
refresh his tired vitals with a dainty modicum. When the clerk and his looby
assistant, had chimed almost for about a quarter of an hour, and jogged the
shepherd to fodder his sheep, and measure his time by the sand glass, his
pretty housekeeper was left te prepare the cacklers against the customary time
of his return.

The diligent maid when she thought her ghostly master had been long enough
exalted two degrees above the clerk, to get about a quarter of an hour on the
right side of his text, guessed it a very proper time to lay down the fowls,
which she did accordingly. As the tid-bits were running merrily round before a
rouzing fire, who should take the advantage of the parson's absence, but his
housekeepers sweetheart, who by his pleasant and comical hoity toities, and
other winning accomplishments, had so wriggled himself into her affections,
that it is not unreasonable to think he had as much command of her as her
master.

The maid having mistaken the time of day, happened to be a little too early
with her cookery, so that the fowls were fully ready, before the parson had
given his hungry auditory leave to return home to their puddings and dumplings.
The sweetheart being a fellow of an incomparable stomach, thought it a great
pity such good victuals should be spoiled for want of eating, and very eagerly
solicited his loving jug to spare him one of the fowls to stop a little hole he
had in his appetite, telling, her, one would be sufficient for her master, and
that she had wit enough to contrive some story or other, handsomely to excuse
the matter, and blind him from the true knowledge of what became of it.

The maid being willing to oblige her lover, who she found was so desirous to
oblige her on all occasions, ventured to take up one to save the longing of her
sweetheart, who, being very well prepared for such a nice enterta^nment,
gobbled it up with such expedition that before his benefactress had wound up
the jack, he had not so much as left the claws which the poor cockril used to
scratch the dunghill withal.

He had no sooner thus dispatched his sweet-heart's first courtesy; but he
began to be very importunate with her for the second telling her an excuse was
as easily made for both as for one; and that she had as good be h^^^ for a
sheep as a lamb: till at last (...) ^^ding a few melting kisses to h^^^ ^^enous
solicitations, he prevailed (...) her to draw the other off the spit, (...) ^e
might finish his meal by robbing (...) parson of his Sunday's dinner. The
second bird being brought before him, he lost no time, but drove down the
former with the latter, without any visible abatement of either his speed or
his appetite. When he had cleared his dish, and washed all down with a cup of
the parson's best beer, he took a thankful leave of his mistress, who now began
to be at her wit's end how to excuse the rudeness she had so foolishly
committed.

As she was thus pondering with herself, who should step in but the parson and
a stranger with him, who coming from another town to hear him preach, the
parson thought himself obliged to invite him home to dinner with him.

No sooner had the old Levite conducted his guest into the parlour, but he
begged his pardon a minute, and retired into another room to whet his knife on
the frame of an old table, which was always his cus^^^ before dinner; the maid
in a peck (...) fears and troubles took the advantage o^ this interim and
stepping into the parlor, in a strange seeming sort of disorder, frightens away
her master's guest with a surprising story, as follows; viz, "Lord, Sir, how
came you to venture yourself home with my master at this time of day? When, if
you had known him, you might have easily discovered by his countenance, he is
in one of his old frieks." "Why, what is the matter with him?" says the country
farmer, "he was wondrous civil to me in the church yard, and by all means would
bring me home to dine with him." "Alas! good Sir," replied the maid, whatever
you do, let me advise you to make the best of your way out of the house, for if
you stay, now he is in one of his frenzical humors, he will certainly geld
you, and I dare say he is whetting his knife for the same purpose, he has
served too or three so already, though they have had discretion to keep it
silent because they would not be laughed at." "I thank thee kindly sweetheart
cried the countryman, "are these his tricks with a pox to him? Wounds show me
the next way out, for I would not lose my tarriwags for the best dinner in
christendom; Upon which the wench showed him out of a back door; and away run
my gaffer as if the devil was at his heels.

He had not been gone a minute, but in comes the parson with his knife in his
hand, and finds his maid stamping and storming, as if she was made in the
parlor with an empty smeared dish upon the table, and his guest gone? "what is
the matter now says the parson?" What^s the meaning of all this? Where Is the
man gone that I brought home with me?' "Lord. Sir," replies the maid "I never
saw such an unmannerly hound since my eyes were open, I no sooner brought the
fowls to the table, but he snatched them both out of the dish, and crammed them
into his breeches and scoured out of the backdoor as if the devil were in him.
"Zouns," says the priest, "I am resolved the impudent rogue shall not cozen me
of my dinner so;" and away run the parson after the countryman, who by this
time, had gotten near a fields length off from him; but however, having
preached himself very hungry, he trotted away after him with his naked knife in
his hand, crying out, "Give me you brazen rogue, what you have run away with in
your breeches;" the fellow answering as he ran, Efaith, doctor not I, I would
rather see you hanged first." The parson finding the fellow too nimble for him
was very willing to compound, and cried out in milder terms, "Prithee, friend
don't run away with them both, but be so kind as to let me have one of them,"
"Not I, by the mass," replies the fellow, "I had rather see you at the devil
than part with either of them." The farmer being young and lusty, soon got
ground of the parson, that he was forced to give over his ch^se and return home
puffing and blowing, having nothing l^ft but batchelor's fare, viz. Bread and
cheese and kisses for his Sunday's dinner.

The Lady's Complaint against the Merchant for running away with the Pump.
A Turkey merchant traveling on the road about 20 miles from London, happened
to be overtaken by bad weather a little before night, and having no prospect of
a tavern to have recourse to for shelter, being a man of figure, he resolved to
beg admittance at the first house he came to, to avoid the severity of the
increasing storm; he had not gallopped on a furlong further, but he came to a
pretty neat box, which stood by the high way side, where he beheld a very
beautiful lady looking out of a window upon which he rode up to the door, and
applying himself to the lady at the casement humbly begged her to take pity
upon a distressed traveller, and that she would be so kind as to give him a
reception till the violance of the storm was blown over, or abated; the
compassionate lady discerning him to be a gentleman, soon granted his request,
and ordered her servant to admit her weather-beaten supplicant, and to take
care of his horse; he had no sooner taken sanctuary in his little paradise, as
he thought it, but a rousing fire was kindled in the parlour, and a cap,
nightgown, shirt, slippers, and all conveniences were brought him for shiftng
off his wet apparel, and putting himself into a more comfortable condition.

When he had thus refreshed his body with a good fire, and a dry garment, he
presented his service to the lady by her waiting maid, and humbly craved leave
to pay his respects to the lady, and that she would honor him with an
opportunity of returning her thanks for the great and charitable obligation she
had conferred upon him. No sooner was the message delivered, but the generous
lady very readily blessed him with her company: after he had attacked her ears
with a whole volley of compliments and discharged himself at her entrance very
much like a gentleman, she called for a bottle of canary, and ordered a very
agreeable cold entertainment to be brought in, till something was provided hot,
that might be more acceptable.

By this time the gentleman presumed so far, as to ask the lady if she was
married, who answered in the negative, further telling him, "That she was
obliged to a gentleman, who was her peculiar friend for her residence in that
house who was gone a long journey into Scotland, and that she did not expect
him back this six weeks; and withal, assured him, since the weather proved so
bad, he should be very welcome to stay all night if it suited with his
convenience." The gentleman being a jolly juvenile spark, and very amorously
inclined, had no power to refuse so kind an invitation from so fair a lady, but
made a facetious acknowledgment of her favor, and thankfully accepted of her
obliging proffer; and to prevent any mistrust that, upon more mature
deliberation, she might have of his being some designing person, he plucks a
letter out of his pocket, directed to him at his house in London, from Sir R. J
--, a justice of peace in the city, which had been sent him about three days
before by the penny post, the lady read it over with abundance of attention,
making him a compliment when she had done, viz, "That there needed nothing
further than his appearance to prove him a gentlemen."

The merchant, as he had good reason, believing her to be a lady in keeping
began to take heart of grace, and to treat her after such an amorous manner,
that was sufficient to let her understand he expected, as certainly as he lay
there that night, that she should be his bedfellow; so that when supper was
over, having prepared her with a few melting kisses, and other sostening
preliminaries, he took the freedom to make her sensible of the unexpressible
happiness he had the hopes of enjoying; to which she seemed neither very
averse, nor vet over forward, but cumningly signified, after a bifarous manner,
that she wanted some further inducement than barely love and opportunity to
bring her to a compliance; upon which, the merchant being an intelligent man
soon discovered her meaning, and being clevated by her charms and dalliance to
the highest pitch of desire, told her that he had no present about him worthy
of her acceptance; but if at any time, when she came to London, she would give
herself the trouble to send for him to any tavern, he would be extremely glad
to wait on her, and that he would present her with fifty guineas to buy her a
diamond ring, if she would do him the honor to wear it for his sake. She
seemingly took but slight notice of his generous offer; but however began to
shift off her former coyness, and liplead him into a pretty good assurance that
he had gained the point, and at last condescended so far as to promise him her
savours, which was no sooner done, but a convenient bed of resignation was
ordered to be sheeted next to her own chamber, whither he could have an easy
recourse at midnight without the notice es^her servants.

When all things were in readiness, the merchant hasted to his pillow, thinking
every minute an age till the business was consummated; when all things were
hush the servants gone to bed, and the opportunity proved seasonable, the lady
was as good as her word, and nothing but Sallengers Round was reciprocally
danced till both parties were rather tired than satisfied. About day break, the
lady bade him good morrow and returned to her own bed, leaving her wearied
lover to refresh himself with a little sleep after his hard night's Journey,
when three or four hours repose had enabled him to rise, up he got, and
recovering his loss of spirits with a plentiful cup of mulled Canary he
returned the lady abundance of thanks for her compassionate favors, discharged
himself handsomely of the servants and so proceeded on his Journey.

About a month after the lady came to town? and according to her lover's
directions, made bold to send for him to a certain tavern no great distance
from his own house; but the gentleman recollecting what an extravagant promise
he had made the lady in requital of her favors, thought it the wisest way to
neglect going; accordingly sent back word, "That he was very busy, and could
not possibly wait on her;" which provoking slight, after the pretense of so
much kindness, justly kindled in the lady, such a revengeful indignation, that
her nimble wits had soon formed a project how she should be even with him,
resolving to put her design in practice with all expedition.

Accordingly she takes coach, and orders the coachman to drive her to Sir
Robert J --, a known Justice of Peace, and the very gentleman who sent the
letter to the merchant which he had shown to the lady; Sir Robert being at home
and at leisure she was soon admitted to acquaint the justice with her business,
who told him that she had a great complaint against his friend Mr. Hazard. The
justice seemed much surprised that so pretty a lady should appear as an enemy
against his friend, whom he thought to be a man of unspotted reputation, and
desired to know what she had to charge him with, upon which the injured lady
laid open her grievances thus, "Your friend Mr. Hazard, the merchant, not long
since took of me a very pleasant little tenement, which he was to occupy
without any let, hindrance, or molestation, for a certain term agreed on
between both parties, in consideration of the sum of fifty guine as, which he
was to pay me on demand; and after; he had enjoyed the premises with all its
appurtenances, the full time of agreement, he quitted the possession very
dishonourably, and now hides himself from me, because he would not pay me the
money." Madam," replied the Justice. "I am very sorry to hear these things of a
gentleman who is my friend, and a person, that has always enjoyed so fair a
character; but however, madam, these are matters that come within the
cognizance of the common law, so that they are not properly within my sphere to
meddle with, but this service I can do you: if you please, madam, I will send
for him, and if, upon hearing both sides, I find he has done you wrong I will
pursuade him all that I can to do you justice. The lady approved of this
proposal, and thanked him for his civility, accordingly Sir Robert dispatched
his footman with a message to Mr. Hazard, which brought him presently before
his fair accufer. who repeated over her former complaint before the face of the
offender; the merchant at first was much surprised to find himself sent for
upon this occasion, till perceiving the lady had so wittily couched her
accusation under such a modest allegory and then he thought it best to
acknowledge the charge, lest by denying it, he should provoke the lady to give
the justice a full explanation of her meaning, to his open shame and dishonor,
so that he confessed he had taken a tenement of her upon such a consideration
as was alleged. "But Madam," says he, "you know there was a deep well
belonging to this tenement, which wanted a pump, whithout which you are
sensible the tenement would have been of no use to me; therefore since I was at
the expense of putting up such a convenience, I think it is but justice you
should make a reasonable abatement, "But Sir," replied the lady, "you must
consider, when you quitted the possession, that you took the pump along with
you; had you left the pump standing that I could have had the use of it when I
had seen occasion, I should now be very willing to allow any deduction; but
since you put up the pump for your own pleasure, and carried it away with you
when you left the tenement. I think it but reason I should have my full money."
"Well Madam," replies the gentleman, "be cause you shall have no just reason to
say I have dealt hardly to a fair lady, I promise you before I part with you,
to pay your full money, and to lend you the pump into the bargain, provided you
will take care never to abuse it!" The lady punctually promised "it should
never be the worse of her wearing." So taking leave of Sir Robert, he waited
upon the lady to the next tavern, in orcer to lend her the pump, and pay her
the money.

Thirty thousand Pounds bid for a Pair of Band Strings; or the two Precious
Stones presented to a rich Widow.
A RICH old alderman of the city of London that dealt in the interloping trade
to the East-ladies, having a pretty young gentleman to his nephew, who had been
bred under him; and being willing to give him an opportunity of raising his
fortune, sent him abroad as a supercargo, and withal gave him a thousand pounds
to improve himself with the best directions he could how to manage it to
advantage: but the young gentleman, it being his first voyage, met with such
unexpected losses and crosses abroad, that he at last was forced to return home
very unfortunate, and was so far from having added to his uncle's benevolence,
that he had quite embezzled, not only his own stock, but his uncle's cargo;
however, making it appear to the old gentleman, it was more owing to misfortune
than extravagance: he was very kind and fatherly to his kinsman,
notwithstanding his disappointment; and having a young brisk widow lady, to
whom he was a cashier, and for whom he sometimes traded, that used often to
dine with him, he resolved by a stratagem, to try if he could not recommend his
nephew as a person worthy of her affections, and as a gentleman proper to
become her husband.

Accordingly to put his project in practice, he provided himself with a stout
horsewhip, which he conveyed privately under his cloak, and when thus armed for
his design, he desired his nephew's company to the tavern, in order to take
part of a small collation. The young gentleman, who was always very fond to
obey his uncle, showed himsef ready in an instant to answer his request; and
away trooped the old fox to the next tavern, with the unfortunate cub after him.

They were no sooner entered, but the uncle desired a private room above
stairs, a quart of claret, and tobacco, ordering the drawer not to suffer any
body to disturb them for half an hour, for that they had some particular
business together, that would require at least that time to be dispatched in.

When all things were performed according to order, and the door shut, the old
gentleman commanded his nephew to strip to the shirt, that he might see what
linen he wore, for he had been informed he was grown such a nasty lousy sloven,
that no body would venture to lie with him. The young gentleman mightily
surprised at his uncle's request, could not imagine what to think of it; at
last considering some body or other, through prejudice, might report such a
malicious story, he resolved to give his uncle the satisfaction he required,
and accordingly pulled off his coat and wa^^coat, assuring him it could be
nothing but the spiteful suggestion of some envious person who was his enemy,
and that in every particular the report was scandalously false.

When he was thus stripped to his shirt the cunning old sly boots, the better
to effects his ends puts on his spectacles, and fell to peeping about his
wrist-bands and collar, as if, in good earnest, he had been looking for
vermin, "Come, Sirrah," says he, "now down with your breeches, let me look in
the wasteband, for that is the most likely harbor to find such cattle in."
"Lord, Sir," says the young gentleman, "you command me now beyond modesty." "I
tell you, Sirrah," replies the uncle, "I will see what condition you are in,
and therefore do as I bid you, or it shall be more out of your way than your
head is worth." The nephew knowing his uncle to be a man of better morals than
to have any brutal design upon him, for fear of disobliging him, condescended
to his further request, which he had no sooner done but the old cuff fell to
peeping in the seams and gathers, as earnestly as if he had no other drift,
than to see if he was lousy; but of a sudden, as he was thus searching
pretendedly for the creepers, up he starts, and before the other could pluck up
his breeches, he lugs out his horse-whip, seemingly in a passion: "Sirrah,"
says he, "your breeches hang, I have heard you whored away your money in Spain
and Italy, and that you are returned home with such damnable pox, that the
testimonies of your manhood are swelled as big, Sirrah, as a couple of Norfolk
dumplings, and I am resolved, before you stir, to know the truth of the
matters; therefore lug out your Young Smock Smelling Plugtail, that I may see
your condition, or I will jirk your buttocks with this instrument of
correction, till I make your teeth chatter in your cod-piece." The young
gentleman believing from his uncle's passion, he had really heard what he told
him, between fear and anger, gave the old gentleman the liberty of beholding
the premises, that his own eyes might bear witness of the falsehood of these
base aspersions.

When the uncle beheld all, according to his judgment, in a sound condition,
"Now nephew," says he, "I have a mind to make a bargain with you, what shall I
give you for those pair of band strings that nature has tied the bottom of your
belly with." "Lord Sir," says the kinsman "I would not take twenty thousand
pound for them." "I will give thee," replies the uncle twenty thousand pounds
for them, and that is more than they are worth, by considerable," "Bless me
Sir," replies the nephew, "I would not part with them for forty." "Thou
extravagant Urchin," cries the old dad, "I will give thee thirty thousand for
them, and if you will not take that, you may keep them." "In truth, Sir."
returns the young one. "not I, I would not part with them for the universe."
"Then thou may even dress thyself," says the old Chap, "and button up your
ware, for I shall not be your purchaser." "Pray Sir," says the nephew, "now
your heat's over, what is you meaning for all this? I am perfectly amazed at
the oddness of your fancy." "Hold your tongue, boy," cries old crusty, "and sit
down to thy bottle and thy pipe; when thou have that in thy bed, that I have in
my head, you will rightly understand my meaning." He then proceeded to ask his
nephew what ready money he had at his command, who told him," About fifty
guineas, and that was all he had in the world:" "That Is not sufficient," says
the old gentleman, "there is a bank bill for two hundred pounds more; be sure
you take care to get yourself in good equipage, and take a couple of Blacks
from on board, and put them into good liveries, and be ready to dine with me
this day se'nnight." Having thus delivered his instructions, they drank off
their bottle, and so parted till the time prefixed.

The old gentleman had not been returned home above half an hour, but who
should step in to sup with him, but the buxom widow, who being very merry and
jocund at table, gave to the old alderman a seasonable opportunity to put her
in mind of matrimony, wondering how so pretty a lady, and so good a fortune,
could spend so much of her youth and beauty without the consolation of a good
husband; and withal began to speak much in the praise of a jolly young nephew
of his, who was lately come from the East Indies and had made so prosperous a
voyage, that amongst the rest of his effects, he had brought over a couple of
such precious stones, that he himself but a few hours since, had bid him 30,000
l. for, but could not prevail with him to part with them, because he had some
thoughts of marrying, could he meet with a lady to his mind, and that he was
resolved to keep them for a present to his bride; this prevailing story took
the listening widow presently by the ears, who very frankly expressed herself,
"That as the gentleman was his nephew, and one that she had so fair a character
of, from so worthy a person as himself. she should be very glad to see him, if
it were for no other reason than that he was his relation"

Upon this encouragement the old gentleman told her, "He had engaged his nephew
to dine with him on that day sen'night, and if she would be pleased to honor
them with their company, he should think himself greatly obliged to her." The
lady upon the aldermans request, answered, "She should accept of his
invitation." And after she had exercised her tongue with a little female tittle
tattle she took her leave, resigning the old alderman to his phthisicky cough,
and flannel night^cap.

When the day appointed came, all persons met according to agreement; and the
young spark had so improved his appearance, by his garb and attendance, that he
looked as great as a Sco^ch Lord, with a couple of his clan or vassals at his
elbow. The lady, by that time dinner was over, could not forbear signifying by
her eyes her approbation of his person: so that by the old gentleman's
management, and his instructions to his nephew, the matter was settled in less
than a fortnight, and the wedding kept, though with some privacy, at the
alderman's own house; where they had not bedded above two or three nights, but
the bride expecting the costly present of those precious stones the alderman
had told her of, took an opportunity one night, when she was fast locked in the
embraces of her bedfellow, to ask him what was become of those delicate rich
stones he had brought over with him from beyond sea? "My dear, replied the
bridegroom, here they are at your service; upon my word these are the
individual jewels my uncle bid me thirty thousand pounds for, but I would not
part with them: and upon my word, they shall not be set to any body's ring but
my own." "Well, my dear, says she since it is as it is, I am so far from
repenting my bargain, that now you have presented them to me, I assure you, I
accept them so kindly, and like them so well, that all the money in the
universe shall not purchase them." So both parties being well pleased, they
lived very comfortable together.

The Scolding Wife; or the Husband's Comical Revenge.
A JOLLY Suck-bottle, who was unluckily decoyed into the wrangling state of
matrimony, happened to be blessed over the left shoulder with a devil of a
termagant, so that if he was not ready to step into his marriage bed by the
time Bow bell proclaimed the ninth hour, he was sure to have his ears stringed
with such a peal of tongue thunder, more terrible to his ears than the crowing
of the cock to the trembling lion: so that having stayed one night with some of
his merry companions beyond the patience of his bedfellow, well knowing that
his bundle of Rue would be highly provoked at his transgression, he bethought
himself of a project that might divert her clam-ours and change the furious
scene into a pleasant comedy.

Accordingly he provided himself with a pound of sausages, which he buttoned in
his breeches, and then staggered home to his tormentor, in order to put his
merry conceit in practice. No sooner was he admitted into his habitation, but
he found his teaser so full charged with ill language, that she let fly a
volley of rogues and rascals at him, wounded his reputation beyond all
patience, taxing him with the neglect of family duty; crying, "She was sure
nothing but the company of lewd women could occasion him to such unreasonable
hours." Upon which words, he snatches a knife in one hand, and clapping the
other into his breeches, cuts off one of the sausages, and daubs it into the
fire, crying, "He hoped now he should put an end to her jealousy." The
frightened wife took it to be the testimony of his manhood, and running to the
door, made a lamentable outcry among the neighborhood, "That her husband had
murdered himself, by cuting off his Do-little, and flinging it into the fire;
begging to rise, for the Lord's sake, for to come to her assistance."

The good women, much alarmed at such a frightful story, whipped on their under
petticoats and slip-shoes, and came running with more speed than if it had been
to a labor; in a minute the house was as full of tittle tattle of all ages, as
if god Priapus had erected his standard, and beat up for female volunteers to
fight under his banner; all shaking their heads, and beholding with sorrowful
eyes, the little spectacle in the fire, hissing, sputtering and broiling, as if
it had really been poor Pego spitting its last venom at that provoking sex,
which had often been the occasion of his downfall. The good man sitting all the
while grunting and groaning in his chair, as if he was just expiring: A cunning
old matron in the front of the female assembly, mistrusting there might be some
cheat in the matter, expressed herself to the rest of her sister gossips after
the following manner, "Come, come, neighbors, I think it is highly necessary
we should enquire into the truth of this unhappy business." And having spoken
these words, she popped her hand into his cod-piece, where she felt the rest of
the sausages, upon which she shook her head, and fetching a deep sigh, cried
out, "I vow to God, neighbors, he has certainly unmanned himself, and has cut
so great a gash in the bottom of his belly, that his guts are tumbled into his
breeches;" which occasioned the good man to burst into open laughter, and at
last to discover the whole secret, that the talkative congregation might be
undeceived, and return home to their warm bed, and there with their husbands,
fall to the old trade of basket-making, which they accordingly did, leaving the
pre-supposed Gelding to convince his Whither do you go, that he had more wit in
his anger, than to revenge himself of an ill tongue, by burning his peace maker.

The Watch-maker and the Constable.
A WATCH-MAKER, who was much given to wind up the springs of life above the
common pitch, with a cheerful bottle, he happened one night to tarry so long
over his tipple, that the midnight monarch at Ludgate had got the start of him,
and resumed his elbow throne before the other had quitted his tavern chair; so
that having a little overloaded himself with liquor, as he was staggering
through the gate, he had a verbal summons from the watch, to reel before the
constable, who made the accustomary enquiry into what occasion he could have to
drink so much and to stay out so late? The watch-maker hickup'd an answer as
well as he could, telling the constable flatly, though not very plainly, "That
good wine, and good company, were the chief motives that induced him into his
error." "Pray, friend," further added Mr. Conniwoble, "of what trade are you?"
"A watch-maker," replied the other. -- "Odds heart," says her Majesty's
representative to his body guard, "suppose this man should have a charge of
watches about him, and happen to loose them now he is in drink, who knows but
he may lay them to our charge." Then turning to his drunken respondent, asked
him, if he had ever a watch about him? Who looking round him, replied, "Yes
truly and a constable too; I wish the devil had them all." "Well, friend," says
the constable, "you may go about your business, for if you have any watches
about you, I find, you have wit enough to secure them; and so farewell to thee."

The Waterman and the drowned Dog; or the Gentleman cozened of his Sausages.
A GENTLEMAN who lived at Greenwich, having business at London, and being a
lover of sausages, coming by a wise's house who was eminent for making them, he
furnished himself with a couple of pounds in a sheet of brown paper, which he
designed to carry home for his own eating. When he had dispatched the affair
that called him to town, he returned to Tower Stairs, in order to take boat for
Greenwich. When he came to the waterside, finding he had the advantage of the
tide, being a man of no prodigality, he contented himself with a skuller. The
genleman boarding his wherry, sat himself down, and (...) sausages behind him;
but the paper not being tied, began to open a little by degrees, so that the
waterman, who was an arch fellow, by a glance of his eye, discovered what his
fare had provided to regale himself, but took not the least notice of them,
that the gentleman might not mistrust he had any knowledge of what was
contained in his little bundle. By and by they happened to overtake a huge dead
mastiff floating upon the water with his skin off, and his flesh rendered by
putrefaction, of as many colors at the rainbow. The waterman looking earnestly
upon the stinking carrion, shook his head, and scratched his ears, and showed
all imaginable signs of his great uneasiness; which the fare observing, could
do no less than take notice of, and asking him, "If that dog had ever been his,
that he seemed so much concerned at the sight of him." The waterman answered
him, "No, but he could wish he was his now. and that he would willingly excuse
him his fare, if he would be so kind as to let him go back, to take him up in
the stern of his boat." "Z -- ds," says the gentleman, "he will stink so
confoundedly, it will be enough to give me the plague; besides, I cannot
imagine what the devil thou can propose to do with him." "Ah! master, if I
had but him in my boat, I would desire no other fare to day; if my wife had him
but at home, he would be worth, at least, half a piece to us." "Prithee
friend," says the gentleman, "be so kind as to let me know what use thou should
put him to; I have a great desire to be satisfied." The waterman seemed
backward telling him, "It was a secret, and if it should be publicly known, it
would be the ruin of his family." The gentleman grew still the more importunate
to have his curiosity satisfied, giving such assurances of his secrecy in the
matter, that in short the waterman told him, "His wife made sausages, and that
he had lately found by experience, that dog's flesh, which had been sodden
about a month in the river, after it was well cleansed with salt and water, put
in amongst her pork, made the tenderest and best sausages in the world; and
that his wife, since her discovery of this secret, had got such a reputation in
what she pretended to, that she served most of the gentry's houses about
Greenwich."

The nastiness of this story put the gentleman into such a hawking and spitting
condition, as if he had been in a salivation; that when he came to his landing
place, he very fairly walks out of the boat, and leaves the sausages behind
him: The waterman lets him pass on a little way, and then taking them up in his
hand, calls after him, "Sir, sir, you have left your sausages behind you." "Ay,
ay, replies the gentleman, I know it well enough, thou may even take them,
and a pox take thee; the plague take thy wife, and the devil take the dog for I
shall never eat sausages more for fear they should be of your wife's making."
So away trudged the gentle, man, and left his supper to the waterman.

The distressed Seamen: or, the Boat 's Crew that supped in the Whale's Belly.
A JOLLY seaman happening into the company of some romancing travelers, very
confidently affirmed the following story, viz "The last voyage, (says he) I
took, was in a small vessel, called the Sparrow's Nest, bound directly to
Jamaica, where we lay in harbor about six weeks before we got her freighted.
From thence we were consigned back to a merchant in London; and the day before
we sailed, we took on board an old woman, as a passenger, who for many years
had kept a bawdyhouse in Port Royal, till she had successfully acquired by the
industry of the tail, the value of 2000 l. which she had changed into Spanish
gold, and had brought it on board with her in a small escritoir, being very
desirous of spending her latter days in England, that when she died might lay
her bones to rest in her own country, we weighed anchor, with the wind at west
and by south, getting clear of the land without any difficulty; and scudded
merrily on till we made Cuba, the Isle of Pines, the Cape Florida, and so
entered the gulf: But before we got through, (as ill fortune would have it) a
plank happened to start, and we sprung a leak so fast, that, notwithstanding
our pumps, we had four feet water in the hold in less than an hour's time, so
that we had no hopes left of saving ourselves, but by betaking ourselves to the
boat, which accordingly we did; taking int he compass, and such biscuit and
fresh water as we could venture to carry along with us. The old woman begged
hard that we would take in her box of money, which, on second thoughts, we
yielded to, not knowing how useful it might prove to us, if we should chance to
be driven on shore amongst the Florida Indians. We were in all but eight hands
besides the old woman, who was as penitent for all her past crimes, as an old
thief going to the gallows. Thus, exposed to the rage of the merciless ocean,
we depended wholly upon providence to protect us; rowing by turns, keeping on
our right course, by the direction of our compass, having nothing but the dread
of destruction before our eyes, unless by some unexpected miracle prevented.
The remainder of the day we spent in labor at our oars, till at last night
drew on, having neither ship nor shore in sight from whence to expect safety;
but fortune favoring us with little wind and a calm, sea, we thought it
necessary to take so sair an opportunity to refresh our bodies with a little
rest, that we might be the better able to strive against the hardships of
tempestuous weather if it should happen. Accordingly we drew cuts who should
set at the helm, and look out for a sail, or awake the rest, if any danger
should arise, and who should the lot fall upon but myself: A greeably I took my
post, while the rest endeavored to compose themselves to sleep; who being much
tired with the day's fatigue, fell all to snoring in a very little time: they
had not long got the start of me, but I grew so very drowsy that I could not
forbear nodding, and at last dropped into as sound a sleep as any of them; so
that death had now an advantage to have catched us napping.

How many hours we continued in this silence, I cannot tell; at last one
awakes, and finds it so very dark, that he could neither see moon, star, sky or
boat; nor could he perceive the boat had any motion as was usual; with that he
alarms the rest, who began to rub their eyes, and endeavored to look about
them, but could not so much as see their hands, "Bless me, said, I, it is a
dark long night, I believe we shall never see day again." Another takes his
oar, and claps it overboard, "W -- ds, faid he, we are cast ashore in some
creek, where the tide has left us; for the devil a drop of water is there about
the boat." "For God's sake, says the old woman, set me on shore, and give me my
box; I care not where I am, if it be but upon dry land." "Prithee, said I,
strike a light that we may see who and who is together." Which was accordingly
done, upon which we found ourselves pent up in a little place, but where we
could not think nor imagine. The old woman seeing no water about her, was over
hasty to get upon dry land, as she thought, and scrambled over the gunnel of
the boat? at which interim one of the sailors, being a little more circumspect
than ordinary, happened to espy the entrails of some creature or other hanging
over his head. "Z -- ds, says he we are got into a butchers shambles, I think,
for here is a delicate pluck hangs: we have had no fresh provisions for a good
while, by my lord and my lady, I Will have a good slice of the liver." He then
drew out his knife, and cut off about two pounds, upon which we were shot out
as swift as an arrow from a bow, through a narrow passage, and found ourselves
again upon the sea, and no land near us, it being of a sudden broad day light,
and the sun almost upon the meridian, as we found after by our observation. We
were all strangely startled and surprised wondering from whence we came, or
what place that could be from whence we were ejected with such a rapid force.
At last looking round us we espied a monstrous whale which occasioned us to
think he had gorged us in our sleep, and was provoked by the wound in his
liver, to throw us up again. But as fortune would have it we brought the money
along with us and left the old bawd behind, for the whale to spue up at another
opportunity.

The Lover's fortunate Adventure; or, the young Ones too cunning for the old
Ones.
A YOUNG Gentleman of Hackney, known by the name of 'squire Suck-bottle, made
it his endeavor to procure a match with Sir Thomas Closepurse's daughter. In a
little time he made a considerable progress in his design, and had gained both
the affections and consent of the young lady before he had proposed any treaty
with her father, who hearing of the intrigue between Suck-bottle and his
daughter, was so highly enraged at his clandestine proceedings, that he
forewarned him from his house, and as a more secure prevention from the match,
confined his daughter close prisoner in her own apartment. The young 'squire
being deeply concerned at the severe usage of a Roman lover, went by midnight
when all things were hush and silent, to Closepuse's habitation where by the
assistance of a friend, he raised a ladder, and mounted himself upon the leads
of the house and knowing her lodgings, dropped a letter down the chimney, to
give her notice he would make her a visit the next night the same way himself;
which letter in the morning the lady found with unexpressible satisfaction.

According to the time prefixed, the 'squire, with the assistance of two trusty
friends, went in order to accomplish his intrigue. The engine he had prepared
to shoot the chimney being a rope and a basket, by which means he was conveyed
safely through the sooty gulf, at the bottom of which the panting lady was
ready to receive him in her joyful^ arms.

The signal to be given when his friends should pull him up, was a jog with the
rope. Such a familiarity had already passed between them, that they lost no
time in courtship, but prepared themselves for those joys to which they hasted
with equal eagorness. They had no sooner leaped into their downy oli^sium, but
the braces of the ticking began to celebrate the pleasures of the night with
their accustomary music, which was unhappily over heard by her lady mother in
the next room, who waking her husband, told him, "She was sure somebody was got
to bed to her daughter." Upon which Sir Thomas leaps up in a wonderful haste,
takes the key of his daughter's chamber out of his pocket, which he would not
entrust with any but himself, and gropes his way to the door. The lovers having
done with their first course, and being laid down to take a little breath,
happened to hear the old gentleman sumbling at the keyhole; upon which the
daughter, through a great presence of mind, skips nimbly out of the bed, sets a
chair between the bed and the chimney, kneels down, and with abundance of
seeming fervency fell to prayers; and just as her father opened the door
softly, she was in this part of her devotion; "I beseech thee make me a comfort
to my father's gray hairs, increase his riches, advance him to honor, and may
he live to the age of Mathusalem." The old dad was so highly pleased with his
daughter's piety and kind supplications for her aged father, that he took no
notice, and would by no means disturb her, but gently shut the door and
returned to his bedfellow, giving her a sharp reproof for her evil opinion of
their dutiful and godly child.

Having by this stratagem prevented a discovery, the lovers renewed their joys,
the old lady her jealousy, who arose, took the key, and would go herself to be
satisfied: who entered the chamber with such silence, that the busy lovers
heard her not till she stumbled at the chair, and by lucky accident fell into
the basket, which jogged the rope, and gave the signal. The anglers above
thinking they had caught the right fish, pulled up; the old lady roared, but
still they hauled, till at last finding their mistake, took her out of the
basket in a fit, and laid a second time, and drew up him they fished for,
making all a clever escape, free from any detection: leaving the matron of the
family upon the leads, who recovering from her fright, shook of her trance, and
making a lamentable catterwauling, raised the family to her assistance; who
were wonderfully amazed to find their lady in the condition of a chimney
sweeper; and she being unable to give any account how she was conveyed thither,
it was conjectured by her husband as a just judgment to punish her for her evil
conceptions of their innocent and righteous daughter.

The pleasing Revenge; or, the Brewer's Son overmatched by the Weaver's
Daughter.
THERE was a rich weaver in Spittalfield, (which is news in the very place,
because they are generally very poor), who had but one child, and that a
daughter, The old gentleman being a fat man, was full of dropsy and ill
humors, and withal very lethargic. His daughter being aptudent young woman
behaved herself with duty and tenderness to her sick father, that he could not
endute to think of her marrying whilst he lived; having buried his wife, and
could have no body, as he thought, that would nurse and attend him with such
diligence as his kind and obedient daughter: Who indeed, though a good humoured
creature, was blessed but with few external charms to render her inviting. An
arch unlucky blade who was son to a neighboring brewer, using to take delight
in jesting with the female sex, pretended to court her, and made her believe he
designed to make her his wife; carrying on the matter to so great a height,
that the morning was appointed on which they were to be married at St. Pancras
church, he promising to meet her at a certain hour in the churchyard, and to
bring the ring and a license along with him, the whole proceeding being without
the knowledge of the father.

When he had thus carried on the jest almost to the last period, he tells what
he had done to an acquaintance, who was a man of a comely stature, though of a
mean fortune, and knowing she was the only daughter of a rich and infirm
parent, presently bethought himself of a probable method of converting this
project to his own interest, but acquainted not the other of his design for
fear of a disappointment. His friend having told him the morning and hour, and
that he intended not so much as to meet her, but let her wait in the fields by
herself, under the dissatisfaction of so great a disappointment: The other
considering, when thoughts of wedlock are once raised in a woman, too
revengeful passion such base usage must in all probability kindle, would so rob
her reason, that she could not weigh things with such discretion as to with
stand his importunities, so that he ventured, hap hazard to take out a license
and buy a ring; and walks about half an hour before the time to Pancras, goes
into a house, and takes up a convenient room where he might observe the walks
and motions of his proposed help mate.

According to the time, the maiden came fired with thoughts of that happy state
into which she was about to enter; but found no lover (as she expected) to
receive her. She waited a little time with patience; thinking, through the
error of the clock, she might be before the hour. But by that time, she had
waited about half an hour, which seemed as tedious as an age, she began to show
in her face some signs of disorder; then her unknown lover thought it time to
give his courtship a beginning. Accordingly he goes down to her and courteously
gives her a morning salutation, and tells her, "he came on purposs, through the
respect he had for her, to inform her how unmanly and base an affront was put
upon her;" which so greatly enraged her, that her eyes rained showers on her
snowy breasts vexation having turned her pleasing hopes into sighs and sadness;
he then began to express his own affections for her, and breach by little and
little his design, giving her all the verbal testimonies of his love
imaginable; using all necessary protestations to assure her he would prove one
of the best of husbands, and conform to all things where she would place her
case and satisfaction; till at last the maid, prudently considering the
disgrace of being thus served, and what a blot it would be upon her reputation,
when published amongst the neighborhood, consents to his request, and they
were married. She obliging him to keep it silent for a time, till she should
take a seasonable opportunity to pacify her father. Then, after a little time
spent over a small repast, they parted, The first news this married virgin
heard when she went home, was, that her uncle was dead in the country, who had
no children of his own, and had left her 400 l. which the brewer's son hearing,
came within two or three days to beg pardon; and to endeavor to excuse the
rudeness he had committed; she seemingly forgave him, and appointed him a
second time to meet her at the same place, which on his side was then designed
in good earnest. But to return his kindness, she hires one of her father's
journeyman, who was a stout fellow to go and thresh him round the church yard
as it is said the devil does his wife in rainy weather when the sun shines,
which the fellow did accordingly. The victim came running in a great passion to
his mistress and demanded the reason why she had so served him, who told him,
"As he went to be married, she hoped he had met with his match." and so
dispatched him. The old man hearing the story in a little time after, was so
pleased with the witty revenge of his daughter, that he reconciled himself to
her marriage, and received her husband into the house, where they all now live
very comfortably together.

The Thieves too cunning for the Bailiffs: or, one gang of rogues outwitted by
another.
AN unhappy gentleman (who by thoughtless management and dilatory execution of
his own affairs) having reduced a plentiful estate to a slender subsistence,
and being in danger of a judgment, griped into the talons of an unmerciful
miser, thought the safest measures he could take in securing himself from the
raw nous catch poles (those blood hounds or jack alls, who hunt down the prey
for that tyrannic beast, an usurer) was to quit the town, and make a general
trial of his relations in the country, hoping their flowing generosity might a
little repel the current of his ebbing fortune, which must of necessity prove
otherwise impetuous. His wife and a fervent he leaves in town behind him, in a
house of his own, very well furnished, being the only remains of a considerable
patrimony. He had not absented himself from home above two or three days, but
thirty in the hundred, by some busy neighbor was informed of it, who went and
entered up his judgment, takes out execution, and dispatches his emissaries to
the speedy destruction of his debtor: about this time, some thieves having
knowledge of the gentleman's absence, were contriving which way to rob the
house; to accomplish which, lurking about it one evening to make their
entrance, and the careless maid leaving open the back door, while she stepped to
the bakehouse, one of the rouges slipped in, having agreed with his
confederates, to conceal himself in the house till midnight, and then to let
them in, to finish heir design, with the less fear of danger or interruption.
The cunningest of the theives having proceeded so far as to get safe footing
within doors, stepped up stairs undiscovered, and hides himself in an old chest
which stood by the bed side of a well furnished chamber, which no body lay in:
by this time, the other rogues, the bailiffs, I mean, were got to the
fore-door, consulting by what means they should get admittance to serve their
execution, (whilst the poor gentlewoman and her maid were totally ignorant of
either danger) at last they agreed one should knock, and as soon as the door
was opened; rush in by violence, and secure the door for the rest to follow,
which accordingly was done, and their office executed, to the great affliction
and surprise of both the mistress and her servant, the rogue (who, for
distinction's sake, we must call thief) above stairs, who lay as silent in his
chest, as a sturdy Greek in the belly of the Trogan horse, began to be a little
startled at the sorrowful cries and disturbances he heard below stairs thinking
himself now not quite so safe as a thief in a mill; and opening his iron bound
hut (which was indeed made with a design to keep out rogues and not conceal
any), he gave his ears such an advantage of their voices, that he made shift to
discover by their talk, the whole business, resolving still to execute his
roguery as successfully as the liberty stealers had done theirs. So down again
he lay to meditate upon his good work, and consider of the best means to effect
it with the least danger. The cannibals below flairs, according to their usual
civility, turned the gentlewoman and maid out of doors, who were forced to be
beholden to a neighbor for a lodging, whilst these tail pieces of the law, who
bring up the rear of destruction, were devouring the provisions of the
distressed, who had nothing but Providence to trust to for the next meal; some
of these Egyptian caterpillars at night went home, leaving two well armed men
to keep possession, who, about ten o'clock went to bed, making choice of that
room for a lodging where the aonester man of the three lay buried in antiquity;
waiting with patience for the hour of his resurrection. About eleven o'clock he
ventures to open his chest, as far as an oyster does his shell, to receive new
breath, and heard by their snoaring, they were in a fine condition for the
devil to fetch them; out he rises from his dark and uneasy confiner, cramped
and crippled like a London prentice just delivered from his Guild Hall penance;
but stunk as bad as a dying snuff in the socket of a dark lanthorn, for fear
the prying Iscariots should have peeped into his wooden territories, knowing
nothing was more likely, than for one rogue to catch another: But being now
pretty well past that danger, he creeps to the bed side, and seeurcs their
arms, which were swords and braces of pistols, then goes down stairs, lets in
his confederates, were five more, delivering to them the particulars of what
had past, whose first business was to tonguetye the double tongued vipers, who
might otherwise prove as dangerous as a snake in the grass: which when they had
done by the assistance of their gags, and had bound those unmerciful hands
which had drawn many a poor wretch to prison by the collar, they ransacked the
house, but had so much mercy, considering the present ciroumstances of the
gentleman, and the unhappiness of his family, that they were contented with a
small booty, consisting only of a little plate and linen, which they sent off
by one man; the other five, to revenge the hard usuage of the gentlewoman and
her maid, took the two disturbe^ of human quiet and placed them upon each other
in the chest: and having extorted from them before, a confession of who had
employed them, the thieves, like so many bearers carrying an alms house corpse
without the ornament of either parson, clerk, pall, or relations, conveyed them
to the plaintiff's back door, which, by the help of their pick look
instruments, they opened: and a^ careless as our parochial supporters of the
dead, gave them a toss from their wearied shoulders into the plaintiff's
garden, instead of a more methodical burying-place, where they left them a^
contentedly as our corpse tumblers do their brethren of morality, when they fly
from the churchyard to receive the reward of their labor.

The gentleman having made a successful journey, happened to return the next
morning, and finding all things in such a distraction, conceived by his wife's
relation of the matter he was greatly abused; to regulate which, he makes an
immediate visit to his money-loving creditor, (with a sum in his pocket to
satisfy* the judgment) who gave him a morose How do you for a welcome, and
afterward took him into the garden to discourse their business, where they
found the chest, to the great surprise of both; upon which the gentleman taxed
him with a confederacy in the robbery, which the maggots in the nut-shell
hearing, made such a bustle, that occasioned a great surprise in both plaintiff
and defendant, who opened the coffer and found two naked mutes, (who, indeed,
never did deserve the use of either tongues or raiment) but being released from
their long sufferings, and finding where they were, made them concur with the
gentleman's opinion; and, to excuse them selves, were ready to swear the
benefactor was actually in the robbery; which the gentleman taking the
advantage of, frightened his creditor, with threats of warrant, constable,
justice, jury and a halter, till, at last he made him (though with privacy)
compound the felony, by a general release, and satisfaction for his goods. So
that by this fortunate accident, and the assistance of his kind relations, he
was restored to his former prosperity, and ever since makes this the motto of
his arms.

Knaves by a rebound are often bit;
To bite the biter is not fraud, but wit.
Intrigue upon intrigue: Or, tha widow become mother to her gallant, and the
younger brother father to the elder.
A BRISK airy gentleman belonging to one ot the inns of courts, happened to
make his courtship to a rich elderly widow, who had a pretty young girl to her
daughter that thought herself as capable of matrimony as her mother; when the
gentleman had repeated his visits often enough to grow a little familiar; he
found all the agreeable encouragements he could reasonably expect from a person
whose fortune was much superior to his own. But the daughter looking upon her
mother's humble servant with more than ordinary respect thought it abundance of
pity so youthful and so handsome a gentleman, for the sake of a little money,
should bury his juvenile years in the grave of an old woman, when herself would
be very glad to cherish him in the embraces of a young one. The gentleman had
not long continued his courtship, but he found sufficient reasons to suspect
that he had not only worked himself into the widows love, but also into the
affections of the daughter; and began to consider, that the old woman was much
the better fortune, yet the daughter would prove the more agreeable match, and
that what she wanted in fortune would be supplied more to his satisfaction by
her youth and beauty besides, knowing her to be the only child, thought she
must come in at last for the effects of the mother, in case that he could but
be subtle enough to divert her from matrimony. Upon these considerations he
resolved to alter his first resolution and only for the future to make external
courtship to the mother in order to procure more favorable opportunities of
bringing his real design upon the daughter to its intended issue.

The better to carry on this intrigue without the mother's suspicion, he though it
it necessary to acquaint his younger brother with the business. that now and
then when occasion required he might prove an assistant in the matter.

After this manner he proceeded with the old gentlewoman till he had stolen
reasonable opportunities enough to convince the daughter of his affections for
her and to assure her that he only pretended courtship to her mother on purpose
to now and then enjoy a lucky moment of making known the extraordinary passion
he truly had for herself. The younger brother, who was a notable sharp witted
Gentleman and a very, personable man, reflecting one morning in his bed, upon
the foul practice of his brother to gain his ends by disappointing and
deceiving the old gentlewoman, began to think it could be no crime in himself
to take the advantage of his brother's fallacy, and at once make his own
fortune, and do justice the widow, without hindering his brother from effecting
his design upon the daughter.

Accordingly he resolved to act a cunning part, and to neglect no opportunity
of ingratiating himself with the mother, that when she became sensible of his
brother's deceit, he might be ready to supply the disappointment by the offer
of his own service; which he was in hopes, if rightly managed, would be
accepted. The widow having great confidence in the integrity of her sham
pretender, was mighty respectful to the young gentleman upon his brother's
account, so that in a little time he was as familiar in the family, as the
daughter's admirer, who all alone made his younger brother acquainted with
every tittle of his proceedings.

When the elder brother had worked the young lady up to a compliance, a license
was taken out, and the morning was appointed for the priest to say grace to
that love banquet, which both longed for with an equal appetite. The younger
brother was made privy to the happy hour, and engaged to attend the solemnity
in the office of a father, which he performed accordingly when the time came,
and smiled in his own sleeve to see the matter consumated; which was no sooner
over, but he made an excuse to dispatch a little business, promising to be with
them again at dinner.

No sooner had he got his liberty, but away he posted in all haste, to acquaint
the old gentlewoman, "What a dishonorable trick his brother had putupon her,
and how undutiful her daughter had been in complying to be a partner in so base
and treacherous an intrigue." The widow, who had never so much as suspected the
integrity of her gallant, was so amazed and so confused at the strange tidings,
that for a little time she was as stark mad as a raving bed lamite, till her
passion was pretty well spent, and then the young gentleman, to spur on her
revenge, told her, "That his brother's further design was to divert her if
possible, from matrimony in hopes that her own fortune, upon her death, might
descend to her daughter, so that he should become at last master of all her
riches, as well as the fortune already settled upon her daughter, and that this
was the main consideration that induced him to marry her daughter after so many
pretentions to herself." This subtle insinuation so inflamed her malice, that
she vowed, rather than they should be one shilling the better for what she had,
she would marry a cobbler, or any rake hall, that she was sure would spend it
every groat." To which replied the young gentleman, "Madam, a person of your
worth, comeliness and discretion, can never have occasion to dispose of
yourself to either a mean man or a spend thrift, could you conceive me to be a
person worthy of so great a happiness as so good a wife, I should think it a
blessing to myself and family, that you would give it into my power, to repair
the injury and dishonor which my brother has done you; and I assure you
further, madam, that if you make me your husband, it will prove a revenge upon
him, a blessing to me and I promise you, I will do ail that in an honest
gentleman lies to make it a happiness to yourself." "Well says the old
gentlewoman, lest time and delay should make you prove as great a knave as your
brother I will seek out for no other husband nor need any further courtship;
but in the revengeful mood I am now in, I will run this minute, headlong to be
married."

The young gentleman expressed his utmost joy for her sudden resolution, so
immediately ordered a coach to be called and away they went first to make out a
license, and then to be married the very same morning, and at the same church,
and by the same minister who had joined the former couple. As soon as the
ceremony was over, the young bridegroom, by the consent of his bride, ordered
the coachman to drive to the same tavern where the treacherous pair had
provided their wedding dinner, and in they popped upon them just as the first
dish was brought upon the table; the daughter was ready to faint through fear,
the bridegroom bit his nails through madness; the mother upbraided the quondum
lover with baseness, her daughter with undutifulness; the elder brother taxed
the younger with treachery, whilst the greatest winner smiled in his sleeve, to
think that at one lucky hit he had made his fortune.

When their passions, as well as their victuals, were grown pretty cool, the
youngest bridgroom, who was a man of eloquence, made a pleasant speech that
unriddled the whole mystery, and went so far in the reconciliation of all
differences, that they sat down to victuals, and made one dinner serve for both
weddings: The elder brother at last submitting to call the younger father, and
the mother acknowledged the elder to be her son. So that by the help of mirth
and wine they became all friends: and each lived comfortably for the future,
with their own proper mates: and in process of time hammered out such a
promiscuous progeny that would puzzle the herald's office properly to
distinguish what relation they were to one another.

The dying wife's revenge; or, The husband paid in his own coin.
A FARMER's wife falling dangerously ill, was very importunate with her
husband, that he would grant her the liberty of making a will to dispose of her
wearing apparel. The good man, that his wife might go out of the world with a
safe conscience, seemed very willing to comply with her request; and that she
might be sure every thing should be bequeathed according to her own directions.
She thanked him heartily for this last kindness, acknowledging how good a man
he had always been to her and hoped he would ever prosper when she was under
ground, for his love and tender usage, both to her and her children, and so
begged him to fetch pen, ink, and paper, and she would give him instructions.
Away went the good man, at his wife's request, to muster up the materials; but
before he returned had the wit to consider it was a hard case, that her
clothes, which were very neat and good, should be given to a parcel of gossips,
away from her own children; and withal formed a project, as he thought, so to
deceive his wife, that she might die in peace, and yet save her apparel from
the thankless hands of a parcel of tippling tittle tattles. When he had thus
prepared himself, he returns with the scribbling instruments to his wife's bed
side, desiring her freely to impart her mind, promising that all things should
be perfor med accordingly; upon which she began her instructions after the
following manner, viz. "In the first place, give unto my beloved friend and
neighbor, goody Blowzen, my high crowned hat, and best red petticoat, for she
has been always ready to go and come upon all occasions both to me and mine.
The good man, instead of mentioning the benefit, writes, Tittle tattle for
that; and then desired his wife to proceed. "In the next place, says she, I
give and bequeath to my gammer Dowdy, my wedding gown and smock, for she is a
merry dame, and has made us all laugh many a junket." The good man writes,
Tittle tattle for that; and then defires the next item," Lastly, says she, I
give and bequeath my great clasped Bible, and my Whole Duty of Man to my dame
Camwell, for she is a religious woman, of whom I have learned more good over a
jug of strong beer, than ever I did of the parson, for all the tithes we have
given him; and that is all, I desire to dispose of from you. "Very well,"
replies the good man, and again, instead of the last item, sets down a Tittle
tattle for that. Well, wife, says he, now all things are ordered according to
your mind, I hope, you will die satisfied." "Yes yes, says she, I thank you, my
dear and loving husband. I bless God I can give up my ghost with a peaceful
conscience. Pray, stick the will up in the window, and then you may go and
fother the cattle." The good man, according to his wife's direction, left the
paper in the window; and after he had given her a comfortable word or two, away
he went about his business. No sooner was his back turned, but in came one of
her gossiping legatees, to pay her a visit; who entering the chamber, thus
accosted the sick woman, viz. "How do you now, Neighbor? I hope, by the grace of
God, you find yourself on the mending hand." "No, truly. Dame, answers the
dying gammer, I am not a woman of this world; I find, by the weakness of my
lungs and the faintness of my speech, I have but a short time to tarry among
you. But however, as you have been a good friend and neighbor, I have left you
something to remember me when I am gone. My husband, whom you know has been
always a kind and a loving man to me, has given me leave to dispose of my
wearing clothes among you, and has writ my will with his owe hand: yonder it
sticks in the window. Neighbor, you, I know, can read written hand; if you
please to look into it, you may see what legacy I have left you.

With that gammer Dowdy opens the unlucky testament, and discovers the waggery
"Alas!" Neighbor, says she, your husband has only jested with you, he has writ
dowo nothing but tittle tattle for that, tittle tattle for that, and tittle
tattle for that." "Has he served me so, cries the sick dame, now I am going out
of the world? Pray, neighbor, stick it up where you found it; I hope for all
this, to live long enough to be even with him. Pray, neighbor, leave me a
little to myself, for I expect my husband in every minute; and I have something
to say to him, that is not proper for any body to hear." So the gossip shed a
tear or two at parting, and, according to the others request, took her leave
for the present. By and by in comes the good man, and hobbling up to the sick
wife's chamber, asked her how she did? who answered, as if she was just
expiring, "O very bad; not a woman for this world: and therefore she had two or
three dying requests to him, which she hoped, he would particularly observe
when she was gone to her last home." Yes, that he would, to be sure, he most
faithfully promised, desiring her to speak her mind freely, that he might know
what they were, "In the first place, says she, I would have you to take
particular care of my son Robin, and breed him up to reading and writing, that
when he is a scholar good enough, he may be bound apprentice to a mereer: And
as for my son Ralph, I would have you breed him up to your own business,
husbandry: And as for my daughter Joan, I would have you keep her at home; to
milk the kine and look after the diary: But as to the red-headed girl (whom she
knew to be her husband's favorite) I say, as to her, you need not take much
care, because -- "Because what? says Roger, in a mighty passion, why not take
care of her?" "Because, replies the dying dame, she is none of yours."
"Adsheartily wounds, cries Roger, none of mine, you wicked baggage you, whose
is she then?" Tittle tattle for that, cries the good wife, tattle for that
knave, tittle tattle for that cuckold:" and so she died.

Thus we may see, at the last gasp of life,
How sweet revenge is to an angry wife;
If once they are injured, slighted, flamed or shamed;
When dying they will requite us, though they are damned:
Therefore forbear to vex them, for we find,
Like bees they wound, and leave their sting behind.
The wilful drunkard, Or, the-Shoe-maker made a cuckold by the devil.
A Jolly Crispin having a confounded scold to his wife, happened to come home
one night, at a late hour very much troubled with a drunken vertigo in his
noddle. He had no sooner entered the shop, but his angry help-mate, in a mighty
passion for his offense, began to spit out such provoking messes of maundering
broth, in the very teeth of her pot valiant spouse, that he swore, "Since he
could not be quiet at home, he would return from whence he came, and spend the
rest of the night, where he could be more easy." She still persisted in her
termagent spirit, and very aggravating words were tossed backwards and
forwards, till at last the difference grew too great for any present
reconciliation. A chimney sweeper coming by, who had pawned his brooms for an
evenings draught, over-hearing their course compliments, stood a little under
the eves to listen to the fray. The shoemaker at last grew so highly enraged,
that he swore he would go out again: and wrenched open the door in spite of his
wife's resistance, out he went, and away he staggered, she bawling after him in
these words viz. "Go, and be hanged, you rogue, since you will go, and may the
devil go with you." The chimney sweeper, when he heard the door open skuttled
away a little before the shoemaker, and stepped up into an alley till Crispin
was gone past him; then flinging his sooty sack which he had upon his shoulder
over his head like a hood that he might make the more unusual figure, he
trudged after the shoemaker, till he got just upon the heels of him. Crispin
hearing somebody come ratteling after, faced about, and by the light of the
stars discovered a strange black monster just at his very nose. "Who are you?"
says the shoemaker. "The devil. cries the chimney sweeper, "Pray, Mr. Devil,
says Crispin, what want you with me?" "Your wife sent me after you, cries the
chimney sweeper, to fetch you home?" "Home, cries Crispin, Pray Mr. Devil, to
which home; your home or my home?" To your home answers the chimney sweeper.
"Then by all the shoes in my shop says Crispin, I will not go, except you will
first carry my wife to your home, and then I Will go home presently." "Done says
the chimney sweeper, stay you here till I return, and I Will pack her off for you
instantly." "Done cries the shoemaker, do you perform your work, and I Will
perform my word." Away runs the chimney sweeper to the shoe-maker's house in
St. Martins, knocks at the door, to which comes the wife in her smock,
expecting it was her husband: The chimney sweeper, for fear of frightning her,
presently discovers himself, and tells her what a trick he had put upon her
husband, and upon what errand her spouse had sent him; and that if she would
but first let him make him a cuckold, he would engage to make him a good
husband forever after. Upon this condition the wife consented; and the business
being done with a jirk, he gave her directions how she should manage the
matter, and returned again to shoemaker, who waited with great impatience to
hear the success. "Well, says Crispin to the devil, as he thought, have you
done the business?" "Ay, ay, says the chimney sweeper, effectually, therefore
make haste home, for I forgot to shut the door after me." How did she behave
herself? says Crispin, did she not scold damnably?" "Confoundedly, cries the
chimney sweeper; she has already put hell in an uproar, and how long we shall
be able to keep her there the Lord knows." "Wounds, says the shoemaker, good
devil, keep her now thou have her, for if you let her come back again, I will
certainly hang myself." So bidding each other farewell, away went Crispin with
great joy to his own house: where the door was let a jar, and the wife stood
hid in a closet, above stairs accoring to the chimney sweeper's directions
Crispin when he had made all fast and secure, went up to the room where he used
to sleep, comforting himself with the great kindness the devil had done him;
and sitting down upon the bed side, began to undress, making himself merry with
a piece of an old ballad, which he thought very applicable to his present
happiness, viz.

I value not silver or Gold,
Now I am rid of a troublesome evil;
My Wife was a damnable scold,
But now she has gone to the devil.
Upon these words out bolts his wife upon him from the closet, with her hair
about her ears like a fury and her smock as black with the chimney sweepers
smuggling her, as if herself had been the devil crying out "You lie, you rogue,
I defy the devil and all his works, I will make you know, Sirrah, there is
never a devilin hell can master me, I am set on it; you may see by my pickel, I
was forced to struggle hard to overcome Satan, and since I have conquered the
devil. I am resolved I will master you. The poor shoemaker in the midst of his
jollity, was so sadly cowed at his tormentor's appearance, that he was forced
to cry parley, and acknowledge his wife was master both of Satan and him, for
he could have no power over her So upon Crispin's submission, his tongue
teasing fury put on a clean smock in order to invite her cozened Cuckold to the
buttered bun, which the chimney sweeper devil had left him for his supper, and
then tumbled into bed, where all past differe^^es were reconciled by the
matrimonial peacemaker.

The dead man's resurrection; or the Judge buried alive in his own Cellar.
ONE of the judges in king Charles the second's reign, being in the long
vacation at his country house in Holsworth in Suffolk happened upon too serious
reflection on some little juvenal miscarriages to fall into a deep fit of the
hypocondria insomuch that he fancied himself to be dead, and was so very
obstinate under the influence of his whimsical distemper that he would not be
persuaded to stir hand or foot, or receive any manner of sustenance, but what
was forced down his throat by syringes, or such like stratagems, till he had
brought his body into so low a condition, that had a lighted candle been in his
belly, his sides would have proved as a lanthorn; In this stubborn frenzy, he
lay upon his back, stretched out at his full length like a corpse, and as
motionless as a stone figure upon an old tomb, neither his physician nor his
family knowing what was to do with him. A famous High German doctor coming into
the town, attended with a pack of fools and rope dancers, in order to pick the
country people's pockets of a little money, hearing of so eminent a person
under this unaccountable indisposition took occasion, the first time that he
mounted the public theater, to mention this matter to his country chubs, who
were giving great attention to all the lies he could muster up to his advantage
telling them, "Their country physicians, were all fools and that the judge was
only troubled with the mulligrubs, and that if his lady would send for him, he
would undertake to bring him to speech, set him upon his legs, make him walk,
talk, eat, drink, piss shite, or do any thing in four and twenty hours time, or
else he would desire nothing for his trouble." This large promise of the
mountebank was soon communicated to the judge's lady who being a tender wife to
her husband, and willing to try every thing that might do him good, sent
immediately for the Dutch tooth-drawer, to consult him about the matter; who
told her positively, "He could soon cure him, if she should promise, he should
have a hundred guineas reward provided he had leave without interruption, to do
as he should think fit." The lady assured him, "He should have all the liberty
he desired to work the cure, and the reward he asked when he had performed it."
Both parties being agreed, the doctor sent his man for a joiner and a coffin,
as soon as the one had brought the other, up stairs they went, for the doctor
would not see his patient before he had got his tools ready. When every thing
was in order, in goes the doctor and lady, the rest tarried without, till
called for.

No sooner had the doctor cast an eye upon his sullen patient, but he presently
cries out to the lady, "Lord, Madam what mean you to send for a physician to
the dead man? For shame, keep him not above ground any longer. Upon my word
madam, he has been dead so long that he sti^ks again, and if you don't bury him
quickly, the very sc^nt of his corpse will breed a plague in your family:" "I
have had a coffin in the house some time, replied the lady, but was loath to
have him buried too s^on, for fear he should come to life again." "^y all
means, says the doctor let it be brought in, and order him to be nailed up with
all expedition." "Pray do^or, says the lady do you stay a little in the room,
for fear the rats should gnaw the co^ps and I Will step and order some of my
servants to bring in the coffin presently." The patient heard all this, and was
still too humoursome to break his silence; by and by comes the lady, and her
servants after with the c^ffin, who sat it down by the bed side, and then
according to the doctor's direction, wrapped their master up in a couple of warm
blankets and into the coffin they very orderly laid him, put on the lid, and
made a hammering over his head, as if they were nailing him up, he endured all
without either word or motion: and when he was thus enclosed, they ordered the
great bell of the church to ring out, that he might think, they were bearing
him to his last home the grave: instead of which they carried him down into his
own wine cellar where they s^t somebody to watch by him, till a good supper was
got ready; in the interim the doctor ordered his lady and her servants so to
disguise themselves in winding sheets, and such like dresses, that would best
represent a parcel of ghosts or spirits, the doctor making one amongst them;
when they were thus equipped, the doctor led the van of the hobgoblins, and
into the cellar they went, where they altered their voices as much as possible,
and fell into a merry extravagant chat, concerning the affairs of the upper
world, rattling the bottles and the glasses, extolling their happiness after
death, and drinking to the remembrance of those friends they had left behind,
the cloth being laid, in a little time down came supper, which they f^ll to
with all the seeming jollity imaginable.

As they were thus merrily eating and carousing, "What Is the matter, says the
doctor, with that melancholy ghost, that he does not rise out of his coffin? He
has been among us this fortnight, and he has not yet given us any of his
company: sure he is sadly tired with his journey out of the other world, for he
has had a plaguey long sleep after it: Prithee awake him, and ask him to eat a
bit with us, for he has had no refreshment since he has been in the Elysium."
With that one of the most frightful of the specter with a taper in his hand,
opens the lid of the coffin, and hallooing in his ears, "Mog Damnum Huggle
Duggle, deputy governor of the lower regi^ns desires your company to supper
with him" Upon which he raises his head to the edge of the coffin, and
beholding such a parcel of frightful figures feeding as heartily as so many
ploughmen; "Pray, says he, do dead men eat?" "Aye, aye, and drink too, says the
doctor, or how should they live else?" "Then, says the judge, if e^^ing ^e the
custom of this country, I will make my r^su^^e i^n, and pick a ^i^ ^i^h you."
(...) a hand, and ^o ^u^^^d hi^ (...) a seat at the table (...) s^s^^ (...)
^^am (...) ^l^d t^^n^d ^^at dead ^en (...) so merrily." "^ll may we be so
m^r^y, cri^^ the do^^or, for we live better here without money, than men in the
other world can for a thousand pound a year; for in short, we have every thing
and that for nothing." The Judge, who was a great lover of a little shoulder of
mutton, which his lady remembering, had got one ready at the fire asked them,
"if that country afforded any mutton?" "the best, r^pl^es the doctor, in all
the three worlds: Here fetch a hot shoulder presently; which by one of the
ghostly attendants, was done immediately; at which unexpecting sight, the Judge
was so well pleased, that he fell to and eat heartily.

When supper was over, they drank a cheerful glass to the memory of all, their
particular friends over their head till at la^^ he patient (being much weakened
with long fa^^ing) grew very much fuddled, so that they turned him again into
his wooden territories where he soon fell into a very sound sleep; during which
time they carried him up into his own rrom and put him again into his own bed,
where he rested very well, and his lady with him, till the next morning about
day light; and at last waking, he began to look about him, very strangely
surprised, which the lady perceiving, cried "Prithee, my dear, what is the
matter with thee?" "Lord love, says he, art thou there? Where are we?" "In your
own bed, replies the lady, in your own chamber, in your own house Where do you
think we should be?" "Then, says the judge, I have had one of the
unaccountablest dreams thas ever was heard of;" and falls to repeating all he
had seen over night, "Poh, Poh, says she, never mind such idle whimsies, but
think of what you can eat for breakfast." So up got my lady, and provided him
something that was comfortable, and from that time he was recovered of his
melancholy; so the mountebank had his reward, and the judge sat upon the bench
for several years after.

Reasons quite lost where melancholy rules,
The wisest men we see sometimes are fools.
OLD ENGLAND's EPITAPH,
HIC jacent England's glory wisdom, wit,
Oh! strange! all raised and buried in a Pit.
GILES JOLT.
GILES JOLT as sleeping in his cart he lay,
Some wagg^sh p^lf'rers stole his team away.
Giles wakes, and cries -- What Is here! Od^buddikns! what!
Why how now! am I Giles or am I not!
If he, l've lost six geldings to my Smart,
If not -- Odsbuddikns l've found a cart.
C^^^N OLD LADY'S MARRYING (...) YOUTH.
HARD is the lot of every childless wife
The thoughts of wedlock tantalize her life;
Troth, aged bride, in thee 'twas wisely done,
To choose a son and husband both in one.
FINIS.

