REMARKS ON SOME PRINCIPLES CONTAINED IN THE Presbyterian System, OR Confession
of Faith: LIKEWISE, REMARKS ON THE NECESSITY OF SUPPORTING Gospel Ministers,
ACCORDING TO Gospel Rules.

By THOMAS JOHNSON, OF PELHAM.

NORTHAMPTON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM BUTLER. 1799.

To the Reader.
AFTER mature deliberation on the presbyterian protestant principles, and Mr.
Oliver's strong attachment to the same, binding his adherents to them all the
days of their lives, have influenced the author to some degree of search, to
see if these things are so: and I profess to believe, that there are many
illustrated truths in that composition, called the presbyterian confession of
faith: and I profess to believe, that there are some great errors held forth in
said composition: and if the truths therein contained might be received without
that mixture of error, I had held my peace; but that not being the case,
although I have neither natural or acquired abilities sufficient to compose a
piece fit for the press, yet necessity constrains, yea, overpowers all
objections that lie in the way; for who, with their eyes but half open, would
not have their spirits moved, when they behold the learned superstitious bigots
leading their fellow mortals in an old crooked path? mean time recommending it
to be the best straight, yea, most perfect and only path that ever mortals
traveled in, that ever arrived to the heavenly country.

The sacred writings give an account of some wild gourds, sheared in a pot of
pottage; but before they eat, it was discovered: and one cries out, "O thou man
of God! there is death in the pot;" consequently would not eat till the danger
was removed. And did not the compilers of the presbyterian confession of faith
(although it appears to me more than probable that many of them were pious
godly men) gather wild gourds of error and shear them in with the word of
truth? And what man of God shall we cry to respecting this death being in the
pot? For although the presbyterian ministers may be called men of God, as
above, yet it is those very ministers that have gathered these wild gourds of
error, and sheared them in with the word of truth, and dealing it out for their
adherents to eat: But if we (after being alarmed of this wild gourd of error)
will sit down calmly and eat of this mixed pottage, yea, swear agreeably to the
presbyterian oath (by the great name of the Lord) that we will eat no other
pottage all the days of our lives, we may then fear there will be neither
prophet nor meat to heal this deadly poison: For it is dangerous shutting our
eyes against light, lest God in his righteous judgment close our eyes; lest we
should see light or come to the knowledge of the truth: and as I am attempting
to cast in my mite into the treasury of truth, in opposition to error, would
readily acknowledge my inability either natural or acquired, and feel myself
greatly embarrassed even in expressing my own ideas; but as a stammering child
can neither speak grammatical or systematical, yet a tender father receiving
the broken ideas of his child, overlooks all those imperfections of language;
so in like manner, I ask all, but in a special manner the learned, to overlook
all those imperfections that may appear in my manner of procedure: and when my
attempts to arrange or illustrate ideas systematically shall fail, then look in
a special manner to the ideas suggested. Was I possessed of abilities adequate
to the work which I have undertook, I might have conveyed my ideas in as plain
but smoother manner, which would be more agreeable to corrupt nature to
receive: but if any should think that I am too pointed with my charges against
the presbyterian principles or Mr. Oliver, as their advocate: To such I would
say, that in Paul's epistle to Titus, the apostle informs Titus of some
characters whose mouth must be stopped, because they had teached things that
they ought not. Wherefore, says the apostle, 'rebuke them sharply:' From which
we may infer, that when any erroneous doctrine is set up and boldly advocated,
by swearing to support and defend it, all the days of their lives, that such a
degree of pointed sharpness is necessary, as the nature of the error and
boldness of its advocates require; and in my judgment I have not exceeded the
bounds that the nature of the case requires: but of this, every one will judge
according to the light in which they view things in: but if the matter is true,
I trust that it will not be rejected for its plainness. King David was not
offended because of the plainness of the prophet, when he said 'thou art the
man:' but the Scribes and Pharisees was so offended when Christ told them plain
truth, that they rejected Christ, truth and all, and wilfully shut their eyes
against light; for which, God, in his righteous judgments, closed their eyes,
lest they should see light.

But without any further introductory remarks or apologies, I shall proceed to
point out some of those errors contained in the protestant presbyterian
confession of faith.

1st. THE twenty-third chapter of the confession of faith says, That the civil
magistrate has authority, and it is his duty, to take order, that unity and
peace be preserved in the church, that the truth of God be kept pure and
entire, that all blasphemies and heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and
abuses in worship and discipline prevented or reformed; and all the ordinances
of God duly settled, administered, and observed. For the better effecting
whereof, he has power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to provide
that whatsoever is transacted in them be according to the mind of God:

Now the first great query is, whether this power which the presbyterian
protestant acknowledges the magistrate to be clothed with, is of God or of
men? I presume it is of men; and the practice of the churches at large all
declare it to be of men. Moreover, Christ, the great Head and King of his
church, commissioned his apostles respecting the government of his church; and
withal warns them of the persecutions they would meet with; and tells them,
they should be brought before kings and rulers for his name sake: but if Christ
commissioned kings or magistrates according to the presbyterian protestant
religion, (declared in the aforesaid twenty-third chapter of the presbyterian
confession of faith, to call Synods and inspect them, and to approve or
disapprove, according as the magistrate found agreeable or disagreeable to the
word of God) from whence then would the persecution arise? Would a king
persecute himself, or any acting by his authority, at his call, under his
inspection and control? But the result of this question may be answered by the
defense that Christ made when the Scribes and Pharisees accused him with
casting out devils through beelzebub the prince of the devils. Christ confuted
them by showing them that if satan was divided against himself his kingdom
could not stand. Consequently if the civil magistrate is clothed with such
ecclesiastical authority as the presbyterians say he is, then it follows, that
if kings and rulers persecute the church, as Christ said they would, they are
divided against themselves; consequently could not stand.

2dly. The second article in the thirty-first chapter of the aforesaid
confession of faith (relative to the power of the civil magistrate calling
Synods) is explained by the declaration of the assembly at Edinburgh, August
twenty-seventh, sixteen hundred forty-seven, Session twenty-third; and the
explanation says, In point of government, that although in unsettled churches
a Synod of ministers may be called by the magistrate's authority and
nomination, without any other call to consult etc. and further says, that
although ministers may of themselves meet synodically in churches not
constituted, yet neither of these ought to be done in churches constituted and
settled: it being (say they) always free for the magistrate to advise with
Synods of ministers ordinarily, or being indicted by his authority; meantime
they say that if the magistrate withhold his consent, it is free to meet
synodically from intrinsical power received from Christ, provided nevertheless,
that the ministers first make the necessity of meeting known to the magistrate
by remonstrance and humble supplication.

This explanatory declaration appears calculated to blend the civil and
ecclesiastical power into one compound body; but rather gives the magistrate
the preeminence in ecclesiastical things: but as Nebuchadnezzar's image was
partly of iron and partly of clay, they would not mix together. So Christ being
a spiritual King, having a spiritual kindgom, his laws for the government of
his church will not mix with the temporal laws of civil government; and the
officers appointed for each government are as distinct as the laws;
consequently the officers of Christ's church are not by virtue of their office
to interfere with those things that concerns the civil magistrate, neither may
the civil magistrate (by virtue of his office in the civil department)
interfere upon the office of a ruler in Christ's church; but each one according
to their several stations, whether in church or state in subjection to each
other in the lawful execution of their several offices, rendering to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.

Objection. There is nothing contained in the aforesaid chapters (relative to
the civil and ecclesiastical power being blended together) but what is
agreeably to the example of Godly kings under the law.

Answer. There was many ways taken by the magistrate under the law to enforce
true religion, has no authority under the gospel. And why should we shut our
eyes against the more clear light of the gospel, and seek for light in the more
dark dispensations of the law? When the prophets under the law, beheld the
coming of Christ, they spoke of him as a great light, in a special manner to
the Gentile world: and as this great light has come and committed the keys of
his kingdom, and the government of his church to his ministers; promising to be
with them to the end of the world. And as this great light continues to shine
in the gospel with great conspicuity, for a guide to the churches feet, and a
lamp to her path, how injurious must it then be to the great lawgiver, to
traffic away some of the laws of Christ's house to purchase the strength of
civil government in the church? But as it was with Jeroboam in the beginning of
his reign, so it was with the presbyterians in the beginning of their
presbyterian reign. I shall attempt in some instances to draw the parallel.

And first, Jeroboam with the ten tribes was not willing to subject themselves
to the burden of Rehoboam's little finger, being thicker than his father's
loins, which induced the ten tribes to revolt. So in like manner the
presbyterians were not willing to submit themselves to the burden of the
liturgy rights and ceremonies of the church, which induced them to revolt, and
frame a new code of presbyterian laws.

2dly. Jeroboam was jealous of the weakness of his kingdom, unless he would
prevent the people from going to Jerusalem to worship. Consequently he set up
golden calves in Dan and Bethel, which became a sin. So in like manner the
presbyterians were jealous of their weakness in their revolution; unless they
could frame a code of laws by which the civil and ecclesiastical government
would (in many respects) be cemented together into one compound power, which
being affectually done, became a great sin.

3dly. Jeroboam united with his priests, not only made laws to punish
nonconformists, but did lay wait for them, to catch them, as a snare in Mizpah,
and a net spread in Tabor. So in like manner the presbyterian king, and the
priests being united together, made and established laws calculated to catch
all that would not swear to conform to every point in the presbyterian
confession of faith, and to conform in every point, would in some respects, be
like conforming to the calves in Dan and Bethel.

4thly. As each party was aspiring after united strength in their
establishments, let us now view it in its nature and consequences. It is
evident that Jeroboam's calves which he set up at Dan and Bethel, became a sin
which destroyed his kingdom forever: so that his supposed strength became his
certain weakness. So in like manner it is evident that the presbyterians
aspiring after great strength, blended the ecclesiastical and civil powers
together, which has become a great sin. But let us view the consequences. The
civil authority that was supposed to be a great strength to this building, soon
became its opposer. The covenants that bound all together by solemn oaths, are
committed to the flames. The established laws that were all in her behalf are
no more; and thus the united building is fallen, and great was the fall
thereof. But still some continue to espouse presbyterianism in all its parts;
nevertheless, they have fallen into strife among themselves; some say that I am
of Paul, others say that I am of Apollos, and some say I am of Cephas; and
those that are of Paul, have excommunicated those of Apollos and the Apollians
treat the Cephians as the Jews did the Samaritans, viz. to have no dealings
with them; and there are more symptoms of division, but I cannot as yet
ascertain the name by which they shall be known; but some of the Apollians
fraimed a new confession of faith, leaving out some of those errors that were
in the old; but the aged fathers that had sworn by the great name of the Lord,
to continue all the days of their lives in the obedience and doctrine of the
old confession, would not receive this new confession for their oath sake, and
the compilers of the new confession, could not swear to the errors of the old
confession for their conscience sake. So the contention was great;
nevertheless, for peace sake, conscience yielded, the old confession was
reinstated, and peace restored.

Moreover, as this new confession has made its appearance among the Cephians,
probably it will have some effect upon their minds. But they appear to be in a
lukewarm state: our minister in his formal way of baptizing, appears to have a
venerable regard for the old confession of faith, binding all in greater or
lesser degrees, to adhere to the doctrines therein contained. Nevertheless, in
some other respects he practically pays but little attention to it. Some of our
aged fathers recommend it to be the best system of divinity ever composed since
the days of the Apostles. Some approve of great doctrinal points illustrated in
said confession, but abhor those errors interwoven therewith. Some of our young
men have bound themselves to it, but never see it, nor had the knowledge of
what was in it; and some, gallio like, care for none of these things.

3dly. I proceed to make some remarks on what is said to be required in some of
the commands relative to hope, sorrow, prayer and thanksgiving in the name of
Christ; reading, preaching and hearing the word; the administration and
receiving of the sacraments; church government and discipline, the ministry and
maintenance thereof, and religious fasting; with many other gospel injunctions
of the same kind, which the presbyterian confession of faith, was first
revealed and enjoined upon Adam, for the rule of his obedience. For the proof
of this assertion, I shall consider the import of the 92d, 93d and 98th
questions in connection with the expositions of the first and second
commandments in the larger catechism.

And first, in the 92d question it is asked, what did God at first reveal unto
man as the rule of his obedience?

Answer. The rule of obedience revealed to Adam in the state of innocence, was
the moral law, including the special command.

The 93d question explains what the moral law is, namely, a declaration of the
will of God to mankind, and the 98th question says, that this moral law is
summerily comprehended in the ten commandments; then the compilers of this
presbyterian confession of faith proceed to show what is required in the
aforesaid commands; now provided the doctrine in the 92d, 93d and 98th
questions, is true, then, if there can be found any thing said to be required
in the exposition of the command that never was revealed to Adam in the state
of innocence, as the rule of his obedience; then the exposition is erroneous,
and here let it be noted; that, for brevity sake, I shall only repeat such part
of the answers to the following questions as contain the contradiction in the
104th question; it is asked, what is required in the first commandment? Answer.
Hope in God, and be sorrowful when in any thing he is offended.

Now it is evident that neither this hope nor sorrow was revealed or enjoined
upon Adam in the state of innocence, as the rule of his obedience; for it is
evident, that it is a gospel hope that is here spoken of, for the scripture
here cited to proves the assertion, says, let Israel hope in the Lord; for
with the Lord there is mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption. Now
mercy bestowed, implies guilt in the receiver, and what guilt had Adam in the
state of innocence? Did a holy, a just, a righteous God, make an unholy,
unjust, unrighteousness creature, and at the same time make him in his own
likeness?

Pause here a moment, and consider how great the inconsistency and abuse
offered to the perfections of Deity.

Moreover, Israel was to hope in the Lord on the account of redemption; and
redemption implies, that the redeemed was in a state of bondage: now I would
ask the presbyterian, if God made man in a state of bondage? Was not he made
after God's own image, knowledge, righteousness and holiness; and is this
likeness to God a bondage to him, from which he is to hope for redemption?
Furthermore, it is said in the same question, that God requires sorrow when in
any thing God is offended. Now if this doctrine was at first revealed to Adam
in the state of innocence, as the rule of his obedience; then it follows, that
God tolerated Adam to sin even in the state of innocence, and only required
sorrow in that case; but I submit to your own understandings, whether it would
not be more consistent with the perfections of Deity, to say, that the law
required absolute perfection; consequently admitted of no cause for sorrow. Now
the scripture cited to prove the aforesaid doctrine, is Jeremiah xxxi. 18.
Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thus thou have chastised me and
I am chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me and I shall
be turned, for thou art the Lord my God; and Psalm cxix. 136. Rivers of waters
run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. Query. Is it possible in the
nature of things, that the first revelation God made to Adam as the rule of his
obedience, was, to bemoan himself because he did not receive chastisement in a
suitable manner from God? But the query is, what God chastised him for. Would a
holy God chastise his own likeness, his own image, consisting of knowledge,
righteousness and holiness? But it is added, turn thou me and I shall be
turned. Now the question is, whether God did reveal to Adam for the rule of his
obedience, that Adam should say, turn thou me from thy likeness, from thy
image, from thy knowledge, from thy righteousness and holiness; for as he was
made with God's likeness, image, knowledge, righteousness and holiness, it then
follows, that if he is turned he must be turned from them. Now the question is,
did God at first reveal this to Adam as the rule of his obedience, thus to turn?

Ponder here upon this great absurdity and abuse offered to the perfections of
Deity; and with respect to these rivers of water running down the Psalmist's
eyes. How inconsistent is it to suppose, that God first revealed and enjoined
it upon Adam in the state of innocence, as the rule of his obedience, that
rivers of water should run down his eyes, because they keep not thy law; when
it is evident that Adam in his first state of innocence, was the only one of
the human kind then existing; how then could he have these rivers of water
running down his eyes, because nonexistence keep not thy law; for the word,
they, being in the plural, refering to others, he could not possibly mean
himself; moreover, he was in a perfect state of happiness; consequently, not a
subject capable of sorrow or weeping. Furthermore, I aver, that the law of God
first revealed to Adam in the state of innocence, the rule of his obedience,
never required sorrow from Adam, or any of his posterity on the account of sin;
but it required perfect obedience, as was before observed; but now in this our
fallen state, the revelation of the gospel of Jesus Christ calls for sorrow,
for brokenness of heart, for weeping, and those under the influence of a gospel
spirit will cry, O that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night on the account of sin that dwells in me;
and with the apostle cry, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from
the body of this sin, etc. I now submit to your own understanding, the ideas
suggested, with the assertions said to be required in the command under
consideration.

I now proceed to make some remarks on what is said to be required in the
second commandment; and if the duties there said to be required in that
commandment, were first revealed to Adam in the state of may be true, otherwise
it is not. Let us then attend to the law and to the testimony, for if they
speak not according to these, it is because there is no light in them.

It is asked, what are the duties required in the second commandment?

Answer first, Prayer and thanksgiving in the name of Christ.

2dly, Reading, preaching and hearing of the word.

3dly, The administration and receiving of the sacraments.

4thly, Church government and discipline.

5thly, The ministry and maintenance thereof.

6thly, Religious fasting.

I return to the first particular, respecting prayer and thanksgiving in the
name of Christ; and would ask you who take the presbyterian vows upon you, if
you believe that God did at first reveal Christ in his mediatorial character to
Adam in the state of innocence, and enjoin it upon him as the rule of his
obedience to pray and give thanks in Christ's name? I think that the bare
stating of the question is sufficient to convince any person of the error; and
to undertake to prove this error would be like undertaking to prove that the
sun gives light.

2dly, It is said, that God, at first, revealed and required the reading,
hearing and preaching of the word from Adam, in the state of innocence, as the
rule of his obedience: but I presume there was no written word to read; and if
so, surely no preaching from the word; but if Adam had presumed to preach, I
request to know who would have been his hearers? Moreover, preaching holds up
to view, Christ in his mediatorial character: and of what service would this
have been to Adam in the state of innocence? Judge ye.

3dly, As to the administration and receiving of the sacraments, said to be
revealed to Adam in the state of innocence, as the rule of his obedience: They
point so directly at Christ in his mediatorial sufferings and atonement, that I
think I may with great propriety say, that God never at first revealed them to
Adam in the state of innocence, as the rule of his obedience.

4thly, As church government and discipline are said to be first revealed to
and enjoined on Adam, in the state of innocence, as the rule of his obedience,
it necessarily follows to inquire, from whom did church government derive its
authority? If from God out of Christ, then the assertion may be true; but if
Christ purchased the church with his own blood, and is Zion's King and
Lawgiver, then it follows that Adam in the state of innocence was no member of
Christ's church; consequently could not have church government revealed to or
enjoined on him, from the great Lawgiver, as the rule of his obedience.

5thly, The ministry and maintenance thereof, this assertion being so similar
in various respects to the two last particulars under consideration,

I shall, without any additional remarks, pass to the sixth particular, namely,
Religious fasting said to be revealed to and required of Adam in the state of
innocence, as the rule of his obedience; and to prove this assertion, Joel ii.
12. is cited, where the Lord says, "Turn ye, even to me, with all your heart,
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rend your heart and
not your gartments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and
merciful," etc. Now God calling to man to turn, implies that man has run away
from God: but Adam, during the time of his innocence, walked with God: and
surely God never called to Adam to turn from his obedience in walking in God's
image, knowledge, righteousness and holiness. Moreover, it is added rend your
heart and not your garment. Now Adam's state of innocence or perfection would
not admit of this rending of heart: and why should God tell him not to rend his
garment? He had no garment on till after the fall; but one reason is added why
he should turn; namely, because God is gracious and merciful, which plainly
implies, that man had fallen before ever these calls of grace were made.
Moreover, the import of the words gracious and merciful, as an inducement for
man to turn, makes it evident that these calls to turn, were gospel calls, made
to man after the fall; consequently was not revealed to Adam as the rule of his
obedience before the fall. Therefore the assertion respecting fasting being at
first revealed and enjoined upon Adam as the rule of his obedience is a
fundamental error; and so in like manner are all the other assertions, taken
notice of, not only in this 108th question, but also in the 104th, relative to
hope and sorrow. I might make farther similar remarks on the erroneous
expositions of several of the remaining commands, in which gospel requisitions
are asserted to be first revealed to Adam, in the state of innocence, as the
rule of his obedience: but what has been already said on the expositions of the
two former commands, is sufficient to convince those that are willing to see
not only of the error of the exposition of the two first commands, but also
those similar errors that are contained in the exposition of several of the
remaining commands, and if there be any that will shut their eyes against light
and fully determined to continue all the days of their lives as they are taught
in the belief of every point of the presbyterian confession of faith, then any
further illustrations on the remaining expositions, are unnecessary: for if
there be any that will not hear Moses and the Prophets, the law and the
testimony, neither would they hear or be persuaded, though one should rise from
the dead and declare unto them. Mean time I would observe, that those who thus
believe in this composition of law and gospel, agreeably to the exposition of
the commands, said to be at first revealed to Adam in the state of innocence,
as the rule of his obedience, must, if consistent, believe such things
respecting Deity as is not fit to be named among christians: for they may with
the same propriety make a compound of truth and error, holiness and sin.

Objection. The exposition of the commands only says what is required, and what
is forbidden in those commands; but does not say that every one of those
requirements was first revealed to Adam in the state of innocence, as the rule
of his obedience.

Answer. In the 92d question it is said, that God first revealed to Adam the
moral law, as the rule of his obedience; and the 98th question says, that the
moral law is summarily comprehended in the ten commands; consequently every
thing said to be required in any of the commands, must be understood so as to
coinside with the ground work contained in the 92d and 98th questions; all
which being connected together amount to the very thing that I have asserted,
-- namely, that the exposition of the commands says, that every requirement in
the commands was first revealed to Adam, and enjoined upon him in the state of
innocence, as the rule of his obedience.

Objection 2d. The Scripture was written for our learning and instruction, and
was given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, and the exposition of the
commands are all proved by scripture, and are we not bound to believe the
scripture.

Answer. Although we are bound to believe the scripture when represented in its
true light, yet we are not bound to believe it in the light in which it may be
represented. When Christ was taken up and set on the pinnacle of the temple,
the Devil bid Christ to cast himself down, and immediately produced scripture
for Christ's safety. Namely, it is written, he shall give his angels charge
over thee, to keep thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, least at
any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Now it may be observed, that the
devil quoted as real scripture, with a view to answer his purpose as Christ
quoted to answer his purpose. Who then shall we believe? You will say believe
Christ; but what then shall we do with the devil's citation of scripture? I
answer, we must believe the scripture to be true: but a false light or
representation of Duty given from that scripture, so that it would not apply to
prove the thing the devil quoted it for; and although the scripture is pure and
majestic, ascribing glory to God, light and powerful in the salvation of man,
yet that same devil which attempted to lead Christ into error, and all from the
pretended authority of the scriptures, is now transforming himself into an
angel of light; and representing scripture in a false light, with a view to
frustrate the great designs of God relative to his own glory and the salvation
of man. -- Hence it is that the compilers of the presbyterian confession of
faith, seeing but in part has made such error in asserting gospel to be law,
which only serves to give a false light of the scriptures, and puts the whole
body of the scriptures into a compound body of confused contradictions; but let
law and gospel be kept in their proper place; then the scriptures will appear
in their purity; and the perfections of God in the display of his law will
appear just and glorious; and the great mystery of godliness God manifest in
the flesh, appeared so glorious that the heavenly hosts burst forth in
ascribing glory to God in the highest. How did law and gospel shine forth,
glorious with great conspicuity; when mercy and truth met together,
righteousness and peace kissed each other; when truth sprang out of the earth
and righteousness looked down from heaven! -- Query; who can view the law and
gospel thus in its proper light, through the of the word, and not abhor that
exposition which only serves to lead away the understanding from beholding the
glories of the divine attributes, all meeting in Christ. Thus I have answered
the objection, that although the exposition of the commands may be scripture
language, yet we are not always to believe the light in which scripture may be
represented.

4thly. I proceed to consider some of the presbyterian statute laws and
principles as they are recorded in their confession of faith. And

1st. Parliament sixth, of King James VI. in the year 1579, declares, that
those who agree in doctrine and administration of the sacraments according to
the confession of faith, is the true and holy church of Christ; and those who
gainsay it are no members of Christ's church. From this it appears, that the
presbyterians viewed themselves as the only holy church in the world:
consequently the church of England, congregational and baptist, etc, are
declared to be no churches of Christ. These, likewise, are presbyterian
protestant principles; and I think they exceed the principles of those
professors we have an account of in Isaiah lxv. 5. who said to their fellow
professors, stand off by thyself, come not near to me; for I am more holy than
thou; for it is evident these Jewish professors acknowledged some holiness in
them they bid stand off by themselves; but our old presbyterian professors
would admit of none to be members of the holy church of Christ but
presbyterians.

2dly, Act. 69. Parl. 6. of King James VI. declares, that there is no other
sace of church or face of religion but the established religion; namely, the
presbyterian religion, and which they styled a perfect religion, "and all by
manifold acts of Parliament were bound to profess and subscribe" to this
perfect religion -- namely, to the presbyterian confession of faith, "and all
sheriffs and magistrates "were ordained to search, apprehend and punish all
contraveners," which appears from Act. 5. Parl. 1. Act. 134, Parl. 7. Act. 25.
Parl. 11. King James VI.

Query: does the protestants really believe according to this declaration that
there is no other face of church or face of religion but the presbyterian
religion, agreeably to the aforesaid acts of Parliament and presbyterian
confession of faith? Furthermore, does the presbyterians desire our civil
government to make laws commanding sheriffs and magistrates to search,
apprehend and punish, with all civil pains, our neighboring churches that will
not subscribe and swear to the aforesaid presbyterian confession of faith,
covenants and acts of Parliament? or does not Mr. Oliver, teacher of
presbyterianism, feel ashamed of his own protestant principles that stand here
upon record as an everlasting memorandum of the bigoted persecuting spirit and
error of the presbyterian profession.

3dly, In the 47th Act. Parl. 3. King James VI. it was ordained that none
should be reputed as loyal subjects, but be punishable as rebellers who would
not make a confession of the presbyterian principles then established by law.
Query, does the presbyterians (agreeably to the before cited laws) desire that
all in the United States who does not make a profession of the presbyterian
principles as they were established by law, should be punished as rebels to the
government.

4thly. It was statute by acts of Parliament that all kings and princes at
their coronation and reception of their princely authority, should swear to
maintain the true religion according to the confession of faith, and abolish
all religion contrary to the same, and root out of the empire all heretics; all
which appears from Parl. 12. of King James VI. and 4th Act. and Parl. 1. of
King Charles I.

Now I would ask Mr. Oliver whether he wishes to have a revolution in civil
government and a new system of presbyterian protestant laws established
agreeably to the aforesaid statute acts of Parliament, by which all our members
of Congress would be first required to swear to the presbyterian confession of
faith.

2dly, Swear to abolish every other religion.

3dly, Root out of the United States, as heretics, all that will not profess
presbyterianism agreeably to the presbyterian confession of faith.

5thly. Charles I. Parliament 2. Act. 5. did ordain and command the confession
of faith, and covenants to be subscribed by all his Majesty's subjects under
all civil pains and ordained that it should be read and sworn to by every
member of Parliament before they proceed to any other act, and refusers to
subscribe and swear to said confession and covenants, were to have no voice in
Parliament; and it was ordained, that all judges, magistrates or officers of
any rank, and ministers at their entry should swear and subscribe the
confession of faith and national covenant. Moreover, it was the desire of the
presbyterian people that the King should be clothed with this authority: but
the people in the American States possess a very different spirit, who fraimed
constitutions and enacted laws whereby the different denominations of
professors may enjoy their own religion and all have equal protection from the
law, and one denomination of professors not to be preferred before another; and
all in the union are bound to conform to their constitutional laws:
consequently it is inconsistent with common sense for any person to profess to
adhere to the presbyterian protestant religion according to the aforesaid
statute laws and covenants, and at the same time profess subjection to the
constitutional laws of the United States.

5thly. I now proceed to make some remarks relative to the place in which the
established law of presbyterians say, marriage must be solemnized. In the
direction for the solemnization of marriage, they say, that marriage must be
solemnized in the place appointed by authority for public worship. And as this
act of divines was established by an act of Parliament, it therefore received
the force of law in every point and execution; to pass thereon as may be seen
by the act of Parliament at Edinburgh, February the 6th, 1645.

Moreover, in addition to this act of civil and ecclesiastical authority, the
Presbyterians bound themselves by the oath of God, to conform to said law; as
may be seen in the solemn league and covenant. From this act several things may
come under our consideration. And

1st. Does the word of God prohibit every other place for solemnizing marriage,
but the place appointed for public worship, by authority? If any should be so
lost as to answer in the affirmative, then the second question is, does the
Presbyterian professors pay any attention to this law, or the oath of God in
the covenant, binding to the observation of this law: but peradventure it may
be said that this is a matter of no great consequence; but I would reply, is it
of no consequence whether we swear the truth or not in point of principle, or
is it of no great consequence whether we walk agreeable to the truth we swear.
I shall dismiss this erroneous doctrine with this observation, viz. Where
persons are frequently taught to embrace by oath or otherways, a certain code
of professed religious laws or principles, without suitable investigation,
relative to the truth or error contained in the same has a tendancy to prevent
investigation, to blind the eye, harden the heart, and sear the conscience, by
reason of which God's name and ordinances will be profaned.

6thly. I now proceed to make some observations relative to the fourth article
in the directory for family worship. The assembly says "That it belongs to the
head of the family to perform family worship, it being always free (say they)
to persons of quality to entertain one approved by the Presbytery to perform
that exercise; and in other families where the head of the family is unfit,
that another constantly residing there approved of by the minister and session,
may be employed in that service; wherein the minister and session are to be
accountable to the Presbytery." There are two things noticeable in this
direction, viz.

1st. Although it is a duty incumbent on heads of families to perform that
exercise, yet a person of quality may employ another to perform that worship.
-- Here seems to be a plain distinction between commonality and quality, and I
presume the law of God makes none in that case.

2dly. No person, however godly and gifted he is, may be admitted to pray in a
family where he does not continue to reside. And even admitting he does
continue there, yet it is a crime to admit him to pray, until the minister and
session are notified, and their approbation received. Furthermore, "The
minister and ruling elders in each congregation are to enquire and make trial,
whether the said directions be observed in their bounds, and shall reprove and
censure such as shall be found reprovable or censurable." All which appears
from the act of Assembly at Edinburgh, August the 24th, 1647.

Query. Provided a Presbyterian minister and session, should, agreeable to the
aforesaid act, make search through their congregation, and should find a member
of their church guilty of a breach of the aforesaid act, by asking some godly
friend of his to pray in his family, and said member of church called before
the session and presbytery shall refuse to make any acknowledgment, must they
not according to the rules of church government, debar him from the privileges
of the church, by excommunication or otherwise.

Tell not such abominable principles in Gath, nor publish such profanity of
God's name (by swearing to said principles) in the streets of Askelon, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice.

7thly. I pass to make some observations respecting the national and solemn
league and covenant. And first, it is evident, that the formation of the
covenant was first to compel all (by virtue of civil and ecclesiastical
authority) to acknowledge that the confession of faith in every particular
point was agreeable to the word of God, and then

2dly. To compel all to swear to continue all the days of their lives in the
obedience of the doctrine and discipline of the Presbyterian church, agreeable
to the confession of faith; consequently, the civil and ecclesiastical were
united together, that if any one should refuse to swear and subscribe the oath
and covenant, They should be punished, with all civil pains, cast out of the
church, and rooted out of the empire. All which appears from the act of
Assembly and Parliament, dated Edinburgh, June 11th, 1640, and from several
acts of Parliament, quoted in the national covenant.

It is said in revelation 13th, that a beast did arise out of the earth, having
two horns; which had power to cause that as many as would not worship the image
of the former beast should be killed; and is it not evident that the
Presbyterians, in their great zeal, made a corrupt mixture of civil and
ecclesiastical power, with which they compelled all to submit or suffer civil
pains and ecclesiastical censure; and so far as they exceeded the bounds of
God's law, so far they caused a beast to arise out of the earth.

And as this beast had two horns of power to put to death those that would not
worship the image of the former beast; so in like manner the Presbyterian beast
of error had two horns of power, viz. the civil and ecclesiastical corrupted
authorities; and with these two horns they compelled all to worship the beast
of error, by swearing by the great name of the Lord, that every article in the
Presbyterian confession of faith, was agreeable to the word of God, otherwise
cause them to be slain, by inflicting all civil pains, casting them out of the
church, and rooting them out of the empire; all which appears from their own
records.

2dly. The general ideas sworn to in the covenant, are nothing more than what
is contained in the confession of faith at large. Nevertheless, I shall proceed
to make some remarks on one particular declaration in the national covenant;
the particular that I refer to is expressed in the following words, viz.
Because we perceive that the quietness and stability of our religion and
church, does depend upon the safety and good behavior of the king's majesty,
etc.

This assertion relative to true religion and the church'es stability,
depending on the safety and good behavior of the king, is an error that
invalidates the power and veracity of God in the promises. Jesus says, upon
this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. Now Christ is here not only represented as the rock on which the
church is built; but likewise the builder of the church upon that rock.
(Matthew xvi. 18.) Moreover, if the safety and good behavior of the king,
gives stability to religion and church, as the Presbyterians swear it did; then
it follows, that the bad behavior of a king, makes religion and church
unstable.

Now let us attend to the law and to the testimony, for if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

When the church was carried to Babylon, they were under the Babylonish king,
who was an enemy to true religion and church; and the church was there called
in a way of derision, to sing one of the songs of Zion, and with great
stability she replied; if I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy; so in like manner after
Christ's acsension, the stability of the church was great, notwithstanding the
opposition from government, and the reason is obvious; viz. because the
church'es stability was not built upon the safety and good behavior of an
earthly king, but upon the immutable God, the rock of everlasting strength.

Moreover, when king Darius signed a decree, prohibiting prayer to God, Daniel,
notwithstanding the decree, manifested great stability in opening his windows
toward Jerusalem, and prayed as he did aforetime. Shadrach, Meshack and
Abednego, manifested great stability in refusing submission to the king's
command; embracing the fiery furnace, rather than worship an idol. Consequently
the king was astonished, and said, lo! I see four men walking in the midst of
the fire, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God; surely these men
never built their faith upon the safety and good behavior of mortal flesh, but
upon that God that walked with them in the midst of the fire. Moreover, in the
second psalm we have an account of kings and rulers combining together against
the Lord's anointed; but yet, (says God) have I set my king upon my holy hill
of Zion. Now if Christ as the church'es head, king and representative on Zion's
holy hill, was stable, notwithstanding kings and rulers combined against him;
then it follows that the church (whom Christ represented) will, through Christ,
their head, be stable, notwithstanding kings and rulers combine against her;
consequently the assertion in the oath respecting the stability of religion and
church, depending upon the safety and good behavior of the king, is an
essential error; and as the sin of Jeroboam, in making golden calves, and
setting them up at Dan and Bethel, was a sinful error which clave to his
posterity, so that the succeeding kings departed not from the sin of Jeroboam,
the son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin; so in like manner those golden
calves of error set up in the presbyterian confession of faith at Edinburgh,
and here has become a sin, and that fin of error cleaves to the house of the
succeeding presbyterians from age to age; for as the fathers have eaten sour
grapes of error, their children's teeth are set on edge, because they trusted,
yea, swore to their fathers' principles without due investigation. Thus the
errors that are contained in the aforesaid confession of faith, are, by many,
ignorantly embraced from age to age.

May the spirit of the Lord lift up a standard in mount Zion, and the gospel
trumpet blow with a certain sound, and the sons that the presbyterian church
has brought forth, arise and take their mother by the hand, leading her away
from these errors, and guide her in the way of truth.

Objection. Although Mr. Oliver at first bound his adherents to every paragraph
of the Presbyterian confession of faith, yet he now only binds them all the
days of their lives to the protestant religion and confession of faith; so far
as they shall see it agreeably to the word of God.

Answer. If one person enter into a covenant, binding himself agreeably to
certain articles, to serve another all the days of his life, and conforming to
said articles, should be found very detrimental, they might be altered;
provided both parties were agreed. But if a person bind himself to serve the
Lord all the days of his life, by solemnly engaging to continue in the
obedience of a certain code of laws, and said laws should be found disagreeable
to the word of God, then the question is, how shall this person be disengaged
from his embarrassment? The application is obvious. Mr. Oliver has formerly
bound the people to every paragraph of the confession of faith; and there are
not only paragraphs, but established laws in said confession of faith, which
are contrary to the word of God; as has been shown, and no possible way to be
disengaged from the embarrassment. For if they walk agreeably to the gospel
rule, they thereby break their vow, and if they perform their vow, they thereby
break God's law. I shall conclude this observation, with the observation that
Eli made, relative to Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the Lord, viz. If one
man sin against another, the judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him.

2dly. With respect to the second particular in the objection relative to Mr.
Oliver's only binding his adherents to the protestant religion all the days of
their lives, I would observe, that according to the presbyterian confession of
faith, a true protestant is a true presbyterian, adhering to every article in
the presbyterian confession of faith; which evidently appears implied in the
covenants, and more particularly expressed by the general Assembly at
Edinburgh, August the 17th, 1643, and by the States of Parliament at Edinburgh,
July the 15th, 1644; each one of them approving of the necessity of entering
into a solemn league and covenant "For the preservation of the true "protestant
religion." Now if the presbyterian church and state, by the aforesaid acts,
say, that it is necessary for the preservation of the true protestant religion
to enter into a solemn league and covenant; then it follows, that whatever
principles are contained in the aforesaid covenant, are the principles of a
true protestant, which leads me to consider what these protestant principles
are which are contained in the aforesaid covenant. I shall repeat, verbatim,
the principal things contained in the covenant which are expressed in the
following words:

Namely, we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands
lifted up to the most high God, do swear,

First. That we shall, sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of
God, endeavor, in our several places and callings, the preservation of the
reformed religion in the church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline
and government, against our common enemies; etc. and shall endeavor to bring
the churches of God in the three kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in religion, confession of faith, form of church government,
directory for worship and catechizing; that we, and our posterity after us,
may, as brethren, live in faith and love; and the Lord may delight to dwell in
the midst of us.

Secondly, That we will, in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor
the extirpation of popery, prelacy, etc.

Thirdly, We will, with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our
several vocations, endeavor, with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve
the rights and privileges of the parliaments, and the liberties of the
kingdoms; and to preserve and defend the king's majesty's person and authority,
in the preservation and defense of the true religion, and liberties of the
kingdoms; that the world may bear witness with our conscience of our loyalty,
and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his majesty's just power
and greatness.

Fourthly, We shall also, with all faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all
such as have been, or shall be incendiaries, malignants, or evil instruments,
by hindering the reformation of religion, dividing the king from his people, or
one of the kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this league and covenant.

Fifthly, And whereas the happiness of a blessed peace between these kingdoms,
denied in former times to our progenitors, is by the providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both parliaments; we
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm peace and union to all posterity.

Sixthly, We shall, also, according to our places and callings, in this common
cause of religion, liberty and peace of the kingdoms, assist and defend all
those that enter into this league and covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof: and shall not suffer ourselves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give ourselves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this cause,
that so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the kingdom, and honor
of the king; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same, according to
our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what we are not
able ourselves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed: all which we shall do as in the sight of
God. And this covenant we make in the presence of almighty God, the Searcher of
all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at
the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.

Thus I have repeated, verbatim, the principal things contained in the
aforesaid covenant; consisting of six particulars; and they all coincide with
and enforce the observance of all that is contained in the presbyterian
confession of faith: consequently it proves, to a punctilio, that, according to
the presbyterian principles, a true protestant is a presbyterian: consequently
the first reformers professing prelacy and lutergy with their successors in
religion, were not considered by the presbyterians as true protestants: for the
presbyterians, by acts of assembly and parliament, dated Edinburgh, August
17th, 1643, and Edinburgh, July 15th, 1644, considered it necessary for the
preservation of the true protistant religion, to enter into a solemn league and
covenant; and they are bound by the articles of said covenant to extirpate
popery, prelacy, lutergy and every other profession that deviates in any
particular from the presbyterian profession, then it necessarily follows, that
a true protestant is one that believes in every point or paragraph of the
presbyterian confession of faith, binding himself by the oath of God, to
continue all the days of his life in the obedience of the same.

Thus I have given a true definition of a true protestant, according to the
presbyterian confession of faith. Hearken, then, O thou young presbyterian
protestant! It is for thy sake (that thou might be no longer blindfold and
lead through such dark paths of error) that I have traced the protestant
principles: and although thou mayset swear against popery as the protestants
did, yet how can thou lift up thy hand to the most high God, as they did, and
swear,

First, that the power of the civil magistrate in the church (agreeably to the
23d, and exposition of the 31st chapters in the presbyterian confession of
faith) is agreeably to the word of God?

Secondly, Swear that the exposition of the commands (relative to hope, sorrow,
prayer and thanksgiving in the name of Christ; reading, preaching and hearing
the word; the administration and receiving of the sacrament; church government
and discipline; the ministry and maintenance thereof, and religious fasting)
was at first revealed and enjoined upon Adam, in the state of innocence, as the
rule of his obedience?

Thirdly, Can thou swear that it is the command of God to root out of the
empire, as heretics, all that will not profess presbyterianism agreeably to the
presbyterian statute laws made under the reign of king James and king Charles?

Fourthly, Can thou swear, that they are no members of Christ's church if
they gainsay the presbyterian confession of faith; and swear that it is the
civil magistrate's prerogative to take the keys of Christ's kingdom to open or
shut the doors of the church for or against such as approve or disapprove the
articles contained in the confession of faith?

Fifthly, Can thou swear, that there is no other face of religion or church
but the presbyterian and swear that the presbyterian religion is perfect?

Sixthly, Can thou swear that all ought to be punished as "rebels to the
government that will not make "a confession of the presbyterian principles?

Seventhly, Can thou swear, that the word of God forbids solemnizing
marriage, unless in a place appointed by authority for public worship?

Eighthly, Can thou swear, that it is a violation of the divine law to admit
a person to pray in thy house, without first applying to the minister and
session for their approbation?

9thly. Can thou swear to the first part of the oath in the national
convenant, viz. That there is no other religion pleasing to God, or bringing
salvation to man, but the presbyterian religion?

10thly. Can thou swear to the second article in the covenant, viz. That you
agree in your own conscience to all points of the aforesaid confession of
faith, as unto God's undoubted truth.

11thly. Can thou swear to the third article, viz. That the stability of
religion and church, depends upon the safety and good behavior of the king's
majesty?

12thly. Can thou with the protestant in the covenant Lift up thy hand and
swear by the great name of the Lord, that thou will defend the king's majesty,
with thy goods, body and life; calling the living God, the Searcher of hearts
to witness, that this is your desire and unfeigned resolution, as you will
answer to Jesus Christ in the great day, and under the pain of God's
everlasting wrath, and of infamy and loss of all honor and respect in the
world. -- As these twelve particulars are all parts of the protestant religion
contained in the confession of faith; if thou can swear that they are all
agreeably to the word of God, and that thou will continue all the days of thy
life in the obedience of the same, then thou art so far qualified for being a
Protestant. Mean time it is worthy of notice, that the Presbyterian kings,
Parliaments, majestrates, etc. were all sworn to support the Presbyterian
principles, according to the confession of faith; so in like manner the
protestants protested and swore, by the great name of the Lord, that they would
submit to and defend the king's majesty, his person and authority, in the
execution of the aforesaid Presbyterian laws. But the Presbyterian kings have
revolted from Presbyterianism, burnt the covenants which were the bond of
union, and a new code of laws made by which each one may enjoy his own
religion, and have equal protection from government. Consequently a papist has
the same protection from government that a presbyterian has.

Now the great question is, where is the king and parliament at this day, whom
our young Protestants swear to defend?

It protestants voluntarily swear to defend a king in the execution of those
laws which protect a papist in his religion, then they are guilty of a breach
of the oath of God in the covenants and presbyterian laws in the confession of
faith. Furthermore, if the young presbyterian protestants take upon them the
old protestant vows, and do not protect some king and parliament in the
execution of presbyterian laws according to the confession of faith, then they
are chargeable with a breach of their oath in the covenant: but it is probable
no such king and parliament will be found; but even admitting they should be
found, would not the oath of allegiance to them be rebellion against the United
States? yea, a breach of the oath of allegiance? But provided the protestants
should say, that they mean to submit to and defend the authority of the United
States in the same manner that the old protestants submitted to and defended
king and parliament, I would reply, we have neither king, parliament nor
presbyterian laws, agreeably to prostetant principles in the confession of
faith; but the reverse by giving the same protection to a papist as to a
presbyterian. Consequently the oath of God in the covenants and protestant laws
in the confession of faith, forbids protestant subjection to the authority of
the United States.

Thus I have traced some of the protestant errors, both respecting principles
and oaths: and surely the protestants are in a very singular situation; for
they are so bound with laws and oaths that even where greater light appears and
truth calling them to turn, the oath of God which they have taken, will not
suffer them to turn. Consequently if they march forward, according to the
protestant system, they, in many respects, break God's law; and if they retreat
back, or even stand still, they break their oath: but as I can trace them no
farther here, I must leave them, and bid them adieu.

Nevertheless, as these protestant presbyterian principles and oaths contained
in the presbyterian confession of faith do, in a special manner, concern the
Parish in Pelham, I would submit to their own understanding who has required
these things at your hands? Jophthah (without a call from God) bound himself
with a vow, that if God would deliver his enemies into his hand, when he
returned in peace, he would offer up, for a burnt offering, whatever would meet
him in the door of his house. And God gave him a great victory over his
enemies. And at his return, God providentially sent his only daughter to the
door of her father's house with timbrels, etc. at which sight, Jephthah
remembering his vow, cried out, alas! thou have brought me very low, my
daughter; for I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back. Now it
is worthy of notice, that God's law did not require, consequently forbid
Jephthah to offer up his daughter for a burnt offering; but his vow bound him
to it -- so that if he attended to the law of God, he must break his vow; and
if he performed his vow, he must break the law of God. So in like manner, some
of you have taken the American constitutional oath, by which you are bound to
demean yourselves as loyal subjects of the United States; and to renounce and
oppose the king's jurisdiction in every particular. And you have likewise taken
the presbyterian protestant vows upon you, by which you have bound yourselves
to submit to the King's authority, both in ecclesiastial and civil matters;
defending him with your goods, bodies and lives; and thus like Jephthah, you
have (by your vows) brought yourselves into a snare, out of which you never can
extricate yourselves. Tell not such contradictory vows in Gath, nor publish
such profanity of God's name in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the uncircumcised
rejoice.

Contemplate then upon thine own inconsiderate inconsistency; and thou may
likewise look upon thy protestant Teacher, and say, alas! thou have brought me
very low; for thou have lead me to open my moth in making these presbyterian
vows to the Lord; and like Jephthah, I cannot go back, neither can I
consistently with truth perform my vows. Alas! my Teacher, thou have brought me
very low. But as there are some of the Parish that have not brought themselves
under such contradictory vows, I would say to them be careful about bringing
yourselves under any professed religious vows or acknowledgments of principles,
where human wisdom forms them, swears to them, and calls upon thee to swear to
them. Consider first whether these principles are built upon the word of truth
in every particular; and secondly, whether God calls thee to swear. For even
admitting the thing is true which man calls thee to swear; thou must have a
"thus says the Lord," as a warrant for thy swearing the truth: for it is
evident God does not call thee to swear to every truth. But I would say to thee
as in the words of inspiration, be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. Better it is that thou should
not vow than that thou should vow and not pay; for thus says the Lord, when
thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to pay it,
for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in
thee not to perform it; but if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in
thee.

Objection. Notwithstanding all that has been said in opposition to the
presbyterian principles, yet God has owned the presbyterian religion in a
distinguishing manner by the effusion of his spirit; therefore that religion
must be right which God thus owns.

Answer. Although God might in former times (when the church was coming out of
popish darkness) wink at error, and at the same time pour out his spirit on
said church, yet the out-pouring of his spirit by no means proves, that they
were not chargeable with great error, neither does it prove (that if they now
refuse to repent at God's call) that God will not fight against them with the
sword of his mouth or cast them into a bed of great tribulation or kill their
children with death, as he threatened some of the Asian churches, if they did
not repent. Therefore let such as are taught to build upon this sandy
foundation, here what the Spirit says unto the Asian churches. And your
attention is here called to the church of Pergamos, who dwelt where satan's
feat was; nevertheless recommended for holding fast God's name and not denying
the faith; although the acknowledging of it made Antipas fall a martyr. Now it
is evident that the spirit of God was poured out in a powerful manner upon this
church; otherwise they would not be entitled to their recommendation. And yet
God charges them with two doctrinal errors, for which they are threatened with
God's fighting against them, it they did not repent. And in like manner the
church of Thyatira was recommended for her works, and charity, and service, and
faith, and patience, and the last to be more than the first; nevertheless was
chargeable with doctrinal error and threatened with judgments, if she did not
repent. And now we are called to hear what the Spirit says unto the churches.
And you have heard what the Spirit says relative to the aforesaid churches.
And the Spirit elsewhere says, that what was written aforetime was written for
our learning and instruction. And if we will learn or be instructed by the
Spirit in the word, we may learn that although the spirit of God might be
poured out upon the presbyterian churches as it was upon the church of Pergamos
and Thiatira; nevertheless, the presbyterian church may be chargeable with
great error, as the aforesaid churches were; and called to repent, and
threatened with judgments if they do not repent, as those churches were;
consequently the objection must vanish before the words of the spirit of truth
as the darkness of the night before the rising sun.

I now proceed to make some remarks respecting the duty of supporting gospel
ministers; but especially the manner in which they are to be supported. And

First. It is evident, that Christ commissioned his apostles or ministers to go
and preach the gospel. And the apostle Paul says that the Lord has ordained
that those that preach the gospel should live of the gospel. For says the
apostle who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a
vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats
not of the milk of the flock? And the law of Moses says, thou shall not muzzle
the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn; and they which minister about
holy things live of the things of the temple; and they which wait at the altar
are partakers with the altar. And the apostle says, let him that is taught in
the word communicate unto him that teaches in all good things. And where we
find a faithful minister that will venture to trust God and the people for his
support, the people are under the greatest obligation to remember him and
contribute toward his support. But to forget their ministers, in this case,
would be forgetting their God who supports them; and have a tendency to remove
the candlestick out of its place, and make their souls like a barren tree in
the garden of the Lord. For the apostle in the fixth of Galatians, after
speaking of the duty of communicating, says, be not deceived, God is not
mocked; for whatsoever a man soeth, that shall he reap.

Secondly, I now proceed to make some remarks relative to the manner in which
gospel ministers ought to be supported. It is evident, from scripture, that
Christ has ordained that his ministers shall receive all as a free will
offering of the church or people where they labor; but no tax levied for civil
officers to collect by attaching property or otherwise. And to prove this
affertion, let us attend to the law and to the testimony; and see what the
spirit of God says by the apostle Paul, in Philipians 4th, 10th and downwards,
which contains a recommendation of the Philipians for communicating to Paul's
necessity. Mean time Paul speaks of it in the 17th verse as a gift, and in the
18th verse, referring to their communicating, says, that it is an odor of a
sweet smell, a sacrafice acceptable and well pleasing to God. Now if this way
of collecting support for ministers was well pleasing to God, then it ought to
be strictly attended to. Furthermore, in Paul's first epistle to the
Corinthians, 9th chapter, the apostle shows, at large, how the Lord has
ordained that they that preach the gospel should live of the gospel; but Paul's
epistle never was directed to the civil magistrate nor legislative body for
their interposition: but it was directed to the church of God at Corinth, with
all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord: from which
it plainly appears, that the duty of supporting gospel ministers is a matter
that concerns the church and not the civil government. Moreover, in the whole
of Paul's epistles, when he recommends or enjoins the duty of liberality,
gifts, freewill offerings, communicating or bounties either for the support of
ministers or poor saints, he there writes particularly to the churches; and he
farther says, that their liberality was an evidence of their submission to the
gospel, as appears from 2d Corinthians ix. 13. In Paul's epistle to the
churches of Galaria, he says, that the gospel which he preached was revealed
to him by Jesus Christ; and in that same epistle, Paul writes to the churches
showing them the duty of communicating to their teacher. Now if Jesus Christ
has revealed to the churches, by Paul (as has been shown) that his ministers
must be supported by a freewill offering of the church, then it follows that
the churches ought to pay due attention to the orders that Christ has given:
and then their offerings will be an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable and well pleasing to God. From which we may infer that no strange
fire of twon or parish forcibly taxing to support ministers, is an odor of a
sweet smell; no strange fire of constables attaching property and disposing of
it for less than its real value, accepted as an odor of a sweet smell; but all
may be said to be a smoke in God's nostril, yea a fire that burns all the day.

How criminal then must those societies be, who (despising the wisdom of God in
the method recommended and enjoined upon the churches for supporting ministers)
prefer their own wisdom in taxing, as more just and righteous than God's. But
let such societies hear what inspiration says; Shall mortal man be more just
than God? Shall a man be more just than his Maker? Job iv. 17. Must the wisdom
of the eternal I AM, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First
and the Last, be despised, and man's wisdom prefered? Be astonished, O ye
heavens! and be ye afraid, who thus build up walls with the tool of human
invention, and plaster them with such untempered mortar!

The sacred writings give an account of Naaman the Assyrian who was a leper,
and came to a prophet of the Lord to be healed of his leprocy; and the prophet
bade the leper go and wash in Jordan seven times, and be clean. The leper at
first depised the word of the Lord, spoken by the prophet; and prefered his own
wisdom in esteeming the waters of Abana and Pharpar better than the waters of
Israel. Thus the leper turned away from the word of the Lord. And are we not
all (by nature) covered over with the leprosy of sin? God has instituted gospel
ordinances, for the recovery of our leprosy; and will you, like Naaman, dispute
the wisdom of God relative to the method of cure? Naaman's wisdom not
perceiving God to work by what means he pleased, called in question the
excellence of of the water to which he was directed. And will you practically
and professedly dispute the wisdom, the equity or expedience of our Lord's
revelation to the apostle Paul relative to the manner of supporting gospel
ministers, whose labors, when blessed, are a mean in God's hand to recover us
of our leprosy?

When God gave Moses direction respecting building the altar of whole stone, he
adds, if thou lift up thy tool upon it thou have polluted it; and enjoins it
upon Moses to see that every thing should be done according to the pattern
shown in the mount. Now if this altar would be polluted, if a tool was lifted
upon it, then we may, with equal propriety, infer, that if after Christ (...)
what this altar pointed at (and as king in his church instituted laws and
ordinances for his church strictly to attend to, till his second coming) that
if the tool of human invention is lifted up to new model the laws and
ordinances, then they are polluted. Furthermore, God says, he hates robbery for
a burnt offering; which leads me to inquire when a church may be guilty of
robbery, and offering it to the Lord. To which I would answer, when the church
professes a desire to attend upon gospel ordinances, and partake of gospel
privileges; but at the same time is not willing to advance all their own
property to defray the expense. Consequently attaches the property of others
who differ with them in opinion, and disposes of said property for much less
than its real value; presenting all to their minister, as a reward for his
ministerial service. All being thus done with a professed view to support the
gospel. The way being thus paved, the doors are kept open for all to meet and
offer the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to God; then it may with great
propriety be said, that this church is guilty of robbery, and offering it to
the Lord. But God not only hates robbery for an offering, but refuses to accept
an offering of lean, sick, torn or blind; how then can you that are thus guilty
presume to enter the door of God's house to offer the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, when your own conscience witnesses against you that you have
robed your neighbors, by attaching their property, and disposing of it, to
enable you in a cheaper way to sacrifice to the Lord? But hear what the Lord
says in the matter, cursed be the deceiver which has in his flock a male, and
avoweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing, for I am a great king
says the Lord of host.

When the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and David numbered the
people; the Lord sent the plague of pestilence among the people, and when the
angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem, to destroy it, the Lord said to
the angel, stay now thine hand; and David was there called to sacrifice to the
Lord, and Araunah the Jebusite offered to give David the oxen and threshing
instruments for a burnt offering; but David, from a sense of his own sin, in
numbering the people, and a sense of his duty to his God, would neither attach
his neighbor's property in order that his neighbor might bear a part of the
cost of the sacrifice, nor even accept of it as a gift; but told Araunah that
he would not offer a burnt offering to the Lord his God that which cost him
nothing. Consequently he bought the materials, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings, and the Lord was entreated for the land, and the plague was
stayed. Go thou and do likewise, that our spiritual plagues may be stayed, and
the Lord be entreated for our land.

Objection. Those offerings under the law were to be whole, without blemish,
that they might be figurative of Christ, who was without spot; and who was to
offer up himself as a sacrifice to God, in behalf of sinful man: consequently
the observations respecting those sacrifices under the law, cannot apply to the
support of ministers under the gospel.

Answer. If there was no gospel in those legal sacrifices, then it is evident,
that the Old testament saints obtained eternal life by the works of the law.
But I presume you will agree to the gospel revelation, which says, that by the
deeds of the law no flesh living shall be justified: consequently it follows,
that there was a great display of the gospel of Christ in those sacrifices. And
so far as the gospel of Christ shone in those legal sacrifices, so far, and in
the same gospel light, will those observations, drawn from the legal
sacrifices, apply, to our supporting gospel ministers, in this our gospel day.
Moreover, as the instituted way of worship, in offering sacrifice under the
law, could not be done without expense, so under the gospel, God's ministers
and our gospel religion, cannot be supported without expense: consequently it
follows, that in this respect the sacrifice and offerings under the law, and
the sacrifice and offerings for supporting ministers under the gospel, are
exactly similar; and in that light, the observations that will apply in one
case, will apply in the other; which proves the objection to be wholly
groundless; nevertheless, the truth of this assertion will still appear more
evident from those gospel sacrifices, which the apostle speaks of in Philipians
iv. 18. where the apostle speaking of the Philipians' communicating or gifts
for his support, says that it was an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable and well pleasing to God, as has been before observed. And the same
apostle, in Hebrews xiii. 15, 16. says, let us offer the sacrifice of praise
continually; and adds, forget not to communicate; for with such sacrifice God
is well pleased. Now the apostle in enjoining these gospel sacrifices must have
some reference to the gospel that was revealed in those sacrifices under the
law, which makes it evident, that those sacrifices under the law (although in
some respects figurative of Christ in pointing directly at the sufferings of
Christ as our surety, yet in other respects) refered to the gospel way of means
of salvation through Christ. Moreover it is evident, from those gospel sacrifices
that were offered under the law. When Jonah was in the whale's belly he was
incapacitated to offer legal offerings, or in that way to sacrifice unto the
Lord, yet he by faith looking toward God's holy temple says, I will sacrifice
unto the Lord with the voice of thanksgiving. And the Psalmist in the 116th
psalm says, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay
my vows unto the Lord in the presence of all his people. I will offer to thee
the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord. I will
pay my vows unto the Lord now, in the presence of all his people, in the courts
of the Lord's house, in the midst of thee O! Jerusalem. And what think ye that
profess to take the cup of salvation; will you offer to God the gospel
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving upon your own cost? or will you send an
officer to attach your neighbor's property to help to pay for your sacrifice?
Query. Is it not expedient to have a princely spirit, and out of your own
property pay your vows unto the Lord, and then come into the courts of the
Lord's house in the midst of thee, O! Jerusalem or church of Pelham, and say
with the Psalmist, what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward
me? These observations, duly considered, may serve as an answer to the
objection.

Objection second. If all are left to their own free will relative to paying
ministers, we shall soon have no ministers among us, and religion rooted out of
the land.

Answer. This objection arises from unbelief, as it calls in question the word
and power of the divine Spirit; for when Christ had accomplished all that he
came to do and suffer, he promised to send the comforter; and after his
ascension (according to his promise) the power of his spirit came upon them:
consequently religion was planted where the civil authority opposed and tried
to root it out. And inspiration says, not by might nor by power, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou, O! great mountain before
Zerubbabel? Thou shall become a plain; and he shall bring forth the head stone
thereof with shouting; crying grace, grace, unto it. Mean time I grant that the
gospel way, pointed out for supporting ministers, may have a tendency to root
out those ministers whom God never planted; but there is no danger of rooting
out those whom God has chosen and called to the ministry. Paul had but a small
inncome of the world for his ministerial labors: yet being chosen, qualified
and called to preach the gospel, he says, woe is me if I preach not the gospel.
Jeremiah, under reproaches and bad success, said that he would not speak any
more in God's name; but he immediately replies, that God's word was in his
heart as a burning fire shut up in his bones, and was weary with forbearing.
And in the 32d of Job we have an account of Elihu's saying I am full of the
matter. The Spirit within me constrains me. Behold my belly is as wine which
has no vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles. These passages of scripture
manifest the power of God's Spirit in the hearts of God's messengers: and you
may as well think to root out God's spirit as to root out God's ministers. Thus
pressed with the power of God's spirit influencing them to cry aloud and not
spare; yea, to lift up their voice like a trumpet, showing the people their
transgressions, etc. Mean time they know that God claims a prerogative over the
flax and wool, the beasts of the forest and the cattle upon a thousand hills,
the fowls of the mountains and wild beasts of the field, yea, the world and the
fullness thereof, and the hearts of all that possess it are in his hands and he
can turn them whithersoever he pleases, even as the rivers of water. And the
good minister knowing this is willing to trust his God, knowing that God can
and will influence the people voluntarily to give to their minister that degree
of support which God shall see most conducive to his glory and the minister's
good: for no good thing will he with hold from them that walk uprightly.
Nevertheless, if any of God's ministers should, in a peevisn fret, like Jonah,
run away from the presence of the Lord, they may expect God's judgments to
follow them, as they did Jonah, until they return to their duty as Jonah
returned to his, by preaching the word that God bid him; and as to religion's
being rooted out of the land as mentioned in the objection, I would observe
that a deviation from the gospel rule is the most probable way to root religion
out of the land. -- Saul deviated from the law of God, which rooted him and his
out of the land. Solomon in his old days turned from the law of his God, for
which the principal part of his kingdom was rooted up, and the law not being
attended to by the people, religion depreciated greatly out of the land, till
by successive deviations from the law of God, they were rooted out of their own
land. The Jewish church by successive deviations from the law of God, rooted
out not only religion, but themselves, as a church or nation; and the apostle
in first Corinthians, 10th chapter, illustrating the privileges of the Jewish
church, and the errors which that church run into, with the punishment which
ensued; says, that those things were written for our admonition. Now if we will
be admonished, we must know that a deviation from the rules that God has
prescribed, incurs his wrath, and has a tendence to root religion out of the
land. Therefore, if you wish to avoid those evils against which we are
admonished, and to have the power of religion among us, the ordinances being no
more like dry breasts, then give due attention to the divine precepts; ever
remembering that the wisdom of man (to new modle God's laws, in order to
preserve religion in the land) is foolishness with God, and only serves to root
religion out of the land. These observations duly considered, may serve as a
sufficient answer to the objection.

As I am drawing near to a close, I would remark, that probably two characters
will in a special manner stigmatize the other with all his performance -- to
wit:

First, The traditionated bigots who always think that their religious
principles are right, and all others wrong.

Secondly. The peaceable who have such a great love for peace, that they can
stand and see truth trampled on and laid in the dust, and peace as a tomb stone
laid on truth's grave, lest truth should arise from the dead and make a
disturbance in the church; this last character not appearing to me as dangerous
as the former. To such I would say, that God's attributes consist of truth as
well as peace: and where we find great regard for peace and truth, not equally
regarded, we may then be assured that satan appears dressed in the garb of
peace preaching peace to the people. Mean time like a canker worm, is eating
out the very vitals of truth, which is one essential attribute of God;
consquently essential to true religion. Moreover, Christ says, I am the truth:
and the true church having Christ, they have the truth. Furthermore, Christ
says, my peace I gave unto you. Now as Christ has bequeathed his truth and
peace to the church, they cannot be divided by the church. Moreover, this peace
that Christ bequeathed, will cause division in the world: for Christ says,
suppose ye that I came to send peace on the earth? I tell you nay! but rather
division: but satan is always opposed to Christ; and if Christ came to send
division in the earth, then it follows that satan sends peace; Consequently we
find universal peace in the Gentile world, till Christ; the truth was preached
by the Apostle; and then tumultuous confusion ensued; and if truth made such a
disturbance, then no doubt it will now have the same operation. Take heed then
ye lovers of peace, and see whether your love for peace descends from truth;
for they always unite together; yea, marcy; truth, righteousness and peace have
met and kissed each other, and you cannot love one of God's attributes without
loving the whole; neither can you be influenced by one only, but by the whole.
For as they all met in Christ, so the benefits resulting therefrom influence
the soul to love equally all that is in Christ, and all that descend from
Christ: consequently, if the spirit of God descends upon the Presbyterian,
congregational, or baptist churches, it will influence those churches to love
each other, even although they do not see so near alike as to join in full with
each other; for every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him, and will unite all together as brethren of one family, and so
far as any possess this love, so far they enjoy God and possess heaven. For God
is love; consequently all heaven is love: and this love is a distinguishing
characteristic between the heirs of heaven and the heirs of hell. For Jesus
says, by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another, and this love takes fast hold of truth, and will not let it go; yea,
the spirit of truth as proceeding from the father is promised as the comforter.
And where we find the spirit of truth thus walking our streets, and frequenting
our assemblies, there we shall always find love and peace.

CHRIST rules the nations with his truth,
Yet makes his love be known;
Yea, peace and love, and grace and truth,
All flow from CHRIST the Son.
Then let the church his truth receive,
And not despise his love;
Then peace bequeathed will be received,
By CHRIST'S own Turtle Dove.
Finally, and to conclude, although they in this militant state, can see but in
part, consequently may differ injudgment respecting religious sentiments, and
be distinguished by presbyterian, congregational, or baptist, etc. yet this
love, peace and truth cemented together, will incite to honor, and prefer one
another; and in a word, will unite all in ascribing blessing and honor, and
glory and power, to him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb forever
and ever, which is the desire of him, who, for the reasons herein contained,
has absented himself from your assemblies.

FINIS.

