A DESCRIPTION OF THE AMERICAN YELLOW FEVER, WHICH PREVAILED AT CHARLESTON, IN
SOUTH CAROLINA, IN THE YEAR 1748.

BY DOCTOR JOHN LINING, PHYSICIAN AT CHARLESTON.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO 41, SOUTH
SECOND STREET. 1799.

A Description of the American Yellow Fever, in a Letter from Dr. JOHN LINING,
physician at Charlestown, in South Carolina, to Dr. ROBERT WHYTT, Professor of
Medicine in the University of Edinburgh. March 7, 1754.

CHARLESTOWN, December 14, 1753. SIR,
IN obedience to your desire, I have sent you the history of the yellow fever
as it appeared (...) the year 1748, which, as far as I can remember, agreed in
its symptoms with the same disease, when it visited this town in former years.
In this history, I have confined myself to a faithful narration of facts, and
have avoided any physical inquiry into the causes of the several symptoms in
this disease; as that would have required more leisure than I am, at present,
master of, and would perhaps have been less useful than a plain description.

I wrote this history, so far as it relates to the symptoms and prognostics, in
the year 1748, when we had the disease last in this place; intending
afterward, if it returned, to add, from further experience, the method of
cure, and likewise an account of any other symptoms which might attend it; but
as no such opportunity has offered, I must now omit that part. However, I hope
the description which I have given of this dreadful malady, which so frequently
rages like the plague in the southern parts of America, is so full, that a
physician may, from thence, not only form a true judgment of its nature, but
likewise be able to deduce and communicate some more certain method of cure,
than has perhaps hitherto been used.

I am sorry I could not give a fuller account of the dissections of those who
died of this disease, having unfortunately lost my notes taken from those
dissections.

I am, etc.

I. THAT fever, which continues two or three days, and terminates without any
critical discharge by sweat, urine, stool, etc. leaving the patient excessively
weak, with a small pulse, easily depressible by very little motion, or by an
erect posture; and which is soon succeeded with an icteritious color in the
white of the eyes and the skin, vomiting, haemorrhages, etc. and these, without
being accompanied with any degree of a febrile pulse and heat, is called in
America, the yellow fever.

II. THIS fever does not seem to take its origin from any particular
constitution of the weather, independent of infectious miasmata, as Dr. Warren
In his Treatise concerning the malignant fever in Barbados
has formerly well observed.

FOR within these twenty-five years, it has only been four times epidemical in
this town, namely, in the autumns of the year 1732, 39, 45 and 48, though none
of these years (excepting that of 1739, whose summer and autumn were remarkably
rainy) were either warmer or more rainy (and some of them less so) than the
summers and autumns were in several other years, in which we had not one
instance of any one being seized with this fever; which is contrary to what
would probably have happened, if particular constitutions of the weather were
productive of it, without infectious miasmata. But that this is really an
infectious disease, seems plain, not only from this, that almost all the nurses
catched it and died of it; but likewise, as soon as it appeared in town, it
soon invaded newcomers, those who never had the disease before, and
country people when they came to town, while those who remained in the country
escaped it, as likewise did those who had formerly felt its dire effects,
though they walked about the town, visited the sick in all the different stadia
of the disease, and attended the funeral of those who died of it. And lastly,
whenever the disease appeared here, it was easily traced to some person who had
lately arrived from some of the West-Indian Islands, where it was epidemical.
Although the infection was spread with great celerity through the town, yet if
any from the country received it in town, and sickened on their return home,
the infection spread no further, not even so much as to one in the same house.

III. THE subjects which were susceptible of this fever, were both sexes of the
white color, especially strangers lately arrived from cold climates, Indians,
Mistees, Mulattoes of all ages, excepting young children and of those only such
as had formerly escaped the infection. And indeed it is a great happiness that
our constitutions undergo such alterations in the smallpox, measles and yellow
fever, as for ever afterward secure us from a second attack of those diseases.
There is something very singular in the constitution of the Negroes, which
renders them no liable to this fever; for though many of these were as much
exposed as the nurses to the infection, yet I never knew one instance of this
fever amongst them, though they are equally subject with the white people to
the bilious fever.

IV. THIS fever began in the middle or rather toward the end of August, and
continued till near the middle of October, when the weather became cold enough
to prevent its further progress. In the beginning of August, the weather was
warmer than I had ever known it in that month: the mercury in Farenheit's
thermometer, for some days at 2 o'clock, p. m. rose, in the shaded air, to the
96th degree, at which time several people died of apoplexies. The latter part
of August and the first week in September were much more temperate; the weather
being then much as usual at that season of the year. The second week in
September was cold, the wind being constantly easterly and the weather cloudy;
after which time I kept a register of the heat of the shaded air; an abstract
of which follows.

IN the latter part of September, and from the 1st to the 18th of October,
September. October. The mean heat at 2 p. m. was 72 65 The mean nocturnal heat was
68 54 The greatest heat at 2 p. m. was 79 75 The least heat at 2 p. m. was 60
52 The greatest nocturnal heat was 71 70 The least nocturnal heat was 62 42 The
greatest increase of heat in 24 hours was 13 17 The greatest decrease of heat
in 24 hours was 9 22

IN all the month of September, and in the greatest part of October, the wind
was easterly.

THE depth of the rain in August, September and October respectively, was
6.881, 7.442 and 5.550 inches; which, though it exceeded the rain of these
three months taken together at a medium, from the ten preceding years, by 5.570
inches, yet it was inferior to that which fell in the same months in several
other years; for in the years 1747, 50, 51 and 52, there fell respectively, in
those three months of these years, above 21, 22, 24 and 26 inches of rain.

V. FOR a day or two before the attack of the fever, people in general
complained of a headache, pain in the loins and extremities, especially in the
knees and calves of the legs, loss of appetite, debility and a spontaneous
lassitude.

SOME, however, were seized suddenly, without any such previous symptoms.

VI. AFTER a chillness and horror, with which this disease generally invades, a
fever succeeded, in which,

1. THE pulse was very frequent till near the termination of the fever, and was
generally full, hard, and consequently strong: in some, it was small and hard,
in others, soft and small; but in all those cases, it frequently varied in its
fullness and hardness. Toward the termination of the fever, the pulse became
smaller, harder, and less frequent. In some there was a remarkable throbbing in
the carotids and in the hypochondria; in the latter of which it was sometimes
so great, that it caused a constant tremulous motion of the abdomen.

2. THE heat, generally, did not exceed 102 degrees of Farenheit's thermometer;
in some it was less, it varied frequently, and was commonly nearly equal in all
parts, the heat about the praecordia being seldom more intense than in the
extremities, when these were kept covered. In the first day of the disease,
some had frequent returns of a sense of chillness, though there was not any
abatement of their heat. In a few, there happened so great a remission of the
heat for some hours, when at the same time the pulse was soft and less frequent
and the skin moist, that one from these circumstances might reasonably have
hoped that the fever would only prove a remittent or intermittent. About the
end of the second day, the heat began to abate.

3. THE skin was sometimes (though rarely) dry; but oftener, and indeed
generally, it was moist and disposed to sweat.

ON the first day, the sweating was commonly profuse and general; on the second
day, it was more moderate: but on both these, there happened frequent and short
remissions of the sweatings; at which times the febrile heat increased, and the
patient became more uneasy. On the third day, the disposition to sweat was so
much abated, that the skin was generally dry; only the forehead and backs of
the hands continued moist.

4. THE respiration was by no means frequent or difficult, but was soon
accelerated by motion, or the fatigue of drinking a cup of any liquid.

5. THE tongue was moist, rough and white, even to its tip and edges. On the
second day, its middle in some was brown. On the third day, the whiteness and
roughness of the tongue began to abate.

6. THE thirst in very few was great.

7. A nausea, vomiting or frequent reachings to vomit, especially after the
exhibition of either medicines or food, came on generally the third day, as the
fever began to lessen; or rather as the fullness of the pulse, heat, and
disposition to sweat began to abate. Some indeed, but very few, on the first
day, had a vomiting either bilious or phlegmatic.

8. VERY few complained of anxiety or oppression about the ^raecordia or
hypochondria, nor was there any tension or hardness about the latter.

9. ON the first day they generally dozed much, but afterward were very
watchful.

10. Restlessness and almost continual jactations came on the second day.

11. A great despondency attended the sick from the first attack.

12. THE strength was greatly prostrated from the first attack.

13. THE pain in the head, loins, etc. of which they had complained (V) before
the attack, were greatly increased, and in some, the pain in the forehead was
very acute and darting; but those pains went generally off the second day.

14. THE face was flushed, and the eyes were hot, inflamed and unable to bear
much light.

15. ON the first day, many of them, at times, were a little delirious, but
afterward not until the recess of the fever.

16. THE blood saved at venaefection had not any inflammatory crust; in warm
weather, it was florid like arterial blood, and continued in one soft
homogeneous-like mass, without any separation of the serum after it was cold.
When there was any separation, the crassamentum was of too lax a texture.

17. THE stools, after the first day, were fetid, inclined to a black color,
and were very rarely bilious, soft or liquid, excepting when forced by art; for
an obstinate costiveness attended the febrile state.

18. THE urine was discharged in a large quantity, was pale, sometimes limpid,
and rarely of a higher than a straw color, except when the weather was very
warm, and then it was more saturated, of a deep color, and discharged in
smaller quantities. It had a large cloud, except when it was very pale or
limpid; but more generally it had a copious, white sediment, even in the first
day of the fever.

ON the second day, the urine continued to be discharged very copiously; in
some, it was then turbid, and deposited a more copious sediment, than on the
first day; this sediment was sometimes of a brownish color; in which case it
was generally followed by bloody urine, either about the end of the second or
beginning of the third day. The color and quantity of the urine, discharged in
equal times, were remarkably variable, being now limpid, then of a deeper
color, now discharged in a larger, then in a smaller quantity, which could not
be ascribed to any change made either in the quantity or qualility of the
drink, etc.

VII. THE fever accompanied with those (VI.) symptoms, terminated on the third
day, or generally in less than 72 hours from the first attack, not by any
assimulation, or coction and excretion of the morbid matter; for if by the
latter, there would have been some critical discharge by sweat, urine, stool,
or otherwise, none of which happened; and if, by the former, nothing then would
have remained but great debility. No; this fever did not terminate in either of
these salutary ways, excepting in some, who were happy enough to have the
disease conquered in the beginning by proper evacuations, and by keeping up a
plentiful sweat, till the total solution of the fever, by proper mild
diaphoretics and diluents. But those who had not that good fortune, however
tranquil things might appear at this period, (as great debility and a little
yellowness in the white of the eyes, seemed then to be the chief complaints,
excepting when the vomiting continued), yet the face of affairs was soon
changed; for this period was soon succeeded by the second stadium; a state,
though without any fever, much more terrible than the first: the symptoms in
which were the following.

VIII. 1. THE pulse, immediately after the recess of the fever, was very little
more frequent than in health, but hard and small. However, though it continued
small, it became, soon afterward, slower and very soft; and this softness of
the pulse remained as long as the pulse could be felt. In many, in this stage
of the disease, the pulse gradually subsided, until it became scarce
perceptible; and this, notwithstanding all the means used to support and fill
it; and when this was the case, the icteritious-like suffusion, the vomiting,
delirium, restlessness, etc. increased to a great degree. In some, the pulse,
after being exceedingly small and scarce perceptible, recovered considerably
its fullness; but that favorable appearance was generally of but short
continuance.

2. THE heat did not exceed the natural animal heat; and when the pulse
subsided, the skin became cold, and the face, breast and extremities acquired
somewhat of a livid color.

3. THE skin was dry when the weather was cold, but was moist and clammy when
the weather was hot.

4. THE respiration was natural or rather slow.

5. THE tongue was moist and much cleaner than in the former (VI. 5.) stage,
its tip and edges, as also the gums and lips, were of a more florid red color
than usual.

6. VERY few complained of thirst, though they had a great desire for cold
liquors.

7. THE vomiting or reaching to vomit increased, and in some was so constant,
that neither medicines nor aliment of any kind were retained. Some vomited
blood; others only what was last exhibited, mixed with phlegm; and others again
had what is called the black vomit. That which is called the black vomit, at
first sight, appears to be black; but on a more careful examination, I
observed, that this color proceeded from a great quantity of small, flakey,
black substances which floated in the liquor thrown up by vomit; but the color
of this liquor was much the same with that which the patient had last drank,
and was by no means black. Those black flakey substances are the bile mixed
with, or adhering to the mucus which lined the stomach. For, upon dissection of
those who died of this disease, not only in this but former years, I always
observed that the mucus of the stomach was abraded, and the bile in its cystis
was black and sometimes very viscid. In a lad who died of this disease in the
beginning of the fourth day, and who was immediately opened, the bile was not
only black, but had the consistence of thick Venice-turpentine, and was
exceedingly tough. On the inside of the stomach, there were several carbuncles
or gangrenousspecks. And in all those I have dissected, who have died of this
disease, I have not only always observed the same, but likewise that the blood
was very fluid, and the vessels of the viscera much distended; from whence I
have been very inclinable to think, when the disease was not conquered in its
first stadium, that, about the time of the termination of the fever, there was
a metastasis of the morbid matter to the viscera.
The reaching to vomit continued a longer or shorter time, according to the
state of the pulse; for as that became fuller, and the heat greater, the
reaching to vomit abated, and e contra.

8. THE inquietude was very obstinate, and when they dozed, their slumbers were
but short and unrefreshing. There were some who were drowsy; but these always
awaked, after the shortest slumbers, with a great dejection of spirits and
strength.

9. THE jactations or restlessness was surprising; it was frequently scarce
possible to keep the patients in bed, though, at the same time, they did not
complain of any anxiety or uneasiness; but if asked how they did, the reply
was, Very well.

10. THE debility was so great, that, if the patient was raised erect in the
bed, or, in some, if the head was only raised from the pillow, while a cup of
drink was given, the pulse sunk immediately, and became sometimes so small,
that it could scarcely be felt; at this time, they became cold, as in a
horripilatio, but without the anserine-like skin: their skin became clammy, the
delirium increased, their lips and skin, especially about the neck, face and
extremities, together with their nails, acquired a livid color.

11. THE delirium returned and increased; it was generally constant in those
whose pulse was small and subsiding.

12. THE inflammation of the tunica conjunctiva or white of the eyes increased
much, but without pain.

13. A yellowness in the white of the eyes, if it did not appear before in the
febrile state, became now very observable, and that icteritious-like color was
soon diffused over the whole surface of the body, and was continually acquiring
a deeper saffron-like color. In some indeed no yellowness was observable,
excepting in the white of the eyes, until a little before death, when it
increased surprisingly quick, especially about the breast and neck.

14. THERE were many small specks, not raised above the skin, which appeared
very thick in the breast and neck; but less so in the extremities, and were of
a scarlet, purple or livid color.

15. IN women the menstrua flowed, and sometimes excessively, though not at
their regular periods.

16. THERE was such a putrid dissolution of the blood in this stadium of the
disease, that, besides the vomiting of blood formerly mentioned, and the bloody
urine soon to be taken notice of, there were haemorrhagies from the nose,
mouth, ears, eyes, and from the parts which were blistered with cantharides.
Nay, in the year 1739 or 1745, there was one or two instances of an haemorrhage
from the skin, without any apparent puncture or loss of any part of the
scarf-skin.

17. AN obstinate costiveness continued in some; in others, the stools were
frequent and loose; in some, they were black, liquid, large and greatly
fatiguing; in others, when the stools were moderate, even though they were
black, they gave great relief; in others again, the stools nearly resembled tar
in smoothness, tenacity, color and consistence.

18. THE urine was discharged in a large quantity, in proportion to the drink
retained by the patient: it was pale if the patient was not yellow; but if
yellow, then it was of a deep-saffron color; in either case it had a sediment,
or at least a large cloud, which remained at the bottom of the glass; in some,
it was very turbid, in others, it was bloody, and the quantity of blood
discharged with the urine bore always some proportion to the state of the
pulse; when that became fuller, the quantity of blood in the urine was
diminished: when the pulse subsided, the bloody urine increased, and even
returned after it had ceased some days, soon after the pulse became smaller.

THIS stage of the disease continued sometimes seven or eight days before the
patient died.

IX. WHEN this stadium (VIII.) of the disease terminated in health, it was by a
recess or abatement of the vomiting, haemorrhagies, delirium, inquietude,
jactations, and icteritious-like suffusion of the skin and white of the eyes;
while, at the same time, the pulse became fuller, and the patient gained
strength, which, after this disease, was very slowly.

BUT when it terminated in death, those (VIII.) symptoms not only continued,
but sooner or later increased in violence, and were succeeded with the
following, which may be termed the third stadium of the disease, which quickly
ended in death.

X. THE pulse though soft became exceedingly small and unequal; the extremities
grew cold, clammy and livid; the face and lips, in some, were flushed; in
others, they were of a livid color; the livid specks increased so fast, that
in some, the whole breast and neck appeared livid; the heart palpitated
strongly; the heat about the praecordia increased much; the respiration became
difficult, with frequent sighing; the patient now became anxious, and extremely
restless; the sweat flowed from the face, neck and breast; blood flowed from
the mouth, or nose or ears, and in some, from all those parts at once; the
deglutition became difficult; the hiccoughs and subsultus of the tendons came
on, and were frequent; the patients trifled with their fingers, and picked the
naps of the bed-cloaths; they grew comatous, or were constantly delirious. In
this terrible state, some continued eight, ten or twelve hours before they
died, even after they had been so long speechless, and without any perceptible
pulsation of the arteries in the wrists; whereas, in all other acute diseases,
after the pulse in the wrists ceases, death follows immediately. When the
disease was very acute, violent convulsions seized the unhappy patient, and
quickly brought this stadium to its fatal end. After death, the livid blotches
increased fast, especially about the face, breast, and neck, and the
putrefaction began very early, or rather increased very quickly.

XI. THIS was the progress of this terrible disease through its several stadia.
But in hot weather, and when the symptoms in the first stage were very violent,
it passed through those stages, as Dr. Warren has likewise observed, with such
precipitation, that there was but little opportunity of distinguishing its
different stadia; the whole tragedy having been finished in less than 48 hours.

XII. IT was remarkable, that, 1. The infection was increased by warm and
lessened by cold weather. 2. The symptoms in the several stadia were more or
less violent, according to the heat or coolness of the weather. In hot days,
the symptoms were not only more violent, but in those who seemed, in moderate
weather, to be on the recovery, or at least in no danger, the symptoms were all
so greatly heightened, when the weather grew considerably warmer, as frequently
to become fatal. In cool days, the symptoms were not only milder, but many, who
were apparently in great danger in hot days, were saved from the very jaws of
death by the weather becoming happily cooler. 3. The disease was generally more
fatal to those who lay in small chambers not conveniently situated for the
admission of fresh air, to those of an athletic and full habit, to strangers
who were natives of a cold climate, to those who had the greatest dread of it,
and to those, who, before the attack of the disease, had overheated themselves
by exercise in the sun, or by excessive drinking of strong liquors; either of
which indeed seemed to render the body more susceptible of the infection.
Lastly, the disease proved most certainly fatal to valetudinarians, or to those
who had been weakened by any previous disease.

XIII. THE prognostics in the first stadium are these. 1. The more acute and
constant the pains are in the head, loins, knees, etc. the more the eyes are
inflamed; the greater their inability is to bear light, and the more the face
is flushed at the first attack, the fever and all the symptoms (VI.) in the
first stadium will be the more violent. 2. The more intense the symptoms are in
the first state, the sooner will the fever terminate. 3. The sooner the disease
runs through the first stadium, the shorter will be the duration of the second,
and e contra. 4. The shorter the duration is of the first, the greater and more
certain is the danger in the second state. For when the fever terminated before
the beginning of the third day, death seemed inevitably to be the consequence,
as there was then no possibility of supporting the pulse, and as all the bad
symptoms were then hurried on with such precipitation, that the patient
generally died before the end of the fifth day, excepting a considerable
coolness of the weather happily intervened; but on the contrary, it was a
favorable circumstance when the fever was protracted to the end of the third
day, without any remarkable hardness or depression of the pulse. 5. A great
depression of the pulse, about the termination of the fever, is bad, since,
from that circumstance, the vomitings, incessant jactations, the coldness and
lividness of the extremities, haemorrhagies, delirium, etc. are ushered in with
surprising celerity. 6. The more the strength is prostrated from the first
attack, the greater is the danger. 7. A vomiting coming on early in the
disease, and continuing or increasing, is bad, and generally presages the black
vomit. 8. A sediment in the urine in the first and second day of the disease is
bad, and the more copious the sediment is, the greater is the danger.

XIV. THE prognostics in the second stadium are these: 1. An early yellowness
in the white of the eyes is bad: when it is observable about the end of the
second day, in the first stadium, the patient generally dies about the
beginning of the fourth day from the first attack of the disease. But when the
yellowness does not appear till the end of the third day, if the patient does
not recover, the disease sometimes continues to the 9th or 10th day of the
second stadium before the patient dies. When the yellowness of the skin and
eyes increases fast and acquires soon a deep icteritious-like color, the
greatest danger is to be apprehended. 2. If the inflammation of the white of
the eyes increases, it is bad. 3. The more inflamed and bloody-like the skin is
where it has been blistered, the greater is the danger. 4. If the vomiting
continues or increases, it is bad, but the black vomiting is generally mortal.
5. When the pulse varies frequently in its fullness, being sometimes small,
then fuller, it is bad. But there was less dependence to be had on the pulse in
this than is common in other diseases; for in some patients, in the second
stage of the disease, even within a few hours of their death, the pulse, with
respect to its fullness, softness, equality and frequency, has continued like
that of one in perfect health, although, from the other symptoms, the death of
the patient could be foretold with great certainty. 6. The more the strength of
the patient is reduced in the first, the greater is the danger in the second
stadium. 7. Great restlessness, inquietude, an early delirium and a
continuation of it are very bad. 8. Livid blotches about the neck and breast, a
lividness of the lips and nails, flushing of the face, or a livid color
thereof, are sure signs of the quick approach of death. 9. Frequent loose
stools, which give not any relief, are bad, and the sooner they spontaneously
happen, the greater is the danger: but those which are black, and continue so
without any abatement of the symptoms, are generally mortal. 10. Bloody urine
and all haemorrhagies, excepting slight ones from the nose, are bad; and the
more copious they are, the greater is the danger. But a flux of the menses,
though not at their regular period, if attended with an abatement of the
symptoms, is a favorable circumstance, otherwise it is bad. 11. A suppression
of urine, especially in those, who, in the course of the disease, have had
large discharges that way, is a certain sign of the quick approach of death.

XV. As to the prognostics in the third (X) stadium, it is sufficient to say,
"Nature, alas! was now surpised,
"And all her forces seized,
"Before she was how to resist advised." Dr. Sprat's Account of the plague of
Athens.



FINIS.

