THE NARRATIVE OF PATRICK LION, WHO SUFFERED THREE MONTHS SEVERE IMPRISONMENT
IN PHILADELPHIA GAOL; ON MERELY A VAGUE SUSPICION, OF BEING CONCERNED IN THE
ROBBERY OF THE BANK OF PENNSYLVANIA: WITH HIS REMARKS THEREON.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY FRANCIS AND ROBERT BAILEY, AT (...) HEAD, NO. 116,
HIGH STREET. 1799.

To the Public.
IT is an observation I long have made, that the great when they have power,
will often make a wrong use of it, and that those who are inferior in rank,
have very little chance of justice when opposed to them; as riches furnish a
variety of means both to elude and oppose, the effective force of the law.
Though every one ought to have his full portion of justice, yet I believe no
one will doubt, that it is not generally the case; the rich can elude justice
by giving great bail, and feeing lawyers high, who by that and other methods,
protract the affair till the action dies away^ by one means or another; there
is nothing incomprehensible in all this -- If the small fry get in the least
entramelled in the meshes of the law, they are generally fastened in the net,
and often times punished wrongfully. For as Hudibras observes, For justice
though it punish crimes,
Stumbles on the innocent sometimes.
And what a horrid thing it is for an innocent man to suffer for another's
guilt -- the horror of such a thing, none but an innocent man can feel. The
great in general only think for themselves, and very seldom extend their
thoughts to the happiness and welfare of any but themselves -- wrapped up in
their own greatness, it would be a kind of degradation for them to descend to
so low a thought. I have often observed the death of a great man, (and often a
great villain), deplored as a national loss; while the ingenious mechanic has
been laid by on the shelf as of no advantage to the nation. But I would ask,
which are the greatest benefit to a nation, drones or bees? If then the
ingenious mechanic is suffered by a nation to be neglected, it must be a loss
to such a nation, in the effect produced by such neglect -- to improve in arts,
manufactures, and sciences, has been eagerly pursued by the most Gothic and
barbarous nations in the world, and should the enlightened and improving
Americans withold their support and encouragement; should it be their wish,
after their generously holding out an assylum to foreigners, of ingenuity or
otherwise, to turn upon them with coldness and disdain; consider the
consequences of ingenuity contemned, or ability disdained; see I say, and
examine what will be the ultimate consequences to the nation by such a
procedure. Do not by suspicious maneuvres, take advantage (...) them, to ruin
them, or by low cunning and artifice deprive (...) of their character and means
of living; or by vague and (...) suspicions, punish them beyond the regular
bound and just verge of (...) law; a circumstance to the sufferer that no
compensation can equalize. To conclude, fellow citizens, let the rich and great
be generous, humane, and just -- the mechanic, frugal and industrious, and no
invidious national distinctions made, it may be beneficial to the rising
greatness of America.

THE NARRATIVE, etc.
IT is a secret satisfaction to me, that the press is equally free to the
meanest individual, as well as to the highest; provided the press is not
abused: but who depress and abuse that freedom, more than the combinations who
often have it in their power to do as they please. Under every consideration
and in every point of view, taking in my late unfortunate case and my
mechanical profession; I find there is no protection for me, for should there
be any robbery committed by opening locks, etc. I am liable (from the nature of
my profession (...) the suggestion or suspicion of any malicious (...) who
wishes to injure me, and heaven knows there are too many of the description
called malicious on this side the Atlantic, as well as on the other.

I began my mechanical study at an early age, being only turned of eleven
years, and after spending nearly fourteen years in London in different
manufactories, and having previously studied mathematic'^s, etc. I resolved to
come to America, which displeased my relations and friends in a great measure.
I however undertook the enterprise, and arrived in Philadelphia on the 25th
November 1793, (and if ever there was a mechanical volunteer came into America,
I certainly have a fair claim to the title). I entered first into the employ of
Samuel Wheeler of Philadelphia, (...) discovered was taking advantage of a
stranger with regard to wages, etc. and as he had no great idea of cultivating
the profession, I left him and went to another; but offers being made me by the
late Mr. Hill, I began business for myself, and after working some years with
success; (having produced twelve or fourteen branches that never had made their
appearance here, and brought several to bear that were lying in a dorment
state), I was recommended to the Bank of Pennsylvania.

That the conduct of the Bank of Pennsylvania, on the late robbery, cannot in
my opinion, be pardoned either on the score of public justice or national
policy; but as the affair stands, the public still entertain their suspicion,
and the matter remains unravelled, owing (if my suspicions are well founded and
my judgment right, though not competent in law to know) to a certain peculiar
incomprehensibility. As several glaring reports are in circulation, (which in
the body of this work I shall endeavor to explain), and as persons are
generally the last to hear what materially concerns themselves; I shall take
notice of them, that such suspected characters may have an opportunity of
contradicting the rumor; that they may have it in their power to clear their
conduct of the heavy suspicion which is levelled against them. For my own part,
I have a right to speak, because I suffered innocently; and as I am informed no
legal steps can be taken to enforce a recompense for false and s^vere
imprisonment, I therefore take the liberty to lay my case before my fellow
citizens. When I arrived in America little did I think that I was to become an
author; and as little did I think that in^^^^ious men were ever liable to
suffer, what appears to me prejudice, malice, and injustice. The reader will
observe, the reward was tempting and peculiarly titillating to a keen appetite;
and by the devouring maw of some one ready to swallow such a delicious morsel,
many an innocent man has sufferred: for the sake of a great reward, I presume
in some measure, was the cause of part of my sufferings; but my innocence has
disappointed such, and given chagrin and disappointment to the bitterest (if
not to say the most malicious) of my enemies. If the reward could have been
obtained, I surmise whether or not my life might not have been at stake, by
false representations, legally attested, and a variety of other attempts
combined. The law of this country, says, the Bank is justifiable in taking up
any person and putting him in prison when any accident happens to them: (for
speaking of the bank, it must be understood those immediately in, and connected
with it) provided the prisoner can be held to bail. The bank found no
difficulty in this, as I could be held to such bail as I could not command; and
their power as a body, could form a thousand different ways to ensure my
imprisonment; which they virtually (though I think rather viciously) effected.
This being my case, my particular wish is to lay before my friends and fellow
citizens, a statement of the whole transaction; to show them and the world at
large, the cruel treatment I have received, and which I conceive is not to be
exceeded if equaled, (considering the ^^use in which I suffered) by any
civilized nation.

FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,

ABOUT the third of the month of May, 1797, I was employed in making fixtures
and preparations for the book vault, which was built on the first story of the
Bank of Pennsylvania. On the 7th of July following, I finished two iron doors
under the direction of one Samuel Robinson, a carpenter, (belonging or working
at aforesaid Bank, as I suppose), I observed to him at that time, (and he has
since acknowledged that I told him) the stupidity of making iron doors on that
construction, and at the same time telling him the insecurity of the locks; and
as he was entrusted with the whole charge of the work, it was his duty to
inform the President of the Bank of those impediments I laid down to him at
that early period. The lock of the inner door is a common iron rim lock, with
two tumblers and a brass bolt. The chief design of such locks are for cabin
doors, as the salt water has more effect on iron bolts than on those of brass.
The outer door lock is an old room door iron-rim lock, with the latches taken
out (the latches are in my possession to this day); and as this publication may
no doubt reach Europe, where grand securities are generally understood by
bankers, merchants, and those ingenious mechanics who manufacture the same; I
only ask, What must those men think or say, to hear of a bank of such magnitude
being robbed, for even a compting house is a strange thing there? but if
rightly considered, How can it be otherwise, or suspected otherwise; when such
vast property is only under the security of a ten or twelve inch room door
lock? It is not my business to describe the plan of a bank lock -- Neither is
it my place to give a clear definition of any thing I manufacture, (not to say
but I would do it), but I have been several times treated in this manner, viz.

First, After I have described the manner that such and such things were to be
done, some paltry character carried off the plan elsewhere, and got it done in
a bungling manner.

Second, If you attempt to describe the best mode of working, it is but very
seldom listened to, and only answered in a low way, he or they only wanted a
job for themselves; and people who possess those temporary ideas often reflect
on the honest tradesman who warns them of their danger.

In the early part of 1798, I waited on Mr. Fox, President of the Bank of
Pennsylvania, by the desire of Mr. Stocker, and as the subject of building a
new Bank was then in agitation, I carried with me a box of wards; I only showed
him that work, but did not explain the utility of it -- (let work show itself
when finished). At this meeting there was Mr. Fox -- Smith the Cashier, and
myself. A conversation took place, opened by me. The conversation is as nearly
as I can rec^llect, thus -- I told them I made the iron door and lock for the
Bank that was robbed to the northward, and that that lock was of a construction
which I had never made before; that it required two keys to open the lock, and
but one key hole; that the President carried one key, the Cashier the other,
and that no money could be get out of the vault except both keys were present.
The robbery of the bank to the northward Mr. Fox and myself perfectly agreed
from report; that the inhabitants where this Bank is were divided, even private
families were separate in opinion. The President and Cashier were jealous of
each other -- the President had one party, and the Cashier had another party.
Whether any person ever borrowed any thing from this conversation, I may be
presumed to entertain my apprehensions from late circumstances. The reader will
please to observe, that I was not applied to for this iron door and lock, until
sometime after the robbery of the northern Bank.

About the 4th or 5th of August, the Yellow Fever had assumed an alarming
appearance, and the citizens were removing with precipitation in all
directions; I was at this time employed in making several pieces of work for
the temporary removal of the Bank of Pennsylvania, to a large house adjoining;
which was formerly occupied as a boarding house for young ladies: I was still
working under Robinson the carpenter, who called at my shop and left word with
my apprentice to stop the work, and that he would call and tell me what for. I
waited a day or two -- Being a little uneasy. I went to Lodge Alley where the
preparations were still going on and found Robinson; I asked him why the work
was stopped, his answer to me was, that he would put me up to it by and by, at
the same time giving me strict charge to take no notice to the bricklayers;
however he never put me up to any thing, or his meaning for acting in this way.
On Thursday about the 9th or 10th of the same month, Robinson brought two iron
doors on a dray, (those were the two doors which I made about a twelve month
before) for the book vault* together with the old rim locks, keys, etc. the
doors were to be altered in the following order, viz. the door which was on the
outside of the book vault was made the inside of the cash vault, and the inside
door of the former, was made the outside of the latter, which was done by
removing the hinges of each door to that fide which the locks were on; which
was a complete reverse of the whole work. New key-holes were cut, etc. On
Friday I began to operate on the doors, after doing Mr. Stocker's work. In the
afternoon I was visited by Robinson the carpenter, who brought a person with
him, a stranger to me. They both took a particular observation of the locks,
keys, etc. I told Robinson at this time, that those locks were not fit for a
bank in the hearing of this stranger. (The reader will please to keep in direct
and point blank view this stranger, and there may be a possible surmise of the
character of some of his connections). During the whole work, Robinson informed
me, that Smith the Cashier, would not employ me after this was done, owing to
the delay. I answered it made little difference to me. I gave Robinson and his
companion something to drink, and they both went away toward Second-street.
They had not been gone above ten minutes, when Robinson's companion (the
stranger,) came back, and went into my shop while I was answering a young woman
at the door; I took no notice of him, as he appeared to be Robinson's
confidential friend and companion. He did not stop above a minute, and came to
the door. I said I was in a hurry, and must work all night, as the Bank was in
such haste for their work being done. Robinson's companion answered, that he
would see all Banks damned before he would kill himself this hot weather. He
then took his course toward Front-street -- he did not follow Robinson:
whether they met again immediately or not, I cannot tell, but suppose they did.
Next day (being Saturday), both doors, locks, etc. were carried to
Carpenter's-Hall, where the business of the Bank of Pennsylvania was removed
to. The front door of the vault was hung, the lock fixed complete, the inside
door was hung; but the lock was not screwed on, owing to the following
circumstances. A large bar of iron which is fixed in the brick-work, and serves
as a lock-box or staple, the door being too broad, was brought back to my shop,
to have a mortice cut out of the front style, to receive the above bar or
lockbox. (It is to be observed, that the lock belonging to this door remained
in the Bank all Saturday, Sunday, and part of Monday), when both doors were
fixed to the satisfaction of the Bank. About this time, another smith, (not
Smith the Cashier), was employed in fitting two doors belonging to another
vault, which was kept a profound secret from me. I now began to look on
Robinson with an eye of jealousy, and where his drift would run, was still
unforeseen to me. The next work I did for the Bank, was altering several lamp
irons, mounting lamp posts, etc. but to a certainty, I was not in that Bank
after the 12th or 13th of the month, being then entirely done with their work.
About this time, the Yellow sever began to increase. I made a small hydraulic
engine for Mr. Cramond. About the 20th or 22d of the month, I was walking down
Market-street, with an intention of buying some peaches at Market-street ferry;
as I came round the corner and got abreast of the river Delaware, I there saw
Robinson and his companion (who was with said Robinson at my shop), fitting
drinking together: and it is to be observed, that Robinson and myself never met
without asking each other to drink but at this time. I never saw two men so
much* alarmed and confused in my life, as they were: I saw their alarm and
noticed it, Robinson and his companion saw the discovery I had made on their
apparent embarrassed countenances; but I could not tell what design they were
about, to give them such an alarm, or what cause it could arise from. After
they got the muscles of their faces composed, Robinson called me from the water
side -- He put the following questions to me. Mr. Lion what brought you this
way? Are you not afraid? the Yellow fever broke out here. I answered, What
brought you this way? Are you not afraid? Mr. Lion do you mean to go out of
town? I do not know. Do you mean to go out of town? He answered he did not
know. Says Robinson, Mr. Lion there is a bar wanted for some of the doors of
the Bank: he mentioned the door; but I do not recollect which door. His
companion answered, Damn it, there will be no occasion for that. I told them, I
was ready for them at all times. They were drinking either porter or beer
sangaree, they never asked me to drink, and I thought I could perceive by their
confused and apparent embarrass'd countenances, they would prefer my absence to
my presence; I left them, and went to a peach beat, and bought some peaches,
and carried them to my shop. Having nobody there but my apprentice, I said to
him Jeamie, I saw Robinson, and the stranger that was with him when we were
doing the iron doors, at Market-street ferry; they seemed to me to be in deep
study, I don't think they are after any good.

The last piece of smith-work I done, was a guard iron to a glass case for Mr.
Dobson, it was fixed on Saturday the 25th, before breakfast. This day I was
resolved to go out of town, I hired accordingly a horse and chair, and taking
my apprentice with me, went down to Mr. Leiper's estate in Chester, where it
was my intention to reside, as I had been in that gentleman's employ; if he
could accommodate me while the ^ever lasted I thought it might have been an
advantage to both; but he was not there; I therefore returned to Philadelphia
the same evening. If the fever had not broke out (or a report that it was) at
Boston, it was my full determination to have gone there to work; I heard of a
new bank building there, and it was my wish to work and be industrious as long
as I was young and able. For some time previous to this, we (my apprentice and
myself) were obliged to sleep in the shop, as the Yellow fever was next house
to mine. On Sunday the 26th, ^at breakfast in the shop, eat dinner at Lebanon,
and supped with the family of my apprentice. Monday went into Bucks county
about 20 miles, to farmer Paul's, where my old landlady and her family resided,
(she being sister to Joseph Paul). The family were making me up a piece of
linen for shirts; I took leave of the family with a full determination to go to
the capes of Delaware. Tuesday 28th of August, the ^ore part of the day was
taken up in procuring a passage for the capes, which I found about 3 o'clock
P.M. I had some linen in the wash, and being close tied to time, I gave my
apprentice orders to go on board the schooner, lying at Arch-street wharf,
commanded by captain Edward Collins, bound to Broadkill creek, near Lewis^own;
as my linen would take some time in drying. The wind being southerly, the
schooner took more time than usual to beat down; I ordered my apprentice to
heave out a signal at Almond-street wharf, which was done. I went on board of
said schooner about 5 o'clock P.M. taking a bottle of rum, provisions,
clothing, etc. The crew and passengers consisted of the captain with his wife,
who had been newly married, a young man before the mast, a young woman, myself
and James M'Ginley my apprentice. I took a proper view of all hands, and found
them to be truly Delaware shallop-hands. Our schooner (alias a wood shallop)
was very leaky: the captain said he wanted to sell her, he said he was offered
L.50 for her sails and rigging, but he thought it too little; the main sail was
not without it is decorations, it was completely patched, and was not confined
to canvas only; but toward the lower part, were pieces of check shirts or
aprons. The peak hallyards had three or four knots, and it was with great
difficulty some times to get the knots through the blocks either way; the
foresail was passable; the gibb was a delicate piece of goods, the upper part
being made fast to a woollen stocking. Who would suppose that the exalted
commander of such a temporary unseamed leaky machine as this schooner or
shallop; should, or could have the conscience to assume more dignity, more
importance, and more affectation than the commander of a first-rate man of war
in his Britanic majesty's navy -- but that was the case.

We went down the river next day being Wednesday 29th, all well on board. I
never saw my boy in higher spirits, from the time he came to me. On Thursday
30th, my apprentice began to complain, and from the nature of his complaint,
and what I had heard of concerning the Yellow fever, seemed to correspond. In
this forlorn situation, I did not know what in the world I should do; having no
medicine on board, being no judge of his disorder, and far from home, where no
medical aid could be called to his relief; was to any candid, feeling person;
one of the greatest trials of mind a man can undergo -- it was the greatest I
ever met with. We had a high wind, and a heavy swell, and was obliged to put
into Quahans^y for safety. The storm abated toward the evening, and we
proceeded on our voyage. Next day, Friday 31st, my apprentice continued very
sick: became quite weak, and lost the use of his limbs; and had it not been
that I kept a watchful eye over him, he would have fallen overboard several
times; in this low situation, I was obliged to hold him over the gunnel: and
the risque I ran may easily be conceived; as our blankets were frequently put
together. On Saturday the first of September, we came into Broadkill creek.
After we had sailed up the creek a considerable way, the schooner, or shallop
run aground. We went on shore about 10 or 11 o'clock A.M. My apprentice seemed
much better, but like myself, quite unacquainted with the nature of his
disorder. All his actions, and behavior, appeared to me like a man in a state
of intoxication. We traveled across a salt marsh, and the first house we came
to, was a Mr. Fisher's, who gave us some cider to drink, and likewise gave us
directions to a tavern, which was two miles forward. I said to my apprentice, I
will go forward, and do you walk on at your leisure. I saw by this time he was
getting worse again, he could not wa^k without staggering; the leaders of his
neck were become so weak, that his head was like a ships mast, having lost all
her braces; it is impossible for any person to describe my situation; having no
medicine with me, and being a stranger to the dreadful disorder he was
laboring under; at the same time hearing so much of talk of the ^ever and
ague, I was led to believe that it was that disorder he was laboring under. I
went forward and passed through two woods, and arrived at the tavern kept by
Cornelius Fleetwood, about seven miles from Lewistown. Mrs. Fleetwood got
dinner ready for us. After waiting a considerable time, I began to be uneasy --
I went back the same road but could see nothing of my apprentice -- Then went
through both woods where I found him lying asleep under a tree, having not gone
far from the spot where I left him at first. I raised him up, and with vast
difficulty got him to Fleetwood's tavern. We both sat down to dinner, and much
to my surprise, Sir, says he, I cannot eat. I prevailed on him to take a dish
of coffee, which he consented to. He let fall the saucer. Mrs. Fleetwood
standing by, I made an excuse for him. If even I had been certain that it was
the Yellow fever that was his disorder, my own idea suggested it would have
been improper to have disclosed it on his account; as I was well assured we
should not have long found shelter. After dinner I prepared to walk to
Lewistown, telling Mrs. Fleetwood to let my boy have whatever he wanted. I then
took leave of him, telling him I would be with him next morning, and bring some
medicine. I proceeded to Lewistown, and arrived about five o'clock, P.M. and
fell in with an old acquaintance, Captain Learmonth. Eat supper with him. After
supper we took a walk about town; fell in company with Mr. Joshua Hall, who
engaged with me for my boy to go to work for him; I slept that night at Mr.
Elliot's tavern: next morning being Sunday, the 2d of September, I shaved
myself * eat breakfast with Mr. Elliot's family; I then bought half an ounce of
bark for my boy, concluding in my own mind that his disorder was the fever and
ague. I set off for Fleetwood's tavern, where I had left my boy, and there
being two county roads, I was directed by a black man the wrong road, which led
to Indian river; met a country gentleman, and from him received information,
that I was six and a half miles out of the proper road. Being on foot, the day
excessive hot; and my anxiety of mind in regard to my boy made me like a person
distracted. However by the goodness of the country people, I was directed from
one farm to the other, and came to Fleetwood's tavern, where I found my
apprentice in a shocking situation. I immediately procured two doctors, and
when they met in the room they differed in opinion respecting the disorder.
Doctor Wilson of Lewistown, declared it to be the Yellow fever; Doctor Little,
(from I know not where) insisted it was the nervous fever. I was to receive for
the boy the aid of both, therefore it was not proper for me to differ with
either, as I was no Doctor myself. However Doctor Wilson's opinion proved to be
right. I cannot help remarking the modesty and care that this gentleman treated
me ^ith, and his sympathetic feeling for my perilous situation. Monday,
September 3d, my boy continued very ill; had him bled, and bathed with hot
vinegar, and some herbs by the direction of Doctor Little; at the same time
giving him Doctor Rush's po^ders in molasses -- found that the calomel did not
lay on his stomach, we found sugar to answer better. I nursed him night and day
till Tuesday morning, 4th September, when about six o'clock that morning he
died.

Here I cannot help adding my sorrowful regret for the loss of one of the most
promising youths, perhaps in America; he was aged about 19 years, and had been
with me about nine months. I took (while with me) all the pains in my power to
instruct him in my profession; and began to instruct him in the knowledge of
the useful problems of Euclid's Elements: he began to see into the stupidity of
the old mode of working which gave him an enthusiastic spirit of enquiry; he
was honest; his principles were good; and he had every appearance of becoming a
useful member of society, and an ornament to his country. The attachment of
this lad toward me was wonderful from many instances; and lastly, when we were
obliged to sleep in the shop; (as I have before observed on account of the
Yellow fever existing next-door to my house) he made his bed at my feet, and
after a hard days work, groaning under the burden of heavy labor; he
frequently would feel my feet in the night, and wake me and ask if I was well:
it is wrong to reflect, but the loss I sustained by the death of this promising
youth, I am certain I shall never retrieve.

I got a coffin made for him, and put him into the coffin myself, and had all
the difficulty attendent on such a mournful accident on my own shoulders, by
this time: I had become so weak as to be scarcely able to follow him to the
grave, to sigh a last farewell to his departed spirit. After burying him in
Squire Hazard's burying ground, I was obliged to stay, close in Fleetwood's
tavern where I was like a prisoner: all his customers left him, a school house
just at hand every scholar forsook, I can hardly describe the deplorable
situation in which I was placed. In the space of a few days after having got
every thing clean away; the alarm began to wear off, and though I might venture
into Lewistown, as the people there were afraid I would come too soon and bring
the infection: I remained in Fleetwood's till Friday 7th September, when I
proposed to Mr. Fleetwood to go to Lewistown, as I was without company: he
agreed. I asked him what I had to pay, he went and consulted with his wife, and
he brought me in debt six pounds, I told him I had not so much money left, and
to offer him a note I told him it was what I could not accept of myself, I
addressed Mr. Fleetwood in these words, Sir, I have but thirteen dollars and a
half, I shall want some ready cash in Lewistown, and I am far from home; will
you accept of my watch as I am a stranger to you, and I will pay you the six
pounds, when you come to Philadelphia, (which has been since done) we were both
satisfied, shook hands and parted. I went into Lewistown this day, in which
place after my arrival I was spending my time very agreeable, in fishing,
repairing guns, coffee mills, etc.

About the 12th, or 13th, of the month, I was told by one Samuel Edwards, a
pilot, that a bank was robbed: he was not certain as to what bank, but believed
it to be the bank of Pennsylvania; I gave myself no concern about which bank, I
afterward saw an account of the robbery in a newspaper, I still gave myself no
concern, but I began to think who could be the most likely person that had
committed this robbery: my suspicions were strongly levelled against the
carpenter and the stranger, I saw drinking with him at Market-street ferry.

On Sunday about the sixteenth of the month, a Mr. Hunter and his wife came to
Lewistown, with whom I formerly lodged in Philadelphia; having from that
circumstance a knowledge of, or intimacy with each other for a few years
before, we conversed about the death of several acquaintances, and the subject
of the late robbery of the Bank of Pennsylvania; but he never hinted that there
was any suspicions against me till next day (Monday), when as I was walking
past the house of Mr. Elliot, Mr. Hunter, called me, and asked me to take a
drink with him: he then repeated the story of the Bank robbery, telling me,
that there were many persons taken up, mentioning three names; but I did not
recognize any of the names he mentioned, I then asked him if there was one of
the name of Robinson, taken up, he said he could not tell, he began to tell me
a long circuitous story, adding that he was sorry there were many innocent
people suspected: from his manner and mode of conversation I was induced to ask
him if I was suspected, he told me that I was, I asked him his reason for not
telling me sooner, he said he did not like to affront me. I then told him I
would go to Philadelphia, which he strongly advised me to do. I then called my
landlord Captain Learmonth, and consulted with him, who entirely approved of my
resolution. In which manner I could get a passage to Philadelphia, I was
entirely at a loss. I went immediately to a Captain West, who was to sail next
day to Brandywine-creek about 28 miles from Philadelphia.

I got every thing prepared for the voyage before dinner, and in the afternoon
I went out to sea, on board the British frigate called the Hind, commanded by
Captain Larcom. This frigate and an armed brig came round to raise the Brack
f^oop of war, which had been sunk some time before; I then began to form to
myself the design of making a diving bell and go down into the vessel, as it
appeared to me impossible to raise her: the day before they broke a 13 inch
hawser, I went below with the armourer and spent the afternoon with several of
the officers, till night came on. The pilot-boat had left me, and I was afraid
I should have to stay on board till next morning: during this time some of my
acquaintance on shore were dubious of the commander detaining me, as they said
I would be a useful man on board: at that time there were two officers on
shore, my friends had formed to themselves this idea, viz. to keep the officers
as hostages 'till I was restored. But to my great satisfaction, a pilot-boat
belonging to David Hazard, came out to the brig with the two officers, and I
returned on shore about eight or nine o'clock, I went home and found myself
very hungry, every thing cleaned away, I went to the house of Mr. Elliot with
an intention of getting something to eat and drink, I spent the evening and
slept there that night. Next day being Tuesday about the 17th, or 18th, of the
month. we set sail after dinner from Lewistown for Brandywine creek; we arrived
on the Thursday following, 20th instant, before six o'clock in the morning. I
went twice through Wilmington, (where the Yellow fever was raging) to take the
stage or get any other carriage to bring me up to Philadelphia. The fever was
as fatal in Wilmington, in proportion to the number of its inhabitants, as it
was in Philadelphia* in crossing Brandywine bridge, I begged a chew of tobacco
from a traveller as a preventative -- At this time all intercourse was stopped
between the two places. I was very anxious to reach Philadelphia about 9
o'clock A.M. and resolved to walk it; the day was as warm as any during the
summer, I took of my coat and carried it over my shoulders: on crossing
Brandywine bridge a second time, I met a Mr. M'Kenzie, he asked me where I was
going. I told him and what for; he told me, that the night before, he was in
company with a clerk belonging to one of the banks, who informed the company,
that they had got hold of a shallopman, who took down the river with him, a
smith and his apprentice; and that the smith had a red pock^^ book full of bank
notes. My going down the river with him was true; but as to a pocket book I
never carried one. I knew the shallop man I went down with, to be a poor,
silly, ignorant creature, and this began to make me afraid there was something
very serious. I bought a biscuit and three peaches -- at first start I
traveled to Chester, and saw no person in particular that I knew on the road,
until I came to a white-house, where there was a number of German passengers
consigned to Gurney and Smith, merchants, Philadelphia. I there met a Mr.
Curtis, a potter; as soon as he saw me, he told me what I was going to
Philadelphia for; but persuaded me to go back again as they had got the people.
Here we had something to drink, and I eat my biscuit, which was all the food I
eat during my journey. As I had got so far, I thought I would go and show
myself to some of my acquaintance on the out skirts of the town; I met Squire
Wharton, I met also John Haines, the saddler; but did not know that he was a
constable till next day. Mr. Curtis passed me on horseback, we met at Derby
where we had something to drink, and as there was a barber in the house I got
shaved, being about 7 miles from Philadelphia. I proceeded to Mr. Stocker's
country house situated in the Irish track about two miles from Philadelphia,
arrived there about 7 o'clock in the evening, very low, owing to the heat of
the day, traveling on foot, and the little sustenance I took on the road; I
was so tired I lay down among the grass before Mr. Stocker's door -- he was not
at home. I begged for some refreshment, but instead of receiving any, the
domestics began to quarrel about it; I asked for a drink of water, they would
not give me any thing. I knew I could get any refreshment I wanted at Lebanon:
but had thought they would have taken care of me for one night at Mr.
Stocker's; but I was disappointed. I got up scarcely able to walk and was
proceeding down Irish track lane, on my way to Lebanon, being dark, here I met
two chairs, the first I asked if that was not Mr. Stocker, he answered yes.
Don't you know me said I? Is that Lion? yes, says I. Who took you? I told him I
did not want any taking, I came of my own accord; I asked him what charge there
was against me. He said there was a charge and would be glad If I could prove
my innocence. I told him it gave me but little concern to do that. I then asked
him to let me stay in his house that night, he answered no. I asked him to let
me sleep in his stable among his hay, he answered no. I then begged him to let
me sleep on his floor, as I was afraid to go into town; owing to the Yellow
fever making such terrible ravages he again replied no. We agreed to meet next
morning at 9 o'clock, I then proceeded to Lebanon, ^here I fell in with Messrs.
Saunders, Bingham, and Bri^^ly: they gave me some supper and made me up a bed
on the floor. I told those gentlemen, who I thought had robbed the Bank. They
gave me strict charge not to mention any thing of the sort, told them I could
not keep it; I had seen something that appeared suspicious to me, and I thought
my suspicious ^ere (...) founded. Next morning being Friday, I got up and went
into Philadelphia, to my own house, and (...) another suit of clothes. I
afterward ^ent through Lombard Street, where (...) met Mr. M'Ilwaine, who
informed me that there was a state's warrant granted against me by Squire
Jennings, this appeared wonderful to me. I was in a fainting situation owing to
my long journey, the day before (...) borrowed a che^ of tobacco in
Lombard Street. The city was clothed with that dismal melancholy garb that
one might naturally expect, from the effect of so dreadful a disorder as
reigned at that time. I went to Squire Jennings, by the advice of my friend Mr.
M'Ilwaine, when I went to the office of Squire Jennings, he did not know me;
when I told him my name, and upon asking him if he had granted a state's
warrant, he said no. I then asked him if he had granted a state's warrant
against any person who was under suspicion for robbing the Bank of
Pennsylvania; he said yes, and by the order of Smith, the cashier of said Bank.
Well said (...), here I am; what have you to say against me. He said he could
not stop me, as he had not the warrants, in his possession. He then asked me
where I had been; I told him at Cape Henlopen, about one hundred and fifty
miles from Philadelphia; he asked me if I came that far on purpose. I answered
yes. I then asked leave to get breakfast; he told me he would trust me to get
breakfast, as I had been so honorable as to come 150 miles to surrender
myself. He strongly persuaded me to go to Germantown, where the Bank was
removed; it was too far for me to walk and I was afraid to go into any of their
carriages, because the sick were frequently in all the common carriages; I held
in remembarance my former promise to meet Mr. Stocker, at nine o'clock, A. M. I
breakfasted with my friend John Saunders, at Lebanon; but was very faint and
low, and my joints were become stiff in a great measure. I proceeded to the
house of Mr. Stocker, and arrived there about a quarter past nine o'clock; as I
entered the gate, he mounted his horse, and said, Lion I will be back directly.
While he was gone, Squire Wharton, came to the house, Mr. Stocker returned in
about two hours afterward, and brought with him Mr. Fox, the President of the
Bank, Smith the Cashier: (and Haines, the high constable was slily sent for) at
this time I did not know that Haines, the saddler had been transformed into a
constable. Mr. Stocker, being one of the City Aldermen, opened the examination.
They took down in writing all my travels from the time that I left
Philadelphia. Mr. Fox, asked me if I saw any strangers taking any particular
notice of the locks, I answered no. (I did not when the question was asked,
reckon Robinson the carpenter a stranger, as he and his acquaintance came to my
shop while the doors were there; nor did I according to the question, conceive
the other to be a stranger as I had seen him with Robinson). However I still
held Robinson in suspicion, and from the circumstances of a Mr. Brodie, a
carpenter, who was hanged at Edinburgh. On this examination before Mr. Stocker,
etc. I related the story, with the view to show, in what I held Robinson in
suspicion for robbing the Bank; which was thus delivered, as near as I can
recollect, viz. That in part of the year of 1788 and 1789, I was then on my
travels in Scotland. About this time Mr. Brodie the carpenter, had been tried
and condemned to die for robbing the excise office. Mr. Brodie's long train of
villainies was carried on in the following manner: He employed a vast number of
journeymen, and built perhaps a street at a time: be that as it may, every
house that he finished, he was sure to have false keys made for every door in
the house, until he had a collection of false keys that would have filled a
large cask. He had a secret place situated without the city, where he kept his
false keys. The bunch of keys that was made for each house, had a tally, and
when he wanted to rob any particular house, he possessed himself of such a
bunch of keys, with such a gentleman's tally. He was a man entrusted very much,
and did the government work in his line in that country; and carried on robbery
for several years, till, he was detected robbing the Excise office. He made the
first new invented gallows in the North, and was the first that swung upon his
new invented machine. This circumstance of Brodie's; connected with others,
wrought so much on my mind, (and I knew that Robinson had all the Bank locks in
his possession), that they appeared to me (whether visionary or not), like two
parallel lines. During my examination, became very faint, and called for some
water, which was thought an implication of guilt, (here I would wish to ask the
best informed and most experienced of mankind, if an innocent man has not
generally more tremor when accused, than a guilty person; who is for the most
habituated to an emboldened confidence from nature or from custom). Smith the
Cashier, began to lay down the manner in which the Bank was robbed, and the two
locks that were in my possession were opened, and that the cellar door was
broke open; at this time I did not know the situation of the Bank, whether it
had a cellar door or not.

The suspicions entertained against me at this time, were as follows, to wit.
That I had two iron doors at my shop, with the locks. I knew very well my
innocence, and as there was another smith employed in fixing two other doors; I
asked why not suspect him? They answered me he did his work in half the time. I
found I was in the hands of those who were not the most intelligent of mankind
-- rich, but probably connected with Gotham. Mr. Stocker addressed himself to
me, after having had a secret conversation with Mr. Fox. -- "Mr. Lion, I am
very sorry: but I must be under the disagreeable necessity of committing you to
prison." I begged of him not to do that: assuring him of my innocence, and
accompanied with all the entreaties I was master of; telling him if he sent me
to prison, he was not only sending an honest man there, but the son of an
honest man. But to my grief and sorrow, at this moment entreaties were vain,
opposed to inflexible obduracy. Mr. Stocker told me he had proof against me;
this appeared strange to me, and where the great error lay, my p^^^^rating eye
could not discover. Mr. Stocker said, here is Haines ^he constable waiting for
you. I submitted. -- I knew the Yellow fever had made its appearance, and had
its effect (I believe) in prison. This to me was like fronting the lines of an
enemy, exposed without a possible means of defense; but there is to some (...)
not to be avoided.

I was then ordered into a chair with Haines the constable, who drove me to
prison. After he had lodged me in the hands of the head jailer, he went home
and sickened with the Yellow fever, I myself never expected to come out alive.
I reflected on the hardship of my fate, but consoled myself with the idea, that
innocence would be shielded by providential omnipoten^y. When I entered the
prison, there were between twenty or thirty cases, of that almost unsparing
disorder. I was put instantly under close confinement. The keeper of the
women's wing had charge of me, whose heart was not of the dove kind, but rather
in kind, more like to a lapstone. I begged of him to get me some refreshment.
He brought me some rice soup: it was unwholesome, being made of old rice^ and
even at the best of times, there is not too much nourishment in any of their
dishes; but it was more particularly the case in regard to me, considering the
low situation I was in. About this time, I began to be drawn double. I offered
the keeper a sum of money, (part of the little I had) to get me something
nourishing; adding that I could not eat the soup. He answered (not very
smoothly) if I could not, that I might do without. He then took the soup away,
and I was twenty four hours afterward without a morsel. About this time, the
deaths in the city were very numerous; according to report, they exceeded one
hundred per day. The room where I was closely confined, was in the north west
corner, where I had a view into Sixth-street; here they kept their potatoes,
manufactured shoes, stores, etc. I had about 12 feet by 4 to walk in, the
greatest part of my friends were out of town; and those that were in town, were
afraid to come to the prison; as the fever was raging there, and that with a
degree of violence, together with the heavy charges exhibited against me, were
sufficient preventatives against my having the consolation of seeing any of my
friends. I sent for a worthy citizen, of the name of William Lace: who visited
me twice. I told him of my suspicions. He begged of me to keep quiet. I told
him I could not -- and that if they would let me loose, I thought from what I
had seen at Market-street ferry, I could sift the matter out. Here Mr. Lace
took sick with the Yellow fever; and I was fearful I should never see him more.
About this time, my old keeper died with the Yellow fever, (and I am apt to
think did not leave too much humanity behind him), his name was Lewis,
professing to be a quaker. Some acquaintances occasionally spoke to me at the
window -- I wanted something to eat -- the keepers neglected me sometimes. I
had a little money in my pocket; I tried if I could throw a potatoe into the
street, which I did; I called an old acquaintance to the window, and was about
throwing him a dollar to buy me some meat; he went off telling me he would call
again, but I did not see him 'till I was liberated. Mr. John Saunders, of
Lebanon, visited me, who procured me some refreshment -- he called a second
time, and returned me my money back, with tears in his eyes, (the most
impressive language to show the finest feelings of human nature), imploring me
earnestly to keep up my spirits under my heavy load, he took leave of me and in
a few days after died with the prevailing disorder. Thus the humane and good
are as liable to the dispensations of providence, (if not more so), than the
crafty, mean, and villainous.

About this time the Bank had sent down to Lewistown, and enquired concerning
my travels, and found every thing to be correct, (as related in the first part
of this work), except an omission of telling them that I was on board of a
British frigate, which they got an account of there. Mr. Fox, the President of
the Bank, sent a letter to Mr. Peter Helm, the head jailer, with a twenty
dollar note enclosed. The substance of the letter I understood from the jailer
as he opened the iron door where I was confined, was thus: He asked me if I had
read the Governor's reward, and the additional reward of the Bank. I answered,
Yes, I have read both. He then asked me if I knew any thing concerning the
robbery, as the letter sent from Mr. Fox contained a twenty dollar note, to be
laid out in necessaries for me, and a desire to know if I knew any thing of the
robbery. I answered, I knew nothing of the robbery; but that I suspected
Robinson the carpenter, who had all the locks in his possession, and as the
outer and inner doors must have been open, before they could get to the vault
doors, even allowing the robbery to have been committed by opening the cellar
door. I never had the cellar door lock in my possession, nor the outer or inner
door lock, and putting me into prison on so slight a view of the case; was as
great a cruelty under the exercise of the law, as perhaps ever was committed on
the body of any man. About this time, my friend William Lace was getting over
the Yellow fever, which circumstance was a peculiar gratification to me; he had
buried one of his children, a regretted loss no doubt to him -- he visited me
after his recovery several times. Haines, the high constable, after staggering
through the consequential force of the prevailing malady, visited me likewise
-- the head gaolar with him. He asked me several questions; I told him of my
innocent, though hard case, I likewise told him that I had reason to suspect
certain persons. By this time he had learnt I suspected Robinson, the
carpenter, but I gave him no satisfaction; I told him I had reason to suspect
two persons, and would be glad to get my liberty, as from the situation I had
seen those two persons whom I suspected, I would si^t the matter out. I
likewise told him of the injustice in the Bank, by keeping me under close
confinement so long; telling him at the same time, I thought they had taken the
wrong method to find out such a robbery. I then related to him a comparison,
which I had read of the superstitious customs of old, which is thus, as near as
I can recollect. That in the days of yore, wh^^^ a person died, it was supposed
by some writers that the soul does not leave the body immediately, but
gradually withdraws as the body cools; during this time, the relatives or
friends of the deceased, sets what is called the passing bell to ring; and in
those days, the people believed the Devil to be the Prince of the air and being
fond of music, this bell was rung as they said, to divert him aside, so as the
soul might pass up to the milky way without infernal obstruction. Having
related to Haines this ancient story, and saying at the sametime, the people
who had committed this daring robbery, had whispered into the ears of the Bank,
that it must be this one, or that one, and look that way, or the other way; but
don't look this way: while they who committed the fact, were snugly hiving
their booty. He le^t me, and went I suppose to the directors of the Bank, who I
have not the least doubt, had given him every instruction in what manner to
proceed. But I found sufficient suspicion to believe this visitor of artifice,
(...) be keen for the reward. I was again visited by him in a few days after,
but at first sight I saw (as far as I could judge of appearance) the reward was
his object. We entered into a long conversation. He told me if I could give him
any information, so as the bank could get at some of their money, that I should
be entitled to two thousand dollars. I told him it was out of my power, as I
was an innocent man, and knew nothing of the affair; but I still had my
suspicions. He then asked my suspicions. I declined giving him any
satisfaction; but said if they would let me loose, I thought I could catch the
fellows. He told me that the Directors of the Bank had a meeting, and had given
up the whole to Mr. Stocker; and that it was left entirely at his pleasure to
set me at liberty if he thought proper. This part of Haines' story appeared
reasonable to me, because (as far as I ever understood) in the old country,
they cannot keep a man in prison on mere suspicion exceeding the space of
forty-eight hours, without the liability of the law, (and that liability
consequential). He then asked me if I would tell my suspicions to Mr. Stocker.
I told him as it was left to Mr. Stocker to liberate me, I would not tell my
suspicions 'till I got my liberty, and then I should have a better opportunity
of sifting into my suspicions before I would proceed. Shaking me by the hand,
he delivered me a message from Mr. Stocker, that I should still think him (Mr.
Stocker) my friend. I told him it was impossible for me, considering every
circumstance, to think him my friend, after the severe treatment I had
experienced through his means; as he certainly must have known or suggested to
himself that I was innocent of the charge. I told Haines that there were many
innocent men condemned in prison; he said he believed it to be true, as it is
common here (meaning the prison) to punish the innocent for the guily. I told
him that such a disregard to justice would, or might certainly have an effect
to cause a revolution in this country, and drew several inferential remarks
relative to the bastile of Paris.

I was frequently visited by the convicts, who passed occasionally by my room
door, and amongst those I must particularize a certain John Sheaffer, who had a
brother confined on account of the late robbery of the Bank; he asked me
several questions, such as, where I was at the time the robbery was committed,
etc. and giving him a full account, etc. the reward being great, and he to gain
his liberty; laid one of the deepest and most machinating schemes that could be
capable of villainy, ever heard of, for the sake (of what I suppose) a reward.

Under this long solitary confinement, I wanted books (divested of any other
amusement), to pass away my time; I at length got the Bible and Robert Burn's
Scotch poems, which made my library as complete as was in my power to collect.
I read until I was tired, and walked till I was weary, every day expecting that
my releasement would come; and although I am, and have been, very much given to
professional study, I could not study the grand science which I have made so
much progress in, (considering my age,) embracing every opportunity to do so.
If I attempted to pass away my time in natural musical harmony, ( i. e.
whistling and singing), I was ordered to a dungeon. If I spoke to any person at
the window, I was to be sent to the cells (or a dungeon), this I thought very
hard, for to suffer in the manner I did, before a trial commenced, (or a cause
for trial); the usage I received was worse than any prisoner, either convicted
or those for trial, as we all suffered our confinement, with this difference --
the convicts had a large yard to walk in, while I was lingering by myself, on
suspicion only; and at this period no person admitted to hear the sorrowful
breathings of truth, which emanating from innocence, might have had a
sympathetic effect. Every hour expecting to hear of the discovery of the
robbery, I frequently prayed in the most fervent manner (when it appeared to me
that the robbery was like to be for ever concealed), that the Great Creator
might confuse those who had the money, so as the whole might be brought to
light -- to liberate the innocent, and bring to condign punishment the
perpetrators of the deed, for the commission of which I was suffering. My
breast was now swelled considerably, and I was drawn almost double, my hair
fell from my head as I walked in the room. At this moment I could not help
taking a retrospect of the past, reflectively considering my former situation
in life, being in possession of a house full of furniture, which cost me
between three and four hundred pounds; having three capital beds, and to sleep
on the hard boards every night, was a solemn and serious change. After I had
suffered five weeks or upwards, in this miserable and forlorn situation; Haines
the constable came to the prison with a horse and chair, and told me Mr.
Stocker would be glad to see me. I dressed myself as well as circumstances
would admit, and went before Mr. Stocker, with a long beard, which a razor had
not touched since the time I came through Derby. Mr. Stocker said he was glad
to see me. I told him I^ is very sorry to see him, owing to the wretchedness of
my situation, and began to ask him what could be his meaning for sending me to
prison; to this question he gave me no satisfactory answer. After expostulating
with him for some time, Mr. Fox, the President of the Bank came. No sooner did
he enter the room than Mr. Stocker and himself, (the President), began to talk
about some great dinner, (I thought that human misery might have commanded a
little more respect), and Mr. Stocker observed he was very sorry that he lost
so good a dinner -- this dinner was at Germantown.

Let the reader consider within himself my miserable situation, just brought
out of a loathsome and unwholesome prison, and to hear two men unfeelingly
trumpeting to each other in common though exulting language, the glorious
gormandizing that had taken place on such a day at Germantown. I observed, (or
thought I observed) or saw by this time, Mr. Fox was but a young man in every
sense of the word, as to his experience in the world. We had a long
conversation on the art of lock-making, but I could not extract from them the
least information by what means or manner the inner hall door of the Bank was
opened; this seemed to put the whole congregation to a nonplus, with regard to
my case, this point only ought to have been sufficient to have cleared me, and
I believe in the real opinion of the whole it did -- but say they, you are an
ingenious man, and could do such a thing. After all my trouble and vexation, I
found I had to deal with men who were rather more obstinate and persisting than
experienced, and I was suffering, and had suffered from that cause. I was then
asked for my suspicions. Mr. Stocker got pen, ink and paper, and took down the
following words, as near as I can recollect, viz. That on the Friday afternoon,
or the day after the iron doors came to my shop, Robinson the carpenter, came
to my shop with a stranger, they both examined the locks very closely; Robinson
gave me strict orders to go on as quick as possible, I told him in the hearing
of the stranger that the locks were not fit for a bank. Robinson's answer was,
Damn it, it will make a shift. I gave Robinson and his companion something to
drink, and they both went toward Second-street. In about five or ten minutes
after, Robinson's companion came back and went into the shop, while I was
answering a young woman at the door. Robinson's companion did not stop one
minute -- as he came out of the shop, I said to him, I believe I must work all
night, the Bank is in such a hurry for their work. Robinson's companion
answered, and said, he would see the Bank damned before he would kill himself
for them; he then went toward Front-street* While I was hanging the doors at
the Bank, I saw this companion of Robinson's there; but I could not tell what
he was, I had never seen him 'till within those two days -- Robinson's
companion appeared to me to be a clerk, (I suppose in the Land-office), as
Carpenter's hall had been occupied by the Land-office, prior to the removal of
the Bank of Pennsylvania -- Robinson's companion seemed to me to be well
acquainted with the whole of the Banking house. I afterward, about the 20th or
22d of August, saw Robinson and his companion at Market-street ferry: just as I
turned round from Market-street, they were both sitting at the front window,
and I declare, I never saw two men so alarmed as they were at the sight of me,
they stared and looked confused at one another; I saw they were alarmed at my
appearance, therefore I did not go near them; but they observed I saw the
confusion of their countenances. Robinson called me to the window -- they were
drinking either porter or beer sangaree, but did not ask me to drink. Robinson
says to me, Mr. Lion what brought you this way, are you not afraid? the Yellow
fever broke out here. I answered, what brought you this way, are you not
afraid? Mr. Lion, says Robinson, do you mean to go out of town? I do not know,
says I -- Do you mean to go out of town? he answered, he did not know. Says
Robinson, Mr. Lion there is a bar wanting for a door of the Bank, mentioning
what door; but I do not recollect what door it was he mentioned. His companion
replied, Damn it, there will be no occasion for that. I answered them, I was
ready for them at all times; however I saw by their countenances they wanted to
get rid of my company; I left them, and went to a peach boat and bought some
peaches; carried them to my shop, and gave my apprentice some of them. I said
to my apprentice, Jeamie I saw Robinson and that stranger, at Market-street
ferry, that was in our shop while we were doing the iron doors; they seemed to
be in deep study, and I do not think they are after any good. Having delivered
those suspicions, and Mr. Stocker having taken down the whole in writing; I
asked him if it had any effect, will you give me the reward. Both Mr. Stocker
and Mr. Fox, said it was good for nothing. I then demanded my liberty, from
what Haines had related to me in prison, viz. That the directors of the Bank
had, had a meeting, and left it in the power of Mr. Stocker to do as he thought
proper -- which information I communicated to Mr. Stocker. Mr. Stocker told me
it was no such thing, and that it was out of his power to discharge me. I then
called Haines, who was out of doors, to relate what he said to me in prison. He
seemed not to understand me. Says I to Haines, did you not tell me in prison,
that the Directors of the Bank had empowered Mr. Stocker to liberate me, after
I had delivered my suspicions? Haines with all the assurance properly belonging
to the profession he now follows, (and as if he had been long hacknied in the
profession), flatly denied the whole. Mr. Fox asked me why I mentioned
Robinson's name so often. I answered because I did not know his companion's
name. I perceived by this time the partiality of Mr. Fox toward Robinson; he
would not believe that Robinson ever made use of an oath* I have heard Robinson
swear, and have seen him get as drunk as any other man, but Mr. Fox would not
believe this. Previous to the Yellow fever I had heard a very mean character of
Robinson, in several respects, which strengthened my suspicion, after I had
heard of the robbery of the Bank. I asked Mr. Stocker in what manner I should
get out of prison. He told me it was out of his power to do any thing for me,
as he was an Alderman when he committed me, but since chosen one of the
Assembly, of course he was obliged to relinquish the former. I told him it was
cruel in him to serve me so, and who was his prompter I could not tell; but
certainly there was some person in the Bank who owed me some private animosity;
and observed likewise to him, that there were men in that Bank, who set up the
empty pretensions of being gentlemen, that I would not go over the threshold of
a door to do them a service, owing to their meaness; and telling him at the
same time not to cast any reflections on any other nation, for I plainly see,
said I, when power falls into the hands of the Americans they were not always
more humane than other nations. Said I, would it not have been much better for
you to have taken and hung me at once. Mr. Stocker answered, Mr. Lion if we
have done wrong, there is the law open for you. Sir, said I, in what manner
must I act to get out of prison. He told me I must hire a lawyer, (whether I
had money or not I supppose), and be removed by habeas corpus before any of the
Judges, and g^t out on bail. But, Sir, says I, the bail you asked of me on my
first examination was 150,000 dollars, which was, and is out of my power to
command. But probably the bail, said he, will be lowered. The Yellow fever was
now extensively spreading, and sweeping all before it in the prison, which
affected me much; but Mr. Stocker told me, that if the affair was found out,
and if I was clear, all my losses should certainly be made up to me. He told me
he had sent me twenty dollars for my relief. I thanked him -- Mr. Fox entered
the room after having had a long private conversation with Haines, the supposed
agent of the Bank of Pennsylvania; says he, Mr. Lion are there any such things
as dubbs to be bought at the ironmongers. Dubbs, Sir, said I, (...) don't know
what you mean. Why (says he) keys ready cut, with the wards complete, and fit
to open any lock. I told him I did not think there were any such to be bought.
Well, says Mr. Fox, I sent you twenty dollars for your relief, in case you
wanted any thing. I thanked him. I thought Mr. Stocker's twenty dollars, and
the twenty dollars from Mr. Fox, which made forty dollars, would keep me pretty
comfortable for some time. I begged of them to tell the jailer to use me well,
as I thought for the last fortnight, I had been roughly treated; they both
declared it was not their orders. After laying every circumstance down, that
they had no right to suspect me, Mr. Fox asked me if I knew one Boyd a
bricklayer; I told him I did not, but had heard of him. He then asked me who I
thought could do such a job, as making false keys; I mentioned several, amongst
the rest was my brother James. Mr. Stocker told me there would be a meeting of
the Directors, and that he would do all in his power to modify them, and (says
he) if you are found to be an innocent man, all your losses shall be made good
to you again. I told him it was impossible for them ever to make my loss good,
for it is easy (says I), to take away the good name of a man, but not a very
easy matter to re-establish that name, so taken away; I have (I observed to
him) acted as a gentleman since I was put in prison; but I now found my temper
could no longer be restrained, and told him never more to expect a civil answer
from me. I was then ordered back to close confinement. I went into the chair
along with Haines, who I began to consider as a speculator on human
wretchedness. I prevailed on him to drive me into Third-street, as I wanted to
speak to Captain Guy, which he consented to. As Captain Guy was well acquainted
with the jailer, I told him to step forward and speak to the keeper, and
prevail upon him to use better treatment toward me, which he did the next day;
the jailer then asked my complaint, which (...) delivered to him, viz. That I
was in want of many necessaries, and for a fortnight no person admitted to see
me. The jailer told me that orders were given, and he could not help it, and
that he expected another rush from the prisoners. I told him if he apprehended
any danger, open the door of my room and I will defend you as far as lies in my
power. The city as I rode through had a dismal, deadly, and dreadful appearance
-- no vehicle to be seen but those soul striking carriages, adapted for the
conveyance of the dying and the dead. After I was re-conveyed to my old
habitation, and there again fixed, I begged as a kindness that a friend might
be permitted to bring me some paper, that I might have the pleasure of writing
to some of my friends, and to see if any of them would bail me out -- which was
procured. I wrote a letter first to Mr. Stocker, pointing out to him the
impropriety of keeping me in prison, likewise laying down the crippled
situation of the Bank in regard to it is security against robbery, and that as I
had warned them of danger almost twelve months prior to their last misfortune,
and they would not listen to me; it appeared to me there was a veil over their
eyes, so as to hinder them from seeing clearly, and that their locks were on
the barn door principle. After closing this letter I do not know from what
impulse, (but it might be from a foolish one or otherwise, but it was a sudden
one), I directed this letter in the following manner, to wit. John C. Stocker,
Esquire, from the Honorable Patrick Lion, now in Philadelphia prison. This
letter, the contents of which unfolded the unguarded stupidity of their
security for such extensive property, and such a bold direction to one of the
State Legislators, (who perhaps might think himself one of the Lord's
anointed), had such a powerful effect, that it raised a ferment or a flame
throughout the whole Bank, and they all heartily declared, (and I give them
credit for their candor in this particular), that they would stretch every
^^^don to bring me to punishment, (the view of justice I presume was then
obscured by the interference of prejudice). There is not a doubt but writing
the truth might gall the soreness of some of their half healed wounds, but
truth being my mistress. I follow her dictates, and penned what I did; and what
I did write I defy any or either of them to prove to the contrary, (I mean in
the body of the letter, but leave the superscription out of the question, as a
mere matter of inanity). I wrote letters to several of my friends to step
forward in my behalf; and one of them I cannot help remarking on -- I had
formerly put (with entire confidence in him) into his possession, all the money
I possessed, and had such a particular confidence of his integrity that I did
not require a receipt; he sent me an answer to the following purport, that he
would not bail me for a five penny bit, (or what is commonly termed a fip-penny
bit). I reflected on mankind, and thought at that trying period of time, the
sin af ingratitude was the superlative crime of nature -- but I leave the
wretch to his own feelings. At that identical time I had not one friend left in
the city but William Lace, who publicly declared that he would abide by me, (as
he thought I was wronged), to the last; he was not afraid of any consequences,
as he was well convinced of my innocence -- that man (William Lace), I believe,
possesses the soul of an independent and honest being, and is worthy of his
creator; he frequently visited me at the risque of his life, while the Yellow
fever was ravaging nearly indiscriminately in all parts of the city, but more
particularly in every quarter of the prison. Lawyer Ross visited me, I stated
my case to him, he imagined as the robbery had been so long dormant, it would
not be found out; and he observed that many men from circumstances appertaining
to the law, were punished though innocent, that I was so situated as not to
hope (for the present), any mitigation of course. I got shaved by this time,
and was removed by habeas corpus before Judge Shippen, who was sitting about
three miles from town; my worthy friend Mr. Lace procured two horses and
chairs, and gave a lawyer a fee. I set out accompanied with the head jailer,
Mr. Lace, and Mr. Lace's son; we came to Judge Shippen's residence. I laid down
to the lawyer employed, the whole circumstance, and particularly in what manner
the outer and inner door could be opened, as those locks were never in my
possession, and that those doors must have been opened, before they could get
at the vault door. However after all my trouble in relating every point, which
I thought would have so operated, as to cause my discharge -- I found myself
disappointed.

We came before the Judge, and after waiting some time, Mr. Fox and his
attorney, Mr. Rawle, came. The appearance of Mr. Rawle to me (although he was
retained against me), I was much pleased with, for I dearly love to see a good
and ingenious workman in any profession; the charge was then opened, and Mr.
Fox being sworn, he went on as near as I can recolect, thus, viz That the
business of the Bank was removed to Carpenter's-Hall, that two iron doors from
the old Bank of the book vault, were sent to Mr. Lyon's shop, to have the
hinges, and locks removed, etc. The doors were sent some where about the 9th or
10th of August, but to a certainty it was on a Thursday; several messages were
sent to Mr. Lion, to make as great speed as possible, with the doors, and that
Mr. Lion was told that the doors were for the cash vault. That another smith
was employed to hang the doors of the other vault and that the other smith did
his work in a much shorter time; that he (meaning myself), said on his first
examination, he did some work for Mr. Stocker during the time, that those doors
were in his pofession, and he said the Locks that were on those doors were not
worth a damn for a Bank; that his delay with the doors appeared suspicious, as
the Bank had been robbed. That the inside door was hung first on the Saturday
following, that he did nothing on the outside door till Monday, that he (Lion),
was known to work late the Saturday night when he had those doors in his
possession. That he has endeavored to suspect a Mr. Robinson, and another
gentleman. Here it is necessary to pause a little to enquire who this said
gentleman was, whom Mr. Fox had such an unlimitted confidence in, and of his
integrity likewise; who was this said gentleman but Isaac Davis, the jaunting
companion (sometimes) of Smith the Cashier, or information belies such
jaunting. The same Davis who was courting a relation, (if not a sister), of the
wife of the said Smith; it would have been cruel indeed to have suspected so
amiable, so friendly, and so good a character, as this Isaac Davis (alias the
gentleman) was. (That is, Robinson and the GENTLEMAN), as soon as they heard
they were suspected, came forward and gave a very good and satisfactory account
of themselves, and where they were the time the robbery was committed; that he
(Lion), told Mr. Haines the high constable he would not tell his suspicions
until he got his liberty; that on his second examination he said the inside
lock, was a good one, that having those locks in his possession we were jealous
of him making false keys, as he is a good workman in that line which jealousy
hindered him from doing our work in future, or having any acquaintance in (or
of), the Banks* Mr. Rawle then read the paper, that Mr. Stocker wrote (...) my
second examination, with Robinson's name, but I did not know the name of the
gentleman, who I saw drinking with him at Market-street ferry; but I told Mr.
Stocker to send for Robinson, and close examine him; then ask him who was
drinking with him, says I, the man who was along with Robinson at Market-street
ferry, is the person I mean, and whom I suspect to have robbed the Bank. He
(Mr. Rawle), then read the letter or paper that I wrote to Mr. Stocker, with
the curious direction (as aforementioned), and that he was at Lewistown the
time the robbery was committed, we are sure of; and the account of his travail
throughout we are in possession of which is allowed to be true and just, but
still he is an ingenious man, and what Mr. Smith, the Cashier, has represented
to me appears suspicious; his proving an alibi is to be sure in his favor.
Judge Shippen then asked the following questions, to wit. Mr. Fox have you ever
had a former acquaintance with Mr. Lion? Mr. Fox answered, I had often heard of
him; he has made me a smoke-jack for the use of my house, which answered very
well, and he did the work of the Bank before I was elected President; the first
job he did for the Bank under my direction, was his opening an iron chest, and
I had always heard an honest charactor of him: he was recommended to the Bank
by Mr. Stocker, in particular, and many others. Mr. Judge Shippen then observed
that from what Mr. Fox had related to him, the suspicion appeared well grounded
and he could not take upon himself the power of discharging me: therefore it
would be proper to hold me to bail. My lawyer, then began to enquire after the
bail; and for what sum. The ground work, placed in his hands by me was totally
neglected; which (I surmise) had it been properly handled in a true workman
like manner, might have completely operated for my discharge. I stood and heard
a farce of unfounded (not to say stupid and groundless), suspicions,
nonsensically put together; fit only for the meridian of a tea-table; that (as
far as I am able to judge) scientific men would have thought a mere bagatelle,
and an insult upon their understandings. I then asked Mr. Fox in what manner
the inner door was opened; allowing the robbery to have been committed from the
cellar door. For the inner door lock was never in my possession. Mr. Fox then
began to suppose, that some person was concealed in the body of the Bank. I
then asked Mr. Fox who had possession of the keys of the vault? he answered,
Mr. Smith the Cashier. I told Mr. Fox that neither of the locks were fit for
the security of a Bank (I spoke as far as my professional knowledge led me to
suggest). I told him likewise, that I would not trust a bag full of King George
the second's farthings under the security of such locks. After several
observations on the different methods of Bank work. I told them (that as a
professional man), I knew more about such work, than the whole of them
combined, and put together. Mr. Rawle replied; from that very cause we have got
hold of you; as you are from every report (and what does a lawyer know, or
plead on, but from report), an ingenious workman. I was then held to a bail of
six thousand dollars. Mr. Helm, the head jailer then stepped forward, and said,
Sheaffer had something concerning the business to come forward with. I was then
ordered back to prison, in expectation of getting bail. The bail being lowered
to six thousand dollars; I thought it would not cause me much trouble to raise
a bail of six thousand dollars. In this predicament, I sent word to all that I
supposed my friends; but every one of those supposed friends, relinquished the
idea of serving me: because I was innocent, and unfortunate. Likewise public
confidence (as far as related to me), being greatly diminished by the injurious
(and I think I am warranted to say unjust) representations of the Bank. The
only staunch friend (even in this trying situation) was Mr. William Lace. I was
replaced in my former comfortable abode: ( viz. close confinement). Considering
to myself, how I was placed, was a double severity of mind, and feeling. I
looked and judged of myself, as a stranger in a free and liberal country. I
knew nothing of the systematic plan, (or I might, if impassioned call it
villainy), that had been represented against me. The robbery was still immured
under the murky veil of darkness, impossible at that present moment to be
brought forward to the lucid glare of day. Situated as I was, and not a person
absolutely coming to my relief, I thought (and felt), that it was the hardest
trial any man's mind and constitution could undergo. The bail was now reduced
from 150,000 dollars to 6,000 dollars, which former sum was demanded (or
exacted) by Mr. Stocker; I now thought it was out of my power to raise even,
6,000 dollars; my mind (supposing I must bear the hardship of fate resting on
my shoulders, and a heavy burden indeed it was), was quiet and easy. I here at
this time found I had but one friend who was in town, viz. Mr. William Lace. It
may be necessary at the peculiar and thoughtful moment which then occurred, to
state (as it was then a just idea) the view of my worldly concerns, to wit.
When I left Philadelphia to escape the probable fatal effects of the Yellow
fever, (not the Bank robbery), I possessed the following -- I had a house full
of furniture, every thing as complete as a person in my circumstances would
wish, and which cost me between three and four hundred pounds; my winter wood
was laid in; a smart young fellow for an apprentice, whose loss I most
sincerely regret; I then had and now possess, (after all my hardships and
sufferings) a shop full of tools, that I do not believe there is such in
America, I am certain there is not such a collection in Philadelphia; I had
likewise 1400 dollars in the Bank of North America; the first deposit was on
the 17th of April, 1797, consisting of 860 dollars; the second deposit,
November 3d 1797, of 220 dollars; the third deposit was on the 14th August,
1798, of 410 dollars, and the checks I drew on said Bank amounted to 90
dollars, which left a balance in my favor of 1400 dollars. The last
circumstance I shall here sum up, (though it may appear whimsical) is my Will
and Testament, which was drawn up, signed and sealed, (in presence of Mr.
North, etc.) on the eighth day of August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-eight, a copy of which I subjoin: viz.

The last Will and Testament of Patrick Lion, of the city of Philadelphia,
Smith.
Being of sound mind, and disposing memory, is as follows: namely.

First, I desire to be buried in as frugal a manner as possible, consistent
with decency; (that is to say), a plain stained coffin, and that there be a
foot and head stone to my grave, with the following inscription -- My sledge
and hammer's both, d^clin'd,
My bellows too have lost their wind;
My fire's extinct, my forge decayed,
And in the dust my vice is laid;
My coal is spent, my iron's gone,
My nails are drove, my work is done.


My Executors hereafter named, having deposited my remains as above described;
then as to all my worldly estate whatsoever, and wheresoever, wherewith it may
please the Great Author of my being and existence to bless me, the whole being
personal, I dispose of as follows: viz. After payment of my funeral expenses,
the expense of this my will, and all my just debts; and also my executors
retaining in their hands for their trouble in executing this my will, all
reasonable charges, and all the remainder, arising from the sale of my
household furniture, implements of trade, ready money, debts owing, and so
forth. I give and bequeath to my father, Patrick Lion, of the city of London --
Smith. But in case, he, the said Patrick Lion should be dead, then to my
mother, Mary Lion, wife of said Patrick Lion, if living; otherwise to my
youngest sister Jane Lion, if living; otherwise to my uncle John Craig, of the
city of Aberdeen, in Scotland, Scrivener: and if in case none of the aforesaid
persons should be living, then my mind and will is, that the aforesaid bequest,
shall be divided to and amongst those next of kin, to the said John Craig, a
share and part alike, and I do hereby nominate, constitute, and appoint,
Richard Guy, bricklayer, James Fraquier, stone-cutter, and Thomas Dobson,
bookseller, all living in the city of Philadelphia, aforesaid, to be the
executors, of this my last will and testament; declaring, ratifying and
confirming this, to be, my last will and testament. In witness whereof, I
Patrick Lion, the testator, have to this my last will and testament, set my
hand and seal, this eighth day of August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-eight.

Signed, sealed, published and declared, by the said testator, Patrick Lion, as
and for his will and testament in the presence of us, (who at his request, and
in his presence, and in the presence of each other) subscribe our names as
witnesses thereto.

PATRICK LION.

GEO: NORTH, JAS. NORTH.
After a valuation of my household furniture, my capital tools, stock in trade,
and ready cash, it would have amounted to 6,000 dollars at least; so that
whoever came forward to be my bail, could be no looser. It was now drawing on
toward the latter end of October, and after a few days return from my
examination before Judge Shippen; Haines the high constable, came to the room
where I was under close confinement, and asked me if I would answer one
question. I replied, I would answer him any thing he pleased to ask me. Says
he, do you know one of the name of Majess, a pretended Englishman? I told him I
did not; I asked him if any person of such a name, had any concern in the
robbery? he said, -- No. He could not give me any reason for asking after such
a man; but this was only a counterpart of his former deep, fly, wire-drawing
projects. Sheaffer the convict, came and asked me if I knew the clerk of the
Alderman's Court; I told him I did not, -- he answered, he (the clerk) knows
you very well; perhaps he does, said I. Says Sheaffer, do you know Captain
Phelps; I told him I did not; says Sheaffer, he is very well acquainted with
you; I told him that must be impossible, for I had never heard of such a name,
who could have the least distant claim to my company, or acquaintance. Here at
this identical period, I was informed by one of the convicts, that Sheaffer,
with several others, (whether from a bribe, or their habituated principle of
villainy, I know not), intended shearing my life, character, or consequence in
life away -- to blast my fame, and damn my poor remains of happiness -- but a
conscious feeling of my own innocence, baffled their endeavors, and in not the
least touched my soul with trouble, as I knew their dark machinations could
have but little avail.

There was a Mr. Murray came to the window of my prison, to speak with me; I
was then (I suppose from that circumstance), ordered into a dungeon, but after
some debate in the grand divan, I was excused by the head jailer, under the
positive promise never more (while a prisoner, suppose), to speak to any one at
the window. At this time, my worthy friend Lace, was walking past the window,
(but from what cause, I know not, was afraid to speak to me), he waved his
hand, but I did not understand him. I thought some persons unknown to me, had
formed and accomplished a design, and that villainously, for the sake of the
reward to swear against me. He shook his head at me, which I understood, as a
signal that I was gone, which brought me to an ejaculation, and to my bended
knees.

About this time, I found myself rather sickly; I begged for a little wine, but
I could not get it. I was examined by the head jailer, who was a good judge (at
this time), of the Yellow fever, and he declared me out of danger. The weather
now became extremely cold, and the coldness of the weather made me shiver and
tremble. The convicts (generally speaking), had fires, or a fire in their
respective workshops. Richard Guy got up one morning, when the frost set in,
and sound himself very cold. I wonder, said he, (whether to himself or not, is
left to the world), if they have allowed poor Lion any fire, who is confined in
a damp room of a prison. He came to the prison, and enquired, and found that I
was not overheated within the walls of a cold, damp, unwholesome, loathsome, and
solitary prison. He reprimanded the conduct of the conductors of the prison
toward me, and as they would not wish to be guilty of the sin to blush for
shame; they conscien^ously caused a fire to be kindled for the advantage, and
comfort my suffering constitution.

The long confinement I had experienced, and the hard usage I had received,
forced me to a conjecture that there was certainly some secret enemy saying
closely in wait, for the deprivation of all human faculties, (my life), and the
sooner shortened the better; but my heart was good and firm: I knew and felt my
innocence, and that was my grand, great, and substantial support. On the last
day of the month of October, a discovery was made in the prison, of a
conspiracy against me, (and that conspiracy of the most black, dark, and
malignant that human nature could, or might have suggested, caused, or formed,
viz. That when Sheaffer, (who may be in the eye of the law a very respectable
character), and a doctor, whether a disciple of Sangrado or not is out of my
power to tell^, but both were criminals, and they acting (to wit, Sheaffer and
the doctor) in conjunction and joined by a certain captain Phelphs, (a trio of
infernals fit for Hell.) Those three worthy gentlemen (though accident might
make them criminals), had formed the plot as aforementioned for a considerable
time, until it was discovered by some of their fellow convicts in prison. The
doctor came forward and confessed the whole to Mr. Helm, the head jaoler; after
he had laid down to Mr. Helm this piece of villainy openly, he then came to the
room where I was under confinement, and then and there told me, that John
Sheaffer was the planner of the whole scheme, and that he employed a certain
captain Phelps to embark in the business for what purpose I know not. Soon
after this, Sheaffer came to the room where I was and brought another convict
with him (to be a second clause and bribed witness I suppose). He then
addressed me as far as I can recollect, in the following words. Sir, that
wicked doctor, I find, has been telling Mr. Helm a parcel of lies; I never had
any conversation with Mr. Smith respecting you, no farther than I told him you
was an innocent man. Our business was about some forged checks: (the Cashier I
suppose) might enter into a collateral conversation in regard to the checks.
The doctor had given me a pretty good idea of proceedings before, and what
Sheaffer now told me, seemed to me to have such a corresponding effect on my
mind, that I answered Sheaffer in this manner, viz. (It might be improper or
impassioned, You, and Mr. Smith may both go to hell. You are right my friend
said Sheaffer, and marched off. In a few hours after the head jailer came into
my room, and said there are fresh orders. What are they, said I. You must go
into the east-wing of the prison; I answered, "Thy will be done." There is
another prisoner coming here, said he. Pray, Sir, (quoth I), what is his crime?
On account, (he replied) of the Bank. Well, Sir, says I, I hope you have got
the right one, for my sufferings have been, and are now very great. I was then
conducted into the east-wing, where common thieves and vagrants remain for
trial; all the different apartments were wet, owing to scrubbing the rooms to
cleanse the infection from that part of the prison, where the Yellow fever with
that malignity peculiar to itself, had been ravaging and laying waste every
thing before it; I was put into the room No. 12, where I found two more
unfortunates encaged for the same crime, I was myself; we were now allowed some
wood to make a fire to dry the rooms, etc. and toward night, I sat down in
company with about eight or ten prisoners, in this blessed and beautified place
for different crimes, and some of the company that composed a part of the
aggregate, appeared to me the most desperate men I ever saw. One in particular
entertained, (if an innocent man could think it so, the company with a
compendious history of part of his life, and introduced triumpthantly a long
train of villainies: in short, I conceived he was the wickedest man I ever saw,
(or ever wish to see. But the heart of the wicked, I believe at some particular
periods, are capable of being softened. We all, (when rest was required), laid
down on our soft and comfortable bed of boards. One of my ^ellow prisoners who
laid next unto me, says friend, I presume you have seen better days in your
time; I told him I had, I told him likewise it was hard an innocent man should
suffer for the crime of the guilty. Having no pillow to lay my head upon,
though not so religiously inclined as I perhaps ought to be^, I borrowed an
expression from the New Testament, spoken by the admitted Savior of
christianity, when he was in distress: viz. The foxes have holes, and the birds
of the air have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his head. This
observation had such a wonderful effect upon my unsought for companion, that it
softened the wickedness of his heart so much, he instantaneously jumped up, and
found me a pillo; saying, my friend, this is not a sit place for you. Next day
the prisoners formed themselves into different companies, the genteelest part
of them, (if any could be properly termed genteel) took possession of No. 9,
and strongly invited me there; But being a mere uncultivated stranger, it was
some time before I would consent to be linked with this genteel, or
gentleman-like society or company; at last I agreed. There were none admitted
in this grand company, but those on suspicion of noble and great crimes, such
as for instance, forgery, robbing Banks, etc. The prisoners for trial were
removed from Morris's building. They now introduced another prisoner on
suspicion of robbing the Bank of Pennsylvania; he was admitted into our room.
There being on his admission, four of us confined at the same time, for the
same charge; but to confine, deprive men of liberty, destroy character,
wantonly, with a numerous variety of et ceteras, on mere paltry, and vague
innuendos or suspicions, is a cruelty perhaps not sanctioned in any other
country but this, which should be the grand emporium of liberty: Myself
confined on suspicion of making false keys: Two others found in a tavern, for
playing at cards for a dollar per game: And a young lad for having the pleasing
misfortune of being in possession of a fifty dollar note, on the Bank of the
United States; Smith, the Cashier, took him before Squire Jennings; but the
great, honest, and Chester county Cashier, of the Bank of Pennsylvania, did,
according to the report of the lad; show him (the lad), but little humanity. It
is not always the case that those who rail vehemently against vi^e, are the
most virtuous. The young ^ad fell on his knees begging (for what was out of
their power to give) Mercy. Their hearts were a composition of (...) and steel,
and he was accordingly committed. Having described four prisoners, the fifth
one who was put into the room where I was under close confinement, was put in
the prison for keeping company with the young (lad, who was put in prison for
having the fifty dollar note). This young man (who was supposed to be the
companion of the other youth), had not remained in prison two weeks, before he
became in an apparent or positive deranged state. ^every day (^^^m
circumstances attendant on a prison), became more and more acquainted with my
fellow prisoners, one of the then prisoners, gave me a brief (but I believe a
just description of captain Phelps), who was out of doors acting in conjunction
with that amiable character, (known I believe throughout the United States by
the name of John Sheaffer) for, and on account of propositions laid down to
them, to receive an hire for villainy (perhaps heared of villainy or unheard of
villainy), that is immaterial at present. Phelps was speaking justly and
fairly, as honest a character to be trusted with an oath, as many others, (to
swear the life and character of an honest man away, to have, and effect or
cause for the gallows, though that man whose life was to swear away, was
innocent), and was like others, as deep an endy'd scoundrel as ever disgraced
walking the surface of the Earth; and Sheaffer and company (it is rumoured)
were his intimates, and companions. He (this captain Phelps) would (if
possible), swear away the life of any man, for the sake of a reward. (Justice
being out of the case, or it was immaterial to Phelps), for like all the
rascally retainers of the law, for the sake of a reward; he could guelph down
both law and conscience without feeling pain or compunction: and Phelps for
doing this was a hireling, (eight dollars the reward) for what? to swear wrong,
or right for the sake of the sea, the wicked gave against the innocent. It is
impossible to describe the situation I was then in, expecting to be starved, or
doomed to more misery, than I had already received; (though an innocent object
of misery, cruelly situated in regard to myself) I expected to be plunged into
a state of starvation, through the means of an invidious individual.

About this time, one of my old journeymen who had a particular regard for me;
wrote a letter, and gave it into the hands of Mr. Lace, the contents of the
letter, were feeling, friendly, innocent, but unguarded; the purport was thus,
telling me to keep up a good heart, there was no fear, and such like. Mr. Lace
examined the letter, and prudently witheld it, (as the police of Philadelphia,
whose fondness for commission on slight suspicion, is but too prevalent, might
have transformed the meaning of this letter, wrote in a style of simplicity and
unlettered partiality), as it might have been the cause of his imprisonment; by
the bye, every letter must be sent into the prison unsealed -- in a day or two,
Mr Lace with the journeyman alluded to, with him, got leave to visit me. I
complained of the severity I sustained, and begged of the journeyman to go and
bring me one of my beds from my house. I told them of the plot that had been
formed, (by the fertilized brains of two complete villains); to wit, Sheaffer,
and the Doctor, both convicts, and the arch villain termed captain Phelps, a
noted swindler, and and one of Doll Tearsheets' captains. Mr Lace was struck
with horror at the recital, and begged me to have no conversation with any of
them, to shun and avoid speaking of my profession in any point of view
whatever; by this time the twenty dollars that was sent by Mr. Fox, and Mr.
Stocker, (though both had complimented me with the sending twenty dollars each,
and raised my expectations to forty dollars) was expended. Mr Lace procured me
one of my beds, and supplied (...) with provision; about this time, the
infamous captain Phelps' death was announced in the prison, which caused the
scheme (entered into by a person or persons, as I firmly believe, and think
with strong proof) to prove an abortion. I now began to see into the internal
regulations of the prison. A prisoner was one afternoon playing a game of
drafts, the board and what are called men, had been cut out with a knife; he
was seized by the collar -- I addressed the keeper thus, or nearly in the
following words, viz. Pray Sir, where are you going to take this man? To the
cells -- he replied; for what, says I? his answer was, for playing at drafts --
pray, Sir, quoth I, where is the great crime in that, consider and feel what
are the principles of humanity: consider this man is naturally a brother, and
perhaps innocent of his charge -- you don't know whose hands, yourself may fall
into yet -- you make dreadful playthings of the keys of the cells -- consider
Sir, the crime of being the cause of slow murder. There is a God in heaven,
(omnipotent and merciful; but whose avenging arm could crush thy worthless
carcass to nothing, and whose power could overw^^lm thy soul with misery), will
judge of you. Be not hard, (said I), on your fellow creature, let the man go.
The keeper let him go. The prisoner then turned toward me, and with tears in
his eyes, (and I love to see the tears of honest sensibility, add^ ^^ed me in
the following manner; May God almighty bless you* Sir, I shall be ever thankful
to you. This short and concise prayer or blessing, was worth more to the (...)
of my feelings, and of man, than all the money in the Bank of Pennsylvania; and
more than all the ill used dross the world comprizes.

There is not, (if a man may be permitted to speak his opinion), a better
school for villainy, than the convict-yard o^ Philad (...) prison. At this
school I believe a (...) might make (...) with, more than he (...) if he was a
constant visitor there. It is customary in every room when the prisoners are
locked up at night, to have a bucket; and the rule is, whoever makes use of the
bucket first, must carry it down in the morning: it happened one night, that
the bucket had been used by some of the prisoners; but by whom, it was not
exactly known; however to end all disputes, the Bible was got, and every one ^n
that room swore, he did not use the bucket that night. This is a specimen of
what an ingenious criminator might effect amongst such a set of worthy
disciples, especially if he carried the means of seeing with him; and a just
specimen of what you will find in Philadelphia prison. But this kind of false
swearing was not confined to the prison; but others (their) accomplices out of
doors, true brothers in iniquity, endeavored to effect the purpose.

I now began to understand by the prisoners, the meaning of the term, which I
had heard used by Mr. Fox, the President of the Bank, viz. The term Dubb, it is
a flash term used for key, and is used among thieves. I understood from them,
that there were (rum dubbs, que^r dubbs, fluted dubbs,) and such a man was a
good dubbsman; this (as I learned, from the genteel company, I was unjustly
confined with), is the genuine explanation of the term or ord dubb, which term
I never had heard before it fell from the lips of Mr. Fox the President. Nor
had I the least idea of the meaning of the term, till I was removed into that
learned seminary here the term was explained, viz. amongst thieves of all
descriptions.

Captain Phelps' character was very well understood by several of the
prisoners, but a more infamous character, (if what I heard was true, and of the
truth of which information I have not the least doubt), ever came to my notice:
but as the man was dead, it gave me no concern; it may, however, be reduced to
a certainty, that he had taken several false oaths at so low a rate as six
dollars. From report, a gentleman inimical to me, had visited this notorious
villain several times; probably with a view to give latitude to his intentions.
The next that was hired on this nefarious business, was one of the name of
Miller, a former convict and who was in for another offense: I found by his
discourse, he was a sapper and miner under the orders of General John Sheaffer,
and a certain gentleman; but I followed the advice of my worthy friend Lace, to
hold little conversation with any of the convicts; nor give an idea to any
villain of my workmanship. I told Miller I could not do the work I was charged
with, and that I did not follow key making, and was only a rough smith. Miller
and the rest of his gang, gave up the idea of wire drawing any unguarded
expression from me. The Robbery still remained undiscovered, and my treatment
hard: no friend was admitted to see me, or communicate with me. If I wrote a
few lines, they were burnt or destroyed. If Mr. Lace wrote to me, it was the
same. I was obliged when prisoners were discharged, to write him by means of
their conveyance, to prevent him giving himself too much trouble on my account,
as he earnestly felt for my situation: one night after all the prisoners were
locked up, the head gaolor came to the door where I was confined, and called me
by name: I answered, Sir. Have you got a brother, says he, yes Sir, I replied,
where is he? I don't know, here I paused, for I did not know but they might
have hauled him into prison as well as myself; as the least suspicion according
to what I had experienced myself might warrant such an act. At last I answered,
if you ask Mr. Ludlam, the plumber he can tell you; the jailer told me he was
dead at New York of the Yellow fever, this circumstance was more pleasing to
me, than if he had undergone, one weeks punishment, such as I had experienced
he must (from punishment like mine), have fallen a victim for Potter's-field,
his constitution being broke, and his health greatly impaired before. About the
14th of November, Jonathan Smith, the Cashier, sent for me out of the east-wing
of the prison. The room when I went below, and where he was waiting for me, had
every thing cleared away but a few chairs, hand-cuffs, etc. when I entered the
room, the jailer shut the door; Smith then began, well, Mr. Lion, you are here
yet. I took a chair to sit down; but while sitting down, I said the following
words, to this great Cashier, Yes, Sir, I am here yet, and if it had not been
for your speculation, I should have been out before this. Why so, what
speculation of mine? did you not go personally and tell those people that were
to have been my bail, that you was sure I had a hand in the business? yes, says
he, and I am sure of it; and at the sametime, kept winking with his starboard
eye, with all the appearance of low cunning, the most consumate gentleman could
make use of: for the purpose I imagine, of extracting from my countenance,
something or other that he might make use of to my injury; at those words I
took fire, I told him his insinuations were false, and that through his means
and others, I was ruined, and all they could do now, was to take me out of
prison and crucify me. He got tired by this time of winking with his starbord
eye, and then set too with his larboard eye, and put that in motion. We, said
he, have sound the keys, and can prove you made them. I defy you and all the
seed of Adam to prove that I was ever guilty of a mean action. You (says he)
shall be kept in prison, you shall be tried at the bar. I can bear, said I, my
confinement and punishment with glory, being honored with feelings arising
from innocence -- we parted. I must confess my temper was warmed, owing to his
long insinuating winking, which would have more become a Billingsgate
fish-woman, or a Poissarde of Paris, than a Cashier of a State Bank. I was next
visited by a Mr. Samuel Rhoads, (and a gentleman with him) an entire stranger
to me; here I thought it was requisite for me to be upon my guard. He then
began his story, to wit. Mr. Lion my smoke-jack is out of order, I am sorry for
that, Sir, said I; cannot you, said he, tell what is the matter with it: I
smiled, and was obliged to bite my under lip to prevent me from laughing, and
then told him if I saw the jack there was a probability I could tell him what
was the matter; but not else. What time do you expect to get out? I cannot tell
you, Sir, I am willing to satisfy the public in any legal form, enquiry, or
otherwise; but do not expect to get out before next court. Well, says he, I
must wait. The gentleman who was a stranger to me, then addressed me. Mr. Lion,
what is the charge alleged against you? I told him. They certainly cannot keep
you here if there is no oath against you; have you got any money, because you
can make them pay sweetly for keeping you here. I gave him no satisfaction as
to that point; but I said, if I am brought to the bar, I am informed there may
be a something, have a cloudy appearance, against Smith the Cashier. What, says
Mr. Rhoads, something appear against Smith the Cashier? Yes, says I, it is
rumoured abroad I understand, that he is supposed to have been at the bottom of
this business; (indeed, says I, I told him so myself). Says Mr. Rhoads, why
don't you apply to George Ludlam, he is your friend; Sir, says I, since I have
been in this place, all my friends, (generally speaking), have left me, and
some of them to whom I have lent considerable sums of money; but I possess the
spirit of independence: I will wait with patience 'till they can keep me no
longer -- we then parted, they went into an adjoining room, for what purpose I
know not, but in cases of this kind, there was room to suspect it was not about
the smoke-jack, that those visitors called upon me for information of, it
rather appeared to me that they must have had an an inculcation, of th^se
low-cunning lessons which had generally prevailed against me. I was next
visited by Mr. Benjamin W. Morris, this was about the 19th of November; (and
suppose Mr. Morris then kne^ the Bank's suspicions against Davis). I have had
dealings with Mr. Morris frequently; but must confess, he appeared to me not
always to confine himself to the principles of truth, but rather to the
contrary; and when I find out a liar, (according to the old proverb, a liar is
not to be believed though he accidentally speaks truth), I look upon him, as
never to be by me believed. I was afterward brought down from the east-wing of
the prison, in the north-wing, and to my surprise there stood Mr. Morris in
^aiting; I thought immediately that this visitor as one of the Pumps belonging
to the Bank, to suck out something to establish a crime, though it was
sufficient evidence to any candid mind of my innocence. He proceeded in his
lesson in the following manner, Mr. Lion did you finish my ^heels before you
left town? No, Sir, I did not; ^ell that question is answered. He then took me
do ^n into the center of the convict-yard, I suppose to prevent people from
hearing what he had to say. Pray Mr. Lion what are you here for? I began to
tell him the particulars, and in the course of the narration, relating to him,
the hard usage I had endured, he desired me to stop. Well, says he, I am one of
the Directors of the Bank; (are you Sir, I replied), and last night ^e found
all the money to a fe^ thousand dollars; (I replied), I am extremely glad to
hear it, Sir. But, says he, you made the picks -- did not, (...) answered,
don't speak so loud: we can prove it. (...) defy you (says I), to prove (...)
ever did a mean action in all my (...). Well, says he, you will see. I defy you
and all mankind. Don't speak so loud, said he, and we parted. He as allowed to
go out of doors, but I was ordered back to the prison. (...) regard this charge
of my making picks, as a part of the system aforementioned, i. e. the lying
system; and his no following up that system, I did not believe the money was
found. But luckily for me this assertion of his proved true.

To confirm Mr. Morris's assertion, that the money as found, a newspaper of the
20th of November, came to the prison ^ith some provisions. This paper, was the
Gazette of the United States, published by Mr. Fenno, in which I read the
following paragraph: viz.

Democratic mystery unravelled.

It is ^ith great satisfaction (...) acquaint our readers, that the notes
robbed from the Bank of Pennsylvania, at the commencement of the fever; have
been recovered to within four thousand dollars of the hole amount which there
is a further prospect of getting hold of.

"It appears that one Isaac Davis, a carpenter, and a noted democrat, in
conjunction with a porter belonging to the Bank, who died of the sever, were
the sole agents in this nefarious business. Davis had set up his carriage and
pair, and pretended that an India^^^^ had arrived at New York, in which he sent
out an adventure. On the death of his accomplice, he took the whole of the
cash, (of which a dividend had been made), into his possession; and as detected
by means of the large deposits he had made in each of the Banks."

"N. B. Citizen Davis had made off."

The name of Davis I knew not, or which of the porters were concerned with him,
I was equally at a loss to know; at this time, I was even unacquainted with the
names of either of the porters of the Bank. However, I made strict enquiry of
Mr. H^^^n, the head jailer, who gave me this information, viz. "That it was one
Davis a carpenter, who wrought at the Bank, and one Cunningham a porter
belonging to said Bank." The name of Cunningham was not more familiar to my ear
than the name of Davis, for I knew neither. I then wrote to my tried friend
Lace, to endeavor to get my liberty. He waited on Mr Fox, but got no
satisfactory answer: he wrote to me in prison that he would bring me my
discharge in a few ho^^^, which was what I had long been expecting, and on
account of such information, gave an additional quickness of hearing to me, and
an additional expectation likewise, being glad to hear, receive, and indulge
myself, on such information; I was preparing to have the dismality attending
on, and the horrescent scene of a Prison. But resentment had not yet quitted
the malignant breast of some secret enemy, (which I verily believe) I had in
that Bank, and who from the several ideas of my fellow prisoners, which were
regularly entertained by them, cast a deep suspicion in my mind, upon a
particular individual; (and who are better judges of a schoolmaster than his
scholars). My fellow prisoners wrote to Smith the Cashier, and (from what
influence I know not), were by degrees discharged under the orders of the
Mayor. I do not know what weight, (in the scale of justice or influence), might
have been thrown in. If I had wrote a whining, canting, hypocritical, and
despicable letter to the Bank, like some persons: there might I believe have
been some repugnance against their uniform system of cruelty; but truly
speaking my mind, I would have sooner died under the hardships an innocent man
suffered, than I would have disgraced my firmness, as a man, to ask a paltry
boon from a character like Smith, the Cashier. Independent, native, honesty
forbade it. For in the first place, he came to the prison and falsely accused
me; and I had previously heard, that this Machiavel was the most inveterate
enemy I had in the Bank: and in the second place, (if I could judge of the
system laid down by Lavater), there appeared a down, sullen, hanging, and
revengful look about him, that made me think if I was a Judge upon a criminal
case, such a prisoner would not not have gained much by the favor of nature;
but I believe mankind may mistake on the principles of physiognomy, for many a
man, with a fine appearance, has deserved the gallows, and many a valuable
diamond, has been unjustly punished, because he had a ^ough outside. My worthy
friend, Mr. Lace, went to Mr. Hallowell the attorney, to know why I was
detained in prison. Mr. Hollowell waited upon Mr. Fox, who received him
complaisantly with one of his tea table observations, viz. That Cunningham,
(the man deceased accused, and whose evidence now can be of no avail before any
human judicature); might have dealt with me for false keys, as well as any
other man. And that they were determined to punish me as far as the law would
admit of. Here all my friends at this trying crisis bore the aspect of alarm;
blushing at, (as they supposed), such unjustifiable conduct. Then under such a
consideration, my worthy friend Mr. Lace, was advised to employ Mr. Dallas,
counselor at law, (who I believe is the honest man's friend, and an excellent
expounder of the law -- and though he may have enemies, merit always causes
them; yet he is I believe the a just and worthy lawyer).

I now got a new pair of stockings, and observed as I had worn a pair of old
stockings for eight weeks, the service they had undergone would pay for the
new; and I sent the old ones to Lace to give an emblematical idea of the
prison. I began at this time to prepare for trial, and did not know, but some
gentlemen might endeavor to have a second edition of their former works in
folio, not rough, but neatly bound, and lettered. Under such apparent
circumstances, I sent for a quire of paper, and wrote (as far as I was able,
considering every thing), my travail and defense. After completing the whole,
the keeper of the east wing of the prison came to me, after locking up, and
told me that my friend Lace was below, waiting for, or ready to receive my
writings, which I delivered to the keeper, but my writings were debarred going
beyond the confines of the prison door. In less than ten minutes after this,
Mr. Fox sent up stairs for one of the name of Martin, who was in for forging
notes on the Bank of Pennsylvania; whatever passed between Mr. Fox and Martin,
was none of my concern I thought; be that as it may, the stratagem I believe
was effected, and my writings I suppose fell into the hands of Mr. Fox, which
gave me but very little uneasiness. In short, if Mr. Fox had read my writings,
he must have seen by them, that he had no impulse, feelingly, to act against me
from motives of his own; but I believe he had a prompter behind the curtain, to
teach him the scenes of tragedy.

It was, (by whose order I know not), a Mr. Wood, a clerk to, or for the
prison, who stopped my writings, and which I think he had no right to do, as it
was taking the advantage of an unprepared and innocent prisoner. And believe
every prisoner has a right to write to any friend; providing there is no
relation contained in it of conspiracy of such like. But no, it seems (says
(...) to myself), there is a policy, to get as many mechanics in the convict
yard as possible, and be sure, (says this narrow minded policy), get as many
old countrymen, (as the term is commonly used), as you can; it is not much
matter under what pretense.

The court where my trial was to have been, was in such a state of
prolongation, that many worthy and respectable men, thought it was cruel,
wanton, and malicious in the Bank, (or their agents), to do as they did toward
me, as every unprejudiced and unjaundiced eye, could without winking discern
their spleen. It was therefore thought proper that I should be removed by a
second habeas corpus, before the Supreme Court. My friend Mr. Lace, by this
time had employed Mr. Dallas, (of whose ability and integrity I unquestionably
entertained a high opinion), in favor of me. Though I thought it was as
strange, as it is inconsistent with reason, to employ a lawyer to defend an
innocent man: but when I took a view of the train of villainy, which had been
carried on against me, I clearly perceived it required as much trouble to
extricate an innocent man from Philadelphia prison, as it did a guilty one; the
convict-yard, and policy thereof, (as far as I could judge from reflection and
observation), are enough to make humanity shudder, as perhaps there may be many
an innocent man suffering years of slavery, therefore it requires every
exertion of the prisoner to be used in his defense; particularly if he ^s an
ingenious mechanic, and what is termed an old countryman likewise. A few days
previous to my removal before the Supreme Court, my friend Mr. Lace called on
me at the prison, and told every circumstance in regard to my removal; and that
Mr. Ingersol the Attorney General, was to plead against me. I told Mr. Lace, I
thought it was hard I should be soused; but if Mr. Ingersol is against me, I
know he will do every thing in his power to hurt me, because he has a private
animosity against me, on account of trade. On the 14th of December, 1798. I
dressed myself, and about 10 o'clock, I was sent for out of the east wing of
the prison, to be conducted before the Supreme Court by one of the Keepers:
however I would not go over the prison door, until my writings were restored to
me. After some deliberation I got my writings, which contained most of the
former part of this work; I was then conducted before the Supreme Court,
accompanied by one of the keepers, and my steady and constant friend Mr. Lace.
After waiting some time (...) was called up before the three Judges, viz.
Judges M. Kean, Shippen, and Smith. Mr. Fox swore nearly to the same effect as
he did before Judge Shippen, when I was removed by habeas corpus the first
time; and he want over the suspicions which I delivered before Mr. Stocker,
which was about six weeks before the robbery was discovered; and in those
suspicions, as I have related before in this work, concerning Robinson the
carpenter, and his companion; I thought I had good grounds for suspecting them
from their confused appearance at the sight of me, when drinking together at
Market-street ferry; and their nice inspection of the locks when at my shop.

Smith, the Cashier, sworn. It seemed to me he could hardly hold up his head,
from what cause I know not, but I may suggest from his evidence given against
me, his humane feelings in regard to me were not very poignant. However Jo^tie
went over the whole work as well as ^e could; but in this particular, he swore
that the outside door was hang first, which was right. but it (...) Mr. Fox's
oath before Judge Shippen, (...) then ((...)) swore before the judge and
company present that (...) door was (...) this is a very material point, (...)
the (...) on the (...) door was the worst of the two, as I have related before,
it is an old room door lock, with the latches taken out. However Smith, still
went on, although he could not hold up his head, (being not of the Corinthian,
but the leaden order); he swore after the robbery was committed, he observed
the key of the vault, had some plaster or cement on it. He, said Smith, the
Cashier, swore likewise, that there had been a print of the key taken as it
appeared to him on wax, or on clay, or on putty, or on plaster of Paris. From
such an oath as this, it was easy to conceive any person's drift; in short, a
disappointed gentleman, might not know in what manner to bring his swearing to
bear, because the reader may observe, there is in this oath, the color of
gold, of copper, of silver, of lead, and several mixtures. Here I cannot help
making one observation, with regard to my physiognomonical knowledge, and I do
publicly declare, I can read a man's conscience, and will not be deceived at a
less proportion, than as one to six. At this time I could read Smith the
Cashier, through and through; and it appeared to me the indelible mark of
conscience was perceivably depicted on his brow, though fate may have ordained
him for another purposes.

Robinson swore, (the companion and intimate of Isaac Davis), this Quiz, (for
the Bank sent me to the flash school), was in such a condition, that the Judges
were obliged, to tell him to hold up his head, and speak out; and many of the
spe^^^^tors from the appearance of the man, supposed him to have been the
thief. As they said he confessed I told him of the insecurity of the locks more
than once, which proves that my knowledge of the crippled state of that Bank
was not wrong; but well founded. His oath upset Mr. Fox's, as he swore, the
outside door of the vault was hung first.

John alias Jack Haines saddler, and high constable and one of the wire-drawers
of the Bank of Pennsylvania or their agents -- swore, that he visited me twice,
and that I told him I knew who committed the robbery; and that I observed to
him, I would not te^l until I got my liberty and swore that I sent for him to
communicate the same. He went on with a long train of cant, peculiar to
himself. (Mr. Fox swore mistakenly once, which can be proved); but this
evidence wound up the whole; I declare I never heard a man swallow the gudgeon
before so completely (I am much obliged to the Bank for the knowledge of some
phraseology I occasionly make use of, as they sent me to a well educated
seminary): But the reward I believe was his object, and like a man dreaming
that he had a large quantity of cash in his fist* and awaking in the morning
found it to be a dream, and being a shadow instead of reality, feels forcibly
the disappointment. I must acknowledge, I sported with him, when I suspected
the reward was his object, and he very artfully turned the word suspect, into
the word know -- my suspicions with regard to Mr. Robinson, and his companion,
was all along kept secret until this time; when to my great surprise the
strange gentleman that came to my shop, with Robinson, and whom I had a
physiognomonical view of at Market-street ferry; this strange gentleman and
companion to Robinson, turned out to be Isaac Davis who robbed the Bank, and in
whose possession the money was found. This is some proof of my knowledge, only
by looking a man in the face, and it is the deepest knowledge I know of. The
Attorney General began; I observed this gentleman's conduct before, and I was
not the least deceived, he went on with my travel from Philadelphia and with a
great many insinuations thereon, much to my disadvantage, and which were not
founded upon fact. Mr. Dallas pleaded feelingly for my long suffering, and
proving an Alibi, was sufficient to have discharged me. The Attorney General
then read the deposition of Samuel Wheeler. This deposition I have frequently
applied for; but could not obtain, which I am well aware of, I ought to have
obtained, which was either false, or malicious. One observation the
Attorney General advanced was a positive truth, to wit, that I had expressed in
prison, that I was only a common Smith, and never made keys, and I defied any
person to come forward and prove that they ever saw me make a key of any
description: this part I acknowledge to be true, as I was advised to do so on
account of the villainous design that was plotting to swear away my life; to
deny that I was a lock-smith, in any point of view. The Attorney General got
this information I suppose from Smith, the Cashier: who frequently visited the
thieves in that prison -- whether he carried the means to fee with him, I
cannot tell. He then read the paper, which Mr. Stocker wrote on my second
examination, which is several times related in this work. The reader will see,
how well my suspicions were grounded; Robinson was then asked by one of the
Judges if he was well acquainted with Davis: he began to make answer (but was
ordered again to hold up his head, and speak out), he said he knew him when he
was 'prentice, and had been intimate with him ever since. The Attorney General
then began (but I must not say to his credit) to deliberate on the oath of the
renowned Blacksmith Samuel Wheeler, which was his chief ground work. And the
lock of the Supreme Court, had the same finish, (which Samuel Wheeler swore it
should not): let any lock-smith, or any other blacksmith, even Smith the
Cashier, I say what must they think of a man, who has sworn either falsely and
maliciously or from ignorance, that the screws of the cap of such a lock, were
always filed off flush with the lock-plate. I tell the public (I have no
occasion to tell professional men) that the cap screws of iron rim-locks are
always rounded at the points, and screwed about two threads through the
lock-plate, and not filed off flush as Samuel Wheeler swore. There is no large
lock filed off flush with the lock-plate, or plates except mortice-locks: this
is a piece of information simple as it appears, that will serve to give Samuel
Wheeler, a lesson he did not know any thing of. Here is another striking
instance of Samuel Wheeler's judgment in Bank-locks, he was sent to repair a
lock as I am informed, by the smith who altered the doors for the other vault:
^e the said Wheeler took the lock to pieces and not knowing what was the matter
with it, took a large hammer and with the penn thereof, drew the bit of the
key, so as to lay a greater hold of the talons of the bolt; by doing this the
celebrated gate-maker altered the key so much, that the key would not ^it the
wards of the locks; and like a true wise man of Gotham, was obliged to tear out
the wards of the lock, which just suits the shallow unmechanical ideas of the
Bank of Pennsylvania. A general conversation ^ook place in the court amongst
all hands, I begged to be heard, and began from the period of leaving the city
to the time the robbery was discovered, and by extracts from the former parts
of this work, (without any flattery to myself) made a tolerable good defense;
but when I came to mention, that one of the locks of the vault being an old
room door lock, with the latches taken out; Mr. Fox would not let it pass ^n
the court, he contradicted it. Smith the Cashier, (who has all the appearance
of a runner), went speedily out of the court and brought back a Quaker with
him. The Quaker did not swear but affirmed, that I said the locks were good and
could not be picked, I never had any conversation with the man about locks of
any description in my life; but it appeared to me he was brought forward to
serve a purpose. Robinson the companion of Isaac Davis, could not deny but I
told him of the deficiency of those locks, more than twelve months prior to the
robbery; and I can prove I did publicly, and yet Jontie from motives which I
shall endeavor hereafter to explain, brought this Quaker to swallow the
gudgeon -- lucky indeed for me Captain Phelps was dead. However, I could not
get John Haines' oath and I asked (as he had already sworn, that I sent for
him), if he could tell by whom, he could not, nor can tell of any person I sent
to him to this day; but he being fond of a lazy life, (if a man may judge from
the acceptance of his present situation), wanted possession of loave^ and
fishes, at whose expense, is immaterial to me. Mr. Dallas made several very
feeling remarks so as to operate forcibly on the minds of all present, to
effect my discharge: but the oath of Smith the Cashier, with his wax, clay,
putty, plaster of Paris and the Devil and himself knows what, Haines'
observation, arising from mortified disappointment, and Wheeler's ignorant and
mistaken oath. -- The honorable Judge M'Kean held me to a bail of two thousand
dollars. I have no reflection to cast on any of the honorable Judges of the
court, for if false evidence is levelled against a prisoner, it will no doubt
cause him to be held to bail, and sometimes cause him to be hanged. Mr. Dallas
turned to me, and asked if I could raise bail for the above sum I answered I
could not tell, as it appeared to me I was a stranger in the land. A Mr. Bryden
being in the court came forward as one of my bail, I asked him how much he
could bail me for, he said he would bail me for L.800 this was more than two
thousand dollars; but it was necessary to have two, I was permitted to go to my
neighborhood, under the care of the keeper of the east wing of the prison; I
went to the house of Richard Guy, and asked him if he would bail me for one
thousand dollars, he answered yes, five thousand if you want it. Bail was
entered by both these friends; and all that know them, know they would not bail
a dishonest man. I was a prisoner at large* and (...) Mayor's court bound to
keep the peace, particularly to Smith the Cashier of the Bank of Pennsylvania.
I went and saw several old acquaintances, and they gave me something to drink;
(after drinking nothing exclusive of water, for three (...)* When I had rested
a few days to relieve me from the exhausted state I was in, from imprisonment,
I began to collect the following materials for my defense, at my expected
ensuing trial, viz. a conversation which took place between Smith the Cashier,
and a friend of mine, who has related it publicly as follows.

Mr. R. I saw Mr Lion last night.


S. Cashier. Did you, by God! what has he got out?


Mr. R. Yes.


S. Cash. I am sorry for that, what does he say?


Mr. R. He says you have used him very cruel.


S. Cash. By God, we will use him worse, we are not done with him yet, we will
try and confine him longer.


Mrs. Smith who was present. To her husband Jontie.


Mrs. S. Are you not afraid, now he is loose.


S. Cash. Damn him we have got him bound down, and damn him, we have got him
fixed so, that he cannot sue us.

Thus finishes this dialogue for the present; but as there is another similar,
which took place between the same parties, after the bill was found IGNORAMUS,
I shall take notice of it in turn. I then began to enquire into the character
of Smith, the Cashier of the Bank of Pennsylvania, and was told that he was
originally bred to country work. I was inclined to believe the report from two
causes, viz. He had been a bitter enemy against me, that inclined me to believe
a report however unfounded. The second was from his appearance, manners, and
language, correspondent with those of black-smiths, butchers, sailors,
cart-drivers, etc. But a man who has been put into the office of one of the
State Banks, to make use of such language as he did, and to say that he was
sorry an innocent man had got out of prison, and that they would use him worse
and confine him longer; I ask if all this was consistent, for a man in his then
present situation. Mrs. Smith no doubt saw the side which her husband had
taken, and was apprehensive for his safety. The circumstance of binding me down
was very easily effected, for this was the only truth he swore, to wit, my
saying in prison that I would be revenged on him. But the stratagems which were
carried on by the Bank, wind up the whole, which they had carried on under
their idea of justice. The story of Smith being bred to country work, I found
to be false; as I have it from good authority that he was brought up to be a
quill driver from a boy and seldom or ever country bumpkins carry pen-knives
with them.

I now had time to lay my hard, though innocent case, before Mr. Dallas who
told me all he wanted of me was to get some persons to come forward and give me
a good character and to bring them forward; I told (...) I could bring forward
some of the first m^n in the city: he required also if it was possible, to
bring any person who knew me at home. I told him I would bring several and
amongst those, is Mr. Cou^^and, who wrought with me in a manufactory in London,
nearly ten years ago, with this Mr. Dallas was perfectly satisfied; but Mr.
Lion said he, I heard it whispered in the court, that you had 1400 dollars
(...) one of the Banks, I answered that was true, and the Bank of Pennsylvania
is apprehensive that it is some of their money. As I have already given the
reader an account of the statement of my Bank book in the former part of this
work, it will be needless to go over the same ground. I told Mr. Dallas I would
satisfy the world on that point, he said that was all that was wanting; but Mr.
Dallas added they may be inquisitive to know how you made this money, I told
him I would bring my books and a general statement of my worldly affairs, etc.
Several of my acquaintances were very busy in collecting every information
respecting the unjustifiable conduct of the Bank toward me, I was told that
John Corneck who keeps the sign of the Horse and Groom in Stawberry-alley, had
some information to give me. I went to Mr. Corneck and took a friend with me,
he informed me that Cunningham, the porter, who slept in the Bank (as the term
is), one night was obliged to sleep at his house (...) he could not get into
the Bank to sleep, owing to a particular mistake, to wit, after Cunningham had
locked up the Bank, and Smith and him coming away, (Cunningham going to get his
supper I suppose, and then to return to the Bank to sleep). Smith handed
Cunningham a key, which was not the key of the front door; but Cunningham going
to the Bank with an intent to sleep I suppose, or to make necessary
arrangements for robbing it, I know not; be that as it may, the key that
Cunningham had, would not fit the front door lock, therefore Cunningham was
obliged to sleep at Mr. Corneck's that night: and Mr. Corneck publicly declared
that he saw Cunningham go to bed, and he saw Cunningham tie this key to his
neck with his garter, and he slept with the key all night. I will leave to the
readers to judge what key this must have been. Being under bail, it was
impossible for me to settle my mind to my professional business, and being very
successful in collecting every circumstance, so as to make the Bank no doubt in
the eyes of many appear inconsistent and ridiculous. -- I found out where both
the watchmen were, belonging to the Bank, and had the opportunity of examining
both those honest men: (who were implicated by Smith the Cashier) and in short
their commitment was wrote, and the Mayor was hesitating whether to send both
those poor men to prison, or not. At present the watchmen don't like to say
much about it.

The Mayor's Court drawing near, I collected my evidences, and every
circumstance was attended to for the defense of an (...) and innocent man. On
the 12th of January, 1799, a b^^ was preferred against me to the grand jury,
who turned it out ignoramus I ^^nt a friend who was well acquainted with one of
the Ju^y-men; who by my order, told him that it was my particular wi^h, and
desire to be brought to the bar; as I was in possession of materials and
documents, sufficient to stand in my own defense, and to make the Bank of
Pennsylvania appear cloudy and darkened in the eyes of the world. Two days
(...): to the mortification of the Bank; it appeared in the public prints, that
the Bill was, ipse facto; found ignoramus. When the Bill was found ignoramus,
the following conversation took place between the parties formerly alluded to.


Mr. R. Is Mr. Lion ^ot clear, or is he condemned?


Smith, Cashier. (After a little consideration), answered, he has got clear.


Mr. R. I suppose you will make him a compensation for his lost time and
expenses?


S. Cash. He may think himself damned well off, he has got off so easy.

The condition I was placed in, and the plan which seemed to be carrying on
against me by Sheaffer, etc. I really was very thankful for my acquittal,
because if Sheaffer's intended plan had taken place, it might have amounted to
a conviction; but Captain Phelps, (the friend of Sheaffer, etc.) died. But how
cunningly those geniuses of poppy and wormwood were acting, is a long mystery,
like the labyrinth of Daedalus, not easily found out. On the 11th of the month,
that is to say, the day before the bill was found ignoramus respecting me, the
committee of the State Legislature had made out their story, which did not make
its appearance 'till the 14th of the present month, during this time, I wrote a
memorial directed to the President and Directors of the Bank of Pennsylvania,
naturally expecting they would step forward to make good every loss I sustained
through their internal misfortune. A copy of which I here subjoin, etc.


[COPY]. To the Honorable the President and Directors of the Bank of
Pennsylvania.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU will be pleased to take into your consideration all the circumstances
attending my unfortunate though innocent case -- On foot I traveled from
Wilmington, under heavy distress, anxious to surrender myself to you, laboring
under your suspicions. So anxious was I to see you, that I neglected taking
proper nourishment on the road; being conscious of my innocence and integrity
of mind, I surrendered myself with pleasure. After my examination before Mr.
John C. Stocker, I was thrown into an unwholesome prison, where the Yellow
fever raged with a forcible degree of malignity, there being at the time
between twenty and thirty cases of that ravaging disorder then in prison;
several of the keepers died that occasionally served me with necessaries;
during which time, being six weeks under close confinement, and without a bed;
I have been twenty-four hours without a morsel to eat, or a drop of water to
drink, besides the extreme danger I ran in losing my life, by that terrible,
calamitous, and tremendous disorder, nominated the Yellow fever; and likewise
by false representations a heavy bail was exacted, which bail, (from my
situation and such representations, public confidence being diminished in
regard to me), was out of my power to command. At length suffering three months
imprisonment, eight weeks of which I was in one pair of stockings; being denied
every necessary communication with my friends, and held on suspicion without an
oath, (or any ground for an oath), against me; suffering all the inconvenience
of a loathsome and unwholesome prison, then under the scourge of the prevailing
malignity of 1798), which no tongue can describe, nor man's feelings conceive,
unless in the then peculiar situation -- the loss of my trade by getting into
other channels, during my confinement; the vast expense and accumulation of
debt, during my imprisonment, from shop and house rent; loss of my time in my
profession; furniture and valuable tools decaying and rusting; and above all,
the deprivation of character, which I suffered, (or must suffer), in the
estimation of my fellow citizens of the United States; and such depreciation of
character no doubt will reach Europe, where my aged parents, (if living),
reside, which on their hearing whether just or false), may according to the old
but warranted saying, bring their gray hairs wi^h sorrow to the grave. To hear
the harsh tidings of a son being brought to a trial for life and death, must
strain and break the heart strings of parental affection. Any honest man must
consider his character as the most inestimable treasure in his possession, and
of which he ought to be a vigilant guardian; but if wrested from him by means
he cannot guard against, he has only to lament that such a possibility exists
without his power to guard against the blow. In my present case, any
investigation, take it in any point of view, I am ready and willing to answer,
or to meet. Justice has been invariably my object, decidedly so; it is my wish
that, that peculiar object should and ought to be attained, and I am ready and
willing to manifest my desire and ability to effect so desirable an object.
Resting on my idea of your justice, I submit this address, and to sum up the
whole, I want a recompense for all my real losses, my sufferings, and my
depreciation of character, which I humbly conceive to be a just, honest, and
honorable demand; and under every consideration of my case, either generally
or collaterally, I must think, ought to have weight in your deliberate
considerations concerning me. If there is any question, or any circumstance
relative to the case, harboring in your breasts, I am willing to come forward
whenever you please, to answer any interrogatories, as I am satisfied every
coming question will be an additional proof of my innocence.

If you will be pleased to give a decisive answer to this representation, it
will oblige.

Your humble, (though injured), servant. PATRICK LION.
Philadelphia, January 15 th, 1799. P. S. Since writing the above, a paragraph
has appeared from the committee, to whom was referred that part of the
Governor's address, relative to the Bank robbery, wherein my name is introduced
in the most flagitious form: with what degree of justice can such a paragraph
be looked at, after the bill respecting me was found ignoramus.

N. B. If you should be so disposed, please to address to me, to the care of
Mr. Dobson, Stone-house, Second-street; on account of the late circumstance, I
being unhinged of house and home.




While writing the above memorial, out come the declaration of the Committee of
the Legislature of Pennsylvania; to whom was referred that part of the
Governor's address, which relates to the robbery of the Bank of Pennsylvania,
and upon which I shall be very concise. "That on the night of the 4th of August
last, some person or persons entered the banking house in Lodge-alley, and made
an unsuccessful attempt to force open the doors of the cash-vault, and to pick
the lock of an iron chest used by the second teller." Let any person first
consider the security of a Bank when it is so lame and unprovided, as to yield
to every attempt of an entry; it goes on considering the insecurity of the
building, and the impossibility of making such repairs to it as would render it
safe to trust the property any longer there. The immediate removal of the Bank
to Carpenter's-Hall was proposed -- This building from it is construction, and
the improvements which had been made to it in the occupancy of the Bank of the
United States, was thought perfectly secure. Remark, This first attempt of the
robbery as kept a profound secret, and the reader will keep in his memory, that
in the first part of this work, I being uneasy, went to Lodge-alley where the
preparations were still going on, and found Robinson; I asked him the meaning
why the work was stopped, his answer to me was, he would put me (...) to it by
and bye: at the same time giving me strict charge to take no notice to the
bricklayer; however I suppose this was his meaning. The Committee goes on; "but
previously to the removal, which took place on the Saturday following, a new
patent lock for the outer door was procured." -- Remark, This patent lock is
sold in London by a Mr. Ives, corner of Shoe-lane, Fleet Street: this is the
most insignificant patent that ever was granted by his majesty king George the
third of Great Britain. The wards of this lock are clumsy and of solid brass,
which causes the cavities of the key to be extremely wide and easy to be
copied. This lock had two tumblers, which may attract the attention of those
who do not know better. It does not signify if a lock had a dozen tumblers,
provided you can procure a key the same as the original. On the same day,
(Saturday), in the Banking-house, I took up this stupid lock, and the inner
door lock; and in the presence of Clement Garretson, told Robinson the
carpenter, that both these locks were not fit for a bank; he answered me, that
the front one had a double tumbler. It has been whispered to me that Isaac
Davis procured this patent lock, and this lock I leave to those mechanics who
are acquainted with the art, and the Attorney General to explain, (for he
stopped in the middle of Samuel Wheeler's art). The Committee goes on; "The
watchman were charged to be particularly vigilant," and I am authori^ed before
witness, to tell the committee, Sam Fox, Sam Robinson, Sam Wheeler, Sam Rhodes,
and all the Sams, or Neddies belonging to the Bank; that it is a downright
falsity. They declare publicly that no such charge was given to them, and that
it was kept a secret that any attempt was ever made on the Bank. The Committee
adds, "That Mr. Annesly, the runner, having occasion to go to the Bank to
complete some business which he had left unfinished the evening before, found
the back door of the Banking-house open; and looking into the room, he to his
great surprise, discovered the doors of the back vault likewise open: he
immediately roused the port^^ who was asleep up stairs -- Cunningham
immediately came down stairs and unlocked the front, as well as the inner door
of the house, they went into the Banking room and found all the window shutters
secure, the back door unbarred, and the doors of the cash vault unlocked. Mr.
Annesly went immediately to t^ the residence of the Cashier, and apprized him
of what he discovered."

Remark, Cunningham came down stairs and unlocked the front and inner doors --
the opening the inner door was what staggered my prosecutor (or persecutors) on
my examination: for this lock must be opened before they could come to the
vault doors and when I asked this question there appeared to be a conscious
silence amongst the whole, (or amongst all hands) it is said the back door was
unba^^^d. The back door it seems had no lock at all; but just barred like a
barn door, instead of a banking house. The doors of the cash vault unlocked;
but how these doors were unlocked is still kept a secret, and when Mr. Annesly
^ent to the Cashier I do not know that any particular surprise was evinced.

The Committee -- "A message was immediately sent to the President of the Bank;
upon his coming to the city he found the Cashier, Runner and Porter in the
Bank. Upon an examination of the house, it was found the locks had been opened
by false keys, for no injury had been done to the wards of them, nor was there
any appearance of force having been used." -- Remark, I suppose before the
President came, the Porter might have got the matter (or matters), in train, an
a preparative for his reception. The Committee goes on, "That several persons
were arrested upon suspicion, and amongst those, is Patrick Lion the Smith, who
was employed in fitting the iron doors of the cash-vault; and without whose
privity it is believed this robbery has not been committed." -- Remark, This
Committee composed of three members, (their names I shall mention hereafter),
but they certainly have to the eyes of their fellow citizens generally, been
guilty of a great and unwarrant, able oversight, to call it no worse: and I
declare (I think, provided they were acting as enemies against this country),
if an army of eighty thousand men, composed of such men as this committee
consisted of, that ten thousand men such as myself would make them tremble in
their harness. I have conversed with several of the members. and I am sure
there are gentlemen amongst them, and those gentlemen reprobate in strong
terms), this committee for taking hold of an honest citizen's name; and
insinuate against him to the public, in the manner they have done. If the
language they have made use of respecting me is not of their manufacture, let
them publicly declare it; and whether derived from a Fox, a Smith, a Stocker,
or from whom. This very case I hope will serve as a lesson to all the states in
their assemblies, never to run headlong into mischief not ascertainable: with
respect to the policy attending the affair, it evidently carries with it every
feature of disguised fear: and it will hereafter be placed in the history of
extraordinary things, that an individual possessed of ingenuity in the line of
his profession; should be made a martyr of, because he possesses that
ingenuity: and I defy the world to prove that even the ingenuity I do possess,
was applied to any bad purpose, but always to the contrary.

The committee say, "They had the satisfaction to discover the perpetrator of
this daring robbery, so that the whole amount of the property stolen, has been
recovered, except about three thousand, two hundred dollars. One Isaac Davis, a
carpenter by trade, had an account open in the Bank, (or in the Bank of
Pennsylvania), and the first circumstance which excited the suspicion of the
President and Cashier against him, was the deposit of 16,000 dollars; enquiry
was made into his circumstances and character, which was found to be such as to
induce the officers to watch his conduct. On Saturday the 17th of November,
just before the Bank closed, he deposited 3,910 dollars. Their suspicions were
then increased, and it was thought proper to enquire at the Banks of the United
States and North America, whether he had any accounts open with those
institutions, and on Monday morning such information was obtained, as left no
doubt that he was the robber." Remark, This Isaac Davis was the man, as I have
often before observed, that I long suspected before I went out of town, and
(...) was along with Robinson at Market-street ferry. The Committee says he was
a carpenter, but they do not say that he was employed at and in the Bank, no,
they are sub silenti^ like a dumb clock in that case -- ^nquiry was made into
his circumstances and character. Jonathan Smith, Cashier of the Bank of
Pennsylvania, (well knew, or ought to well know) his character and
circumstances. Smith must have known that the finances of Davis, were not
capable of keeping a carriage, and Davis's childish observation on an India
adventure, ought not to have escaped the penetrating sagacity of a Bank
Cashier. Davis was fond of dress and out ^ard sho^^, Smith knew that; but did
he not like ^ise know, that Davis was obliged to give a note for his and for
his apprentices board, and by way of cover to enquire into his character and
circumstances, etc. is what is called in some affairs "a good one." On Saturday
17th of November, (he, Davis, made another deposit. The reader ^ill observe,
that Smith visited me in prison, a few days before the robbery ^as discovered;
and to a certainty the money as found in a fe^ days after. There are certainly
some honest men in the Bank of Pennsylvania; but I think, and it is my opinion,
this robbery ^as discovered by my firm resolution: and my suspicions, were, and
have been proved to have been well grounded, and I ^as as justly entitled to
benevolence if any was in possession*

The Committee says, "he, (Davis), was invited to the house of the Cashier,
upon a pretense which excited no apprehension of the views of the officers: and
their party, by threats of an immediate arrest, and by promise of an
intercession with the Governor for a pardon, a confession of his guilt was
ext^^t^d from him." -- Remark, This is the grandest farce of the whole, and
well played off; the Committee has not told their story perfectly right at all:
what I have understood is as follows, he was invited by his acquaintance Smith
to his house, by way of joke, to do some work; (and in which house I suppose he
spent many a joyous evening): and it was told to me Mr. Fox was one of the
actors in this farcical scene. Mr. Fox I understand, was placed in a dark room,
with a pistol and a cutlass, and I suppose there were some others of equal
bravery, who supposed the shield of heaven would defend both their courage and
their carcases, all equally armed. Smith the Cashier, conducted Davis into the
dark room -- the curtain rose, and discovered all the warriors. "Davis was then
implicated," says the Committee, "they then le^t him to his own reflections,"
-- but to disregard the punishment inflicted on innocence, is a new species of
justice, at least it is to me.

I now come to the Cashier again; On the 21st of November the said Cashier,
enclosed a bond and warrant of attorney to Isaac Davis, drawn in favor of the
President, Directors and Company of the Bank of Pennsylvania, for the sum of
3,000 dollars, requesting him to execute the same, this was intended to secure
some real estate he held in the county of Delaware. Remark, The Bank have never
reflected on their permitting Davis to escape if they had, it must have
amounted to self condemnation: because it is here stated, that the Cashier of
the Bank, was in actual correspondence with him. If Smith sent him a bond on
the 21th of November, why did not Smith send for Davis, and secure him, to be
tried by the laws of his country. No, Smith thought he might be too near, I
suppose if he was in Philadelphia. The Committee say that, "the robbery
originated with Cunningham, (and pray how should ihis sagacious and all-wise
committee know that it did), who procured the false keys, and that he, Davis,
does not know who made them." -- Remark, The introduction of false keys is
pretty well laid on, as it served very well to blind the public. If there were
false keys made, will any man persuade me Davis did not know who made them. At
another sitting of the Legislature they go on. "First, That the aforesaid
Benjamin Brannon, contrary to the duties of his office; endeavored to prevent
a certain Isaac Davis from being punished, whom he knew had robbed the Bank of
Pennsylvania." -- Remark, In answer to this, what did the Bank let him go for,
the Bank in my opinion were far more to blame than Brannan. "Secondly, That on
the 21st of November last, Jonathan Smith, Esquire, Cashier of the Bank of
Pennsylvania, sent a bond to Isaac Davis." -- Remark, Here Smith (is called an
Esquire), and for what mortal reason, or for what design, is best known to the
Legislature themselves. They first blame Brannan for preventing Davis from
punishment, and then tell the public that Smith sent a bond to him on the 21st
of November: as I observed before, why did not Smith send Haines or some one of
a similar profession, and take Davis prisoner, and not lay all the fault on
Brannan. The Legislature thus continue, viz. That the said Benjamin Brannan,
called several times on the Cashier of the Bank, between the 22st of November,
and the 24th of the said month; and impressed a belief on the mind of the
Cashier, that Isaac Davis would tell who made the picks and keys, etc. --
Remark, Does not this appear like an undeniable proof, that Davis must have
known who made the keys, for Mr. Brannan would not have impressed the Cashier,
with such an idea; unless he had some authority so to do, or strong reasons
from expressions that might fall from Davis to that purport. What relates to
Mr. Brannan personally, I shall pass over, as I have no business with it. I
shall now conclude the long detail of this lethargic committee. The committee
are of opinion that the President and Cashier of the Bank of Pennsylvania, for
their care* vigilance and exertions, in detecting the robber, and recovering
the money stolen from the said Bank, deserve the highest commendation. Ordered
to lie on the table -- Remark, If I am permitted to give my opinion, in place
of this wiseacre committee, that opinion would be as follows, That the
President and Cashier had neither care or vigilance, and in place of deserving
the highest commendation, they ought to be Nebuchadnezzared; as they were
warned of their insecurity long before. Having thus finished this long
hypocritical story, of either a led-away or uninformed committee: I shall
proceed to the names of said committee, as extracted from the Journals of the
Legislature, and from the following Sections, to wit.

Friday, December 14 th, 1798, A. M.
13th. Resolved, That a committee be appointed, to enquire into the
circumstances respecting the robbery of the Bank of Pennsylvania, mentioned in
the Governor's address: and make a report to this House.

Saturday, December 15 th, 1798, A. M.
The thirteenth resolution was adopted.

Ordered, That Mr. Preston, Mr. Frailey, and Mr. Weaver, be a committee for the
purpose expressed in the said resolution.

Since I have been out of prison, I find Mr. Fox has made every enquiry after
my situation; from such enquiries, if he has been told the truth, I am
perfectly easy: he asked Mr. Murray, what liquor I was fond of, Mr. Murray
answered, the last time I called on Mr. Lion, at his shop, he gave me some wine
and water to drink. I asked Mr. Lyon's reason for drinking wine and water, he
answered if he drank spirits and water, and followed up the work, he was then
carrying on with great activity, that he would be in a state of intoxication
all day. Mr. Murray told the truth; Mr. Fox, I have heard, likewise has
enquired what my politics were, and if I was a man fond of talking about such
like -- I shall make a speech for Messrs. Preston, Frailey, and Weaver, when
they meet next session, which I hope will satisfy Mr. Fox in regard to my
politics; and as I have visited the British House of Commons, I shall take the
rules, because I don't know how they proceed in the Pennsylvania State
Legislature. (Here it is,) And there shall be a cry of Hear him! Hear him! That
the alien law in our opinion, (speaking on the principle of political opinion),
is of no effect under its denomination, because we can under any pretense,
(gentlemen), criminate any foreigner, (particularly if he be an ingenious man),
and throw him into prison at pleasure, and particularly if he will not fall
down and worship the carbuncles that grow upon our noses. You know,
(gentlemen), that it is our peculiar desire to come as near to the British
system as possible, for you know, (gentlemen), that the hereditary system is
the best for us; because we will then get leave to keep all our wisdom to
ourselves, and to our sons, and our sons, sons: thereby destroying the idle
pretensions of the scientific, the learned, and men of genius and talents, and
make them bow down their neck to the goddess y^lep'd Ignorance. You know,
(gentlemen), the blessed effects of keeping Lions in the tower, for in the year
of our Lord, ninety and eight, there were two Lions confined in our great
towers, in the Presidency of John Adams, Esquire, (whom God preserve). You
know, (gentlemen), that one Lion was held in bondage, whether for speaking the
truth or not we do not know, and the other, the younger, because he is an
ingenious man; and neither of them would fall down and worship the carbuncles
that grow on our noses. Hear him! Hear him! For it is said that the Younger saw
the light in one of the great cities in the east, on the A^^ion shore, and we
have it from good authority, that he is a cunning man, and can work in gold,
and in silver, in brass, in iron, and in steel; and he can instruct the cunning
men of our tribes: moreover it is told to us, (gentlemen), that he is the
seventh son of Patrick Lion, his father, (since dead of a broken heart), and
that he has got what is called the second sight; for it is further manifested,
that he can tell who is a thief as soon as he has the second sight, and the
great men where our Treasures are held cannot deny it, for he has given
convincing proof of his wisdom. You know, (gentlemen), that they confined him,
but he would not fall down and worship the carbuncles that grew on their noses.
For lo! they kept him forty and eight days in close confinement, and all that
time without a bed, and sometimes in a state of starvation; but the Lord
visited him in prison, and strengthened him, and his beard grew ^o a
considerable length; and he was ordered several times into the deep dungeon,
and still he would not fall down and worship the carbuncles that grew upon
their noses. There was even an attempt to bring false witness against him,
which grieved his heart, and he was thrown into the east wing of the prison,
amongst the thieves, and he preached to them and kept the innocent heart in
good order, and without fear: and he was ordered to the cells more than thrice,
and he went on his way to the cells; but one of the keepers of the tower, who
had more humanity than some of the others, said, you have done no harm, your
prosecutors have no right to punish before trial. And his prosecutors were
admitted to falsely accuse him, and told him in these words, that he would be
confined, tried, and condemned: but his heart was true, he never yielded, and
publicly declared that he would not fall down and worship the carbuncles that
grew on their noses. Hear him! Hear him! He was kept eight eight weeks in one
pair of stockings, he was prevented from almost any communication out of the
tower, but he had one friend left, and ^e was a worker of steel, and his heart
was as true, for he declared himself out of fear, and he was independent of the
Scribes and Pharasees, and he would not fall down and worship the carbuncles
that grew on their noses. The Younger Lion has likewise declared, that he will
drink what he pleases, and when he pleases; and is clearly of opinion, that it
is not the business of the Scribes and Pharasees to inspect into his conduct so
minutely: he has publicly declared, that he will still adhere to republican
principles, and all those things he will abide by attendent thereon, and act as
is becoming a man in the land of liberty, without licentiousness. And be it
further known, (gentlemen), that Lion the Younger was held in bondage during
the greatest part of the plague, and he wrote his narrative in the prison, but
it was not suffered to go to his counsel, for fear it might do him some good.
And it appears unto us, that our country is greatly troubled with this dreadful
plague, the Hessian fly, and that there is a set of young B^^dies or Dubbsmen
rising up in our land, and that wickedness is making vast progress thereby; and
we think it necessary for the good of our youths, and the sake of religion* to
ho^d the 5th of July, as a day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer; and that we
do borrow the following most excellent prayer from the church, which is likewise

Lion the Smith's Prayer.
From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocricy; from envy,
hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness, Good Lord deliver that unfortunate
Bank, the Bank of Pennsylvania; is the earnest prayer of Patrick Lion, in
behalf of this committee -- after prayers are over we must not spend the day
the same as on a former fast day we had last year.

On the 1st of February, 1799, I waited on Mr. Fox, the President, and I asked
him if they had taken my memorial into consideration; he said he had read it,
but their reliance was placed on Haines' declaration, and from such declaration
they held themselves in justification. I then began to ask Mr. Fox several
questions, but he would not give ^e a direct answer, and declared off; at the
sametime said he was incapable of talking on the subject: then entered a
strange gentleman, and I left the room. On the sixth of the same month, I was
told by a friend of mine, that Young Brannan made use of the following
expressions, or to that purport, to wit. (That Smith the Cashier, wished Isaac
Davis to get out of the way, as it would prevent Smith the trouble of finding
out who made the false keys). On the eighth I found out Young Brannan, and took
with me Mr. Condie, the above question I put to Young Brannan, but his answers
were evasive, and he gave it as his opinion, that if there were any false keys
made, it must have been Davis who made them himself; but my friend still
persists that these (as nearly as he possibly can recollect), were the
expressions Young Brannan made use of, at the Bull's head, in Strawberry-alley.
Young Brannan then gave proper directions where Isaac Davis' mother lived, and
Mr. Condie went with m^ t^ the house on the same afternoon, and we found
Benjamin Davis, brother to the said Isaac, and he had accounts from his brother
Isaac, that Patrick Lion was entirely innocent of the charge. I was then
advised to write a letter to the said Isaac Davis, and get his declaration from
under his hand, and on the 12th instant, I went a second time to the house of
Mary Davis, mother of the the aforesaid Isaac, Mr Condie being still w^^^ me;
the said Mary Davis had sufficient word from her son Isaac, declaring my
innocence: I then handed her a letter, requesting her to forward the same to
her son Isaac, she told me s^^ did not know where he was, but if ever she heard
of him, she certainly would forward it. A copy of which I lay before my readers.

Philadelphia, February 12 th, 1799. SIR,
BY this time you will no doubt from your experience acknowledge, that it is
the nature of compassion to associate with misfortune, and as I have formed an
acquaintance with your brother Benjamin, who has informed me what you have
expressed in your observations concerning my innocence, the inference of course
follows. Sir, I have suffered three months imprisonment, six weeks of which I
was under close confinement, and without a b^d to sleep on; at the sametime
running all the risque of that terrible and tremendous disorder, called the
Yellow fever, denied every necessary communication with my friends; was eight
weeks in one pa^^ of stockings, and suffered all the inconveniences of a
loathsome and unwholesome prison; Sir, from all the above circumstances of my
sufferings, (and the cause of such circumstances and sufferings, you know I am
innocent of,) I heartily forgive you, and no doubt feel for you, (...) I hope
you will in course of time arrive to be an ornament to society. Sir, there is
one thing I beg of you, a declaration from under your hand, declaring my
innocence, which will be greatly acknowledged, and add much to your
phila^throphy in the estimation, (in the mind), of your fellow citizens: Sir, I
beg of you to forward your declaration respecting me, and it will relieve the
most injured, and innocent.

PATRICK LION.


I thought it proper to enquire what operations the doors of the other vault
went through, by the other smith; I and my friend Lace, went to the other
smith, and he declared he did not remove more than two of the hinges of the
doors, which was half the work that I did; I had four hinges to remove, and
because I was longer in doing double the work of another man, (besides doing
Mr. Stocker's work), it seems was cause enough to suspect me, and hurl me into
prison. The Bank was indebted to me the sum of L.17:8:9^, and this instance may
give an idea whether a faint one or not of the th^n existent meaness of that
Bank. Mr. Witherow drew the bill from my books on the 16th of February, and
carried the bill to the Bank, which bill was handed to Mr. Fox -- Smith being
present, came forward and returned Mr. Witherow the bill, and said that he
would discharge the bill, if he, (Mr. Witherow), would deduct the twenty
dollars which was sent to Mr. Lion while in prison, to which Mr. Witherow
replied, that he was not authorized by Mr. Lion to deduct any thing from the
bill; and therefore must take the bill back and receive further orders from Mr.
Lion, before he could settle it on such conditions. It is to be observed that I
never sent for twenty dollars to Mr. Fox or Mr. Stocker, although they both
claimed the merit of the good deed, or ever contracted any debt with them. The
twenty dollars which were sent to me, was intended I verily believe as a man
trap to catch unwary innocent, and unguarded feelings -- Mr. Helm received the
twenty dollars, and that he laid it out in necessaries for me, I do not deny;
but to give a man a present of twenty dollars, when he was suffering through
the negligence of those who thrust him there, and then want to stop it out of
his bill; seems to me one of those low, debased, mean, and unworthy actions,
that would more become the vilest of the Jewish race, than the philanthropic
and polished breasts of gentlemen composing the body of a commercial and
national institution.

I waited about three weeks, thinking that when the storm awakened in the
breasts of some of that body against (...) might be lulled; that calm
consideration would get over the precipitate ebullitions of anger and
prejudice, and that they would consider deliberately what their conduct might
appear in the eyes of the world.

I asked advice from several professional gentlemen, and I was advised from the
above statement to sue the Bank of Pennsylvania before the Alderman's Court. I
applied to Squire Jennings for the purpose, but he would not grant me a
summons; but said he would write a letter to Mr. Fox, to this I had no
objection but it struck me instantly, thus, that if a poor man is indebted, he
is summoned and brought in triumph (to use a vulgar though common phrase) up to
the bull-ring; however Mr. Fox, did not like to dispute this ground, he sent
the money to Squire Jennings and I gave a receipt for the same to prevent any
farther exposition of the Bank. I still had an idea that I could have brought
an action of damages for false imprisonment, and waited on several gentlemen of
the law, and which cost me a considerable sum; but I could find none that would
ensure me any success, from the following observations of theirs. First I was
held to bail and if I brought an action against the Bank of Pennsylvania it
must be tried at the Supreme Court, and it would come on before the very
Judges* which held me to bail* and that would be a countermand of their
judgment if they even countenanced my action. Second, The trial must come
before the same Court and it is most probable the Jury which would be
impannelled would be men interested in the Bank of Pennsylvania: under those
two heads they could not give me any encouragement to bring the action forward.
It is easy to hold a man to bail providing the prosecutor can tell a tough
story and when a Jury is kept under the thumb of a Bank the (...) is settled
without either regard to law or justice. I have applied to the late mayor's
brother Mr. Baker, for all the papers respecting the robbery of the Bank, or a
copy of them which were in the possession of the late Hillary Baker: but his
brother tells me Mr. Fox holds them, and I have been since told by the watchmen
that the above papers are in the hands of Billy Sansom, I should ^e glad to
know what business Mr. Fox, or Billy Sansom, has to retain papers which ought
absolutely to be in the office of the mayor for inspection: I should have been
glad to have had copies of them, at least Samuel Wheeler's, deposition which
was either ignorant, false, or malicious, according to my conception. The Bank
of Pennsylvania was very much disappointed, and the vast expense that they were
at with me, I suppose made them more inveterate against me. They rode after
John Boyd, a Brick-layer, near forty miles into West-Chester, to be an evidence
against me, and when they got John Boyd he did not know me. I am sure I did not
know him at that time, but we have since became acquainted and he has related
to me the whole of that part of the farce. I now return to Haines, the
constable or catchpole, or what you will. I am sorry for neglecting so amiable
a character so long -- when he got his orders to go to the Capes after me, he
was told by several of my Friends, that I was gone to Cape Henlopen; but in
place of going there, he went into the Jersey, and down to Cape May. I have the
story from captain John Carsin's mother, who was about that time a neighbor of
mine, and a better woman is not in the circle of my acquaintance. Haines fell
in with this old lady at Cape May, but unfortunately for him, she was well
acquainted with me and my family concerns; and would not allow Haines to
advance any false representations against me: It was not only the erroneous
accusation of the Bank of Pennsylvania against me; but Haines must have visited
Rebecca Barker, or some of her companions; she being under the denomination of
my mother-in-law. I only lay such cases down, to find what rational man can
place confidence in such reptiles -- such women are a disgrace to the modest
sex, and serves as another instance of my belief, that there are not too great
a number of men can boast of a good mother-in-law. Haines, when at Cape May was
told that I went into a tavern, and called for something to drink; and looked
over the newspaper; and as soon as I had read the paper, drank off the liquor
in a hurry, and went into a cedar swamp, and set fire to it in two different
places. God knows I never was at Cape May in my life. Haines and the
high-constable of Cape May, (a pair of worthies), cut down from some of the
large trees, two clubs, and like the t^^in brother giants, Gog and Magog,
issued forth on a wild goose chase into the cedar swamp; but the asses could
find no Lion. For Saul was sent after his father's asses, but could not find
them, and then was declared wise enough to be a king; but if asses cannot find a
Lion what is their wisdom entitled to. Haines did not go to look for a brother,
he went out to look for a Lion, the king of the beasts, and he could not find
him; and the king of the beasts thinks it a very great hardship, that he should
be hunted after, by one of the meanest, lowest, and most debased of his
subjects.

I have related the nature of the Philadelphia prison in several parts of this
work; the advocates of which, cannot believe that such treatment is exercised
on the prisoners, in any part of the prison; but these people that will not
believe that the Philadelphia prison is as bad as any other prison, that is to
be read of, my only wish is, that they may have a fair and speedy trial of it:
it is impossible say these unbelieving advocates, that any man can be
twenty-four hours without a morsel. When it can be proved, that a prisoner some
time back, was starved and disfigured by the rats; and I suppose those
advocates cannot deny that a keeper cannot at pleasure take the unfortunate
women out of the west-wing, and keep them in the cells -- for what purpose I
suppose may be easily guessed at. A man taken to the cells for God knows what,
sometimes at the request of his prosecutor, or persecutor, I cannot say which,
for they are synonimous; and kept several months on half a pound of bread, and
a quart of water every 24 hours, until he is so weak that he has been known to
know the plaster from the walls, and could not stand to evacuate his urine.
After such a reduction, the unfortunate and sometimes innocent victim, is
conducted to the sick room and breathes his last: and if it is asked what he or
they died of, it answered (sometimes) of an indamation of the bowels, or a
consumption, or any thing but the real thing. I say no prisoner has a right to
be put to the cells by the orders of the prosecutor, or prosecutors, to extort
any thing from him, or to satisfy their savage barbarity: why rail at the rack
or the inquisition, if similar methods are pursued, to extort by means of
force, the frantic exclamations of suffering innocence, for the purposes of
self-condemnation. I only mention those things, to let my fellow citizens know
a little of the too much boasted of Philadelphia prison; and as this is but a
small specimen, I shall likely take more particular notice of many things in a
publication I may think proper to make hereafter, and in which I shall not
forget my friend Haines, who used to be a common visitor in that prison.

On the 4th of May 1799, I went to the house of Mary Davis, with Mr. Condie,
and received an answer from Robinson's old crony, viz. Isaac Davis. Here it is
--

State of Pennsylvania, 1799.
I RECEIVED information from you, with your situation, and do sympathize with
your long suffering and loss of character. My heart was deeply wounded when I
heard of your imprisonment, because I was sensible of your innocence: therefore
I can safely say, you had no hand in robbing the Bank of Pennsylvania, though
perhaps I am not to be relied on at present; but I declare your innocence with
a heart full of sorrow, for my departure from the great moral principle, hence
I undoubtedly realize the necessity of a strict adherence to virtue -- Virtue
and industry are completely competent, to satisfy the mind with solid
happiness. This I have realized by fatal experience, I will in future pursue
the plain paths of my former diligence.

ISAAC DAVIS.

To Mr. Patrick Lion.

Observation. When the Bank was robbed, from what I can learn; Smith, Davis,
and Robinson, were all in triangled situations. Davis at Brannan's table, would
frequently say at dinner, I wish they could catch the thieves: Smith at
Germantown, and Robinson in the state of New Jersey; but they all sung the same
tune, to be sure Lion must be the man, and if this one will take him, or that
one will take him, there will be three thousand dollars for you. Then some got
guns, and some got pistols, and some got swords, and some got clubs, (and off
to the swamps). Such a continued race of warriors never existed before, only in
the chimerical brain of the famed Knight of La Mancha, when he attacked the
flocks of sheep, and had his teeth knocked out by the shepherds.

The opinion of many in regard to Davis, runs in this kind of language, viz.
That Davis was a great rogue but bigger fool; a rogue first for robbing the
Bank, and a fool for not being more careful in preserving the cash when he was
in possession. But the Bank, or the public at large, will accept of my opinion,
(it is this): First, I say that if Davis took the money, he was wrong, for no
man has a right to take that which does not belong to him. Second, If Davis
ever suffered himself to be made a tool for other people's private purposes, he
certainly must be granted a fool without redemption, in my poor humble opinion:
because this affair is not yet developed to the ^^^ld, or in what manner this
Bank was robbed, and which still remains a mystery. I say it appears to me, as
if some people (...) be pleased the whole should be buried in oblivion, without
the funereal farewell of a whisper.

It has been reported that the Bank offered me different sums of money, and
that I had made a certain demand: I declare to the public, the Bank never came
forward, nor did I ever make any demand. If they are closely interrogated, it
is answered by a fetch or come off, such as, there are still some doubts, etc.
about it. Some relate one story, and another a different one, as nearly answers
the purpose for which it is spoken. Where is then such an instance? Can the
Histories of different nations furnish you with such a refined instance of
cruelty, and such polished combination of man, styling themselves gentlemen,
and residing in a free Christian country, (I mean to select those for my
observation only, as were the cause of my sufferings) as those I unfortunately
had to deal with, but such an instance of cruelty is not to be forgotten, if
forgiven on this side of the grave, whatever may be the consequences on the
other. If the equilibrium is destroyed between man and man, the aggressor
should give to the injured the Balance due in his favor, and give back to the
injured every atom of his due; but no, say these gentlemen, we publicly declare
we will punish him, and bring him down, never more to behold the glorious
luminary of Heaven: and close his eyes in terre^tial darkness. I only ask if it
would not have been more humane, of those gentlemen, to have come to the
prison, and have taken me by the hand and humanely as London merchants
certainly would have done -- pride, ignorance, or indolence, or all, may have
carried them farther than they expected. And their keeping me in prison nearly
three weeks, after the money was found, served only to blind the public, into
their measures at that time; but at present I have the pleasure to inform those
gentlemen, and the committee for whom I have so great a regard, (on account of
their decision so well frought with Solomonic wisdom), that it has been my
chief study to fulfill the station which I believe nature intended me for, in,
and on all my transactions in life. A disinterestedness which has been often an
injury to me, but which I have invariably pursued in spite of the false show,
glare, glitter, and splendor of the world: an open plainess, and honest
bluntness of speech, which as my feelings dictated: were involuntarily spoken.
These are pleasant, soothing reflections to me, they quiet the corroding
irksomeness of care, and give a delicious composure at night to the wearied
body. And when those gentlemen, who are so great in the world's eye, leave this
world and the bell tolls their funereal knell, honors they cannot rationally
boast of, and all their grand speculations die with them: while on the other
hand, my works will be durable and ornamental, and probably my works and my
principles, may not so soon be forgotten, as those of the gentlemen above
alluded to.

I do not know a better country or part of a country in the world than
Pennsylvania for people to die in, and get a good posthumous name: for if he
who dies, has practiced swindling, usury, and every other vice, within the pale
of the law; he is sure to be a good patriot, an indulgent husband, a kind
father, with a variety of other innumerable virtues. If a woman, hacknied in
all the meretricious arts and failings of her sex: she is every thing that is
less than a saint, and praised with more virtues than ever belonged to a mortal
of either sex: but newspaper praise, for the dead, ought to be valued at the
price of old rags, being just as cheap, and of equal worth.

To sum up the whole, if any inaccuracies have crept into this work: I hope I
shall be forgiven, as I am more accustomed to mechanics than to authorship: but
I hope I have as nearly as possible, kept the undeviating path of truth, and
while she remains my mistress, I have not the least doubt, but this will meet
with the approbation of my fellow Citizens,

Whose humble servant, I remain, PATRICK LION.
N. B. Just as this work was going to the press, -- Hazard* Esquire. of Broadkill
Hundred, and who acted with such a degree of benevolent humanity to me, by his
assistance to me in the behalf of my apprentice, who deceased by the prevalent
malignant of 1798. -- called to see me, and in an extraneous conversiation;
informed me that, that he took the depositions of several persons by order of a
Mr. M'Night, acting clerk for the Bank of Pennsylvania; but the said Mr.
M'Night, possessing a bad and deficient memory, forgot to pay him (said Hazard^
Esquire.) the customary fees.



FINIS.

