NARRATIVE OF A LATE EXPEDITION AGAINST THE INDIANS; WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE
BARBAROUS EXECUTION OF COL. CRAWFORD; AND THE WONDER^ (...) DR. KNIGHT (...)
JOHN (...) 1782. (...) A NARRATIVE OF THE (...)

THE NARRATIVE OF DR. KNIGHT.
ABOUT the latter end of the month of March, or the beginning of April of the
year 1782, the western Indians began to make incursions upon the frontiers of
Ohio, Washington, Youghagany, and Westmoreland counties, which has been their
constant practice ever since the commencement of the present war between the
United States and Great Britain.

In consequence of these predatory invasions, the principal officers of the
abovementioned counties, namely, Colonels Williamson and Marshall, tried every
method in their power to set on foot an expedition against the Wyandot towns,
which they could effect no other way than by giving all possible encouragement
to volunteers. The plan proposed was as follows: Every man furnishing himself
with a horse, a gun, and one months provisions, should be exempted from two
tours of militia duty. Likewise that everyone who had been plundered by the
Indians, should if the plunder could be found at their towns, have it again,
proving it (...) his property: And all horses lost on the expedition by
unavoidable accident were to be replaced by horses taken in the enemy's country.

The time appointed for the rendezvous, or (...) meeting of the volunteers, was
fixed to be on the 20th of May, and the place, the old (...) town on the west
side of the river Ohio, about forty miles below Fort Pit by land, and I think
about 75 by water.

Col. Crawford was solicited by the Genera^^ voice of these western counties
and districts to command the expedition. He accordingly set out as volunteer
and came to Fort Pit two days before the time appointed for the assembling of
the men. As there was no surgeon yet appointed to go with the expedition,
Colonel Crawford begged the favor of Genesis Irvine to permit me to accompany
him, (my consent having been previously asked) to which the General agreed
provided Col. Gibson did not object.

Having obtained permission of the Colonel. I left Port Pit on Tuesday, May
1st, and the next day about one in the afternoon arrived at the Mingoe bottom.
The volunteers had not all crossed the river until Friday morning the (...)
they then distributed themselves into eigh^^^^ companies, choosing their
captains by vote. There were chosen also, one Col. Commandant, four field and
one brigade-major. There were four hundred and sixty five who voted.

We began our march on Saturday May 25th, making almost a due west course, and
on the 4th day reached the old Moravian town (...) the river Muskingum, about
60 miles from the river Ohio. Some of the men having lost their horses on the
night preceding returned home.

Tuesday the 28th in the evening, Major B^^^^ton, and Captain Bean, went some
distance (...) camp to reconnoitre: Having gone about one quarter of a mile
they saw two Indians, upon whom they fired, and then returned to camp. This was
the first place in which we were discovered, as we understood afterward.

On Thursday the 4th of June, which was the eleventh day of our march, about
one o'clock, we came to the spot where the town of Sandusky formerly stood; the
inhabitants had moved 1^ miles lower down the creek, near the lower Sandusky:
But as neither our guides or any who were with us, had known any thing of their
removal, we began to conjecture there were no Indian towns nearer than the
lower Sandusky, which was at least 40 miles distant.

However, after refreshing our horses, we advanced on in search of some of
their settlements but had scarcely got the distance of three or four miles from
the old town when a number of our men expressed their desire to return, some of
them alleging that they had only five days provisions upon which the field
officers and captains, determined, in council, to proceed that (...) and no
longer. Previous to the calling of (...) council, a small party of light horse
had (...) sent forward to reconnoitre. I shall here remark, by the way, that
there are a great many extensive plains in that country: The woods in general
grow very thin, free from brush and underwood; so that light horsemen may
advance a considerable distance before an army without being much exposed to
the enemy.

Just as the council ended, an express returned from the above mentioned party
of light horse with intelligence, "that they had been about three miles in
front, and had seen a large body of Indians running toward them." -- In a
short time we saw the rest of the light horse, who joined us, and having gone
one mile further met a number of Indians who had partly got possession of a
piece of woods before us; whilst we were in the plains but our men alighting
from their horses and rushing into the woods, soon obliged them to abandon that
place.

The enemy being by this time reinforced, flanked to the right, and part of
them coming in our rear, quickly made the action more serious. The firing
continued very warm on both sides from four o'clock until the dusk of the
evening, each party maintaining their ground. Next morning about six oclock
some guns were discharged at the distance of two or three hundred yards, which
continued till day, doing little or no execution on either side.

The field officers then assembled and agreed, as the enemy were every moment
increasing, and we had already a number wounded, to retreat that ^ight. The
whole body was to form into (...), keeping the wounded in the center. We had
four killed and twenty three wounded, of the latter, seven very dangerously, on
which account as many biers were got ready to carry them: Most of the rest were
slightly wounded and none so bad but they could ride on horseback. After dark
the officers went on the out posts and brought in all the men as expeditiously
as they could. Just as the troops were about to form, several guns were fired
by the enemy, upon which some of our men spoke out and said, our intention was
discovered by the Indians who were firing alarm guns. Upon which some in front
hurried off, and the rest immediately followed, leaving the seven men that were
dangerously wounded, some of whom however got off on horseback, by means of
some good friends, who waited for, and assisted them.

We had not got a quarter of a mile from the field of action, when I heard Col.
Crawford calling for his son John Crawford, his son-in-law Maj. Harrison, Maj.
Rose and William Crawford, his nephews, upon which I came up and told him I
believed they were before us -- He asked, was that the Doctor? I told him it
was he then replied, they were not in front, and begged of me not to leave him
-- I promised him I would not.

We then waited, and continued calling for these men till the troops had passed
us. The Colonel told me his horse had almost given out, that he could not keep
up with the troops, and wished some of his best friends to remain with him; he
then exclaimed against the militia for riding off in such an irregular manner,
and leaving some of the wounded behind, contrary to his orders. Presently there
came two men riding after us, one of them an old man, the other a lad: We
enquired if they had seen any of the above persons? And they answered they had
not.

By this time there was a very hot firing before us, and, as we judged, near
where our main body must have been. Our course was then nearly south-west, but
changing it, we went north about two miles, the two men remaining in company
with us. Judging ourselves, to be now out of the enemy's lines, we took a due
east (...), taking care to keep at the distance of fifteen or twenty yards
apart, and directing ourselves by the north star.

The old man often lagged behind, and when this was the case never failed to
call for us to halt for him. When we were near the Sandusky Creek he fell one
hundred yards behind, and bawled out, as usual, for us to hault. While we were
preparing to reprimand him for making a noise, I heard an Indian halloo, as I
thought one hundred and fifty yards from the man, and partly behind him; and
after this we did not hear the man call again, neither did he ever come up to
us any more. It was now past midnight, and about day break Col. Crawford's and
the young man's horses gave out, and they left them. We pursued our journey
eastward, and about two o'clock fell in with Capt. Biggs, who had carried
Lieut. Ashly from the field of action, who had been dangerously wounded. We
then went on about the space of an hour, when a heavy rain coming on, we
concluded it was best to encamp, as we were encumbered with the wounded
officer. We then barked four or five trees, made an encampment and a fire, and
remained there all that night. Next morning we again prosecuted our journey,
and having gone about three miles found a deer which had been recently killed.
The meat was sliced from the bones and bundled up in the skin with a tomahawk
lying by it. We carried all with us, and in advancing about one mile further
espied the smoke of a fire. We then gave the wounded officer into the charge of
the young man, desiring him to stay behind whilst the Colonel, the Captain, and
myself, walked up as cautiously as we could toward the fire. When we came to
it, we concluded from several circumstances some of our people had encamped
there the preceding night, We then went about roasting the venison* and when
just about to march observed one of our men coming upon our tracks. He seemed
at first very shy, but having called to him he came up and told us he was the
person who had killed the deer, but upon hearing us come up, was afraid of
Indians, hid in a thicket and made off. Upon this we gave him some bread and
roasted venison, proceeded altogether on our journey, and about two o'clock
came upon the paths by which we had gone out. Capt. Biggs and myself did not
think it safe to keep the road, but the Colonel said the Indians would nor
follow the troops farther than the plains, which we were then considerably
past. As the wounded officer rode Capt. Biggs' horse, I lent the Captain mine;
the Colonel and myself went about one hundred yards in front, the Captain and
the wounded officer in the center, and the two young men behind. After we had
traveled about one mile and a half, several Indians started up within fifteen
or twenty steps of the Colonel and me. As we at first discovered only three I
immediately got behind a large black oak, made ready my piece and raised it up
to take sight, when the Colonel called to me twice not to fire; upon that one
of the Indians ran up to the Colonel and took him by the hand. The Colonel then
told me to put down my gun, which I did. At that instant one of them came up to
me whom I had formerly seen very often, calling me Doctor and took me by the
hand. They were Delaware Indians of the Wingenim tribe. Captain Biggs fired
amongst them but did no execution. They then told us, to call these people and
make them come there, else they would go and kill them, which the Colonel did,
but they four got off and escaped for that time. The Colonel and I were then
taken to the Indian camp, which was about half a mile from the place, where we
were captivated. On Sunday evening five Delawares who had posted themselves at
some distance further on the road brought back to the Camp, where we lay,
Captain Biggs' and Lieutenant Ashley's scalps, with an Indian scalp which
Captain Biggs had taken in the field of action: They also brought in Biggs'
horse and mine, they told us the two other men got away from them.

Monday morning, the tenth of June, we were paraded to march to Sandusky, about
33 miles distant: They had eleven prisoners of us and four scalps, the Indians
being seventeen in number.

Col. Crawford was very desirous to see a certain Simeon Girty, who lived among
the Indians, and was on this account permitted to go to town the same night,
with two warriors to guard him, having orders at the same time to pass by the
place where the Colonel had turned out his horse, that they might if possible,
find him. -- The rest of us were taken as far as the old town which was within
eight miles of the new.

Tuesday morning, the 11th, Col. Crawford was brought out to us on purpose to
be marched in with the other prisoners. I asked the Colonel if he had seen Mr.
Girty? -- He told me he had, and that Girty had promised to do every thing in
his power for him, but that the Indians were very much enraged against the
prisoners; particularly Capt. Pipe one of the Chiefs: He likewise told me that
Girty had informed him that his son-in-law, Col. Harrison and his nephew
William Crawford, were made prisoners by the Shawanese, but had been pardoned.
This Capt. Pipe had come from the towns about an hour before Col. Crawford, and
had painted all the prisoner's faces black.

As he was painting me he told me I should go to the Shawanese towns and see my
friends. When the Colonel arrived he painted him black also, told him he was
glad to see him and that he would have him shaved when he came to see his
friends at the Wyandot town. When we marched, the Colonel and I were kept back
between Pipe and Wyngenim, the two Delaware chiefs, the other nine prisoners
were sent forward with another party of Indians. As we went along we saw four
of the prisoners lying by the path tomahawked and scalped, some of them were at
the distance of half a mile from each other. When we arrived within half a mile
of the place where the Colonel was executed, we overtook the five prisoners
that remained alive: The Indians had caused them to sit down on the ground, as
they did, also the Colonel and me at some distance from them, I was there given
in charge to an Indian fellow to be taken to the Shawanese towns.

In the place where we were now made to sit down there was a number of squaws
and boys who fell on the five prisoners and tomahawked them. There was a
certain John M'Kinley amongst the prisoners, formerly an officer in the 13th
Virginia regiment, whose head an old squaw cut off, and the Indians kicked it
about upon the ground. The young Indian fellows came often where the Colonel
and I were, and dashed the scalps in our faces. We were then conducted along
toward the place where the Colonel was afterward executed; When we came within
about half a mile of it, Simeon Girty met us, with several Indians on
horseback; He spoke to the Colonel, but as I was about one hundred and fifty
yards behind could not hear what passed between them.

Almost every Indian we met struck us either with sticks or their fists. Girty
waited till I was brought up, and asked, was that the Doctor? -- I told him,
yes, and went toward him reaching out my hand, but he bid me begone, and called
me a damned rascal; upon which the fellow who had me in charge pulled me along.
Girty rode up after me and told me I was to go to the Shawanese towns.

When we were come to the fire the Colonel was stripped naked, ordered to sit
down by the fire, and then they beat him with sticks and their fists. Presently
after I was treated in the same manner. They then tied a rope to the foot of a
post about fifteen feet high, bound the Colonel's hands behind his back and
fastened the rope to the ligature between his wrists. The rope was long enough
either for him to sit down or walk round the post once or twice and return the
same way. The Colonel then called to Girty and asked if they intended to burn
him? Girty answered, yes. The Colonel said he would take it all patiently. Upon
this Capt. Pipe, a Delaware Chief, made a speech to the Indians, viz. about
thirty or forty men, sixty or seventy squaws and boys.

When the speech was finished they all yelled a hedious and hearty assent to
what had been said. The Indian men then took up their guns and shot powder into
the Colonel's body, from his feet as far up as his neck. I think not less than
seventy loads were discharged upon his (...) body. They then crowded about him,
and to the best of my observation, cut off his ears: When the throng had
dispersed a little I saw the blood running from both sides of his head in
consequence thereof.

The fire was about six or seven yards from the post to which the Colonel was
tied: It was made of small hickory poles, burnt quite through in the middle,
each end of the poles remaining about six feet in length. Three or four Indians
by turns would take up, individually, one of these burning pieces of wood and
apply it to his naked body, already burned black with the powder. These
tormentors presented themselves on every side of him, so that which ever way he
ran round the post they met him with the burning faggots and poles. Some of the
squaws took broad boards upon which they would put a quantity of burning coals
and hot embers, and throw on him, so that in a short time he had nothing but
coals of fire and hot ashes to walk upon.

In the midst of these extreme tortures he called to Simeon Girty and begged of
him to shoot him: But Girty making no answer he called to him again. Girty
then, by way of derision, told the Colonel he had no gun, at the same time
turning about to an Indian who was behind him, laughed heartily, and by all his
gestures seemed delighted at the horrid scene.

Girty then came up to me and bade me prepare for death. He said, however I was
not to die at that place, but to be burnt at the Shawnese towns. He swore by G
-- d I need not expect to escape death, but should suffer it in all its
extremities.

He then observed that some prisoners had given him to understand that if our
people had him they would not hurt him; for his part, he said, he did not
believe it, but desired to know my opinion of the matter; but being at that
time in great anguish and distress for the torments the Colonel was suffering
before my eyes, as well as the expectation of undergoing the same fate in two
days. I made little or no answer. He expressed a great deal of ill will for
Col. Gibson, and said he was one of his greatest enemies, and more to the same
purpose, to all which I paid very little attention.

Col. Crawford at this period of his sufferings, besought the Almighty to have
mercy on his soul, spoke very low, and bore his torments with the most manly
fortitude. He continued in all the extremities of pain for an hour and three
quarters or two hours longer, as near as I can judge, when at last being almost
spent, he lay down on his belly: They then scalped him and repeatedly threw the
scalp in my face, telling me "that was my great Captain." -- An old squaw
(whose appearance everyway answered the ideas people entertain of the Devil)
got a board, took a parcel of coals and ashes and laid them on his back and
head after he had been scalped: He then raised himself upon his feet and began
to walk round the post: They next put a burning stick to him as usual, but he
seemed more insensible of pain than before.

The Indian fellow who had me in charge now took me away to Capt. Pipe's house,
about three quarters of a mile from the place of the colonel's execution. I was
bound all night and thus prevented from seeing the last of the horrid
spectacle. Next morning, being June 12th, the Indian untied me, painted me
black, and we set off for the Shawanese town, which he told me was somewhat
less than forty miles from that place. We soon came to the spot where the
Colonel was burnt, as it was partly in our way; I saw his bones laying amongst
the remains of the fire, almost burnt to ashes, I suppose after he was dead
they had laid his body on the fire.

The Indian told me, that was my Big Captain and gave the scalp halloo. He was
on horseback and drove me before him.

I pretended to this Indian I was ignorant of the death I was to die at the
Shawanese town, affected as cheerful a countenance as possible and asked him if
we were not to live together as brothers in one house when we should get to the
town? He seemed well pleased, and said, yes. He then asked me if I could make a
wigwam? -- I told him I could -- he then seemed more friendly -- we went that
day as near as I can judge about 25 miles, the course partly southwest -- The
Indian told me we should next day come to the town the sun being in such a
direction, pointing nearly south. At night when we went to rest I attempted
very often to untie myself, but the Indian was extremely vigilant and scarce
ever shut his eyes that night. About day break he got up and untied me: He next
began to mend up the fire, and as the (...) were troublesome I asked him if I
should make a smoke behind him? He said, yes. I then took the end of a dogwood
fork which had been burnt down to about 18 inches long: It was the longest
stick I could find, yet too small for the purpose I had in view: then I picked
up another smaller stick and taking a coal of fire between them went behind
him: Then turning suddenly about, I struck him on the head with all the force I
was master of; which so stunned him that he fell forwards with both his hands
into the fire, but seeing him recover and get up, I seized his gun while he ran
off howling in a most fearful manner -- I followed him with a determination to
shoot him down, but pulling back the cock of the gun with too great violence I
believe I broke the main spring. I pursued him, however, about thirty yards
still endeavoring to fire the gun, but could not; then going back to the fire
I took his blanket, a pair of new mokkisons, his hopp^s, powder horn, bullet
bag, (together with the gun) and marched off, directing my course toward the
five o'clock mark; about half an hour before sunset I came to the plains which
I think are about sixteen miles wide. I laid me down in a thicket till dark,
and then by the assistance of the north star made my way through them and not
into the woods before morning. I proceeded on the next day and about noon
crossed the paths by which our troops had gone out: These paths are nearly east
and west but I went due north all that afternoon with a view to avoid the enemy.

In the evening I began to be very faint, and no wonder; I had been six days
prisoner; the last two days of which I had eat nothing, and out very little the
first three or four: There were wild gooseberries in abundance in the woods,
but being unripe required mastication, which at that time I was not able to
perform on account of a blow received from an Indian on the jaw with the back
of a tomahawk: There was a weed that grew plentifully in that place, the juice
of which I knew to be grateful and nourishing; I gathered a bundle of the same,
took up my lodging under a large spreading beach tree and having sucked
plentifully of the juice, went to sleep. Next day I made a due east course
which I generally kept the rest of my journey. I often imagined my gun was only
wood bound and tried every method I could devise to unscrew the lock but never
could effect it having no knife nor any thing fitting for the purpose; I had
now the satisfaction to find my jaw began to mend and in four or five days
could chew any vegetable proper for nourishment, but finding my gun only a
useless burden left her in the wilderness. I had no apparatus for making fire
to sleep by so that I could get but little rest for the gnats and musquetoes;
there are likewise a great many swamps in the beach ridge which occasioned me
very often to lie we^: This ridge through which I traveled is about 20 miles
broad, the ground in general very level and rich, free from shrubs and brush:
there are, however, very few springs, yet wells might easily be dug in all
parts of that ridge; the timber on it is very lofty, but it is no easy matter
to make a strait course through the same, the moss growing as high upon the
south side of the trees as on the north. There are a great many white oaks, ash
and hickory trees that grow among the beach timber; there are likewise some
places on the ridge, perhaps for three or four continued miles where there is
little or no beach, and in such spots, black, white oah, ash and hickory
abound. Sugar trees grow there also to a very great bulk: The soil is
remarkably good, the ground a little ascending and descending with some small
rivulets and a few springs. When I got out of the beach ridge and nearer the
river Muskingum the lands were more broken but equally rich with those before
mentioned, and abounding with brooks and springs of water: There are also
several small creeks that empty into that river, the bed of which is more than
a mile wide in many places: The woods consist of white and black oaks, walnut,
hickory and sugar trees in the greatest abundance. In all parts of the country
through which I came the game was very plenty, that is to say, deer, turkies and
pheasants, I likewise saw a great many vestiges of bears and some elks.

I crossed the river Muskingum about three or four miles below Fort Laurence,
and crossing all paths aimed for the Ohio river. All this time my food was
gooseberries, young nettles, the juice of herbs, a few service berries, and
some May apples, likewise, two young blackbirds and a turripine which I
devoured raw. When my food sat heavy on my stomach, I used to eat a little wild
ginger which put all to rights.

I came upon Ohio river about five miles below fort M'Intosh, in the evening of
the 21st day after I had made my escape, and on the twenty second, about seven
o'clock in the morning, being the fourth day of July, arrived safe, though very
much fatigued, at the fort.

A SHORT MEMOIR OF THE WITHIN MENTIONED COL. CRAWFORD.
COL. CRAWFORD, was about 50 years of age, had been an old warrior against the
savages. He distinguished himself early as a volunteer in the last war, and was
taken notice of by Colonel (now General) Washington, who procured for him the
Commission of Ensign. As a partisan he showed himself very active, and was
greatly successful: He took several Indian towns, and did great service in
scouting, patrolling and defending the frontiers. At the commencement of this
war he raised a regiment in the back country by his own exertions: He had the
Commission of Colonel in the Continental army, and acted bravely on several
occasions in the years '76, '77, and at other times. He held his Commission at
the time he took Command of the militia in the aforesaid expedition against the
Indians; most probably he had it with him when he was taken: He was a man of
good judgment, singular good nature, and great humanity, and remarkable for his
hospitality, few strangers coming to the western country, and not spending some
days at the crossings of the Yochaghany river, where he lived; no man therefore
could be more regretted.

THE NARRATIVE OF JOHN SLOVER.
HAVING in the last war been a prisoner amongst the Indians many years, and so
being well acquainted with the country west of the Ohio I was employed as a
guide in the expedition under Col. William Crawford against the Indian towns on
or near the river Sandusky. It will be unnecessary for me to relate what is so
well known, the circumstances and unfortunate event of that expedition; it will
be sufficient to observe, that having on Tuesday the fourth of June fought the
enemy near Sandusky, we lay that night in our camp, and the next day fired on
each other at the distance of three hundred yards, doing little or no
execution. In the evening of that day it was proposed by Col. Crawford, as I
have been since informed, to draw off with order; but at the moment of our
retreat the Indians (who had probably perceived that we were about to retire)
firing alarm guns, our men broke and rode off in confusion, treading down those
who were on foot, and leaving the wounded men who supplicated to be taken with
them.

I was with some others on the rear of our troops feeding our horses on the
glade, when our men began to break: The main body of our people had passed by
me a considerable distance before I was ready to set out. I overtook them
before they crossed the glade, and was advanced almost in front. The company in
which I was, had separated from me, and had endeavored to pass a morass; for
coming up, I found their horses had stuck fast in the morass, and endeavoring
to pass mine also in a short time stuck fast. I ought to have said, the company
of five or six men with which I had been immediately connected, and who were
some distance to the right of the main body, and had separated from me, etc. I
tried a long time to disengage my horse, until I could hear the enemy just
behind me, and on each side, but in vain. Here then I was obliged to leave him.
The morass was so unstable that I was to the middle in it, and it was with the
greatest difficulty that I got across it, but which having at length done, I
came up with the six men who had left their horses in the same manner I had
done; two of these, my companions, having lost their guns.

We traveled that night making our course toward Detroit, with a view to shun
the enemy, who we conceived to have taken the paths by which the main body of
our people had retreated. Just before day we got into a second deep morass and
were under the necessity of detaining until it was light to see our way through
it. The whole of this day we traveled toward the Shawanese towns, with a view
of throwing ourselves still farther out of the search of the enemy. About ten
o'clock this day we sat down to eat a little, having tasted nothing from
Tuesday, the day of our engagement, until this time which was on Thursday; and
now the only thing we had to eat was a scrap of pork to each. We had sat down
just by a warrior's path which we had not suspected, when eight or nine
warriors appeared. Running off hastily we left our baggage and provisions, but
were not discovered by the party; for sculking some time in the grass and
bushes, we returned to the place and recovered our baggage. The warriors had
hallooed as they passed, and were answered by others on our flanks.

In our journey through the glades, or wide extended dry meadows, about twelve
o'clock this day we discovered a party of Indians in front, but sculking in the
grass and bushes were not perceived by them. In these glades we were in great
danger, as we could be seen at a great distance. In the afternoon of this day
there fell a heavy rain, the coldest I ever felt. We halted while it rained,
and then traveling on we saw a party of the enemy about two hundred yards
before us, but hiding ourselves in the bushes, we had again the good fortune
not to be discovered. This night we got out of the glades, having in the night
crossed the paths by which we had advanced to Sandusky. It was our design to
leave all these paths to the right, and to come in by the Tuscarawas. We should
have made a much greater progress, had it not been for two of our companions
who were lame; the one having his foot burnt, the other with a swelling in his
knee, of a rheumatic nature.

On this day, which was the second after the retreat, one of our company, the
person affected with the rheumatic swelling, was left behind some distance in a
swamp. Waiting for him sometime we saw him coming within one hundred yards, as
I sat on the body of an old tree mending my mokkisons, but taking my eye from
him I saw him no more. He had not observed our tracks, but had gone a different
way. We whistled on our chargers, and afterward hallooed for him but in vain.
Nevertheless he was fortunate in missing us, for he afterward came safe into
Wheeling. We traveled on until night, and were on the waters of Muskingum from
the middle of this day.

Having catched a fawn this day we made a fire in the evening, and had a
repast, having in the mean time eat nothing but the small bit of pork I
mentioned before. We set off at break of day. About nine o'clock the third day
we fell in with a party of the enemy about twenty miles from the Tuscarawas,
which is about 135 miles from Fort Pit. They had come upon our tracks, or had
been on our flanks, and discovered us, and then having got before had waylaid
us, and fired before we perceived them. At the first fire one of my companions
fell before me, and another just behind; these two had guns: Tnere were six men
in company, and four guns, two of these rendered useless by reason of the wet,
when coming through the swamp the first night; we had tried to discharge them,
but could not. When the Indians fired I ran to a tree, but an Indian presenting
himself fifteen yards before me, desired me to deliver myself up and I should
not be hurt: My gun was in good order, but apprehending the enemy behind might
discharge their pieces at me, I did not risk firing, which I had afterward
reason to regret when I found what was to be my fate, and that the Indian who
was before me and presented his gun, was one of those who had just before
fired. Two of my companions were taken with me in the same manner, the Indians
assuring us we should not be hurt. But one in company, James Paul, who had a
gun in order made his escape, and has since come into Wheeling. One of these
Indians knew me, and was of the party by whom I was taken in the last war. He
came up to and spoke to me, calling me by my Indian name, Mannuchcothee, and
upbrading me for coming to war against them. I will take a moment here to
relate some particulars of my first captivity, and my life since.

I was taken from New River, in Virginia, by the Miamese, a nation of Indians
by us called the Picts, amongst whom I lived six years; afterward being sold
to a Delaware, and by him put into the hands of a trader, I was carried amongst
the Shawanese, with whom I continued six years; so that my whole time amongst
these nations was 12 years, that is, from the eighth to the twentieth year of
my age. At the treaty at Fort Pit in the fall preceding what is called
Dunmore's war, which, if I am right, was in the year '73, I came in with the
Shawanese nation to the treaty, and meeting with some of my relations at that
place, was by them solicited to relinquish the life of a savage, which I did
with some reluctance, this manner of life having become natural to me, inasmuch
as I had scarcely known any other. I enlisted as a soldier in the Continental
army at the commencement of the present war, and served fifteen months. Having
been properly discharged I have since married, have a family, and am in
communion with the church.

To return: The party by whom we were made prisoners had taken some horses, and
left them at the glades we had passed the day before. They had followed on our
tracks from these glades; on our return to which we found the horses and rode.
We were carried towachatomakak, a town of the Mingoes and Shawanese. I think it
was on the third day we reached the town, which when we were approaching, the
Indians, in whose custody we (...), began to look sour, having been kind to us
before, and given us a little meat and flour to eat, which they had found or
taken from some of our men on their retreat. This town is small, and we were
told was about two miles distant from the main town, to which they meant to
carry us.

The inhabitants from this town came out with clubs and tomahawks struck, beat
and abused us greatly. One of my two companions they seized and having stripped
him naked, blacked him with coal and water: This was the sign of being burnt:
The man seemed to surmise it, and shed tears. He asked me the meaning of his
being blacked; but I was forbid by the enemy in their own language to tell him
what was intended. -- In English, which they spoke easily, having been often at
Fort Pit, they assured him he was not to be hurt. I know of no reason for
making him the first object of their cruelty, unless it was that he was the
oldest.

A warrior had been sent to the greater town to acquaint them with our coming,
and prepare them for the frolic; for on our coming to it, the inhabitants came
out with guns, clubs and tomahawks. We were told that we had to run to the
council house, about three hundred yards. The man that was blacked was about
twenty yards before us, in running the guantlet: They made him their principal
object, men, women and children beating him, and those who had guns firing
loads of powder on him as he run naked, putting the muzzles of the guns to his
body, shouting, hallooing and beating their drums in the mean time.

The unhappy man had reached the door of the council house, beat and wounded in
a manner shocking to the sight: for having arrived before him we had it in our
power to view the spectacle: it was indeed the most horrid that can be
conceived: They had cut him with their tomahawks shot his body black, burnt it
into holes with loads of powder blown into him: A large wadding had made a
wound in his shoulder whence the blood gushed.

Agreeable to the declaration of the enemy when he first set out, he had reason
to think himself secure when he had reached the door of the council house. This
seemed to be his hope, for coming up with great struggling and endeavor, (...)
hold of the door but was pulled back and drawn away by them; finding they
intended no mercy, but putting him to death he attempted several times to
snatch or lay hold of some of their tomahawks, but being weak could not affect
it. We saw him borne off and they were a long time beating, wounding, pursuing
and killing him.

That same evening I saw the dead body of this man close by the council house.
It was mangled cruelly and the blood mingled with the powder was rendered
black. The same evening I saw him, after he had been cut into pieces and his
limbs and his head about two hundred yards on the outside of the town put on
poles. That evening also I saw the bodies of three others in the same black and
mangled condition: These I was told had been put to death the same day and just
before we had reached the town. Their bodies as they lay were black, bloody,
and burnt with powder; two of these were Harrison, and young Crawford. I knew
the visage of Colonel Harrison, and I saw his clothing and that of young
Crawford, at the town. They brought horses to me and asked if I knew them? -- I
said they were Harrison's and Crawford's. They said they were.

The third of these men I did not know, but believe to have been Col.
M'Cleland, the third in command on the expedition.

The next day the bodies of these men were dragged to the outside of the town,
and their carcases being given to the dogs, their limbs and heads were stuck on
poles.

My surviving companion shortly after we had reached the council house was sent
to another town, and I presume he was burnt or executed in the same manner.

In the evening the men assembled in the council house; This is a large
building about fifty yards in length and about twenty five yards wide; and
about sixteen feet in height, built of split poles covered with bark: Their
first object was to examine me, which they could do in their own language,
inasmuch as I could speak the Miame, Shawanese and Delaware languages, which I
had learned during my early captivity in the last war: I found I had not
forgotten these languages, especially the two former, being able to speak them
as well as my native tongue.

They began with interrogating me concerning the situation of our country, what
were our provisions? our numbers? the state of the war between us and Britain?
I informed them Cornwallis had been taken, which next day, when Matthew Elliot,
with James Girty, came, they affirmed to be a lie, and the Indians seemed to
give full credit to their declarations.

Hitherto I had been treated with some appearance of kindness, but now the
enemy began to alter their behavior toward me. Girty had informed them, that
when he asked me how I liked to live there, I had said that I intended to take
the first opportunity to take a scalp and run off. It was, to be sure, very
probable that if I had such intention, I would communicate it to him. Another
man came to me and told me a story of his having lived on the south branch of
Potowmac in Virginia, and having three brothers there, he pretended he wanted
to get away, but I suspected his design; nevertheless he reported that I had
consented to go. In the mean time I was not tied and could have escaped, but
having nothing to put on my feet, I waited some time longer to provide for this.

I was invited every night to the war dances, which they usually continued
until almost day. I could not comply with their desire, believing these things
to be the service of the devil.

The council lasted fifteen days; from fifty to one hundred warriors being
usually in council, and sometimes more. Every warrior is admitted to these
councils; but only the chiefs or head warriors have the privilege of speaking.
The head warriors are accounted such from the number of scalps and prisoners
they have taken.

The third day M'Kee was in council, and afterward was generally present. He
spoke little, and did not ask any questions or speak to me at all. He lives
about two miles out of the town, has a house built of squared logs with a
shingled roof; he was dressed in gold laced clothes. I had seen him at the
former town through which I passed.

I think it was on the last day of the council, save one, that a speech came
from Detroit, brought by a warrior who had been counseling with the commanding
officer at that place. The speech had been long expected, and was in answer to
one sometime before sent from the town to Detroit: It was in a belt of Wampum
and began with addressing them, "My children," and enquiring why they continued
to take prisoners? "Provisions are scarce; when prisoners are brought in we are
obliged to maintain them, and still some of them are running away, and carrying
tidings of our affairs. When any of your people fall into the hands of the
rebels they show no mercy: why then should you take prisoners? Take no more
prisoners, my children, of any sort; man, woman or child."

Two days after a party of every nation that was near being collected, it was
determined on to take no more prisoners of any sort. They had held a large
council, and the determination was, that if it where possible they could find a
child of a span or three inches long, they would show no mercy to it. At the
conclusion of the council it was agreed upon by all the tribes present, viz.
the Tawaws, Chiappawaws the Wiondots, the Mingoes, the Delawares, the
Shawanese, the Munses, and a part of the Cherokees, that should any of the
nation who were not present take any prisoner, these would rise against them,
take away the prisoners and put them to death.

In the course of these deliberations I understood what was said perfectly.
They laid plans against our settlements of Kentucky, the Falls, and toward
Wheeling. These it will be unnecessary for me to mention in this narrative,
more especially as the Indians finding me to have escaped, and knowing that I
would not fail to communicate these designs, will be led to alter their
resolutions.

There was one council held at which I was not present: The warriors had sent
for me as usual, but the squaw with whom I lived would not suffer me to go, but
hid me under a large quantity of skins. It may have been from an unwillingness
that I should hear in council the determination with respect to me, that I
should be burnt.

About this time twelve men were brought in from Kentucky, three of whom were
burnt on this day: The remainder were distributed to other towns, and all as
the Indians informed me, were burnt. This was after the speech came from
Detroit.

On this day also I saw an Indian who had just come into town, and who said
that the prisoner he was bringing to be burnt, and who he said was a doctor,
had made his escape from him. I knew this must have been Dr. Knight, who went
as surgeon of the expedition. The Indian had a wound four inches long in his
head which he acknowledged the doctor had given him: he was cut to the scull.
His story was, that he had untied the doctor, being asked by him to do so, the
doctor promising that he would not go away; that while he was employed in
kindling the fire, the doctor snatched up the gun, had come behind and struck
him: that he then made a stroke at the doctor with his knife, which he laid
hold of, and his fingers were cut almost off, the knife being drawn through his
hand; that he gave the doctor two stabs, one in the belly, the other in the
back; said the doctor was a great, big, tall, strong man. Being now adopted in
an Indian family, and having some confidence for my safety, I took the liberty
to contradict this, and said that I knew the doctor who was a weak, little man.
The other warriors laughed immoderately, and did not seem to credit him. At
this time I was told that Col. Crawford was burnt, and they greatly exulted
over it.

The day after the council I have mentioned about forty warriors accompanied by
George Girty came early in the morning round the house where I was. The squaw
gave me up; I was sitting before the door of the house; they put a rope round
my neck, tied my arms behind my back, stripped me naked, and blacked me in the
usual manner. George Girty as soon as I was tied, damned me, and said that I
now should get what I had deserved many years. I was led away to a town distant
about five miles, to which a messenger had been dispatched to desire them them
to prepare to receive me: Arriving at this town I was beaten with clubs and the
pipe ends of their tomahawks, and was kept for some time tied to a tree before
a house door. In the mean while the inhabitants set out to another town about
two miles distant, where I was to be burnt, and where I arrived about three
o'clock in the afternoon.

Here also was a council house, part of it covered, and part of it without a
roof. In the part of it where no cover was, but only sides built up, there
stood a post about sixteen feet in height, and in the middle of the house
around the post, there were three piles of wood built about three feet high and
four feet from the post. Being brought to the post my arms were tied behind me
and the thong or cord with which they were bound was fastened to the post; a
rope also was put about my neck and tied to the post about four feet above my
head. During the time they were tying me, piles of wood were kindled and began
to flame.

Death by burning, which appeared to be now my fate, I had resolved to sustain
with patience. The divine grace of God had made it less alarming to me: for on
my way this day, I had been greatly exercised in regard to my latter end. I
knew myself to have been a regular member of the church, and to have sought
repentance for my sins; but though I had often heard of the faith of assurance,
had known nothing of it; but early this day, instantaneously by a change
wrought upon me sudden and perceivable as lightning, an assurance of my peace
made with God sprung up in my mind. The following words were the subject of my
meditation -- "In peace thou shall see God. Fear not those who can kill the
body. In peace shall thou depart." I was on this occasion by a confidence in
mind, not to be resisted, fully assured of my salvation: This being the case, I
was willing, satisfied, and glad to die.

I was tied to the post, as I have already said, and the flame was now kindled.
The day was clear, not a cloud to be seen: if there were clouds low in the
horizon, the sides of the house prevented me from seeing them, but I heard no
thunder, or observed any sign of approaching rain. Just as the fire of one pile
began to blaze, the wind rose; from the time they began to kindle the fire and
to tie me to the post, until the wind began to blow, was about fifteen minutes.
The wind blew a hurricane, and the rain followed in less than three minutes.
The rain fell violent, and the fire, though it began to blaze considerably, was
instantly extinguished. The rain lasted about a quarter of an hour.

When it was over, the savages stood amazed and were a long time silent. At
last one said, we will let him alone till morning, and take a whole day's
frolic in burning him. The sun at this time was about three hours high. It was
agreed upon and the rope about my neck was untied, and making me sit down, they
began to dance around me. They continued dancing in this manner until eleven
o'clock at night; in the mean time, beating kicking, and wounding me with their
tomahawks and clubs.

At last one of the warriors, the Half Moon, asked me if I was sleepy? I
answered, Yes. The head warrior then chose out three men to take care of me. I
was taken to a block house; my arms were tied until the cord was hid in the
flesh; they were tied in two places, round the wrist and above the elbows. A
rope was fastened about my neck, and tied to a beam of the house, but
permitting me to lie down on a board. The three warriors were constantly
harrassing and troubling me, saying, "How will you like to eat fire tomorrow --
you will kill no more Indians now." I was in expectation of their going to
sleep; when at length, about an hour before day break, two laid down; the third
smoked a pipe, talked to me, and asked the same painful questions. About half
an hour after, he also laid down and I heard him begin to snore. -- Instantly I
went to work, and as my arms were perfectly dead with the cord, I laid myself
down upon my right arm which was behind my back, and keeping it fast with my
fingers, which had still some life and strength, I slipped the cord from my
left arm over my elbow and my wrist. One of the warriors now got up and stirred
the fire: I was apprehensive that I should be examined, and thought it was over
with me; but my hopes revived when now he lay down again. I then attempted to
unloose the rope about my neck, tried to gnaw it but in vain, as it was as
thick as my thumb and as hard as iron, being made of a buffaloe hide: I wrought
with it a long time, gave it out, and could see no relief. At this time I saw
day break and heard the cock crow: I made a second attempt almost without hope,
pulling the rope by putting my fingers between my neck and it, and to my great
surprise it came easily untied: It was a noose with two or three knots tied
over it.

I stepped over the warriors as they lay, and having got out of the house looked
back to see if there was any disturbance; I then run through the town into a
corn field; in my way I saw a squaw with four or five children lying asleep
under a tree: Going a different way into the field I untied my arm which was
greatly swelled and turned black: Having observed a number of horses in the
glade as I ran through it, I went back to catch one, and on my way found a
piece of an old rug or quilt hanging on a fence which I took with me: Having
caught the horse, the rope with which I had been tied serving for a halter, I
rode off; the horse was strong and swift, and and the woods being open and the
country level, about ten o'clock that day I crossed the Sciota river at a place
by computation fifty full miles from the town. I had rode about twenty miles on
this side Sciota by three o'clock in the afternoon, when the horse began to
fail and could no longer go on a trot. I instantly left him and ran on foot
about twenty miles farther that day, making in the whole the distance of near
one hundred miles. In the evening I heard hallooing behind me and for this
reason did not halt until about ten o'clock at night, when I sat down, was
extremely sick and vomited; but when the moon rose which might have been about
two hours after, I went on and traveled until day.

During the night I had a path, but in the morning judged it prudent to forsake
the path and take a ridge for the distance of fifteen miles in a line at right
angles to my course, putting back as I went along with a stick the weeds which
I had bended, lest I should be tracked by the enemy. I lay the next night on
the waters of Muskingum: The nettles had been troublesome to me after my
crossing the Sciota, having nothing to defend myself but the piece of a rug
which I had found, and which while I rode I used under me by way of saddle; the
briars and thorns were now painful to and prevented me from traveling in the
night until the moon appeared: In the mean time I was hindered from sleeping by
the musquetoes, for even in the day I was under the necessity of traveling
with a handful of bushes to brush them from my body.

The second night I reached Cushakim; next day came to Newcomer's town, where I
got about seven rasberries, which were the first thing I ate from the morning
in which the Indians had taken me to burn me until this time, which was now
about three o'clock the fourth day. I felt hunger very little, but was
extremely weak; I swam Muskingum river at Oldcomer's town, the river being
about two hundred yards wide; having reached the bank I sat down, looked back
and thought I had a start of the Indians if any should pursue. That evening I
traveled about five miles, next day came to Stillwater, a small river, in a
branch of which I got two small crafish to eat: Next night I lay within five
miles of Wheeling, but had not slept a wink during this whole time, being
rendered impossible by the musquetoes, which it was my constant employment to
brush away. Next day came to Wheeling and saw a man on the island in the Ohio
opposite to that post, and calling to him and asking for particular persons who
had been on the expedition, and telling him I was Slover, at length, with great
difficulty, he was pursuaded to come over and bring me across in his canoe.

A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY AND ESCAPE OF Mrs. FRANCES SCOTT, An Inhabitant
of Washington County, Virginia.
ON Wednesday the 29th day of June, 1785. late in the evening, a large company
of armed men passed the house, on their way to Kentucky: Some part of whom
encamped within two miles. Mr. Scott living on a frontier part, generally made
the family watchful; but on this calamitous day, after so large a body of men
had passed, shortly after night, he lay down in his bed, and imprudently left
one of the doors of his house open; the children were also in bed, and asleep.
Mrs. Scott was nearly undressed, when to her unutterable astonishment and
horror, she saw rushing in through the door that was left open, painted savages
with presented arms, raising a hideous shriek -- Mr. Scott being awake,
instantly jumped out of his bed, but was immediately fired at: He forced his
way through the middle of the enemy and got out of the door, but fell a few
paces from thence. An Indian seized Mrs. Scott, and ordered her to a particular
spot, and not to move; others stabbed and cut the throats of the three youngest
children in their bed, and afterward lifted them up and dashed them down on
the floor, near the mother; the eldest, a beautiful girl of eight years old,
awoke and escaped out of bed, and ran to her parent, and, with the most
plaintive accents, cried, "O mama! mama! save me" -- the mother, in the deepest
anguish of spirit, and with a flood of tears, entreated the savages to spare
her child; but, with a brutal fierceness, they tomahawked and stabbed her in
the mothers arms. Adjacent to Mr. Scott's dwelling house another family lived,
of the name of Ball. -- The Indians also attacked them at the same instant they
did Mr. Scott's, but the door being shut, the enemy fired into the house
through an opening between two logs, and killed a young lad, and then essayed
to force the door open; but a surviving brother fired through the door, and the
enemy desisted, and went off: The remaining part of the family ran out of the
house and escaped. In Mr. Scott's house were four good rifles well loaded, and
a good deal of clothing, and furniture, part of which belonged to people that
had left it on their way to Kentucky. The Indians loaded themselves with the
plunder, being 13 in number, then speedily made off, and continued traveling
all night; next morning their chief allotted to each man his share and detached
nine of a party to steal horses from the inhabitants of Clinch. The eleventh
day after Mrs. Scotts captivity, the four Indians that had her in charge,
stopped at a place fixed upon for a rendezvous, and to hunt, being now in great
want of provisions. Three went out, and the chief, being an old man, was left
to (...) care of the prisoner, who, by this time, expressed a willingness to
proceed to the Indian towns, which seemed to have the desired effect of
lessening her keeper's vigilance. In the day time, as the old man was graining
a deer skin, the captive pondering on her situation, and anxiously looking for
an opportunity to make her escape, took the resolution, and went to the Indian
carelessly, asked liberty to go a small distance to a stream of water, to wash
the blood off her apron, that had remained besmeared since the fatal night of
the murder of her little daughter. He told her in the English tongue "go
along;" she then passed by him, his face being in a contrary direction from
that she was going, and he very busy. She after getting to the water, proceeded
on without delay, made to a high barren mountain, and traveled until late in
the evening, when she came down into the valley, in search of the track she had
been taken along; hoping thereby to find the way back, without the risk of
being lost, and perishing with hunger in uninhabited parts. On coming across
the valley to the river side, supposed to be the easterly branch of Kentucky
river, she observed in the sand, tracks of two men, that had gone up the river,
and had just returned. She concluded these to have been her pursuers, which
excited emotions of gratitude and thankfulness to divine providence for so
timous a deliverance. Being without any provisions, having no kind of weapon or
tool to assist her in getting any, and being almost destitute of clothing,
also knowing that a vast tract of rugged high mountains intervened, between
where she was and the inhabitants eastwardly, and the distance of the Kentucky
settlements unknown, and she almost as ignorant as a child of the method of
steering through the woods, excited painful sensations. But certain death,
either by hunger or wild beasts, seemed preferable rather than to be in the
power of beings, who had excited in her mind such horror. She addressed heaven
for protection, and taking courage, proceeded onward. After traveling three
days, she had nearly met with the Indians, as she supposed, that had been sent
to Clinch to steal horses, but providentially hearing their approach, concealed
herself among the cane, until the enemy had passed. This giving a fresh alarm
and her mind being filled with consternation, she got lost, proceeding
backwards and forwards for several days; at length she came to a river, that
seemed to come from the east; concluding it was Sandy river, she accordingly
resolved to trace it to its source, which is adjacent to the Clinch
settlements. After proceeding up the same several days, she came to where the
river runs through the great Laurel mountain, where is a prodigious water-fall,
and numerous high craggy cliffs along the water edge; that way seemed
impassable, the mountain steep and difficult: However, our mournful traveller
concluded that the latter way was the best. She therefore ascended for some
time, but coming to a range of inaccessible rocks, she turned her course
toward the foot of the mountain and the river side; After getting into a deep
gulley, and passing over several high steep rocks, she reached the river side,
where, to her inexpressible affliction, she found that a perpendicular rock or
rather one that hung over of 15 or 20 feet high, formed the bank. Here a solemn
pause took place; she essayed to return, but the height of the steeps and rocks
she had descended over, prevented her. She then returned to the edge of the
precipice, and viewed the bottom of it, as the certain spot to end all her
troubles, or remain on the top to pine away with hunger, or be devoured by wild
beasts. After serious meditation, and devout exercises, she determined on
leaping from the height, and accordingly jumped off. Although the place she had
to alight was covered with uneven rocks, not a bone was broken; but, being
exceedingly stunned with the fall, she remained unable to proceed for some
space of time. The dry season caused the river to be shallow -- she traveled
in it, and where she could, by its edge, until she got through the mountain,
which she concluded was several miles. After this, as she was traveling along
the bank of the river, a venomous snake bit her on the ancle: She had strength
to kill, and knowing its kind, concluded that death must soon overtake her. By
this time, Mrs. Scott was reduced to a mere skeleton with fatigue, hunger and
grief: probably this state of her body was the means, of preserving her from
the effects of the poison: be that as it may, so it was, that very little pain
succeeded the bite, and what little swelling there was, it fell into her feet.
Our wanderer now left the river, and after proceeding a good distance, she came
to where the valley parted into two, each leading a different course. Here a
painful suspense again took place: A forlorn creature, almost exhausted, and
certain, if she was far led out of the way, she would never see a human
creature -- During this soliloque, a beautiful bird passed close by her
flattering along the ground, and went out of sight up one of the valleys. --
This drew her attention, and whilst considering what it might mean, another
bird of the same appearance in like manner fluttered past her, and took the
same valley the other had done This determined her choice of the way; and in
two days which was on the 11th day of August, she reached that settlement on
Clinch, called New-Garden; whereas (she is since informed by wood men) had she
taken the other valley, it would have led her back toward the Ohio. Mrs. Scott
relates, that the Indians told her, that the party was composed of four
different nations, two of whom she thinks they named Delawares and Mingoes.

She further relates, that during her wandering from the tenth of July to the
eleventh of August, she had no other subsistence but chewing and swallowing the
juice of young cane-stalks, Sassasras leaves, and some other plants she did not
know the names of; that, on her journey, she saw Buffaloes, Elks, Deer, and
frequently Bears and Wolves; not one of which, although some passed very near
her, offered to do her the least harm. One day a Bear came near her, with a
young Fawn in his mouth, and on discovering her, he dropped his prey and ran
off. Hunger prompted her to go and take the flesh and eat it: but on
reflection, she desisted, thinking that the Bear might return and devour her;
besides she had an aversion to taste raw flesh. -- Mrs. Scott continues in a
low state of health, and remains inconsolable for the loss of her family,
particularly bewailing the cruel death of her little daughter.

FINIS.

