AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL MEETING HOUSE, IN
PROVIDENCE, ON THE Fourth of July, 1799.

BY JONATHAN MAXCY, A. M. PRESIDENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE.

Providence: PRINTED BY JOHN CARTER, JUN. AT THE NEW PRINTING-OFFICE,
MARKET-STREET. 1799

AN ORATION.
CALLED by your suffrages, Fellow-Citizens, I once more address you on the
Anniversary of our National Independence. This event, though glorious in
itself, and wonderful in its effects, is, by the peculiar situation of our
public affairs, exalted to a point of unprecedented importance. Never has our
country been exposed to greater danger; never has our government been assaulted
with greater violence, by foreign foes and domestic traitors; never have been
more insidious, persevering and malevolent attempts to corrupt public opinion;
to undermine the foundations of religion, to cut asunder the sinews of moral
obligation, and to cover this happy land with carnage, desolation and ruin. Let
us then with enthusiasm hail the Birthday of our Sovereignty. Let us summon
all our energies against the artifices of secret intrigue, and the aggressions
of open hostility. To animate your patriotism, and inspire you with all the
ardour of violated liberty; to render you feelingly alive to the necessity of
united vigorous measures of defense, to rouse up your generous indignation at
the unprovoked abuses practiced by a foreign nation of gigantic power, permit
me to call back your attention to that period, not far past, when all that was
dear to you as members of society and subjects of government, was suspended
over the gulf of ruin; when you rose up with an invincible courage, and, in the
voice of united thunders, announced to the world that you were FREE, SOVEREIGN
and INDEPENDENT. On that great and trying occasion, what were your feelings?
Did you tamely submit to the usurping arm of foreign domination? Did you
surrender your liberties, without a struggle or a sigh? No, Americans, you did
not; you acted the part of men worthy of liberty; you displayed the standard of
freedom; you drew the sword of vengeance; you discharged the thunderbolt of
destruction, and, under the protection of heaven, obtained a triumph, which
glitters in capitals on the pillars of eternity. Succeeding years crowned the
efforts of our wisdom, and the labors of our industry, with a success and
prosperity which have astonished the world. The establishment of an energetic
government, the cultivation of the soil, the rapid increase of population, the
great extension of commerce, the improvement of arts and sciences -- all
combined to perpetuate our freedom, to augment our power, and to render us a
respectable and invincible nation. Guarded by an immense ocean, we hoped to
escape that whirlwind which has long been spending its rage on the devoted
nations of Europe. We assumed a neutral station: our right hand held out the
branch of peace, while our left welcomed the persecuted stranger. Britain first
smote us with her gigantic arm: she listened to our remonstrances, and
redressed our wrongs. France, irritated at our success in preserving peace,
determined on revenge. She renewed with additional vigor those secret,
insidious arts, which she had long practiced to control our public councils,
and to destroy the confidence of the people in the government of their choice.
Detected and disappointed by the vigilance of our rulers, she threw aside the
mask, and disclosed her vengeful countenance on the Atlantic. Our commerce fell
a prey to her all-devouring jaws. The overtures made by our government have
been neglected with the most haughty disdain, and our messengers of peace
treated like the representatives of a nation destitute of wisdom and power. We
have now no resource left to vindicate our honor and our rights, but our
courage and our force. These we trust are sufficient to defend us against all
enemies, whether foreign or domestic.

WE must rank among our disgraces as well as among our misfortunes, the
existence of a set of men in our country, who have derived their political
principles from foreign influence and foreign intrigue; who exert their utmost
efforts to ruin our government, and to prostrate all permanent establishments.
These men discard, as the effects of superstition, all ancient institutions;
and, instead of adhering to an uniform order of things, delight in perpetual
revolutions. Their system of rights, like their system of government, is
metaphysic and fantastical. They do not consider that government is a science
derived from the experience of ages, and that it ought to embrace the rights
and welfare, not of the present age only, but of all posterity. They consider
the chief magistrate in no other view than a private citizen; government in no
other view than an affair of temporary expediency or advantage. Thus they level
that distinction which is the foundation of submission to laws: and reduce a
contract the most solemn and important to an equality with a partnership in
commerce, which at any hour may be broken off and dissolved. Let their ideas of
government be realized in actual operation, and there is an end of all order,
peace and prosperity. For how can agriculture and commerce, arts and sciences,
be carried on to perfection under an administration perpetually changing? What
security has property? What excitement can there be to industry, where it is
liable to lose, in one moment, the acquisition of years? A good government will
derive assistance from the experience of past ages. It will embrace and
perpetuate the complicated mass of individual and public rights and interests.
It ought to be considered as an inheritance to be transmitted from one
generation to another; and not as the capricious offspring of a moment,
perpetually exposed to destruction, from the varying whim of popular phrenzy,
or the daring strides of licentious ambition. The great objects of national
importance cannot be obtained, except under a political system, rendered
permanent by a well regulated balance of power; guarding on the one hand
against tyrannical usurpation, and on the other against democratic violence.
Such we conceive is the government of these United States. Nevertheless, there
are many who view it in a far different light; or, because they are conscious
of its energy, are continually advancing opinions and doctrines which tend to
its subversion. They well know that the people of this country are very averse
to a government like that of England. They take advantage from this
circumstance, and are continually ringing it in our ears, that our government
apes the manners of the British, and is rapidly changing into that complicated
system of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy. This representation is given,
either from ignorance of the British constitution, or from a desire to
annihilate our confidence in our own. Compare for a moment the principal
branches of the English government with the principal branches of the American.
How great the contrast! How wide the difference! The king of Great Britain is
independent; the President of the United States is not. The former holds his
throne by hereditary right; a right not derived from the consent of the people,
nor at the disposal of the people: the latter holds his office by election, and
with the consent of the people. The President of the United States, after a
short space of time, descends and assumes his place as a private citizen; the
king of Great Britain holds his crown and his throne through life. The former
is accountable for his conduct, and liable to impeachment whenever he violates
the laws; the latter is accountable to no human power, nor can he be impeached
at any human tribunal. In the king we behold an enormous power, independent and
unimpeachable; in the President we behold a power limited by the constitution,
and incapable of commmitting abuses with impunity. Can we descry any
resemblance between these two important branches of the American and British
governments? Why then all this outcry against the enormous power of our supreme
magistrate? Why so many industrious attempts to persuade the people that he is
an aspiring monarch? I will tell you: It is because we are blessed with a group
of government levellers, who cultivate those all-preserving, democratic
virtues, jealousy and ingratitude.

IN the government of Great Britain is an inheritable peerage. The lords
temporal and spiritual are independent: they hold their seats without the
consent of the people, and can hold them against their consent. How different
the American Senators! Chosen by the people in a constitutional mode, they are
wholly dependent for their power on the people; and must, after a prescribed
term, revert to their places as private citizens. Great Britain has an house of
commons. In this branch lies the only share which the people have in the
government, and here their influence is very small. For the commons consist of
all such men of property in the kingdom as have not a seat in the house of
lords. The knights which represent the counties are chosen by the proprietors
of lands; and the citizens and burgesses, who represent the cities and
boroughs, are chosen by the mercantile part of the nation. Hence the inequality
of representation is so great in the house of commons, that the people rank
this among their greatest grievances. We can discover no resemblance between
the British house of commons and our house of representatives. In short, the
most important branches of the British government are independent and
hereditary: all branches of the American government are dependent and elected.
Who but a madman, or an enemy to our country, could have had the effrontery to
assert, that our government is formed after the British model? Our government
is our own, and so long as we adhere to it, we shall be a people free,
independent, and invincible.

ANOTHER sentiment strenuously maintained by the enemies of our government, is,
that the union of the States is an affair of occasional convenience or
advantage; and that any State, whenever she sees fit, has a right to denounce
the proceedings of Congress, and to secede from the great political body. These
positions are advanced with a view to impede the energy of the Federal
Government, and even to undermine its foundation. If admitted and reduced to
practice, they will render the execution of laws utterly uncertain; and in case
of foreign invasion, will expose the government to destruction and the country
to devastation. The advocates of these strange political opinions seem not
disposed to profit by past examples. They are like those fanatics who look for
all wisdom in themselves; "and such never fail to find it." I would cite them
to the states of ancient Greece, at the time of the Persian invasion, under
Xerxes. Had these states been united under a common government; had they been
responsible to some supreme controlling power; they would not, through fear and
jealousy, have deserted the public cause, and have left the Athenians and
Spartans to oppose the immense army of Asia. One would suppose, that in a time
of such pressing danger, a sense of the necessity of indissoluble union, would
have had the force of law, to compel all the states to engage in the common
cause. (...) the reverse took place. The haughty monarch of Persia, taking
advantage of the disunion of his enemies, pressed forward, marked his steps
with fire and blood, took the city of Athens, which his general Mardonius soon
after entirely destroyed. This example is a loud warning to us, that a country
divided into a number of independent states can have no safety but in union,
and no union but in responsibility to a supreme controlling power. I will
hazard the assertion, that the states of Greece suffered more from their
internal dissentions and divisions, which arose from the want of a Federal
Government, possessed of a power over them all, than they did from all their
foreign wars. Is it not the part of prudence, to profit by the errors, as well
as by the wisdom of past ages? Is it not the part of folly, in the present
advanced state of the science of government, to admit an idea which the example
of all the ancient independent republics reprobates, as the fruitful source of
division, violence and destruction?

THOSE metaphysic knights in the science of civil policy, who have attempted
the subversion of our government, have done no small mischief by the perpetual
use of certain words and phrases, which, though they conveyed no definite
meaning, yet were calculated like the incantations of magic, to blind, seduce
and mislead the unwary. "LIBERTY, EQUALITY, RIGHTS OF MAN;" these are the
ensigns armorial of the whole tribe of political speculatists; these they hold
up to the people, with a view to change real liberty into licentiousness; real
equality into murderous violence; and the real rights of man into
indiscriminate plunder. The indefinite phrase, " Rights of Man," seems to
imply, that man is born into the world with certain connatural political
rights. This cannot be true, for government is the creature of man's invention
and wisdom, and is founded on the compact of men in society. If man has any
political rights which he can claim, it is because he is a member of the
political system, or a partner in the great community of rights attached to the
government under which he lives, whether this government is formed by his
cotemporaries, or inherited from his ancestors. But man, considered as such,
has but one right, that of self-preservation. The phrase " Rights of Man," has
been lavishly thrown out in this as well as in other countries, with a view to
persuade the people that their government was an arbitrary engrossment of
power; that it was an unreasonable restraint on their passions and energies;
that as it denied them certain rights which they might claim because they were
men, it ought to be demolished and buried in ruin. The direct tendency of the
doctrine styled " Rights of Man," is to disquiet the people, to set them at
variance with their rulers, to fill all the grades of society with an
unreasonable jealousy of each other, and to change the order of civil
institutions into the anarchy of barbarous association.

LET us for a moment contemplate the magical, wonder-working word, "EQUALITY."
This, in the French cavalcade of death, is harnessed up behind Liberty. That
fair goddess is with reluctance dragged into the train, and thrust forward,
that her charms may introduce the infernal procession which troops behind her.
The revolutionary demagogues of our country talk much of equality. They assure
us, in their indefinite, unqualified language, that all men are equal. To
ascertain whether this assertion is true, we must recur to fact and experience.
Nature, so far from having made all men equal, has made them very unequal. All
men have not the same strength and activity of body -- all have not the same
endowments and energies of mind. These are facts which speak in a language too
plain not to be understood. Nature no where yokes up a dwarf with a giant, or a
Newton with an ape. Amidst her mighty profusions of endowments, we discover an
instinctive wisdom, fitting the numerous parts of this stupendous whole to
their several places; arranging them by orders, differences and contrasts, so
as to constitute one perfect system, whose parts are never all young, nor old,
nor equal, but supported in a beautiful diversity through a perpetually dying
and reviving universe.

SOCIETY no less than nature makes great differences and inequalities among
men. When the road to acquisition is equally open to all -- when the laws
equally protect every man's person and property -- all men will not make
exertions equally great -- all will not possess the same spirit of enterprise
-- all will not obtain accessions of wealth, of learning, virtue and honor,
equally extensive and important. The industrious, prudent citizen, will gain
vast quantities of property, while the negligent and idle will remain in the
depths of poverty. To the last, the doctrine of equality is like the music of
angels. Energized by the sound, he rouses from his lethargy, and revels on the
divided spoils of his wealthy neighbor. That men in the social state are equal
as to certain rights -- that they ought to be protected in their persons and
property, while they conduct as good citizens, will undoubtedly be admitted.
This, however, is a very different kind of equality from that which the
promulgers of this pernicious doctrine intended to introduce. Their schemes of
wicked ambition were, to overturn all the established governments in the world,
and to obtain an unlimited control over the minds and bodies of men. Nothing
could be more immediately conducive to this purpose, than to render all the
subordinate ranks of society dissatisfied with their condition. This was to be
accomplished by persuading them, that the governments under which they lived
were unjust and oppressive; that all religion was a vain and idle superstition;
that there was no difference in men, except what arose from arbitrary violence;
that the few who had acquired great wealth had no better right to it than the
many who had acquired none; and that nothing could restore genuine liberty but
the prostration of every dignity and of every advantage, whether derived from
the industry of man, or the bounty of God. The advocates of this pernicious
system of equality, in the career of their opposition to the laws of nature and
society, have expressed their fervent displeasure at that respect which long
has been, and I trust long will be, attached to eminent and dignified men,
exalted to the higher stations in government. This is an important part in the
system of universal disorganization. For if you destroy all respect for
magistrates, you destroy all confidence in them; and leave no security for the
existence of liberty or laws. The cry of our levelling democrats is, "respect
the majesty of the people." -- Where are we to look for the majesty of the
people, except in the persons exalted to office by the suffrages of the people?
These are the characters whose public administrations are to show whether the
people have any majesty. The phrase, "majesty of the people," in its modern
acceptance, brings into view such an indefinite object, made of every
gradation of character, from wisdom to folly, from virtue to vice, from
aspiring ambition to brutal stupidity; that it serves only to perplex the mind,
by rendering its views vast and irregular. We hope the American angle of vision
is not sufficiently large, to take in that indescribable farrago of majesty,
with which our modern levellers are so much enamoured. We hope we have still
judgment enough to distinguish merit, and gratitude enough to reward it. We are
willing that the laws of nature, and the principles of civil association,
should still be followed. We have not yet lost all regard for ancient
institutions and ancient wisdom. We respect our magistrates; we esteem and
protect the ministers of our holy religion; we embrace as our brethren all our
worthy fellow-citizens; we form our political system after the great primeval
model which descends from the source of infinite wisdom; which combines into
one harmonious whole, principalities and powers, and exhibits in one vast and
brilliant assemblage, millions of different dignities, without envy and without
revolution. Peace, and order, and rational liberty; these are the objects to
which we are invincibly attached. If once illumined by the transforming
doctrine of equality, we shall see the whole establishment of nature reversed.
Walking on enchanted ground, we shall see vales usurping the place of
mountains; rivers whirling back to their sources, and skies falling to embrace
the earth. We shall see huge whales sporting on the Andes, and clumsy bears
flouncing in the Pacific. The planets in their courses will utter censure at
their Maker, and the moon will repine at the splendor of the sun. When we are
transformed into complete levellers, we can overleap, at one bound, all the
mighty differences established by infinite wisdom; and, without a seeming
disgust at the junction of eternally jarring principles, shall congratulate
ourselves that we have escaped the drudgery of human prudence, and emerged into
a region of perfect day.

ANOTHER cause which has had an extensive influence in producing and
propagating erroneous notions respecting the nature of civil government, and
which has rendered great numbers of people jealous and unhappy, is either an
ignorant or designed misrepresentation of liberty. All restraints on the
feelings, passions and actions of men, have been considered as the arbitrary
mandates of a tyrant. It has generally been asserted, that when man quits the
savage for the social state, he resigns a part of liberty to secure the rest.
From this erroneous sentiment have originated the most violent invectives
against those measures of government, which limit at a certain boundary the
exercise of civil rights, and render men responsible for the abuse of those
rights. What liberty has man in the unsocial, uncivilized state? I conceive he
has none, which properly comes under the idea of liberty. True, he is exempt
from the restraints of law: he is also destitute of the protection of law. He
consults no will, and no power but his own. Every man, therefore, in an
uncivilized state, is either a tyrant or a slave. No one can be sure of the
produce of his labor, or of the safety of his person. Visionary theorists may
amuse themselves with their pompous descriptions of the liberty of uncovenanted
man; but fact and experience will tell us, that he has no liberty but in a
society governed by laws which control every man's will, and protect the weak
against the strong. What is called liberty in any other state, is properly the
liberty of doing mischief. It is licentiousness or despotism. Government is by
no means founded on what are called natural rights, but on conventional
agreement. Every man in the uncivil state claims a right to every thing. Of
consequence, every man sets himself up for a tyrant. War and bloodshed ensue,
till the strongest arm determines whose right is best founded. Every man in the
uncivil state claims a right to be the judge of his own cause, and the avenger
of his own wrongs. He relinquishes both these rights when he enters into
society. He now has a claim to assistance and protection from the aggregate
wisdom and force of the community. Every right which he now possesses, rests on
the social compact. He cannot now conduct himself in any way that is repugnant
to established laws and constitutions. These prescribe the rights of every
individual, and these alone secure genuine civil liberty. In the social state,
every man is at liberty without any responsibility to extend and to use his
rights, so far as they do not interfere with the rights of others, or with the
general good of the community. The moment a man abuses his rights, with respect
to the character, persons or property of others, he becomes responsible, and
deserves punishment. For if no man is responsible for the abuse of his rights,
society and liberty, with all their advantages, are destroyed.

A GOOD government is a system of restraints on the actions and passions of its
subjects. All good citizens will rank these restraints among their rights, and
not among their grievances. A spirit of rational liberty exults in submission
to the control of just and salutary laws. It considers these as its only
asylum against violence and outrage. A spirit of licentiousness is impatient of
all restraint, delights in perpetual revolutions, and always measures its right
by its power. Some of the citizens of these States consider our government as
too complex in its structure, and too expensive in its operations. They
confidently assure us, that a simple house of representatives, with a speaker,
would fully answer every object of national importance. The simplest forms of
government will generally secure some individual object better than the more
complex; but they commonly leave the most important concerns unguarded. Every
one who is versed in the political history of nations, knows that the ends to
be obtained by government are numerous, often difficult of access, and, when
obtained, difficult to be secured. No simple direction of power can possibly be
accommodated to the complexity of human affairs. Hence it is that the due
distribution of powers, so as to secure the greatest number of advantages, with
the fewest inconveniences, has been considered, by the most profound
politicians, as the most difficult part in the mechanism of civil institutions.
In governments where there is but one branch of power, there is no security for
liberty. Simple democracies, whether managed by the whole people assembled, or
by their representatives, have always proved as tyrannical as the most despotic
monarchies, and vastly more mischievous. It is in vain to substitute
theoretical speculations in the place of facts. The modern zealots of
revolutionary reform may tell us that the science of government is of all
others the most simple; that a nation, in order to be free, needs only an
exertion of will; but the experience of ancient and modern times will tell us
that the science of government is of all others the most intricate: because it
is to be deduced from principles which nothing but experiment can develope: and
that a nation, in order to be free, needs some wisdom as well as will. But our
reeking demagogues, in order to accomplish their designs of demolishing all
permanent establishments, address themselves to the stubborn principle of will,
and guide it, not by convincing the understanding -- not by presenting a
certain prospect of improved liberty and happiness -- but by irritating the
feelings, rouzing up the passions, and loading the soul with a sense of unreal
grievances.

THE enemies of our own and of all other established governments, in order to
give complete success to their schemes of destruction, have attempted to
exterminate all religious and moral principles. They well knew, that if men
would not fear and obey the Supreme Being, they would not any subordinate
being. Hence it is, that such efforts have been made to discredit the doctrines
of natural and revealed religion. Hence it is, that cargoes of infidelity have
been imported into our country, and industriously circulated to corrupt the
minds and morals of the rising generation. Efface the idea of a supreme
controlling power from the minds of men, and you leave none of those exalted
motives, none of those ennobling virtues, none of those aspiring principles of
perfection, which have excited, adorned and animated the greatest geniuses of
ancient and modern times. No government, except absolute despotism, can support
itself over a people destitute of religion; because such a people possesses no
principles on which governmental motives can operate to secure obedience. The
most salutary laws can have no effect against general corruption of sentiments
and morals. The American people, therefore, have no way to secure their
liberty, but by securing their religion; for there is no medium between an
entire destitution of religion and the most deplorable servitude. No nation,
however ignorant and barbarous, except one, has ever attempted to support a
government without some respect to a Supreme Being. Let us then guard with the
utmost vigilance against those domineering, abandoned and arrogant
philosophists, who consider themselves as the asylums of wisdom, and the
oracles of truth; who assert that there is no standard of moral rectitude; and
are striving to persuade man, that to be perfect, he needs only forget every
thing exterior to himself, and suffer all his actions to be guided by the
impulses of his own nature. These sentiments, if reduced to practice, will
undoubtedly destroy all moral, civil and social obligations. For how can men
form societies, institute governments, and cultivate arts* and sciences, who
will be guided by no laws, and controlled by no power out of themselves? Each
one considers himself a deity, and yet conducts like a brute! Each is an
instinctive animal, and yet a perfect intelligence! Such are the effects of
renouncing religion -- of substituting speculation in the room of experience!

WE are called upon as citizens and as men, by the highest motives of duty,
interest and happiness, to resist the innovations attempted on our government;
to cultivate in ourselves and others the genuine sentiments of liberty,
patriotism and virtue. After a long series of peace, prosperity and happiness,
you are threatened with all the horrors and cruelties of war. The tempest
thickens around you, and the thunder already begins to roar. A nation hardened
in the science of human butchery; accustomed to victory and plunder; exonerated
from all those restraints by which civilized nations are governed, lifts over
your heads the iron scepter of despotic power. To terrify you into an unmanly
submission, she holds up to your view Venice, shorn of her glory; Holland,
robbed, degraded and debased; Switzerland, with her desolated fields, smoking
villages and lofty cliffs, reeking in blood amidst the clouds. In the full
prospect of this mighty group, this thickening battalion of horrors, call up
all your courage; fly back to the consecrated altar of your liberty, and while
your souls kindle at the hallowed fire, invigorate your attachment to the
birthday of your independence; to the government of your choice; feel with
additional weight the necessity of united wisdom* councils and exertions, and
vow to the God of your fathers, that your lives and fortunes; that every thing
you esteem sacred and dear; that all your energies and resources, both of body
and mind, are indissolubly bound to your sovereignty and freedom. On all sides
you now behold the most energetic measures of defense. All is full of life, and
ardour, and zeal. The brave youth, the flower and strength of our country, rush
into the field, and the eye of immortal WASHINGTON lightens along their
embattled ranks. Approach these hallowed shores, ye butchers, who have
slaughtered half Europe -- you will find every defile a THERMOPYLE, and every
plain a MARATHON! -- We already behold our fleet whitening the clouds with its
canvass, and sweeping the ocean with its thunder. The Gallic flag drops to
American valor, and our intrepid sailors sing victory in the midst of the
tempest. -- Brave men! you will fight for your country while an inch of sinew
stretches on your bones, or a drop of blood throbs in your veins! --
Fellow-Citizens, it is not by tribute, it is not by submission -- it is by
resolution, it is by courage, that we are to save our country. Let our efforts
and our wisdom concentrate in the common cause, and show to the world, that we
are worthy that freedom which was won by the valor and blood of our fathers.
Let our government, our religion and our liberty, fostered by our care, and
protected by our exertions, descend through the long range of succeeding ages,
till all the pride and presumption of human arrangements shall bow to the
empire of universal love, and the glory of all sublunary grandeur be forever
extinguished.

FINIS.

