THE NEW PLEASING INSTRUCTOR: OR, YOUNG LADY's GUIDE TO VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS.
CONSISTING OF ESSAYS, RELATIONS, DESCRIPTIONS, EPISTLES, DIALOGUES, AND POETRY.
Carefully extracted from the best Modern Authors. DESIGNED PRINCIPALLY FOR THE
USE OF FEMALE SCHOOLS; BUT CALCULATED FOR GENERAL INSTRUCTION AND AMUSEMENT. BY
A LADY.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, Sold by them, No. 45,
Newbury-Street; by I. THOMAS, Worcester; by THOMAS, ANDREWS, and PENNIMAN,
Albany; and by THOMAS, ANDREWS, and BUTLER, Baltimore. APRIL, 1799.

Preface.
AMONG the various selections of Lessons in Reading and Speaking, which have
fallen into the hands of the Compiler of the following sheets, she does not
recollect any one adapted to the use of schools for Young Ladies. Feeling too
sensibly the many inconveniences resulting from the partial attention that has
heretofore been paid to their education, warmly interested in the happiness of
the female part of the rising generation, and wishing for their improvement in
virtuous principles and habits, no less than in those personal accomplishments,
that are suitable to their sex, she has been induced to contribute something
toward the promotion of so desirable an end, by making the selection, for
which she now solicits the patronage of their Instructors and of the public in
general. Though it is principally designed for the use of schools, she flatters
herself that it will be found not unworthy the perusal of such as have already
finished their education. To render the book more deserving of their attention,
she has generally preferred whole pieces to extracts; and has taken much pains
to collect a pleasing variety of matter. As it is the opinion of the most
judicious of both sexes, that public exhibitions, in speaking, are not only
unnecessary but highly improper for Misses, the number of Dialogues inserted is
small, and these are designed only to assist them in learning to read this kind
of compositions with propriety.

The Compiler having been careful, in every part of the work, to reject
whatever is too common; and, finding that the fairest flowers in the field of
poetry have been culled out by those who have preceded her in such collections,
is apprehensive that this department will appear rather barren: she hopes,
however, that the pieces she has selected will not be thought destitute of
merit, or ill-adapted to her general design.

Her aim throughout, has been to blend instruction with rational amusement.
Convinced that books, which convey only the latter, are already too much
multiplied, she has admitted but few pieces, which do not tend either to inform
the mind, to improve the heart, to correct the manners, or to regulate the
conduct.

If the work, in addition to the entertainment it may afford the younger part
of her sex, shall be found to produce any of these valuable effects, the
Compiler will reflect on the hours, which she has spent in collecting and
arranging the materials that compose it, with great satisfaction; and "Glory in
the work she did not write."

CONTENTS.
PART I. Extracts, Essays, Descriptions, Tales, etc.
READING Polite Lady. Page 9 Writing and Spelling -- Page 10 Cyphering -- Page
11 Grammar Page 12 Geography Polite Lady. Page 13 Music -- Page 14 Drawing --
Page 15 Needle Work -- Page 17 Cleanliness -- ibid Conversation -- Page 18
Diversions -- Page 21 Employment -- Page 22 The Beauty of Virtue -- Page 24
Modesty -- Page 25 Goodnature -- Page 28 Envy Mrs. CHAPONE. Page 29 Friendship
-- ibid Economy -- Page 32 Content WILKS. Page 35 Chastity Polite Lady. Page 36
Obedience to Parents WILKS. Page 37 The Immortality of the Soul -- Page 38
Religion CHAPONE. Page 40 Model of Conduct for one Day WILKS. Page 42
Politeness and Accomplishments CHAPONE. Page 44 The Folly of Pride Elements of
Morality. Page 46 The Stepmother. Detraction -- Page 49 Children taught the
Usefulness of Servants -- Page 53 Against Cruelty to Animals -- Page 57 Of
Flowers Ladies' Natural History. Page 60 The Utility of Relaxation FORDYCE.
Page 63 The Female Choice. A Tale Evenings at Home. Page 64 Difference and
Agreement; or, Sunday Morning Evening at Home. Page 66 The four Sisters -- Page
68 Descent and Rise of the Empress of Russia BRUCE. Page 71 History of a
virtuous Young Lady -- Page 73 Anecdotes of Smith, a German Artist COGAN. Page
76 Character of Mary, Queen of Scots STUART. Page 82 Story of Amelia Nevil
HAYLEY. Page 85 History of Meletina -- Page 96 Description of Casos and its
Inhabitants SAVARY. Page 100 Description of the Prospect from Mount Etna
BRYDONE. Page 109 An interesting Family Picture KEATE. Page 111 The Independent
Pensioner -- Page 116 The Benevolent Princess ENFIELD. Page 119 The
Affectionate Daughter Mrs. ROWSON. Page 122 Splendida; or, Charity and Vanity
Observer. Page 126 Coquetry sometimes justifiable -- Page 127 The Danger of
Dissimulation Adventurer. Page 132 Urganda and Fatima. An Eastern Tale Mrs.
ROWSON. Page 143 Address to the Sun OSSIAN. Page 147 Filial Affection and Duty
exemplified Mirror. Page 148 An affecting Scene -- Page 151 Distresses of a
Daughter Man of Feeling. Page 153 Isaac and Rebekah PRATT. Page 155 Naomi and
Ruth -- Page 159 Noah's Dove -- Page 166 The Dean of Badajoz. A Tale New Annual
Register. Page 168 Cautionary Hints to learned Ladies KNOX. Page 175 The Value
of Reciprocal Attentions -- Page 176 Goodness of Heart -- Page 177 The
Importance of governing the Temper -- Page 178 Sensibility -- Page 179 Want of
personal Beauty a frequent Cause of Happiness -- Page 181 On the Literary
Education of Women -- Page 185
PART II. Epistles -- elegant and entertaining.
Alcander to Ophelia An original Communication. Page 187 Rural Taste of a
Tradesman's Wife New Annual Register. Page 191 Julia Montague to Emily Beaumont
Friend of Youth. Page 193 John Homespun to the Author of the Mirror Page 195
Elizabeth Homespun to the same Page 200 Ignatius Sancho to L. Stern Elegant
Epistles. Page 205 L. Stern to Ignatius Sancho -- Page 206 Dr. Johnson to Miss
Thrale -- Page 207 Miss Talbot to a newborn Child Elegant Epistles. Page 208
Constantia to the Author of the Lounger Page 210 Beauty and the Graces Citizen
of the World. Page 214 Victoria to the Author of the Rambler Page 217 Ditto to
do. Page 222
PART III. Dialogues and Dramatic Pieces.
1. On different Stations in Life Evenings at Home. Page 226 2. On Presence of
Mind -- Page 230 3. On Flattery Friend of Youth. Page 235 4. Tony Lumpkin,
Constantia Neville, etc. GOLDSMITH. Page 241 5. Mr. Delville, Mr. Briggs, and
Cecilia Miss Burney. Page 245 6. Mr. Briggs, Mr. Hobson, Mr. Albany, and
Cecilia -- Page 248 7. Trudge and Wowski INKLE and YARICO. Page 252 8. Inkle,
Trudge, and Yarico -- Page 255 9. Aesop and Mrs. Riot Lethe. Page 257 10. The
Force of Virtue in Misfortune Anon. Page 261 11. Sigismunda and Tancred
THOMSON. Page 264 12. Leontine and Athenais -- Page 268
PART IV. Poetry.
Jessy on her watery Bier SHENSTONE. Page 275 Ophelia's Urn -- Page 278 The
Princess Elizabeth -- Page 279 The Rose, to Dr. Priestly Mrs. MOODY. Page 281
Atheism punished COWPER. Page 282 Domestic Happiness -- Page 284 Virtue and
Ornament FORDYCE. ibid Edwin and Sir Topaz. A Fairy Tale PARNELL. Page 285
Reflections occasioned by a Thunder-Storm Miss CARTER. Page 290 The Three
Warnings. A Tale Mrs. THRALE. Page 291 148th Psalm paraphrased Anon. Page 294
Charity. A Paraphrase PRIOR. Page 296 A Prayer for Indifference, to Oberon Mrs.
GRENVILLE. Page 298 The Fairy's Answer Countess of C. Page 300 Encomium on
Women, versified from LEDYARD. Page 302 Ode to Wisdom Mrs. CARTER. Page 303 The
Origin of the Fan Anon. Page 305 To a Young Lady, with some Flowers RICHARDSON.
Page 306 The guardian Genius of Female Excellence New Annual Register. Page 307
The Rose. A Song LADD. Page 308 Female Faults and Follies satirized YOUNG. Page
309 A Vernal Shower THOMSON. Page 312 A Flower Garden Page 314 Female
Amusements and Accomplishments -- Page 314 Moral Reflections on the Winter of
Life -- Page 316
CONCLUSION
A short System of Virtue and Happiness KNOX, altered. Page 319
THE NEW PLEASING INSTRUCTOR.
PART I. Extracts, Essays, Descriptions, Tales, etc.
READING.
TO be able to read with propriety, is certainly a genteel accomplishment, and
not so easy to be acquired as most people imagine; and perhaps you will not
find one woman in five hundred, that is possessed of it. There are so many
faulty ways of reading, which young people are apt to run into, that it is
difficult to avoid them all; and when once a bad habit is contracted, it is
almost impossible to correct it.

There is your aunt Filmer, who reads with such a canting tone as grates the
ears of the whole company. She has frequently almost sung me to sleep, though
reading one of the most diverting books in the world. Your cousin Pultency, you
know, reads with such hurry and rapidity, and such neglect of the proper stops
and pauses, that the most attentive hearer cannot understand one sentence she
pronounces; whilst Mrs. Dashwood reads in such a slow and slovenly manner, and
draws out the words to such an immoderate length, that nobody has patience to
follow her. Mrs. Nugent reads with such a loud and shrill voice as stuns the
ears of the whole audience. It might do very well in a public assembly, but is
altogether unfit for a tea-table: whereas Miss Littleton's accent is so faint
and feeble, that you must apply your ear almost to her mouth, before you can
understand the subject.

I would therefore have you form yourself upon the example of your governess,
who, indeed, is one of the best readers I ever heard. She reads with the same
easy natural voice as she uses in conversation. She observes the stops and
pauses with great exactness. She reads so slow as to be easily understood by
any person, who will give a proper attention, and is not absolutely dull; and
yet so fast, as not to disgust those of the quickest apprehension. Her voice
she carefully adapts to the number and extent of her audience. When she reads
to a large company, her voice is high without being shrill; when to a small
one, it is low, but withal distinct. In a word, she is a complete mistress of
the art of reading; and you cannot fail to become so too, if you imitate her
manner, and follow her directions.

WRITING AND SPELLING.
WRITING, my dear, is one of the most useful arts that ever was invented. Were
it not for this art, the knowledge of every person would be contracted within
the narrow circle of his own experience and observation; but by means of this,
we can enjoy the knowledge and discoveries of all those, who have lived before
us; and, in some measure make them our own. By means of this art, you may
converse with your friend, though removed to the most distant corner of the
world, almost as well as if personally present. By means of this art, you can
preserve on paper whatever you read, hear, or see, that is worth remembering;
and which it would otherwise be impossible to treasure up in your memory.

But it is not only an useful, it is likewise a polite qualification; nor
should any one pretend to the character of an accomplished woman, who cannot
write a distinct and legible hand. Let me therefore advise you to be remarkably
careful and diligent in learning the art of writing. Follow the directions of
your master, who, I presume, will lay before you the most perfect copies and
examples. Of all the various hands, a round hand is, in my opinion, the most
proper; for when you are a mistress of that, you may, with great ease, learn
either a neat running or Italian hand; but if you begin with the latter, you
never can arrive at any degree of perfection in the former. When you write,
never be in a hurry, but proceed with the greatest care and deliberation:
always write as well as you can, and then your hand will be still improving;
for if you do not, instead of improving, it will, every day, become worse. But
before you put pen to paper, you must resolve not to indulge yourself in the
wrong spelling of a single word; and if you faithfully observe this rule for a
short time, you will soon be able to spell any word without the help of a
dictionary. Nothing, indeed, is more unworthy the character of a gentlewoman,
than false spelling: and yet, in this respect, I am sorry to say it, most of
our sex are shamefully deficient; and some of them too, whom I know to be
persons of excellent good sense and distinguished abilities: but this must have
been owing to bad habits contracted in their youth, of which they were never
afterward able to get the better. It is therefore your part to prevent, what
it is so extremely difficult to correct.

CYPHERING.
OF all the various qualifications of an accomplished woman, there is not any
one more useful and necessary than cyphering. Without this, you must depend
upon your memory for every farthing of money that passes through your hands.
Without this, you can neither keep an account of the money you receive, nor of
what you expend. Without this, you will be in danger of being cheated by every
person you deal with. Without this, you will not be able to assist me in the
management of our family, which, however, I expect you should be in a few
years; and still less will you be able to superintend the economy of your own,
when, in the course of providence, you come to be mistress of one. In a word,
without this, you will be altogether unqualified for several of the most
important duties in life.

Let me therefore persuade you, my dear, to give particular attention to your
cyphering, and to acquire such a competent knowledge in this useful art, as is
proper for a woman. I say, a woman; for it is not necessary that she should
understand it so perfectly as a man: as her sphere of action is more confined,
so her knowledge, in this respect, should be more confined likewise. You ought,
however, I think, to be a complete mistress of the four simple rules of
arithmetic, the rule of proportion, and a plain method of book-keeping. And I
would advise you to begin to keep a distinct account of all the money you
receive or lay out, and, indeed, of every thing belonging to you, that can be
numbered; as soon, I mean, as you have acquired a knowledge of cyphering
sufficient for that purpose. By this means, you will, at once, impress the
rules of arithmetic more deeply in your memory, and insensibly acquire such a
habit of accuracy and regularity, as will be of great service to you in your
future conduct.

GRAMMAR.
I AM glad to hear that you have, at length, entered on the study of grammar. I
hope you will go on, with spirit and perseverance, and not be discouraged by
its apparent difficulty; for, however great this may be, these will enable you
to overcome it; and in proportion to your trouble in the acquirement of
grammatical knowledge, will be your satisfaction in the possession of it. Of
all studies, you will probably find grammar the least entertaining: it is,
however, one of the most necessary, and therefore ought not to be neglected.
Without a competent knowledge of this science you cannot express yourself with
propriety, either in conversation or in writing; and the possession or want of
it is one great occasion of the difference observable in the language of the
polite and the vulgar, the learned a^ ^he ignorant. A striking instance of this
difference o^s in two of your female acquaintance, Caroline M. and Sophia S.
The former, possessed of excellent sense, but without any knowledge of grammar,
expresses herself in so awkward and incorrect a manner, that, with all her
understanding, she is often disgusting; while the latter, with not half her
abilities, or general knowledge, by being mistress of the rules of grammar,
expresses herself, both in writing and conversation, in so easy, correct and
graceful a manner, as charms all who hear her converse, or enjoy her
correspondence. You will, I hope, make her your model, and not think you have
attained sufficient knowledge in that branch of your education, till you can
speak and write as correctly and with as much propriety as she does.

GEOGRAPHY.
I HAD lately the pleasure of hearing, from your governess, that you are daily
improving in all the different branches of your education, and particularly in
geography, which, she says, you have been learning for some months past. This
is an accomplishment equally useful and genteel; but in which, I am sorry to
say it, most of our sex are shamefully deficient; as I could prove by a variety
of examples. Your aunt Delaval has frequently asked me whether Constantinople
lay in Asia or Africa, and a thousand other questions no less ridiculous. Miss
Fenton, whose wit is greater than her knowledge, and her vanity greater than
both, is perpetually committing blunders of this kind. Mr. Grenville happened,
the other day, to be reading the news papers to a large company, and, among
other articles, one from Warsaw, giving an account of a certain nobleman, who,
for some slight cause, had divorced his lady. He had no sooner finished, than
Miss, with her usual forwardness, observed that these Spaniards were the worst
husbands in the world. Some of the company blushed, others smiled, and the rest
remained demurely grave. Miss, perceiving her error, was confounded and
abashed: but the gentleman, out of his great humanity, endeavored to apologize
for her, as well as he could, by adding, that the young lady's remark was very
just; that, though the place mentioned in the news-paper was the chief city in
Poland, he believed there was a town somewhere in Spain of the same name, and
it was a very easy matter to mistake the one for the other. Into such shameful
blunders do young ladies frequently fall, from their ignorance of geography;
and to such pitiful shifts must their friends have recourse, to save them the
blush of confessing their ignorance. But the knowledge of geography will
effectually prevent your committing any blunders of this kind, as it will teach
you the names of all the principal towns in the world. Nor is this all; it will
further acquaint you with the climate, the soil and produce of all the
different parts of the earth; and with the customs, manners, government and
religion of the several inhabitants: by which means you will be able to talk
pertinently on most subjects that occur in conversation.

MUSIC.
YOUR governess writes me, that you are become a great proficient both in vocal
and instrumental music. This, though not the most useful, is certainly one of
the most genteel qualifications which a young lady can possess. It is, of all
others, the most agreeable amusement, the most pleasant recreation; and she
that understands music, ^eed never complain that her time lies heavy on her
hand. It is at once the best preventative, and the most effectual cure for
melancholy and low spirits, as it can banish every gloomy and desponding
thought, and inspire us with cheerfulness and good humor.

The power of music over the human mind is very surprising, and almost
irresistible. When we are depressed with sorrow and grief, it can cheer and
enliven our drooping spirits. When we are elated with excessive and immoderate
joy, (for joy may be immoderate and even dangerous) it can allay the violence
of the passion, bring us down from the giddy height, and reduce us to a state
of pleasing tranquillity. If inflamed with anger, or boiling with rage, it can
soften and melt us into pity and compassion. In a word, hatred, malice, envy,
and every other vicious passion, may, by the power of music, be presently
banished, or at least charmed and allayed for a while, and if the charm be
frequently repeated, they may at last be overcome.

These are a few of the many advantages which may be derived from music. But
all this is only meant with regard to those who have a taste for music, or, as
it is commonly called, a good ear; for there are some people so utterly devoid
of this taste, that they can make no other distinction of sounds, than that of
more or less loud. To them, the noise of a blacksmith's hammer, and the finest
airs of a violin, are the same; whilst a person of a good ear, improved by
practice, receives from such an entertainment the most exquisite and refined
pleasure; perhaps the most refined that can be enjoyed in this world, except
that of doing a good action.

DRAWING.
WERE drawing only to be considered as an innocent amusement, even in this
light would it merit your attention; for innocent amusements are of more
importance to our happiness, and perhaps to our virtue too, than many people
imagine. The most active and busy stations of life have still some intervals of
rest, some hours of leisure. The body, as well as the mind, requires it. And,
if these are not employed in innocent amusements, they will either lie heavy on
our hands, and, instead of raising, depress our spirits; or, what is worse,
tempt us to kill the time, as it is called, by such amusements as are far from
being innocent.

But drawing is not only an innocent amusement: it is more; it is an useful
qualification. It will exercise, delight, and improve your imagination, by
filling it with the images of every thing that is beautiful or curious in the
works of nature or art. It will strengthen and correct your judgment, by
obliging you to examine the objects you copy with greater care and accuracy
than you would otherwise have done; and it may sometimes be an assistance to
your memory, as it will enable you to take down on paper a greater variety of
objects, or circumstances of the same object, than it would be easy, or perhaps
possible, to remember. It will likewise be of great use in furnishing you with
beautiful patterns and designs for sewing, which those who are ignorant of this
art must borrow from others, without being able to judge whether they are good
or bad.

But I have neither time nor inclination to enumerate all the advantages which
a young lady may derive from the art of drawing. What I have said, however,
will, I hope, be sufficient to kindle in you a desire of acquiring an
accomplishment, at once so useful and genteel. Allow me to give you one general
advice, which is this; let the objects from which you copy, be chiefly the
works of nature; and carefully avoid every thing that is unnatural, whimsical,
or romantic, as most Chinese drawings are. To imitate the former, has a natural
tendency to improve the taste; to copy the latter, has a natural tendency to
corrupt and pervert it.

NEEDLE WORK.
THOUGH there are many other female accomplishments more showy and specious,
yet there is not any one more useful than needle work; nay, I may venture to
say, there is none equally so. What an infinite number of the female sex, and,
perhaps, the most virtuous part of it too, live by the needle? How greatly does
it contribute to render our persons more decent, more agreeable, and more
beautiful? What a surprising difference is there between the appearance of Lady
Morton, whom you have often seen at church, and Doll Common, the cinder-wench?
and yet this difference is chiefly owing to dress; and dress depends chiefly on
the needle.

After all, I do not desire you to apply to your needle so as to hurt your
eyes, or weaken your constitution: far from it. On the contrary, I would have
this, and all your other studies, carried on in a perfect consistency with your
health, which is never to be sacrificed to any consideration whatever. All I
mean is, that you should not neglect this qualification as useless, nor despise
it as mean, or beneath a gentlewoman. Useless it cannot be, for there is no
station of life in which a woman can be pla^ed, where it is not highly
serviceable, and for the most part absolutely necessary. And it is so far from
being mean and unworthy the character of a lady, that I will venture to say,
there never was an accomplished woman without a competent skill in this useful
art.

CLEANLINESS.
CLEANLINESS is a habit, I had almost said a virtue, which you cannot learn too
soon, nor retain too long, both from a regard to yourself, and the world around
you. It will, at once, contribute to the ease and health of your body, and be
the means of introducing you into polite and genteel company; at least the
opposite extreme of dirtiness will certainly deprive you of that advantage; it
will either make your company to be shunned; or, if that cannot be done, it
will always render your presence disagreeable.

But beware that you do not confound cleanliness with finery; nor mistake the
one for the other. They are as distinct in their nature as any two things can
well be; and, though not inconsistent, are frequently found to be separated. A
woman may be very neat and clean in a plain and simple dress; and she may be
very dirty and tawdry in a fine and costly one. There is Miss Molesworth, she
never wears any thing above a plain silk gown; but that, and all the other
parts of her dress, which are equally simple, she puts on and adjusts with such
elegance and propriety, as pleases the eye of every one that beholds her:
whilst Lady Dormer, on the contrary, though dressed in the richest satin
brocade, and loaded with a profusion of jewels and pearls, is, after all, so
slovenly and tawdry, that she may be said rather to carry her clothes like a
porter, than to wear them like a well dressed lady.

But you say, it consumes a great deal of time: I am persuaded you always find
as much as you ought to bestow, in order to be neat, between the time that is
usual for leaving off school, and that of going to dinner. Besides, it will
every day require less, for the more you practice it, the easier it will
become; and a twelvemonth hence, I dare say, you will be able to dress yourself
as well in half an hour, as you can do at present in a whole one.

CONVERSATION.
FIRST of all, take care never to interrupt any person when she is speaking.
This is the height of ill manners. If she talks longer than she ought, and even
deserves to be interrupted, yet be not you the first to do it. That will come
with a better grace from one of greater age and experience. If she be guilty of
one fault, that is no reason why you should be guilty of another. If you have a
reflection to make upon any thing she has said, you must reserve it till the
end of the story; though perhaps you may imagine it would have come in with
greater propriety in the middle of it. If the remark would have been very
pertinent then, it will not be impertinent now; but if it appears to be
trifling here, you may be assured it would not have been very sensible even
there. By this means you will at once discover your prudence and discretion,
and insensibly acquire a habit of retaining and examining your thoughts before
you throw them out in conversation.

I am the more anxious to caution you against this practice of interrupting
people in the middle of their discourse, because it is an error which young
persons, from the natural heat of their temper, and the vivacity of their
spirits, are most apt to commit. Your friend is telling a story: in consequence
of something she says, a good thought strikes your fancy; out it comes; for you
can contain yourself no longer: your friend is stopped: the rest of the company
smile; and yet perhaps your remark was very smart and witty. But was it really,
do you think, or could it possibly be, so very smart and witty, as to apologize
for your ill manners in interrupting your friend? Every sensible person will
tell you that it could not.

Another rule which you ought carefully to observe, is, never to take up too
much of the conversation yourself, and far less to engross the whole of it.
This, even in persons of the greatest age, knowledge, and experience, must
appear ridiculous; but, in one so young, so ignorant, and so inexperienced as
you are, it would be condemned as the height of arrogance and presumption.
Indeed, every one seems to be entitled to a greater or less share of the
conversation, in proportion to her years and knowledge: but no person, let her
years and knowledge be what they will, has a right to the whole of it; nor
should any one, however young and ignorant, be entirely excluded. This would
destroy the very end of conversation, which is mutually to impart and receive
knowledge, pleasure, and improvement. For, what knowledge or improvement can
she possibly receive, who is always talking herself, and never allows the rest
of the company to open their mouths? Or, what pleasure can they enjoy, who are
condemned to profound silence, and have their ears perpetually stunned with the
noise of the same tongue? If, indeed, they could enjoy any pleasure in such
circumstances, they must be endued with great patience and humility; greater, I
am afraid, than fall to the share of any individual of the human kind.

In company, never speak ill of any absent person, whether friend, stranger, or
enemy. The first would be base, the second unjust, and the last low and
mean-spirited. By speaking ill of your absent friends, you deserve to lose, and
certainly would lose, both them and those who are present; for who, in their
senses, would cultivate a friendship with one guilty of so much perfidy and
baseness? By speaking ill of strangers, you would make all the world your foes;
for she, who, without the least provocation, can asperse the character of those
with whom she has little acquaintance and no connection, deserves to be the
object of universal detestation. By inveighing against your absent enemies, you
would discover the most contemptible meanness of spirit and littleness of mind;
and if it should come to their ears, might flatter their pride and vanity too
much, by making them imagine, that they had ruffled your temper more perhaps
than they had really done, or, at least, than you should give them an
opportunity of knowing.

Another rule which you ought to observe in conversation, is, never to say any
thing that may give pain or uneasiness to any one of the company. By this I do
not mean any of the errors which I have described and condemned above. All
these, to be sure, give pain and uneasiness to the persons that suffer by them;
but then they do so in plain and open terms, and, of consequence, may be the
more easily corrected or refuted. What I mean at present is, that you ought
never to say any thing that seems to reflect, even in the most distant manner,
upon the faults or foibles of any of the company, or of their absent friends.
If this proceed from malice, it betrays a bad heart; if from want of thought,
it discovers a weak head: and the ill-natured and foolish are equally
unqualified for the delicate intercourse of polite conversation.

DIVERSIONS.
WITH regard to diversions in general, I would have you to remember, that they
are to be considered merely as diversions, and not as serious business. They
are intended not to dissipate and unsettle the mind, but only to relax and
unbend it; that it may return to the performance of the important duties of
life with greater alacrity and vigor; and therefore you ought never to allow
them to take up too much of your time, and far less to engross the whole of it,
as is the practice, I am afraid, of too many young ladies. What with shopping
in the forenoon, visiting in the afternoon, and plays, balls and concerts in
the evening, I doubt they find but little time for more useful employments.
This might do extremely well, had we been sent into the world only to divert
ourselves for a while with baubles and gew-gaws, like children; but that would
be a supposition equally unworthy our great Creator, and the dignity of our own
nature: on the contrary, we were placed here to contribute to the happiness and
welfare of our fellow creatures, and to improve our minds in knowledge, virtue
and piety, in order to qualify us for a better and happier state hereafter.

Let me therefore advise you, never to have recourse to diversions, till once
you are fatigued and wearied with business. By this means you will enjoy them
with double pleasure; whereas, should you make them your employment, instead of
your amusement, they will lose all their relish. For it is with diversions as
it is with all other sensual pleasures; the more frequently they are enjoyed,
the less agreeable do they become; they pall upon the sense, grow tasteless and
insipid, and at last perfectly nauseous and irksome: so that, as well from a
regard to your own happiness, as from a sense of duty, you should take care
never to throw away too much of your time upon them. And that you may not be
tempted to do so, learn to employ yourself in some more serious and useful
business: for I believe in my conscience, that it is not so much from an
immoderate love of pleasure, as for want of something else to do, that so many
young ladies squander away the whole of their time in a perpetual round of
diversions.

EMPLOYMENT.
I AM glad to see by your last, that you are fully convinced of the truth of
what I said concerning dress and diversions, and are so sensible of the
inestimable worth and value of your time, which indeed is the most precious
treasure you can possess, as it is the foundation and groundwork of every
other blessing you enjoy.

But precious as our time is, yet there is not any one thing of which we are so
careless, or rather prodigal and profuse. We either squander it away upon mere
trifles, or allow it to pass in a state of listless indolence, or lazy
inactivity. The present moment we seldom enjoy, or improve to any good purpose.
We are perpetually busied in forming schemes for some future and distant
period; but when that period is come, we neglect it, as we have done those that
are already past; and then lay new schemes for some other period more distant
still: and so on without end; till, at last arrived on the verge of old age, we
begin to take a review of our past conduct, and find that we have consumed the
greatest part of our time in forming schemes and resolutions; but have hardly
ever had the wisdom and courage to put so much as one of them in execution.

Such is the picture of a lazy, indolent, and idle person: for, I believe, even
the laziest of that lazy tribe have still some thoughts of doing better
tomorrow; but tomorrow comes and passes like today, and another morrow after
that; and thus they doze away their whole lives in a kind of waking dream or
reverie. Such a conduct us this would be extremely foolish and absurd, even
upon the supposition that they were certain of arriving at old age, though
indeed it were to be wished, for the honor of their character, that they never
reached that period, since the longer they live, they only become the more
ridiculous: but when it is considered that no one can promise herself another
year, and hardly even another day or hour, then folly is too gentle a name for
such a behavior; it is madness, it is phrenzy in the highest degree: and yet
with this phrenzy and madness every person may be said to be seized, who
consumes her whole life in idleness and indolence.

But do not mistake me. I do not mean to insinuate, by any thing I have now
said, that the mind should always be kept on the stretch; but this, I think, I
may safely affirm, that it ought always to be engaged one way or other, either
in some useful and profitable employment, or in some innocent and cheerful
diversion, that it may return to the duties of life with greater vigor and
alacrity; but never should, by any means, be suffered to rust in sloth and
inactivity.

Idleness is a most pernicious and fatal vice, whether we consider its
influence on the mind or body. It weakens the strength and impairs the beauty
of the latter; for an indolent person will hardly be at the pains to take so
much exercise as is necessary to keep the body in health and vigor. It
stupifies and benumbs the understanding; for she will not take the trouble to
improve it either by reading or conversation. Nay, it will even corrupt and
debase the heart; for it is inconsistent with a state of ease and indolence to
have the strong but fine affections of love, pity, compassion, sorrow,
sympathy, and the like, frequently awakened and excited in the breast: and yet
if these tender passions are not frequently excited either by real or imaginary
objects, the heart will gradually become hard and unfeeling, and at last
perfectly callous and insensible.

This disease of idleness has different effects upon different tempers. What
tempts Mrs. Stanley to spend the greatest part of her time in scandal and
defamation? Why it is idleness working upon a disposition naturally sour and
splenetic. What makes Miss Temple trifle away her whole life in an insipid
round of public and private diversions? Because she has got nothing else to do;
it is idleness working upon the natural levity and giddiness of her mind. In a
word, idleness is the parent, or at least the nurse, of most of the follies and
vices incident to human nature, and from which we might easily be preserved,
would we only take care to keep ourselves always engaged either in some useful
employment, or innocent amusement.

THE BEAUTY OF VIRTUE.
A BEAUTIFUL person, with a vicious mind, is no better than a painted
sepulcher, fair and comely without, but ugly and deformed within. A wit,
without humanity and goodnature, is a pest and a nuisance; like a venomous
wasp, or poisonous serpent, she stings and bites every one she meets, without
distinction of friend or foe. And a person of knowledge and learning, without
humility and modesty, is generally a vain, conceited, and prattling pedant.

On the other hand, a beautiful young lady, if she is virtuous at the same
time, becomes by that means, at once more virtuous and beautiful: more
virtuous, because her temptations to vice are more frequent and strong; and
every time she resists these temptations, she gives the most convincing proof
of her untainted chastity and unspotted honor: more beautiful; for what is
beauty? it is not a set of features formed with the nicest symmetry and
proportion; it is not a complexion composed of the purest white and red; no:
but it is both these informed, inspired, lighted up, and animated by the
emanations of a virtuous mind: it is chastity, modesty, goodnature,
compassion, benevolence, and all the other virtuous dispositions and tender
affections streaming forth from the eyes, those windows of the soul, and
playing in every lineament of the face. Unless these virtues prevail in the
soul, and are strongly marked and expressed in the countenance, the finest
features and complexion are little better than the face of a painted baby, or
lifeless statue: all is dull, dead, and inanimated; or, what is still worse,
groomy, four and sullen.

Hence the graceful blush of modesty, and the pleasing smile of goodnature, so
frequently and so awkwardly affected by those who are possessed of neither of
these virtues, but perhaps are remarkable for their opposite vices: no matter;
they are paying a compliment to virtue; they confess, by their hypocrisy and
dissimulation, that the appearance of it is amiable and lovely; and if the
appearance of it be lovely, how much more so must the reality be? The truth is,
virtue is the only thing that is good and amiable: sense, wit, knowledge, and
learning, are, in their own nature, indifferent; they are either good or bad,
just as they are well or ill employed. In the hands of a virtuous person they
may be the means of much good; in the hands of a vicious person, they may be
the means of much ill: but virtue, in its own nature and consequences, is
certainly and infallibly productive of happiness, as well to the person
possessed of it in particular, as to the world in general.

MODESTY.
MODESTY is the outward expression of a pure and chaste mind; and, therefore,
every word you speak, every action you perform, every gesture of your body,
every look of your eyes; in fine, every thing, by which the inward dispositions
of the mind can be expressed and discovered, comes under the regulation of this
virtue.

Modesty, as it relates to dress, has already been considered under that
article: as it relates to conversation, it has been, in some measure,
explained. After the advice I then gave you to shun the lewd and immodest
conversation of others, it would certainly be unnecessary to use any other
arguments to dissuade you from running into the same error yourself. There is
something in this practice so base and vulgar, that I will not even suppose you
capable of a thing at once so unpolite and immoral.

Nothing is more inconsistent with modesty, than to talk with a loud, shrill
and harsh tone of voice. This is very unbecoming, even in a man, but much more
in a woman, and most of all in a young woman, whose accent should be low,
smooth and gentle, an emblem of the inward softness and delicacy of her mind.
It is no less inconsistent with the rules of modesty, to talk in a positive and
peremptory strain. This is scarce tolerable, even when you are talking of
things that cannot be contradicted; but it is absolutely intolerable, when you
are speaking of matters that are of a doubtful nature, as, indeed, most
subjects of conversation are. It is the duty of a young lady to talk with an
air of diffidence, as if she proposed what she said, rather with a view to
receive information herself, than to inform and instruct the company.

Modesty, as it regards the countenance, and especially the expression of the
eyes, is no less worthy of your attention, because, perhaps, it appears more in
this than in any one thing whatever. Young as you are, you cannot be ignorant,
that all the different passions of the mind may be painted and expressed in the
countenance. Anger and meekness, joy and sorrow, love and hatred, pride and
humility, impudence and modesty, have each a particular air of the face,
naturally adapted to express them; and whatever passion happens to be uppermost
in the mind, the countenance will take its tincture and expression from thence.
Though I know the face is sometimes a false glass, still I am persuaded it is
often a true one; and that the countenance is often a faithful picture of the
mind.

In a word, the only way to have a modest look, a modest gait, or a modest
behavior, in general, is to have a modest mind. Without this, all the
formality, gravity, and grimace, in the world, will signify nothing; for,
though by this means, you may be able to impose upon the thoughtless and
ignorant, yet the sensible and judicious observer will always see through the
mask, and perhaps but despise you the more for your hypocritical solemnity. But
do not mistake me; while I advise you to be modest, I do not advise you to be
sheepish and bashful; far from it. Modesty and sheepishness, however alike they
may be in appearance, are as different in their nature as any two things can
well be. A modest person will not talk too much or two high in company, because
she knows it is improper: a sheepish person will hardly talk at all, or at
least not so as to be understood, because she is afraid. A modest person looks
with a decent assurance; a sheepish one is abashed, and blushes at she don't
know what. A modest person will never contradict the general taste of the
company, unless it be inconsistent with decency and good manners; a shepish
person will hardly contradict it, even when it is. The one acts from principle,
the other from mere instinct; the one is guided by the rules of right reason,
and therefore is consistent in her conduct; the other is guided by no rules at
all, and consequently has no uniformity of character.

Let me advise you carefully to guard against false modesty, which is one of
the greatest enemies of virtue, and perhaps has betrayed young people into as
many vices as the most abandoned impudence. Never be so extremely modest as to
comply with any thing that is bad, how much soever it may be in vogue; nor ever
be ashamed to follow what is good, however singular or uncommon.

True modesty is meant to be the preserver, not the betrayer of your virtue; it
will be a kind of guard and protection to your chastity; it will secure you
from the rudeness and impertinence of the impudent and abandoned part of the
other sex. There is such a dignity and majesty in a modest behavior, as never
fails to command respect: it confounds and abashes even the most prodigate, and
makes them either ashamed or afraid of giving vent to their low and obscene
ribaldry, when they are sure it will be received with a blush or frown, with
contempt or aversion.

GOODNATURE.
THE virtue directly opposed to anger and peevishness, and which I would
recommend to your study and practice, is humanity and goodnature; a certain
meekness of temper and gentleness of disposition, that makes us happy in
ourselves, and prompts us to communicate happiness to all around us. This
temper of mind, it must be confessed, is rather the gift of nature than the
attainment of art. Some people are born with such a happy constitution, that
hardly any thing can disturb or discompose them. The former may be said to be
more happy than the latter, but not more virtuous, for nothing deserves the
name of virtue that is not of our own acquisition: and, however difficult the
task may appear, yet this virtue of goodnature, may, in some measure be
acquired by every one who will apply herself to the study of it with care and
diligence.

In order to excite you to the study and practice of goodnature, let me
entreat you to consider the many happy effects that flow from it. It is an
inexhaustible fund of inward peace and tranquillity. What the wise man says of
a good conscience (without which, perhaps, goodnature cannot exist, at least
not in its highest perfection) may properly enough be applied to this virtue,
to wit, that it is "a continual feast." A person blessed with this happy temper
of mind, possesses within herself a never-failing source of joy and pleasure:
she derives happiness from almost every incident and occurrence of life, even
from those, which to the peevish and ill-natured, are the cause of pain and
uneasiness. Thus the be imbibes honey from the very same herbs from which more
noxious animals extract venom.

ENVY.
TO take a sincere pleasure in the blessings and excellencies of others, is a
much surer mark of benevolence than to pity their calamities; and you must
always acknowledge yourself ungenerous and selfish, whenever you are less ready
to "rejoice with them that do rejoice," than to "weep with them that weep."

If ever your commendations of others are forced from you by the fear of
betraying your envy, or if ever you feel a secret desire to mention something
that may abate the admiration given them, do not try to conceal the base
disposition from yourself, since that is not the way to cure it.

Human nature is ever liable to corruption, and has in it the seeds of every
vice, as well as of every virtue; and the first will be continually shooting
forth and growing up, if not carefully watched and rooted out as fast as they
appear. It is the business of religion to purify and exalt us from a state of
imperfection and infirmity, to that which is necessary and essential to
happiness. Envy would make us miserable in heaven itself, could it be admitted
there; for we must there see beings far more excellent, and consequently more
happy than ourselves; and, till we can rejoice in seeing virtue rewarded in
proportion to its degree, we can never hope to be among the number of the
blessed.

Watch, then, my dear child, and observe every evil propensity of your heart,
that you may in time correct it, with the assistance of that grace which alone
can conquer the evils of our nature, and which you must constantly and
earnestly implore.

FRIENDSHIP.
FRIENDSHIP, in the highest sense of the word, can only subsist between persons
of strict integrity, and true generosity. Before you fancy yourself possessed
of such a treasure, you should examine the value of your own heart, and see how
well it is qualified for so sacred a connection: and then a harder task remains,
to find out whether the object of your affection is also endued with the same
virtuous disposition. Youth and inexperience are ill able to penetrate into
characters; the least appearance of good attracts their admiration, and they
immediately suppose they have found the object they pursued.

It is a melancholy consideration, that the judgment can only be formed by
experience, which generally comes too late for one's own use, and is seldom
accepted for that of others. I fear it is in vain for me to tell you what
dangerous mistakes I made in the early choice of friends; how incapable I then
was of finding out such as were fit for me, and how little I was acquainted
with the true nature of friendship, when I thought myself most fervently
engaged in it! I am sensible all this will hardly persuade you to choose by the
eyes of others, or even to suspect that your own may be deceived.

A due regard to reputation is an indispensable qualification in the choice of
a friend. "Have regard to thy name," says the wise son of Sirach, "for tha^
will continue with thee above a thousand great treasures of gold." The young
person who is careless of blame, and indifferent to the esteem of the wise and
prudent part of the world, is not only a most dangerous companion, but gives a
certain proof of the want of rectitude in her own mind. Discretion is the
guardian of all virtues, and when she forsakes them, they cannot long resist
the attacks of an enemy. There is a profligacy of spirit in defying the rules
of decorum, and despising censure, which seldom ends otherwise than in extreme
corruption, and utter ruin. Modesty and prudence are qualities that early
display themselves, and are easily discerned; where these do not appear, you
should avoid, not only friendship, but every step toward intimacy, lest your
own character should suffer along with that of your companion; but where they
shine forth in any eminent degree, you may safely cultivate an acquaintance, in
the reasonable hope of finding the solid fruits of virtue beneath such sweet
and promising blossoms; should you be disappointed, you will at least have run
no risk in the search after them, and may cherish as a creditable acquaintance
the person so adorned, though she may not deserve a place in your inmost heart.

Fancy, I know, will have her share in friendship, as well as in love. You must
please, as well as serve me, before I can love you as a friend of my heart. But
the talents that please for an evening, may not please for life. The humorous
man soon runs through his stock of odd stories, mimicry, and jests; and the
wit, by constantly repeated flashes, confounds and tires one's intellect,
instead of enlivening it with agreeable surprise; but good sense can neither
tire nor wear out; it improves by exercise, and increases in value the more it
is known: the pleasure it gives in conversation is lasting and satisfactory,
because it is accompanied with improvement: Its worth is proportioned to the
occasion that calls for it, and ^ses higher on the most interesting topics; the
heart, as well as the understanding, finds its account in it; and our noblest
interests are promoted by the entertainment we receive from such a companion.

But family friendships are friendships made for us, if I may so speak, by God
himself! With kindest intentions, he has knit the bands of family love, by
indispensable duties; and wretched are they, who have burst them asunder by
violence and ill will, or worn them out by constant little disobligations, and
by the want of that attention to please, which the presence of a stranger
always inspires, but which is often most shamefully neglected toward those
whom it is most our duty and interest to please. May you, my dear, be wise
enough to see that every faculty of entertainment, every engaging qualification
which you possess, is excited to the best advantage for those, whose love is of
the most importance to you -- for those who live under the same roof, and with
whom you are connected in life, either by the ties of blood, or by the still
more sacred ties of a voluntary engagement.

Conversation, which is so apt to grow dull and insipid in families, nay, in
some to be almost wholly laid aside, must be cultivated with frankness and
openness of friendship, and by the mutual communication of whatever may conduce
to the improvement or innocent entertainment of each other.

Reading, whether apart, or in common, will furnish useful and pleasing
subjects, and the sprightliness of youth will naturally inspire harmless mirth
and native humor, if encouraged by a mutual desire of diverting each other,
and making the hours pass agreeably in your own house: every amusement that
offers, will be heightened by the participation of these dear companions, and
by talking over every incident together, and every object of pleasure. If you
have any acquired talent for entertainment, such as music, painting, or the
like, your own family are those before whom you should most wish to excel, and
for whom you should always be ready to exert yourself, not suffering the
talents you have gained, perhaps by their means, and at their expense, to lie
dormant, till the arrival of a stranger gives you spirit in the performance.
Where this last is the case, you may be sure vanity is the only motive of the
exertion: but how little sensibility has that heart, which is not more
gratified by the silent pleasure painted on the countenance of a partial
parent, or of an affectionate brother, than by the empty compliments of a
visitor, who is, perhaps, inwardly, more disposed to ridicule and criticize,
than to admire you.

ECONOMY.
ECONOMY is so important a part of a woman's character, so necessary to her own
happiness, and so essential to her performing properly the duties of a wife and
of a mother, that it ought to have the precedence of all other accomplishments,
and take its rank next to the first duties of life.

Economy consists of so many branches, some of which descend to such
minutenesses, that it is impossible for me in writing to direct you in every
particular.

The first and greatest point is to lay out our general plan of living in a
just proportion to our fortune and rank: if these two will not coincide, the
last must certainly give way; for, if you have right principles, you cannot
fail of being wretched under the sense of the injustice as well as danger of
spending beyond your income, and your distress will be continually increasing.
No mortifications, which you can suffer in retrenching in your appearance, can
be comparable to this unhappiness. If you would enjoy the real comforts of
affluence, you should lay your plan considerably within your income, not for
the pleasure of amassing wealth; though, where there is a growing family, it is
an absolute duty to lay by something every year: but to provide for
contingencies, and to have the power of indulging your choice in the disposal
of the overplus, either in innocent pleasures, or to increase your funds for
charity and generosity, which are in fact the true funds of pleasure.

In your table, as in your dress, and in all other things, I wish you to aim at
propriety and neatness; or, if your estate demands it, elegancy, rather than
superfluous figure: to go beyond your sphere, either in dress, or in the
appearance of your table, indicates a greater fault in your character than to
be too much within it. It is impossible to enter into the minutiae of the
table: good sense and observation on the best models, must form your taste, and
a due regard to what you can afford, must restrain it.

Ladies, who are fond of needle work, generally choose to consider that as a
principal part of good housewifery: and, though I cannot look upon it as of
equal importance with the due regulation of a family, yet, in a middling rank,
and with a moderate fortune, it is a necessary part of a woman's duty, and a
considerable article in expense is saved by it. Many young ladies make almost
every thing they wear; by which means they can make a genteel figure at a small
expense. This, in your station, is the most profitable and desirable kind of
work: and, as much of it as you can do, consistently with a due attention to
your health, to the improvement of your mind, and to the discharge of other
duties, I should think highly commendable. Absolute idleness is inexcusable in
a woman, because the needle is always at hand for those intervals, in which she
cannot be otherwise employed. If you are industrious, and if you keep good
hours, you will find time for all your employments. Early rising, and a good
disposition of time, is essential to economy.

The neatness and order of your house and furniture, is a part of economy,
which will greatly affect your appearance and character, and to which you must
yourself give attention; since it is not possible even for the rich and great
to rely wholly on the care of servants, in such points, without their being
often neglected. The more magnificently a house is furnished, the more one is
disgusted with that air of confusion, which often prevails where attention is
wanting in the owner. But, on the other hand, there is a kind of neatness,
which gives a lady the air of a house-maid, and makes her excessively
troublesome to every body, and particularly to her husband: in this, as in all
branches of economy, I wish you to avoid all parade and bustle. Those ladies,
who pique themselves on the particular excellence of neatness, are very apt to
forget that the decent order of a house should be designed to promote the
convenience and pleasure of those who are to be in it; and that, if it is
converted into a cause of trouble and constraint, their husbands and guests
would be happier without it. The love of fame, that universal passion, will
sometimes show itself on strangely insignificant subjects; and a person, who
acts for praise only, will always go beyond the mark in every thing. The best
sign of a house being well governed is that nobody's attention is called to any
of the little affairs of it, but all goes on so well of course that one is not
led to make remarks upon any thing, nor to observe any extraordinary effort
that produces the general result of ease and elegance, which prevails without.

CONTENT.
THE utmost happiness we can hope for in this world is contentment; and, if we
aim at any thing higher, we shall meet with nothing but grief and
disappointments.

A sure method to secure content, will be to observe the following rules;
first, never to see superiors with envy; secondly, to reflect on the various
calamities and misfortunes that human nature is subject to; and, thirdly, to
form a regular impartial comparison, between ourselves and those who are placed
below us in the enjoyments of life. Those considerations will fortify and
strengthen the mind against the impressions of sorrow; will reconcile it to the
natural distresses that befall it, and will prepare it for the enjoyment of
peace and tranquillity. Great inconveniences attend running into any extreme.
Much of our happiness depends upon an evenness of temper; in not suffering the
scale of our reason to mount us too high, in the season of prosperity, nor to
sink us too low with the weight of adverse fortune. Wherefore, my advice is,
that you never may exult immoderately, upon a new accession of good, nor be
abjectly cast down, at the sudden approach of evil. The true regard of your own
private satisfaction, should incline you to stability and resignation, upon any
change, and to keep your spirits always calm and even; because your life would
be a labyrinth of perplexities without it. Had you all the desirable properties
in the world, you could be no more than pleased and contented with them; and,
if by a right way of thinking, you can reconcile yourself to your own
condition, you will fall very little short of the most complete happiness that
mortals can enjoy.

Greatness in glittering forms displayed,
Affects weak eyes much used to shade;
And, by its falsely envied scene,
Gives self-debasing fits of spleen;
But they, whom blessed content inspires,
This science learn -- to bound desires:
By happy alchymy of mind
They turn to pleasure all they find:
They both disdain in outward mien
The grave and solemn garb of spleen:
Unmoved, when the rude tempest blows,
Without an opiate they repose;
Nor meddling with the gods' affairs,
Concern themselves with distant cares;
But place their bliss in mental rest,
And feast upon the good possessed.
CHASTITY.
CHASTITY is the next virtue that is to fall under your consideration: no charm
can supply its place: without it, beauty is unlovely; wit is mean and wanton;
quality contemptible, and good breeding worthless. Chastity is so essential and
natural to your sex, that every declination from it is a proportionable
receding from womanhood. An immodest woman is a kind of monster, distorted from
its proper form. She who forfeits her chastity, withers by degrees into scorn
and contrition; but she who lives up to its rules, ever flourishes, like a rose
in June, with all her virgin graces about her -- sweet to the sense, and lovely
to the eye. Chastity heightens all the virtues, which it accompanies; and sets
off every great talent that human nature can be possessed of. It is not only an
ornament, but also a guard to virtue. This is the great point of female honor,
and the least slip in a woman's honor is never to be recovered.

This, more than any other virtue, places your sex in the esteem of ours; and
invites even those to admire it, who have the baseness to profane it. I
therefore recommend it to your approbation, in the minutest circumstances.
Chastity is a kind of quick and delicate feeling in the soul, which makes her
shrink, and withdraw herself from every thing that is wanton, or has danger in
it. This makes it so great a check to loose thoughts, that I prescribe to you
the practice of it in your greatest solitudes, as if the best judges were to
see and censure all you do.

It is reported of one Lucretia, a Roman lady, that having been ravished by
Sextus, eldest son to Tarquin, the king of the country, she took a dagger in
her hand; and, after having publicly exhorted her relations to revenge her
injury on the barbarous ravisher, she plunged it in her bosom, at once putting
an end to her life and her disgrace. And such was the opinion which the Romans
entertained of this crime, as well as of the fatal consequences which followed
the commission of it, that the whole nation rose in arms, and not only
dethroned the king, and banished the royal family, but even, if I may so speak,
banished kings, in general, making a decree, that, for the future, no king
should ever sway the scepter over the Roman people, but that their government,
instead of a monarchy, should thenceforth become a republic.

OBEDIENCE TO PARENTS.
IT is impossible that young people should steer their course aright in the
world, before they are acquainted with the situation of the many dangers that
lie in their way; wherefore it is necessary, that they should be under the
government and direction of those, who are appointed, by the laws of nature, to
take the charge of their education. If children had but sedateness enough, how
readily would they embrace the counsel of their parents; how attentively listen
to their precepts; and how strenuously pursue their advice! They have already
walked in the difficult wilderness of life, and observed the various dangers
that lurk in the paths of it, to annoy the footsteps of those who never trod
the way. Of these, with much tenderness and affection, parents make a discovery
to their children; and intersperse gen^^^ ^^vices, what course to take.
Children, for this reason, should not take it ill, if the commands of their
parents sometimes seem difficult and disagreeable. Perhaps, upon experiment,
they may prove as pleasing as if they had followed their own choice. However,
this they may be certain of, that all such cautions are intended out of true
love, by those who are more experienced than themselves, and therefore better
judges what their conduct should be.

To those who honor their parents, it is promised by the word of eternal
truth, that their days should be long in the land of their inheritance. From
this we may learn how amiable the performance of this duty is in the sight of
Heaven. Let your obedience to your mother be therefore your delight and
exercise. God has given her power over you, to bring you up in his fear and
service. She was the guardian of your childhood, and is the guide of your yet
inexperienced youth; this must naturally enliven your love for her, and melt
you into the gentlest obedience to her. Therefore let filial affection be your
governing principle; and behave yourself toward her with all humility and
observance. Let no pretense of your being in the right, ever provoke you to
answer her with indifference or contempt. You must love her, and be grieved at
every thing that disquiets her. You are to please her in all circumstances; to
comfort her on all occasions; to obey her commands with pleasure; to consult
her in all affairs, and to reverence all her precepts. Consider, that all this
is but a moderate return of gratitude, for the toils and hardships, expense and
inquietudes, she has suffered for you; for the care she has taken to educate
and instruct you; for the good examples she has shown you, and for the honest
principles, and improvements of the mind, she has conveyed unto you.

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL.
MANY are the arguments that establish this great (...). First, it is
reasonable to believe, that an immaterial being, enriched with so many
beautiful faculties, as the human soul is, can naturally have no internal
principle of corruption, or be subject to annihilation; and hence arises a
certainty of its being a particle of an immortal and eternal essence. Again,
its love of existence; its hopes of undying happiness; its satisfaction in the
practice of virtue; its remorse on the commission of vice; and the delight it
takes, in the contemplation of its divine original, are irresistible proofs of
its immortal nature. He must be lost in stupidity, who can either imagine, or
believe, that a thinking being, which is in a perpetual progress of
improvement, that is always capable of new accomplishments and further
enlargements, and is still traveling on, from perfection to perfection,
should, in the beginning of her inquiries, and after a few discoveries of her
own excellencies and acquirements, fall away into nothing, and perish with
corruption. Besides, the justice, wisdom, goodness and veracity of God, are all
concerned in the proof of her eternity. In this world, man, let his talents be
ever so great, and his labor ever so constant, can never take in his full
measure of knowledge; can never establish his soul in virtue, or come up to the
perfection of his nature. Would it then agree with the infinite justice and
wisdom of God, to create such noble beings, for so mean a purpose, as to perish
with the beasts of the field? That would be, to give us reason to be abortive,
talents not to be exerted, and capacities not to be gratified; which would
destroy that infinite wisdom and goodness of the Deity, that shines through all
his works.

We are to look upon this world as a nursery for the next, and are only to
receive our first rudiments of existence here, and afterward to be
transplanted into eternal dominions; where our immortal souls will still be
adding knowledge to knowledge, and virtue to virtue; and will shine forever
with new accessions of glory to all eternity. This is the triumphant pleasure
of our souls: this is the highest perfection of our nature; and it must be a
prospect pleasing even to God himself, to see his creation drawing nearer to
him by greater degrees of resemblance.

RELIGION.
HITHERTO you have "thought as a child, and understood as a child; but it is
time to put away childish things." -- If you desire to live in peace and
honor, in favor with God and man, and to die in the glorious hope of rising
from the grave to a life of endless happiness; if these things appear worthy
your ambition, you must set out in earnest in the pursuit of them. Virtue and
happiness are not attained by chance, nor by a cold and languid approbation;
they must be sought with ardour, attended to with diligence, and every
assistance must be eagerly embraced, that may enable you to obtain them.
Consider that good and evil are now before you; that, if you do not heartily
choose and love the one, you must undoubtedly be the wretched victim of the
other.

The first step must be to awaken your mind to a sense of the importance of the
task before you; which is no less than to bring your frail nature to that
degree of Christian perfection, which is to qualify it for immortality, and,
without which it is necessarily incapable of happiness; for, it is a truth
never to be forgotten, that God has annexed happiness to virtue, and misery to
vice, by the unchangeable nature of things; and that a wicked being (while he
continues such) is in a natural incapacity of enjoying happiness, even with the
concurrence of all those outward circumstances, which in a virtuous mind would
produce it.

As there are degrees of virtue and vice, so there are of reward and
punishment, both here and hereafter: but do not aim only at escaping the
dreadful doom of the wicked; let your desires take a nobler flight, and aspire
after those transcendant honors, and that brighter crown of glory, which await
those who have excelled in virtue; and let the animating thought, that every
secret effort to gain his favor is noted by your all-seeing Judge, and that he
will, with infinite mercy, proportion his goodness to your labor, excite every
faculty of your soul to please and serve him. To this end, you must inform your
understanding what you ought to believe and to do. You must correct and purify
your heart; cherish and improve all its good affections; and continually
mortify those that are evil. You must form and govern your temper and manners,
according to the laws of benevolence and justice, and qualify yourself, by all
means in your power, for an useful and agreeable member of society. All this,
you see, is no light business, nor can it be performed without a sincere and
earnest application of the mind, as to its great and constant object.

True devotion is not a melancholy sentiment that depresses the spirits, and
excludes the ideas of pleasure which youth is so fond of: on the contrary,
there is nothing so friendly to enjoyment, so productive of true pleasure, so
peculiarly suited to the warmth and innocence of a youthful heart. Do not
therefore think it too soon to turn your mind to God; but offer him the first
fruits of your understanding and affections: and be assured, that the more you
increase in love to him, and delight in his laws, the more you will increase in
happiness, in excellence and honor; -- that, in proportion as you improve in
true piety, you will become dear and amiable to your fellow creatures,
contented and peaceful in yourself, and qualified to enjoy the best blessings
of this life, as well as to inherit the glorious promise of immortality.

What an example is set before us in our blessed Master! How is his whole life,
from his earliest youth, dedicated to the pursuit of true wisdom, and to the
practice of the most exalted virtue! When you see him, at twelve years of age,
in the temple, amongst the doctors, hearing them, and asking them questions, on
the subject of religion, and astonishing them with his understanding and
answers, -- you will say perhaps, "Well might the Son of God, even at those
years, be far wiser than the aged; but can a mortal child emulate such heavenly
wisdom? Can such a pattern be proposed to my imitation?" Yes, my dear, remember
that he has bequeathed to you his heavenly wisdom, as far as concerns your
good. He has left you such declarations of his will, and of the consequences of
your actions, as you are, even now, fully able to understand, if you will but
attend to them. If then you will imitate his zeal for knowledge, if you will
delight in gaining information and improvement, you may even now become "wise
unto salvation." Unmoved by the praise he acquired amongst these learned men,
you see him meekly return to the subjection of a child under those who appeared
to be his parents, though he was in reality their Lord: you see him return to
live with them, to work for them, and to be the joy and solace of their lives;
till the time came, when he was to enter on that scene of public action, for
which his heavenly Father had sent him, from his own right hand, to take upon
him the form of a poor carpenter's son. What a lesson of humility is this, and
of obedience to parents! When having received the glorious testimony from
heaven, of his being the beloved Son of the Most High, he enters on his public
ministry, -- what an example does he give us, of the most extensive and
constant benevolence! How are all his hours spent in doing good to the souls
and bodies of men! Not the meanest sinner is below his notice: to reclaim and
save them, he condescends to converse familiarly with the most corrupt, as well
as the most abject. All his miracles are wrought to benefit mankind; not one to
punish and afflict them. Instead of using the almighty power, which accompanied
him, to the purpose of exalting himself, and treading down his enemies, he
makes no other use of it, than to heal and to save.

A MODEL OF CONDUCT FOR ONE DAY.
THE surest way you can take, to live above such mistaken, perishing
enjoyments, as this world can boast, is to put yourself under the necessity of
observing, how one day goes through your hands, and let virtue, sincerity, and
religion be the rules of actions for that day. Oblige yourself to a certain
order of time, in your devotions, in your business, in your retirements,
amusements, recreations, and pleasures. Let your first care be to please the
Deity, who presides over all your cheerful hours, and innocent conversations;
the next to avoid the reproaches of your own heart; and the next, to escape the
censures of the world. A lady is never so sure of her conduct; as when the
verdict she passes upon her own behavior is confirmed by the opinion of all
that know her. By an observation of these rules, you will come to a discovery
of all the foibles that lurk in the secret corners of your soul; and will soon
arrive at a true and impartial knowledge of yourself. You are likewise
carefully to consider, how far you deserve the approbation, with which the
world favors you: whether your actions proceed from worthy motives, and how
far you are really possessed of those virtues, that they imagine you are. Friends
may not see our faults; they may be partial and conceal them from us; or else
they may soften them, so as to reconcile us to them, and make them appear too
trivial to be taken notice of. I therefore, cannot think it improper, to
consult, what character we bear among our enemies, whose malice (though it may
inflame our imperfections, and expose them in too strong a light) has
frequently some ground for what it advances. By the reproaches which an enemy
casts upon us, our eyes are opened to several blemishes and defects in our
conduct, which otherwise would escape our observation.

The exercise of some social virtue or other will fall in your way almost every
day in your life. To relieve the needy, and comfort the distressed; to make
allowance for the stips and defects of others; to advise the ignorant, and
soften the envious; to rectify the prejudiced, and quiet the angry; to silence
detraction, and justify the deserving; to overlook hatred, and forgive an
injury; to mitigate the fierceness of others, and to subdue our own passions;
are virtues that may give daily employment to the most industrious tempers, and
in the most active station of life. Those are exercises suited to reasonable
creatures, and always bring delight to the discreet manager.

POLITENESS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
WHILST you labor to enrich your mind with the essential virtues of
christianity -- with piety, benevolence, meekness, humility, integrity, and
purity, and to make yourself useful in domestic management, I would not have
you neglect to pursue those graces and acquirements, which may set your virtue
in the most advantageous light, adorn your manners, and enlarge your
understanding; and this not in the spirit of vanity, but in the innocent and
laudable view of rendering yourself more useful and pleasing to your fellow
creatures, and consequently more acceptable to God. Politeness of behavior,
and the attaining such branches of knowledge, and such arts and accomplishments
as are proper to your sex, capacity, and station, will prove so valuable to
yourself through life, and will make you so desirable a companion, that the
neglect of them may reasonably be deemed a neglect of duty, since it is
undoubtedly our duty to cultivate the powers entrusted to us, and to render
ourselves as perfect as we can.

You must have often observed that nothing is so strong a recommendation on a
slight acquaintance as politeness; nor does it lose its value by time or
intimacy, when preserved, as it ought to be, in the nearest connexions, and
strictest friendships. This delightful qualification, so universally admired
and respected, but so rarely possessed in any eminent degree, cannot but be a
considerable object of my wishes for you; nor should either of us be
discouraged by the apprehension that neither I am capable of teaching, nor you
of learning it, in perfection; since whatever degree you attain will amply
reward our pains.

Whatever tends to embellish your fancy, to enlighten your understanding, and
furnish you with ideas to reflect upon when alone, or to converse upon in
company, is certainly well worth your acquisition. The wretched expedient, to
which ignorance so often drives our sex, of calling in slander to enliven the
tedious insipidity of conversation, would alone be a sufficient reason for
enriching your mind with innocent subjects of entertainment, which may render
you a fit companion for persons of sense and knowledge, from whom you may reap
the most desirable improvements; for, though I think reading indispensably
necessary to the due cultivation of your mind, I prefer the conversation of
such persons to every other method of instruction: but this you cannot hope to
enjoy, unless you qualify yourself to bear a part in such society, by at least
a moderate share of reading.

Natural philosophy, in the largest sense of expression, is too wide a field
for you to undertake; but the study of nature, as far as may suit your powers
and opportunities, you will find a most sublime entertainment: the objects of
this study are all the stupendous works of the Almighty hand that lie within
the reach of our observation. In the works of man, perfection is aimed at, but
it can only be found in those of the Creator. The contemplation of perfection
must produce delight; and every natural object around you will offer this
delight, if it could attract your attention: -- if you survey the earth, every
leaf that trembles in the breeze, every blade of grass beneath your feet is a
wonder as absolutely beyond the reach of human art to imitate as the
construction of the universe. Endless pleasures, to those who have a taste for
them, might be derived from the endless variety to be sound in the composition
of this globe and its inhabitants. The fossil, the vegetable, and the animal
world, gradually rising in the scale of excellence; the innumerable species of
each which preserve their specific difference from age to age, yet of which no
two individuals are ever perfectly alike -- afford such a range of observation
and inquiry as might engross the whole term of our short life, if followed
minutely. Besides all the animal creation, obvious to our unassisted senses,
the eye, aided by philosophical inventions, sees myriads of creatures, which by
the ignorant are not known to have existence; it sees all nature teem with
life; every fluid, each part of every vegetable and animal swarm with its
peculiar inhabitants, invisible to the naked eye, but as perfect in all their
parts, and enjoying life as indisputably as the elephant or the whale.

But, if from the earth, and from these minute wonders the philosophic eye is
raised toward the heavens, what a stupendous scene, there, opens to its view!
Those brilliant lights, that sparkle to the eye of ignorance as gems adorning
the sky, or as lamps to guide the traveller, assume an importance that amazes
the understanding! They appear to be worlds, formed like ours for a variety of
inhabitants; or suns, enlightening numberless other worlds too distant for
discovery! I shall ever remember the astonishment and rapture with which my
mind received this idea, when I was about your age: it was then perfectly new
to me, and it was impossible to describe the sensations which I felt from the
glorious* boundless prospect of infinite beneficence bursting at once upon my
imagination! Who can contemplate such a scene unmoved? if your curiosity is
excited to enter upon this noble inquiry, a few boooks on the subject, and
those of the easiest sort, with some of the common experiments, may be
sufficient for your purpose; which is, to enlarge your mind, and to excite in
it the most ardent gratitude and profound adoration toward that great and good
Being, who exerts his boundless power in communicating various portions of
happiness through all the immense regions of creation.

THE FOLLY OF PRIDE.
MARY now went up to Leonora, a rich Baronet's daughter, and taking her
good-naturedly by the arm, she said -- Come, Leonora, let us take a walk round
the garden; the race does not suit well with our fine holiday dresses.

But Leonora was very proud, and drew her arm hastily back, saying -- Pray,
Miss Jones, take care, or you will rumple the lace on my sleeves. She then drew
up her head, bridled her chin, and turned up her nose; as much as to say, a
tradesman's daughter like you ought not to be so familiar with me. The lace on
my dress is very rich, and the flowers the finest that have lately come from
France, continued she; my mother purchased them, that I might have something to
distinguish me, when I was forced to mix with nobody know^ who; for I am a
young lady of a good family, and it is insupportable to see citizens daughters
imitate, in every thing, people of condition, said the lady who so often visits
my mother, Lady Upstart. I had these paste bookles lately sent home; they were
bought of the Prince of Wales' jeweller: what pedlar set yours? I never saw any
thing so vulgar. I put mine on for the first time when I sung at a private
concert before the Prince. For you must know, that I am allowed to sing
charmingly; Lord Smoothtongue, who dined at our house the other day, said that
I had a fine angelic Italian voice. He spoke in French to me too for half an
hour, and declared, that I prattled like a native of France. I shall soon begin
to learn Italian; it is not very difficult; but nothing indeed is difficult to
me; I shall be able to speak it in six months.

Thus did she run on, till poor Mary was quite weary of her foolish pride and
chat, and longed to leave her, to enjoy her vain thoughts alone. She looked
anxiously round for an opportunity, and saw a young lady coming whom she had
been in company with before. She instantly left Leonora, and joined Charlotte,
saying -- Will you take a walk with me, for this is a sweet garden? With all my
heart, answered she; and they turned down another walk, and left Leonora, with
her fine lace and paste buckles, to count her steps, and look in vain at the
trees for admiration.

The rest of the company gathered round these two girls, and all agreed that
Leonora was haughty and foolish. Let her go, said Charles; a Miss who knows so
much is not fit company for us; we might rumple the lace on her fine dress. Who
will play at questions and commands? I, I, cried they all, and away they ^an to
a feat at the upper end of the garden, to begin to play.

The haughty, vain Leonora, who saw herself excluded from this amusement, was
ready to bite her nails with vexation. She walked up and down the path with a
grave step, looking at them as if she expected to be invited by some one, to
play with them; but no one took notice of her. She passed by with a pretty
pocketbook in her hand, hoping that they would ask to see it, and admire its
silver clasp and enamelled figures. But, instead of that, the little folks
began to whisper, and then burst into a loud laugh.

Leonora perceiving that they were laughing at her, turned away blushing with
anger, and at last began to weep, because she could not vent her passion on
them.

Then she happened to meet her father, who was a sensible man, and saw with
pain that his wife spoiled her daughter. What is the matter with you? Why do
you weep? Has any accident befallen you? How should I laugh, answered she;
those children have no manners. They sit there together, and laugh and play
without inviting me. They appear what they are, poor vulgar creatures; I ought
not to have expected better from them. Would you believe it, when I passed by,
they laughed me out of countenance. Is not that very rude and ill-bred?

True, said her father, it was indeed very rude; but, perhaps, you offended
them first.

I, answered she; I have done nothing to them; I would not demean myself to
quarrel with such --. She stopped short, because she saw a frown on her
father's brow. She then related to him, that she had only informed them how her
singing was admired, and that she spoke French remarkably well. I told them
indeed, added she, that I was soon to learn Italian, and kept them at a
distance, that they might not tear my lace, they were so rude. Leonora!
Leonora! said he, you have acted very simply. If you wish to be respected and
loved, and that people should like to be in your company, you must not always
speak of yourself and your talents, for you will then certainly disgust them.
You must attend to what others say, and observe their good qualities, and not
be eager to intrude the little you know on every body you meet. I am not
surprised that they laughed at you. If a man were to be in my company, who only
talked of himself, and took care to let me see that he thought me an inferior,
because he had a larger fortune than myself, I should laugh in his face. For a
proud man is always ridiculous.

He took her out of the garden and sent her home, telling her as he led her to
the carriage, that he would take away her fine clothes, and send her to a
little farm-house in the country, if she did not soon appear to have more
sense; for pride is folly. A fool may wear fine clothes; but a fool will never
become wise.

THE STEPMOTHER. DETRACTION.
MARY chatted during this time with little Emilia, Mr. Goodman's daughter, who
gave her a description of every thing remarkable in her village and house.
Amongst other things, she said, that her present mother was not her own mother,
but a stepmother: her own mother, she said, she had never known, because she
died when she was an infant. A stepmother, do you say? replied Mary, quite
surprised; a stepmother! Poor child! I have always heard that step-mothers
were very cruel; that they beat poor children, and do not give them enough to
eat. Do not believe such stories, dear Mary, answered Emilia! I remember I
heard the same thing, but I found it very different. It is possible there may
have been many cruel step-mothers; and for that reason I wish that all good
children may keep their own parents; but my stepmother is certainly the best
woman in the world. She has her own children, and my mother's, but she loves us
all as well as her own. The cake and fruit she distributes amongst us are
always in equal shares: when they are naughty, they are always punished as
severely as I am, when I am careless or neglect my work. She has only once
given me a blow; and I am ashamed to tell you I deserved it, for telling her a
lie, and persisting in (...) though she took me gently by the hand, and told me
that a dreadful thing a lie was. And this is her usual method; she melts me by
her kindness, and I promise to try to become better; for I know that I acquired
some bad habits before my father married again. What then would have become of
me if I had not had a stepmother? My own mother was gone to heaven; I never
knew her: but my stepmother had pity on me, and has taught me to read and
work; nay, to tell truth, and be orderly: my father loves me twice as well as
he did; and I love my father, though people say I am passionate and have a bad
temper. I wish to be good. And then, when I was sick, yes, very sick, she sat
up with me all night, and was so kind -- who knows where I should have been
now, but for her?

Mrs. Jones did not meet with such an agreeable companion. She walked with the
sister of an amiable young lady, lately married to a very worthy man. She found
her conversation very tiresome; nay, it gave her great pain. She had been
brought up by a relation; and, in her childhood, been with thoughtless, idle
people; and had learned from them the dreadful custom of slandering, or
speaking ill of every body. Mrs. Jones did not yet know her evil propensity:
she took her arm in a friendly manner, and said, your sister's marriage with
such a worthy man gave me great pleasure. I congratulate you, and sincerely
wish that they may all their lives enjoy the happiness they merit. Hannah (for
that was the name of this malicious girl) thanked her coldly for the part she
took in the happiness of her family. But, continued she, with a sneering laugh,
I know not whether the doctor's happiness, or, if you please, the professor's,
will be so very great. Now it is only the honey-moon. But when he has his wife
at home a month or two, he will soon see what a fine choice he has made. I
really do not know what he will do with her. She knows nothing of the
management of a family; and she has such a bad temper, God help those who are
to live always with her! for my part, I am very glad that she is now out of our
house. The worthy professor will have trouble enough with her; but then, (she
laughed again) the worthy professor has no right to find fault with her. I know
him, and know all his tricks. I must not mention them: but, Mrs. Jones, if you
knew what I know, you would form quite a different opinion of him.

Mrs. Jones now testified her surprise, and assured her that she never had
heard any thing but good of him and her sister. Besides, Mr. Goodman had
praised them, and he was certainly a worthy, sensible man.

He may be a learned man, answered Hannah, but he is nothing more. He leaves
all things at sixes and sevens; and if any one will give him a glass of wine,
he will say all that is kind and good of them for it. I do not love to speak
ill of others; but I know very well what they say of his wife; ha! ha! ha! she
can skin a flint in the management of her house; you will see more sunshine
than bread there, I fear.

Mrs. Jones earnestly endeavored to defend her friends; for she knew them, and
would not suffer such artful calumny to shake her good opinion. But the more
she defended their characters, the more ill this malicious girl said of them.
She then turned the conversation to other persons; and she had something bad to
tell of every one. Mrs. Jones listened above half an hour to these malicious
slanders, for she could not stop her: unable to bear it any longer with
patience, she looked at her with contempt, and abruptly interrupted her. Madam,
said she to her, you have recollected something ill of every person you have
mentioned; I should be glad to hear you, just to turn the torrent, say
something good of them.

How can I help it, said she, if people are not better? How can^t I speak well
of them, when they have nothing good in them?

What, continued Mrs. Jones, are you not ashamed of yourself? Have you heard
nothing good of any of those persons you have been calumniating? I love and
esteem them all, because I know them to be good; but if I only believed half
what you have said of them, they would sink so low in my opinion, that they
would forfeit the place they have in my esteem: I should be forced to despise
them, as being destitute of virtue and honor. Is not this detestable? Hannah!
Hannah! if you robbed me of my watch or purse, it would be very wrong; but it
would not be so blameable an action as slandering, if you deprived me of my
reputation, and thus robbed me of my honor! However precious my watch may be,
I can purchase another if it be stolen; but gold cannot rub out the stains you
might fix on my good name. But only think how much you have injured yourself.
How can I respect a person who has spoken in such a style of her own sister and
brother! If I were to repeat to them, to Mr. Goodman, or any of the other
persons you have mentioned, only half what you have said of them, what do you
suppose would be the consequence?

What do you say, dear Madam? (interrupted the frightened Hannah) surely you
will not repeat what I have spoken to you, because I considered you as my
friend. I did not mean any harm.

If I (answered Mrs. Jones) spare you, you will soon betray yourself: you will
soon lose every friend you have. All your acquaintance will fly from you; they
will despise and loathe you. We loathe a slanderer as we do a viper. I, at
least, shall take care in future not to come near you, lest you should again
fasten on my ear, as you have done today, to instill poison into my heart; for
whoever speaks ill to me of all the world, will certainly not speak well of me
when my back is turned.

So saying, she hastily left the malicious girl standing alone, not knowing
what to do with herself, she was so vexed. She walked angrily up and down the
garden; and, meeting her sister, would have begun to speak ill of Mrs. Jones;
but she would not hear her, and turned from her, saying, I know you sister, and
I know Mrs. Jones. I have not time to listen to you.

This made her very angry. When the whole company were cheerful, and walked
about chatting and laughing, Hannah flew to a dark corner, and seated herself
there, the prey of her own malice.

CHILDREN TAUGHT THE USEFULNESS OF SERVANTS.
THE frequent amusements in which Mr. Jones's family had been engaged for some
time past, interrupted too much their regular employments. Charles had not done
what his master every day required; Mary's work was left unfinished; Mrs. Jones
had several things to do in the family, and Mr Jones many accounts to settle,
which made him say to his wife and children, we have lately enjoyed much
pleasure, perhaps more than we ought, because we have neglected our necessary
employments. But now it is proper for us to return to our respective
occupations with fresh vigor; else we shall lose by degrees all desire for
employment, and our whole family would then fall into such disorder, that we
should no longer find any comfort in it.

He desired Charles, after he had given this caution, to prepare his exercise,
and went himself to his compting-house.

At first the children did not much relish work, and even Mr. Jones himself
found it more troublesome than usual; but imperceptibly every thing returned
into its former order. Every one fulfilled his appointed task; and finding
themselves very well, they were happily convinced that regular employment
affords more real satisfaction than continual amusements and feasts.

This order was not interrupted till the middle of October, when the two maids
begged Mrs. Jones to let them go to a fair in a neighboring village. Scarcely
were they gone out of the house, when the man servant entered, and, bursting
into a violent fit of crying, he could only bring out -- What shall I do? what
shall I do? Mrs. Jones was alarmed, and asked him what ailed him; but he could
only answer -- They say my father is dying. Mr. Jones pitied the poor man, and
asked if he wished to go and nurse him during his illness? O yes! O yes! said
the man; let me but see him before he dies, or I shall never know a happy day
again! Mr. Jones then instantly gave him leave to go, saying, I would rather do
all your work myself, than keep you from your sick father. Go, and attend him;
and ask my wife for something to take with you, to revive his spirits. Then
Harry soon hastened away, with his pockets full of nourishing things for the
poor sick man.

Mrs. Jones determined to avail herself of this opportunity, to impress a
useful lesson on the minds of her children; and would not send for any
assistance, though all the servants were absent.

They having left every thing in order, much inconvenience was not felt during
the remainder of the day; but the next morning, Mary, going to wash herself,
found no water, and was obliged to go to the pump for it herself, trembling
from head to foot. The children now felt the absence of the servants, and how
much they went indebted to them for waiting on them. When breakfast time came,
the milk was brought; but there were no clean basins to put it in, and the
children must drink out of those in which some milk remained since the day
before, or wash them themselves. When they entered the parlour, every thing was
in disorder and out of its place; all stood as they had left them the night
before; the floor was covered with crumbs, bits of paper, and dust; in short,
it looked like a dwelling in which idle people lived.

Mrs. Jones said, that today she must dust and sweep the room herself, since
no one thought of doing it for her.

The children, who dearly loved their mother, would not suffer her to do it,
but began to work themselves.

Mary took the broom and swept it clean, with some labor; and Charles put the
things in order.

Meanwhile the wind rose, and made the panes rattle; and the pattering of the
rain and hail rendered it still more dreary. The poor children's teeth
chattered, their fingers were stiff with cold, and they asked their mother if
they were not to have a fire today?

I should be very glad of a fire, she replied, but I have nobody to light it.
If then you do not choose to stand trembling, you must contrive to make a fire
yourselves.

Charles lighted some matches, and put them into the grate, but they went out:
he tried again, and sometimes the wood caught fire; but they had not placed the
cinders properly to admit air to draw up the blaze, so it went out again; the
wood did not burn. Mary assisted as well as she could; but as she had never
lighted a fire before, she did not know how to make it, so her help was of no
avail. They stood trembling and crying till Charles's master luckily came in,
and told them how they ought to place the wood, and pile the cinders lightly
over it, so as to admit the air; and not heave a quantity of fresh coals on,
which were damp, and would not readily burn, till the flame had some strength
to curl around them.

They were now comfortable and warm; the children rubbed their hands,
rejoicing, and saying, now we have lighted it, we will not soon stir out of the
warm room. But scarcely was Charles seated by the side of his master, when Mr.
Jones entered with some letters in his hand, which must instantly be taken to
the post.

Here, Charles, said he, run immediately; these letters must be carried to the
post office. Oh, dear father, cried he, I would gladly go; but see what
dreadful weather it is! it rains violently; and how it blows! may I wait till
the shower is over? Fie, fie, the letters must go: the post never waits for
good weather. Come, start up quickly, lest he should be gone. Then Charles ran
away, and came back quite wet: he would have changed his clothes, but had not
time; for his father sent him out again with some other messages.

Mary could not stay much longer by the fire, because she had several things to
do in the kitchen. When it struck one, they came again into the parlour, and
clapped their hands when they heard they were to have mutton-chops and
apple-dumplings for dinner, of which they were very fond. But, when they were
ready, the cloth was not laid, nor the salt-sellars brought in, nor the glasses
washed. Mrs. Jones had taken care to send her husband his dinner warm into his
little compting-house, where he had a great deal of business to do. But she
left the children to prepare the table for themselves; and, before every thing
was ready, full half an hour had slipped away. They now seated themselves at
table, but the mutton was cold, and the dumplings overdone, so that their
dinner did not taste half as good as they had expected.

After dinner they had still many things to do, and were so dreadfully fatigued
in the evening that they thro^ themselves on a sofa, scarcely able to move a
limb. I could not have believed, said Mary to Charles, that the servants had so
much to do: now I feel it; and I will never give them unnecessary trouble
again. Poor people! they are obliged to wait on us the whole day. When we are
sleeping comfortably, in our warm beds, they are forced to get up to light our
fires and sweep our rooms, that we may find every thing in order when we rise.
When it rains and blows hard, we sit in a warm comfortable room; but they must
go out, and not want till the shower is over.

In the winter, when it freezes so hard that their fingers are quite benumbed
with cold, they must go to the well for water. How often they are obliged to
eat their dinners cold; and sometimes through our fault, I fear. I have
frequently been ill-natured to them; I am now very sorry for it. I am, indeed,
very sorry!

And so am I, interrupted Charles, very sorry; for I have often forgotten
myself, and spoken very improperly to the servants. I must tell you what vexes
me: I lately called Henry a blockhead, because he forgot to clean my shoes,
though the poor fellow had been running about the whole day for my father: but,
believe me, I will never do it again; I will always be civil to Henry, Jenny
and Catharine, when I want them to do any thing for me. I will take care never
to speak hastily to them; and, above all, not to call them names. Poor Henry,
how he cried about his father! I wish I had not called him a blockhead! I shall
not be easy till I ask him to forgive me. Mary made the same resolution; and
they both longed for the return of the servants.

The next morning the two maids returned; but Catharine was sent with some
medicines to Henry's father; and, for three days, the children were obliged to
assist Jenny to do the work of the house; and at night they were so tired, that
they did nothing but wish for the next day, hoping that Catharine, at least,
would come back. The fourth day, Mary was standing at the window, thinking how
much work she should have to do the next day, and almost afraid to think of it,
when she heard some one ring the bell; she threw up the window -- it was
Catharine; and at the same time Henry ran up the steps. What joy! She forgot to
pull down the sash. Charles! Charles! cried she, Catharine is come! Henry is
come! They both ran to the street door; and, eagerly opening it, caught hold of
their hands, saying -- Welcome, welcome, dear Henry! good Catharine! we often
wished for you. Their pleasure was still greater, when Henry informed them that
his father would soon be well.

The next day every thing was again in order, and these children never
afterward behaved rudely to the servants; on the contrary, they were always
civil and good-natured to them, and not only pitied them, when they had more
work than usual to do, but endeavored to assist them; and resolved never more
to give unnecessary trouble to those who had at all times so many hardships to
bear.

AGAINST CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
AS Mr. Jones and his family were, one day walking through a field just sown
with wheat, James, all at once, sprang forward, bent down on the ground, then
started up again, threw his hat before him, as if to catch something, and then
darted forward again. Mary, who was curious to know what he had in his eye, ran
after him. At last he caught what he pursued, as Mary came up with him, and
both rejoiced at having taken a little prisoner. Meanwhile, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
were in conversation, and did not observe them. However, they were soon obliged
to stop, for they heard Mary scream out, in a terrified tone -- Dear James, ah!
do not do it; pray, pray hold your hand! And these entreaties having no effect,
she called to her father and mother for help. Mr. Jones could not imagine what
the children were disputing about, but waved his hand for them to come near
him. Dear father, said Mary, you do not know what a wicked boy James is! he has
just caught a field-mouse, and for all I can say, will cut its ears and tail
off. The poor mouse! it never did him any harm! he has already opened his
knife! only look at him. James came up smiling, holding the mouse in one hand,
and the knife in the other. What are you going to do? asked Mr. Jones.

James. I wish to punish this little thief, who steals the poor farmer's corn.


Mr. Jones. You are a cruel boy! fie, for shame. He who can torment a little
helpless animal, has certainly a bad heart. He accustoms himself by degrees to
cruelty, and at last he will find a savage joy in it; and after tormenting
animals, will not fail to torment men.


James. But could we not do very well without mice* They are insignificant
creatures, which are of no use in the world.


Mr. Jones. And is the watch, which your father has given you, something
insignificant?


James. By no means: I would not give it for a thousand mice.


Mr. Jones. Nevertheless, there appears in the structure of this little mouse's
body a thousand times more contrivance than in your watch. Look at this little
ear, through which it hears all that passes round it: through this organ it was
warned when you pursued it; and these pretty eyes, in which the forms of all
the objects before it are painted; and these sharp teeth, with which it can
gnaw the hardest grain; and these neatly turned paws; this skin as soft as
velvet. But you would be still more astonished if you could see its inside; if
you could see how every thing passes there to preserve life; how the little
stomach dissolves the food; how it separates the best juices, and carries them
by very fine channels still further; how flesh, blood, and bones are formed of
them. Put your hand on its breast, and feel how its heart beats, to push the
blood through its little veins. Your watch may be very ingeniously made; but do
you think it would ever produce any little watches? To this degree of
perfection they can never be carried. The most beautiful things made by man are
dead, and without sense: God alone can give life and reason.


James. But still mice do harm; they devour the poor peasant's wheat and rye.


Mr. Jones. The injury they do is very trifling. They commonly only gather up
the grains which the farmer lets fall; and the most part of it would probably
perish, if those little notable mice did not carry it to their nests. And
supposing they are led by hunger sometimes to steal a couple of ears out of a
sheaf of corn, what injury is that? the farmer will never miss it.


James. But I have heard they sometimes multiply so fast, that they often
ravage a whole field.


Mr. Jones. Then, indeed, it is time to destroy them; but without tormenting
them; and they should be put to death as quickly as possible. If the torments
they endured would bring back the wheat, or teach them honesty, there would be
some excuse for it; but this mouse will not be less a thief after you have cut
off its ears and tail.


James. Well then, I will kill the little thief before he does any more harm.


Ah! my dear James! cried Mary, do not kill it; give me the little mouse; I
pray you give it me! Can you deny me?

He gave it her, and, as soon as she got it, she let it run away, calling after
it -- Run, run, poor animal, till you find again your little children.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Jones were pleased with her. Mrs. Jones kissed Mary, and
said, good girl! you have perhaps saved the lives of four or five little mice,
who must have perished with hunger if their mother had been killed.

Mr. Jones still continued the subject. He said, that the smallest animals were
of some use; and that a good man ought not to kill the least worm, unless it
injured him, or that its death would be useful to him; but even in that case it
would be unjust and cruel to torment them.

OF FLOWERS.
FLOWERS are formed to please us, and it is for our sakes that they have
received their lovely appearances: no eye but ours can enjoy their beauties:
the animals never seem to be affected with pleasure, when they behold them; nor
do they ever stop to consider them with attention: they confound them with the
common herbage of the field; they trample on the most beautiful of the tribe,
and are perfectly insensible of this ornament of the earth. Whereas, man,
amidst a crowd of objects and riches that surround him, distinguishes and
pursues the flowers with a peculiar complaisance.

They have likewise an agreeable correspondence with our eyes, and a set of
powerful attractions, that invite us to approach them. Whenever we gather them,
they present us with new perfections in proportion to our regarding them with
nearer attention. The greatest part of them not only regale our view with the
beauty and arrangement of their colors, but gently delight our smell with an
excellent perfume; and, when they have gratified our senses with an innocent
satisfaction, the mind still discloses wonders in them, which ravish its
faculties.

When we have carefully surveyed the structure of a flower, we always find one
or more enclosures appointed for the reception of the seed: around that
enclosure is a set of chives sustaining several packets of powder, which they
scatter on all parts. The whole is encompassed with an empalement, or soft
robe, that unfolds and encloses, with a kind of precaution, according to the
disposition of the air. All these things convince us, that these parts, which
are disposed with so much art and regularity, and wither round the enclosure,
when the seed is formed, are instrumental in the generation of the seed. We are
likewise convinced of the original design of flowers: the Almighty, by
dispensing the verdure of the earth to mankind, has perpetuated his gifts
through all ages, in consequence of the commission he has given to flowers to
renew each plant from year to year, by infusing fertility into the seed.

This important and first design to procure immortality to plants, is not
inconsistent with a second, which is to delight the view of man. When God
created the flower, he thought fit to blend utility with pleasure. If he had
only appointed them to furnish each plant with a reproductive seed, he would
not have graced the generality of them with such lovely forms and engaging
colors; but they would have resembled roots, which, being only calculated to
impart nourishment to the plant in a situation of obscurity, were not provided
with any embellishment: whereas that great Being, who formed the flowers, seems
to have taken pleasure to shape and paint the greatest part of them in such a
manner, as qualifies them to regale the view of man, and adorn his habitation.
It is difficult to conceive how far the design to delight man with the beauty
and profusion of flowers has been extended. They rear their heads on the lofty
tops of trees, and are diffused through the herbage that creeps along the
earth; they embellish the valleys and the mountains, and the meadows are
enamelled with their colors; they are gathered from the skirts of woods, and
make their appearance even in deserts: the earth is a garden entirely covered
with their bloom.

The beauty of flowers never fails to inspire us with joy; sculpture imitates
them in its softest ornaments; architecture bestows the embellishment of leaves
and festoons, on those columns and fronts, which would otherwise be too naked.
The richest embroideries are little more than foliage and flowers; the most
magnificent silks are almost covered with these charming forms, and are thought
beautiful, in proportion as they resemble the lively tinge of natural flowers.

The festivals in the country are never celebrated without garlands, and the
entertainments of the polite are ushered in with flowers: a young bride, in all
the magnificence of her nuptial array, would imagine she wanted a necessary
part of her ornaments, if she did not improve them by a sprig of flowers: a
queen, amidst the greatest solemnities, though she is covered with the jewels
of the crown, has an inclination to this rural ornament; she is not satisfied
with mere grandeur and majesty, but is des^rous of assuming an air of softness
and gaiety, by the mediation of flowers.

We may, indeed, in some measure, consider it as a misfortune, that we should
ever be deprived of the view of beautiful flowers. But, alas! what more is the
beau^y of our fair readers, than the emblem of a short-lived flower.

The fairest forms that nature shows
Sustain the shortest doom:
Beauty is like the morning rose,
That withers in its bloom.
If the Divine Wisdom seems to have had complacency in the distribution of
those colors that array the flowers, what a new charm has it imparted to them
in their particular airs and forms! We observe some rising with a mei^ of
dignity and grandeur, while others, without the least pomp or ostentation,
attract the eye by the regularity of their lineaments. What an aspect of
majesty is visible in the growth of tulips! how elegant is the symmetry of
those pyramids, in which the lilies appear!

Flowers are not only intended to beautify the earth with their brilliant
colors; but the greatest part of them, in order to render the entertainment
more exquisite, diffuse a fragrance, that perfumes all the air around us; and
it should seem as if they were solicitous to reserve their odours for the
evening and morn, when walking is most agreeable; but their sweets are very
faint during the heat of the day, when we visit them least.

To conclude -- even flowers furnish us with instruction, and conduct us, by
gentle steps, to the knowledge of the First Being, who has thus condescended to
shape and paint them with so much delicacy, and to grace them with such a
variety of beauties. How amiable must he then be, who is the source of so many
charms in such an infinity of objects, to whom he constantly imparts the same
luster they disclosed, when they first appeared on the earth! and, if he has
been pleased to bestow so magnificent an array on creatures of such a trans^ent
duration, and who tomorrow will be withered and trodden under foot, like the
herbage of the field, what will he not do for us, who are the objects of his
complacency.

THE UTILITY OF RELAXATION.
WE do not expect that women should always utter gr^^^ sentences, no men
neither. It were inconsistent with the state of mankind. It cannot be expected
from philosophers of the h^st rank* nor, if it could, do I know that it would
be desirable. I am even inclined to believe that they who understand the art of
what has been termed trifling agreeably, have gained a very considerable point.
The frailty of human nature, and the infelicity of human life, require to be
relieved and soothed. There are many occasions, on which this is not to be done
by sage admonitions, or solemn reflections. These, to well-disposed minds, are
often highly solacing; but to dwell on them always were to strain the machine
beyond its powers. Besides, in fact, a seasonable diversion to anxiety, a
temporary forgetfulness of grief, is frequently a far better method to remove
it, than any direct application or labored remedy. To change the metaphor;
when the road proves rugged, or is in danger of growing tedious, one successful
method of beguiling it is, for travelers to cheer and amuse one another by the
play of fancy, and the facetiousness of mirth. But then the end of the journey
must not be forgotten. Because we are weak, there is no reason why we should be
silly. The brow of care may surely be smoothed without converting it into the
laugh of folly. While we indulge the recreation necessary for mortal, let us
maintain the temper requisite for immortal beings. To reconcile these two
things, and to blend them happily, seems the proper science of creatures on
their journey through time to eternity. From you, my gentle friends, we look
for every thing that, next to the diviner influence of religion, can soften the
inequality, and animate the dullness of the way.

THE FEMALE CHOICE. -- A TALE.
A YOUNG girl, having fatigued herself one hot day, with running about the
garden, sat herself down in a pleasant arbor, where she presently fell asleep.
During her slumber, two female figures presented themselves before her. One was
loosely habited in a thin robe of pink, with light green trimmings. Her sash of
silver gauze flowed to the ground. Her fair hair fell in ringlets down her
neck; and her head-dress consisted of artificial flowers interwoven with
feathers. She held in one hand a ball-ticket, and in the other a fancy-dress
all covered with spangles and knots of gay ribbon. She advanced smiling to the
girl, and, with a familiar air, thus addressed her: --

My dearest Melissa, I am a kind genius, who have watched you from your birth,
and have joyfully beheld all your beauties expand, till at length they have
rendered you a companion worthy of me. See what I have brought you. This dress
and this ticket will give you free access to all the ravishing delights of my
palace. With me you will pass your days in a perpetual round of ever varying
amusements. Like the gay butterfly, you will have no other business than to
flutter from flower to flower, and spread your charms before admiring
spectators. No restraints, no toils, no dull tasks, are to be found within my
happy domains. All is pleasure, life and good humor. Come then, my dear! Let
me put on you this dress, which will make you quite enchanting; and away, away,
with me!

Melissa felt a strong inclination to comply with the call of this inviting
nymph; but first she thought it would be prudent at least to ask her name. My
name, said she, is Dissipation.

The other female then advanced. She was clothed in a close habit of brown
stuff, simply relieved with white. She wore her smooth hair under a plain cap.
Her whole person was perfectly neat and clean. Her look was serious, but
satisfied; and her air was staid and composed. She held in one hand a distaff;
on the opposite arm hung a work-basket; and the girdle round her waist was
garnished with scissars, knitting-needles, reels, and other implements of
female labor. A bunch of keys hung at her side. She thus accosted the sleeping
girl: --

Melissa, I am the genius who have ever been the friend and companion of your
mother; and I now offer my protection to you. I have no allurements to tempt
you with like those of my gay rival. Instead of spending all your time in
amusements, if you enter yourself of my train, you must rise early, and pass
the long day in a variety of employments, some of them difficult, some
laborious, and all requiring some exertion of body or mind. You must dress
plainly, live mostly at home, and aim at being useful rather than shining. But,
in return, I will insure you content, even spirits, self-approbation, and the
esteem of all who thoroughly know you. If these offers appear to your young
mind less inviting than those of my rival, be assured, however, that they are
more real. She has promised much more than she can ever make good. Perpetual
pleasures are no more in the power of Dissipation, than of Vice or Folly, to
bestow. Her delights quickly pall, and are inevitably succeeded by languor and
disgust. She appears to you under a disguise, and what you see is not her real
face. For myself, I shall never seem to you less amiable than I now do; but, on
the contrary, you will like me better and better. If I look grave to you now,
you will hear me sing at my work; and when work is over, I can dance too. But I
have said enough: it is time for you to choose whom you will follow; and upon
that choice all your happiness depends. If you would know my name, it is
Housewifery.

Melissa heard her with more attention than delight; and though overawed by her
manner, she could not help turning again to take another look at the first
speaker. She beheld her still offering her presents with so bewitching an air,
that she felt it scarcely possible to resist; when, by a lucky accident, the
mask with which Dissipation's face was so artfully covered, fell off. As soon
as Melissa beheld, instead of the smiling features of youth and cheerfulness, a
countenance wan and ghastly with sickness, and soured by fretfulness, she
turned away with horror, and gave her hand unreluctantly to her sober and
sincere companion.

DIFFERENCE AND AGREEMENT; Or, SUNDAY MORNING.
IT was Sunday morning. All the bells were ringing for church, and the streets
were filled with people moving in all directions.

Here, numbers of well-dressed persons, and a long train of charity children,
were thronging in at the wide doors of a large handsome church. There, a
smaller number, almost equally gay in dress, were entering an elegant
meeting house. Up one alley, a Roman Catholic congregation was turning into
their retired chapel, every one crossing himself with a finger dipped in holy
water as he went in. The opposite side of the street was covered with a train
of Quakers, distinguished by their plain and neat attire, and sedate aspect,
who walked without ceremony into a room as plain as themselves, and took their
seats, the men on one side, and the women on the other, in silence. A spacious
building was filled with an overflowing crowd of Methodists, most of them
meanly habited, but decent and serious in demeanor; while a small society of
Baptists in the neighborhood, quietly occupied their humble place of assembly.

Presently the different services began. The churches resounded with the solemn
organ, and with the indistinct murmurs of a large body of people following the
minister in responsive prayers. From the meetings were heard the slow psalm,
and the single voice of the leader of their devotions. The Roman Catholic
chapel was enlivened by strains of music, the tinkling of a small bell, and a
perpetual change of service and ceremonial. A profound silence and unvarying
look and posture announced the self-recollection and mental devotion of the
Quakers.

Mr. Ambrose led his son Edwin round all these different assemblies as a
spectator. Edwin viewed every thing with great attention, and was often
impatient to inquire of his father the meaning of what he saw: but Mr. Ambrose
would not suffer him to disturb any of the congregations, even by a whisper.
When they had gone through the whole, Edwin found a great number of questions
to put to his father, who explained every thing to him in the best manner he
could. At length, says Edwin -- But why cannot all these people agree to go to
the same place, and worship God the same way?

And why should they agree? (replied his father.) Do you not see that people
differ in a hundred other things? Do they all dress alike, and eat and drink
alike, and keep the same hours, and use the same diversions?

Ay! but those are things in which they have a right to do as they please.

And they have a right, too, to worship God as they please. It is their own
business, and concerns none but themselves.

But has not God ordered particular ways of worshipping him?

He has directed the mind and spirit with which he is to be worshipped, but not
the particular form and manner. That is left for every one to choose, according
as suits his temper and opinions. All these people like their own way best, and
why should they leave it for the choice of another? Religion is one of the
things in which mankind were made to differ.

The several congregations now began to be dismissed, and the street was again
overspread with persons of all the different sects, going promiscuously to
their respective homes. It chanced that a poor man fell down in the street in a
fit of apoplexy, and lay for dead. His wife and children stood round him crying
and lamenting in the bitterest distress. The beholders immediately flocked
round, and, with looks and expressions of the warmest compassion, gave their
help. A Churchman raised the man from the ground, by lifting him under the
arms, while a Dissenter held his head, and wiped his face with his
handkerchief. A Roman Catholic lady took out her smelling-bottle, and
assiduously applied it to his nose. A Methodist ran for a doctor. A Quaker
supported and comforted the woman; and a Baptist took care of the children.

Edwin and his father were among the spectators. Here, said Mr. Ambrose, is a
thing in which mankind were made to agree.

THE FOUR SISTERS.
I AM one of four Sisters; and having some reason to think myself not well used
either by them or by the world, I beg leave to lay before you a sketch of our
history and characters. You will not wonder there should be frequent bickerings
amongst us, when I tell you that in our infancy we were continually fighting;
and so great was the noise, and din, and confusion, i^ our continual struggles
to get uppermost, that it was impossible for any body to live amongst us, in
such a scene of tumult and disorder. These brawls, however, by a powerful
interposition, were put an end to; our proper place was assigned to each of us,
and we had strict orders not to encroach on the limits of each other's
property, but to join our common offices for the good of the whole family.

My first sister (I call her the first, because we have generally allowed her
the precedence in rank,) is, I must acknowledge, of a very active sprightly
disposition; quick and lively, and has more brilliancy than any of us: but she
is hot: every thing serves for fuel to her fury, when it is once raised to a
certain degree; and she is so mischievous whenever she gets the upper hand,
that, notwithstanding her aspiring disposition, if I may freely speak my mind,
she is calculated to make a good servant, but a very bad mistress.

I am almost ashamed to mention, that notwithstanding her seeming delicacy, she
has a most voracious appetite, and devours every thing that comes in her way;
though, like other eager thin people, she does no credit to her keeping. Many a
time has she consumed the product of my barns and storehouses, but it is all
lost upon her. She has even been known to get into an oil-shop or
tallow-chandler's, when every body was asleep, and lick up, with the utmost
greediness, whatever she found there. Indeed, all prudent people are aware of
her tricks, and though she is admitted into the best families, they take care
to watch her very narrowly. I should not forget to mention, that my sister was
once in a country where she was treated with uncommon respect; she was lodged
in a sumptuous building, and had a number of young women of the best families
to attend on her, and feed her, and watch over her health; in short, she was
looked upon as something more than a common mortal. But she always behaved with
great severity to her maids, and if any of them were negligent of their duty,
or made a slip in their own conduct, nothing would serve her but burying the
poor girls alive. I have, myself, had some dark hin^s and intimations, from the
most respectable authority, that she will some time or other make an end of me.
You need not wonder, therefore, if I am jealous of her motions.

The next sister I shall mention to you, has so far the appearance of modesty
and humility, that she generally seeks the lowest place. She is indeed of a
very yielding easy temper, generally cool, and often wears a sweet placid smile
upon her countenance; but she is easily ruffled, and when worked up, as she
often is, she becomes a perfect fury. Indeed she is so apt to swell with sudden
gusts of passion, that she is suspected at times to be a little lunatic.
Between her and my first mentioned sister, there is a more settled antipathy
than between the Theban pai^; and they never meet without making efforts to
destroy one another. With me she is always ready to form the most intimate
union, but it is not always to my advantage. There goes a story in our family,
that when we were all young, she once attempted to drown me. She actually kept
me under a considerable time, and though at length I got my head above water,
my constitution is generally thought to have been essentially injured by it
ever since. From that time she has made no such atrocious attempt, but she is
continually making encroachments upon my property; and even when she appears
most gentle, she is very insidious, and has such an undermining way with her,
that her insinuating ar^^ are as much to be dreaded as open violence. I might
indeed remonstrate; but it is a known part of her character, that nothing makes
any lasting impression upon her.

As to my third sister, I have already mentioned the in offices she does me
with my last mentioned one, who ^ entirely under her influence. She is besides
of a very uncertain variable temper, sometimes hot, and sometimes cold, nobody
knows where to have her. Her lightness is even proverbial, and she has nothing
to give those who live with her more substantial than the smiles of courtier^.
I must add, that she keeps in her service three or four rough blustering
bullies with puffed cheeks, who, when they are let loose, think they have
nothing to do but (...) drive the world before them. She sometimes joins with
my sister, and their violence occasionally throws me into such a trembling,
that though naturally of a firm constitution, I shake as if I was in an ague
fit.

As to myself, I am of a steady solid temper; not shining indeed, but kind and
liberal, quite as lady Bountiful Every one tastes of my beneficence; and I am
of so grateful a disposition, that I have been known to return (...) hundred
fold for any present that has been made me. I feed and clothe all my children,
and afford a welcome home to the wretch who has no other home. I bear with
unrepining patience all manner of ill usage; I am trampled upon, I am torn and
wounded by the most cutting strokes; I am pillaged of the treasures hidden in
my most secret chambers; notwithstanding which, I am always ready to return
good for evil, and am continually subservient to the pleasure or advantage of
others; yet, so ungrateful is the world, that because I do not possess all the
airiness and activity of my sisters, I am stigmatized as dull and heavy. Every
sordid miserly fellow is called by way of derision one of my children; and if a
person, on entering a room, does but turn his eyes upon me, he is thought
stupid and mean, and not fit for good company. I have the satisfaction,
however, of finding that people always incline toward me as they grow older;
and that those, who seemed proudly to disdain any affinity with me, are content
to sink at last into my bosom. You will probably wish to have some account of
my person. I am not a regular beauty; some of my features are rather harsh and
prominent, when viewed separately; but my countenance has so much variety of
expression, and so many different attitudes of elegance, that those who study
my face with attention, find out continually new charms; and it may be truly
said of me, what Titus says of his mistress, and for a much longer space: For
five whole years, each day she meets my view;
Yet every day I seem to see her new.
Though I have been so long a mother, I have still a surprising air of youth
and freshness, which is assisted by all the advantages of well-chosen ornament;
for I dress well, and according to the season.

This is what I have chiefly to say of myself and my sisters. To a person of
your sagacity it will be unnecessary for me to sign my name. Indeed, one who
becomes acquainted with any one of the family, cannot be at a loss to discover
the rest, notwithstanding the difference in our features and characters.

DESCENT AND RISE OF THE EMPRESS CATHARINE OF RUSSIA.
"SHE was born at Runghen, a small village in Livonia, of very poor parents,
who were only boors, or vassals: her father and mother dying, left her very
young in great want; the parish clerk, out of compassion, took her home to his
house, where she learnt to read. Dr. Glack, minister of Marienburgh, seeing her
there, inquired of the clerk who she was; and being informed she was a poor
orphan, he had taken into his house out of charity, what from a wish to relieve
the poor clerk from a burden he was not well able to support, and a liking to
the little orphan, the Doctor took her home to his house, notwithstanding he
had a numerous family of his own. Here her company and opportunities for
improvement were better, and her deportment such, that she became equally
esteemed by the Doctor, his wife and children: her steady, diligent, and
careful attention to all their domestic concerns ingratiated her so much with
the Doctor and his wife, that they made no distinction between her and their
own children. She ever after showed her acknowledgment with the utmost
gratitude, in richly providing for all those, who could lay claim to any
alliance with the Doctor's family; nor did she forget her first benefactor, the
clerk of Runghen. In this happy situation she grew up to woman, when a Livonian
sergeant, in the Swedish service, fell passionately in love with her; she
likewise liking him, agreed to marry him, provided it could be done with the
Doctor's consent; who, upon inquiry into the man's character, finding it
unexceptionable, readily gave it. The marriage day was appointed, and indeed,
came; when a sudden order came to the sergeant that very morning, to march
directly with a detachment for Riga. Soon after this, General Baur, at the head
of an army, came before the town and took it, in the year 1742, when all the
inhabitants were made prisoners, and amongst the rest this lovely bride. In the
promiscuous crowd, overwhelmed with grief, and bathed in tears at her unhappy
fate, the General observing her, saw a je ne scai quoi in her whole appearance,
which attracted him so much, that he asked her several questions about her
situation; to which she made answer with more sense than is usual with persons
of her rank. He desired her not to be afraid, for he would take care of her,
and gave immediate orders for her safety and reception into his house, of which
he gave her the whole charge, with authority over all his servants, by whom she
was very much beloved, from her manner of using them: the General afterward
often said, his house was never so well managed as when she was with him.

Prince Menzikoff, who was his patron, seeing her one day at the General's,
observed something very extraordinary in her air and manner; and inquiring who
she was, and on what sooting she served him; the General told him what has been
already related, and with due ^ncomiums on the merits of her conduct in his
house. The Prince said, such a person would be of great consequence to him, for
he was then very ill served in that respect: to which the General replied, he
was under too many obligations to his Highness, to have it in his power to
refuse him any thing he had a mind to; and immediately calling for Catharine,
told her that was Prince Me^^ikoff, and that he had occasion for a servant like
herself; and that the Prince had it much more in his power to be a friend to
her than he had; adding, that he had too great a regard for her to wish to
prevent her receiving such a piece of honor and good fortune. She answered
only by a profound courtesy, which showed, if not her cons^nt, that it was not
in her power to refuse the offer that was made: in short, the Prince took her
home the same day, and she lived with him till the year 1744, when the Czar,
one day dining with the prince, happened to see her, and spoke to her: she made
a yet stronger impression on that monarch, who would likewise have her to be
his servant; from whence she rose to be Empress of Russia."

STORY OF A VIRTUOUS YOUNG LADY.
DURING my residence in Moscow, I was told the following particulars of the
Czar. He was born in the year 1672, and was married in 1690, at the age of
eighteen, to Ottokessa Lupochin, a beggar's daughter, by whom he had Prince
Alexis. Some time after, he turned her away, and shut her up in a monastery, on
suspicion of disloyalty to his bed. After the divorce, one Miss Mons, a very
beautiful young lady, born at Moscow of foreign parents, was much in favor
with the Czar; but when he was abroad, Mr. Keyserling, then resident at.
Moscow, as Envoy from the King of Prussia, paid his addresses to, and married
her.

The Czar was sometime after smitten with the charms of another beautiful young
lady, the daughter of a foreign merchant in this city: he first saw her at her
father's house, where he dined one day. He was so much taken with her
appearance, that he offered her any terms she pleased, if she would live with
him, which this virtuous young woman modestly refused; but, dreading the
effects of his authority, she put on a resolution, and left Moscow in the
night, without communicating her design even to her parents. Having provided a
little money for her support, she traveled on foot several miles into the
country, till she arrived at a small village, where her nurse lived with her
husband and their daughter, the young lady's foster sister, to whom she
discovered her intention of concealing herself in a wood near that village: and
to prevent any discovery, she set out the same night, accompanied by the
husband and daughter. The husband being a timber man by trade, and well
acquainted with the wood, conducted her to a little dry spot in the middle of a
morass, and there he built a hut for her habitation. She had deposited her
money with her nurse to procure little necessaries for her support, which were
faithfully conveyed to her at night, by the nurse or her daughter, by one of
whom she was constantly attended in the night time.

The next day after her flight, the Czar called at her father's to see her;
and, finding the parents in anxious concern for their daughter, and himself
disappointed, fancied it a plan of their own concerting. He became angry, and
began to threaten them with the effects of his displeasure, if she was not
produced: nothing was left to the parents but the most solemn protestations,
with tears of real sorrow running down their cheeks, to convince him of their
innocence, and ignorance what was become of her; assuring him of their fears
that some fatal disaster had befallen her, as nothing belonging to her was
missing, except what she had on at the time. The Czar, satisfied of their
sincerity, ordered great search to be made for her, with the offer of a
considerable reward to the person who should discover what was become of her;
but to no purpose. The parents and relations, apprehending she was no more,
went into mourning for her.

Above a year after this, she was discovered by accident. A Colonel, who had
come from the army to see his friends, going a hunting into that wood, and
following his game, through the morass, he came to the hut, and looking into
it, saw a pretty young woman in a mean dress. After inquiring of her who she
was, and how she came to live in so solitary a place, he found out at last that
she was the lady whose disappearance had made so great a noise. In the utmost
confusion, and with the most fervent entreaties, she prayed him, on her knees,
that he would not betray her. To which he replied, that he thought her danger
was now past, as the Czar was then otherways engaged; and that she might with
safety discover herself, at least to her parents, with whom he would consuit
how matters should be managed. The lady agreed to his proposal; and he sat out
immediately, and overjoyed her parents with the happy discovery. The issue of
their deliberations was to consult Madam Catharine (as she was then called) in
what manner the affair should be opened to the Czar. The Colonel went also upon
this business, and was advised by Madam to come next morning, and she would
introduce him to his Majesty, when he might make the discovery, and claim the
promised reward. He went according to appointment; and, being introduced, told
the accident by which he had discovered the lady, and represented the miserable
situation in which he found her, and what she must have suffered by being so
long shut up in such a dismal place, from the delicacy of her sex. The Czar
showed a great deal of concern that he should have been the cause of all her
sufferings, declaring that he would endeavor to make her amends. Here Madam
Catharine suggested, that she thought the best amends his Majesty could make,
was to give her a handsome fortune, and the Colonel for a husband, who had the
best right, having caught her in pursuit of his game. The Czar, agreeing
perfectly with Madam Catharine's sentiments, ordered one of his favorites to
go with the Colonel, and bring the young lady home; where she arrived, to the
inexpressible joy of her family and relations, who had all been in mourning for
her. The marriage was under the direction and at the expense of the C^, who
himself gave the bride to the bridegroom; saying that he presented him with one
of the most virtuous of women; and accompanied his declaration with very
valuable presents, besides settling on her and her heirs three thousand rubles
a year. This lady lived highly esteemed by the Czar and every one who knew her.
Besides t^^ concurring reports of other people, I had the story from her own
mouth.

ANECDOTES OF SMITH, A GERMAN ARTIST.
SOME years ago, while professor Krahe was superintendant of the gal^y of
paintings, he received a visit from a young ^a^er of the town; who, after a
short introduction, took a book out of his pocket, which he presented to Mr.
Krahe, expressing a desire that he would purchase it. The superintendant found,
upon examination, that it was a prayer book, ornamented in the ancient style of
religious foppery, with a number of colored figures and engravings. It was the
one which the Elector Clement Augustus, of Cologne, had ordered to be
published, and was become very scarce and valuable. The professor inquired
whence he had it? and the young man answered with a modest blush, that it was a
copy from one he had borrowed. "By whom?" "By myself," rejoins the youth. Upon
a close examination, Mr. Krahe could scarcely distinguish the copy from the
original. He could not conceal his surprise, and asked why he did not practice
engraving, rather than continue a baker? The youth answered, that it was the
wish of his soul; but his father having a numerous family, could not afford the
expense of suitable instructions. "I design to travel," adds he; "but as my
father cannot furnish the means, and as I knew that you was fond of drawings, I
was emboldened to make this application to you, in hopes that you would
purchase the copy, to furnish immediate help, and I must trust to my industry
and good fortune for future advancement."

"Call here tomorrow, without fail," says Mr. Krahe, with an emphasis that
manifested pleasure and astonishment.

Early the next morning, the professor called upon an intimate friend at
Keysersworth, a few miles from Dusseldorff, of which place the young man was a
native.

This friend, with the power, had the disposition to do good. Krahe told him
the story, showed him the workmanship, and begged him to lend the young artist
two hundred crowns. "He will, doubtless," adds he, "become, in a few years, a
distinguished engraver, and be able to reimburse you. I will be security for
the payment."

"I take no security," answered his friend; and he advanced three hundred
crowns.

Krahe returned to the astonished and transported baker with the money. He
quitted the oven, learned geometry and perspective, applied to drawing
according to the rules of the art, and acquired a competent knowledge of
history.

After assiduous application, for the space of two years, the young man had
made such rapid progress, that Mr. Krahe advised him to quit Dusseldorff, where
no further improvement was to be expected, and visit Paris, promising him a
letter of introduction to Mr. Wills, a celebrated engraver in that metropolis.

Smith (for this was the young man's name) put his advice into execution; and,
in order to economize his little store, he traveled on foot from Dusseldorff
to Paris. But unfortunately, he fell ill immediately upon his arrival; and,
although he applied to a monastery, where he was hospitably received, and
carefully attended, yet incidental expenses, during an illness of some
continuance, had entirely exhausted his little store. Upon his recovery, that
delicate kind of pride, which so frequently accompanies true genius, forbade
his making application to Mr. Wills, while he must appear an indigent beggar.

One day, as he was walking, pensively in the streets, his mind occupied with
his unfortunate situation, he was met by two soldiers of the Swiss guards; one
of whom accosted him with the inquiry, "Young man, are you not a German?" --
"Yes." -- "From whence?" -- "From Keysersworth, near Dusseldorff." -- "You are
my countryman. -- What do you do here?" Smith related to him the particulars of
his history; adding, that a long illness had exhausted a large portion of his
time, and all his money; and that he could not support the idea of being
troublesome to any one. The soldiers advised him to enlist, assuring him that
the service was not severe, and that he would have leisure to follow the bent
of his genius. Smith accepted the proposition, was introduced to the captain of
the regiment, was enlisted for four years, and shortly after was introduced to
Mr. Wills, by the captain himself. As much time was indulged to him, as the
nature of the service could possibly admit, to pursue his favorite object,
under Mr. Wills. He continued in this situation the four years, when he
received his dismission.

Finding that he was in the line of improvement, he continued at Paris two
years longer, applying himself, with the utmost diligence, to the art of
engraving: at the expiration of which term, he returned home, with the best
attestations concerning his talents, industry, and moral conduct.

Professor Krahe received him with open arms, was charmed with the progress he
had made, and engaged him to work in the cabinet. He continued to work under
the inspection of the professor, about two years, conducting himself in such a
manner, as to gain upon the affections of his patron.

It was about this period, that the professor invited our artist to an
entertainment, where several of his friends were to be present. He met his
friends, and was entering into the joys of convivial conversation, when he was
informed that the entertainment was in honor of a stranger. But alas! this
stranger was the destined husband of the professor's eldest daughter; --
beautiful, in his eyes as an angel; and wise, in his judgment, as the goddess
of wisdom. He made as precipitate a retreat as decency would permit, and left
the brisk glass and jovial song to circulate among the happy.

The next morning he returned to the cabinet with the utmost dejection of mind
and countenance. This sudden change was noticed by his benefactor, who inquired
into the cause. Smith, in confused expressions, and with faultering voice,
confessed that he had fallen deeply in love with that very daughter who was
shortly to be in the possession of another.

"Have you intimated to my daughter the strength of your affections?"

"Never," answered the noble youth; "not in the most distant manner. Could I,
without title, fortune, or pretensions of any kind, be so base as to speak of
love to the daughter of my friend, my patron, my benefactor? I was contented to
see her, and was careful to conduct myself in such a manner, that no suspicions
might arise, to debar me of that happiness; and now I learn, that I am shortly
to be deprived of the only satisfaction to which I dared to aspire."

The benevolent professor tried his utmost to soothe and comfort him; assured
him of the strength of his affection; that he loved him as his own child: but
warned him to subdue his love for Henrietra; expatiating upon the criminality,
circumstanced as they were, of indulging the passion.

The poor young man admitted the force of the argument, and promised to obey.
But the struggle was too much for his constitution. He fell ill, and continued
in a dangerous state upwards of four months. Mr. Krahe paid him every
attention, and gave him every consolation in his power. But, in all their
interviews, the name of Henrietta was never mentioned. His lamentable
situation, however, could not be concealed from her. She sympathized with, and
most sincerely pitied him; but, though "pity is so near akin to love," duty
and honor interposed a barrier between them.

The intended husband returned to his parents; and it was not difficult to
perceive, from the tenor of his letters, that certain objections were started
by them to the union. Although he dared not to express his own sentiments fully
upon this occasion, yet Henrietta divined the^, and gave him full power to
follow the genuine bent of his own inclinations, renouncing every claim upon
his promise. The answer was correspondent to her expectations; and, allowing a
short interval for the suppression of the chagrin, which the injured pride of
every young lady must suffer in such delicate situations, she permitted the
sufferings of Smith to engage more of her thoughts, generously indulged her
compassion, until she found it blended with affection; and, finally, addressed
her father thus: "Sir, I know it has been your wish to have Smith for your
son-in-law -- every obstacle is removed. Tell him that Henrietta will be his,
if she can promote his ^^licity."

The joyful father informed him of this declaration in his favor: But the good
news was as like to have proved fatal as his despair. Recovering from his
emotion, and leaning on the arm of his benefactor, he was conducted to the
generous object of his passion; and, by passing the evening in her company, he
was cheered, comforted, and restored.

But how great was the surprise of every one, wh^^ they learned, the next
morning, that the lover had l^^^ the town, in a carriage with four horses, and
had carried his plates and drawings with him! -- What astonishment to Krahe! --
What a thunderstroke to poor Henrietta*

This was so apparently the act of a disordered brain, that his return was
dreaded as much as his flight was lamented. Nor did they receive a single line
in the interval, to remove their doubts. On the ninth day ^e returned from
Munich, with an order for a pension of six hundred florins per annum, to be
paid to Smith by the treasurer of the palatinate.

He had been to throw himself at the feet of the Elector Palatine. He
discovered to him his love, his situation; showed him the certificates of his
conduct, and the specimens of his workmanship. The heart of the Elector was
moved, and he gave him the pension.

"Now, Sir," said the generous hearted Smith, "I am more worthy of my
Henrietta."

See there, my friend, in one short history, the eulogium of numbers! -- I
beseech you to make due comments upon the excellent character of our artist,
the hero of the piece -- upon the benevolence of the professor -- his friend,
of Keysersworth -- the monks in the convent -- the two soldiers, with their
captain -- the engraver Wills -- the Elector Palatinate -- and the amiable
Henrietta; and then revert to my proposition, that the private history of
individuals would, in general, give us more favorable ideas of human virtue,
and of human happiness, than those are apt to imagine, who direct their chief
attention to the ambition of the great, and the subversion of empires.
Numberless are the instances, where individuals emerge from obscurity, and act
a conspicuous part on the theater of life. We behold and applaud the actor,
without adverting to the different stages through which he must have passed,
before he was prepared for this honorable exhibition, and how far he must have
been assisted, in each stage, by those around him.

Go to, ye libellers of your species! ye defamers of God's most perfect
workmanship below! ye that delight to sketch out figures with charcoal, add
horns, a tail, and cloven feet to your sketch, and call it human! Man is
naturally a friend to man. Adventitious circumstances may suppress this kindly
temper, until the most contracted selfishness is deemed a system of genuine
prudence! Tyranny may depress the mind, until it be rendered incapable of one
virtuous exertion! False theology, by representing the heart as naturally
vicious and depraved, may destroy the choicest springs of action; may persuade
us that to act the knave or fool, is merely to act in character: whereas a
consciousness that we are capable of doing much good -- a conviction that we
are naturally disposed to do good -- that the instinct was given us, that we
might become the active instruments of the divine benevolence -- an instinct so
strong, that it is deemed inhuman to stifle its impulse; these are admirably
calculated to quicken the disposition, improve the habit, and extend the
effects.

CHARACTER OF MARY STUART, QUEEN OF SCOTS.
SUCH was the melancholy fate of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, in the
forty-fifth year of her (...) Her abilities were an honor to her birth, which
(...) most illustrious. Her virtues were great; her mi^^tunes greater. While
she was capable of profo^^^ views, and a bold policy, she was firm and
strenuo^^ Her understanding was clear, her judgment penetrati^^ her spirit
lofty, her application vigorous. But she was called to the exercise of royalty,
in an unhappy and (...) critical period. The troubles of the reformation (...)
confirmed the turbulence of her nobles; and she had b^^ accustomed to the
orderly government, and the refin^^ and seducing manners of France. The zeal of
her p^^ple for the new opinions was most passionate; and s^^ was attached to
the ancient religion with a keenness t^^^ excited their fears. Her prime
ministers, though able and popular, were destitute of integrity and patriotism;
and a conspiracy to disturb her peace, and to accomplish her ruin, was formed
early by an imperious rival, who, to exorbitant power and immense wealth, added
the singular felicity of being directed by statesmen devoted to her purposes,
and possessed of the greatest talents. Wi^^ the happiest intentions; with
public spirit and love of justice; with moderation, liberality and splendour,
she attained not the praise of true glory. Circumvented by the treachery of
smiling and corrupted counselors, and e^posed to the unceasing hatred and
suspicions of turbulen^ ecclesiastics, she perpetually experienced the miseries
of disappointment, and the malignity of detraction. With great capacity for
business, she was unsuccessful in affairs. Infinitely amiable in her private
deportment, she enjoyed not tranquillity and happiness. She was candid and
open, engaging and generous. Her manners were gentle, her temper cheerful, her
conversation easy and flowing, her wit polite, her information various, her
taste elegant. But her husbands, like her courtiers, were eager to interrupt
her prosperity and enjoyments; and while her administration was deformed with
disasters and faction, her domestic life was embittered with disquietudes and
sorrow. With every claim to felicity, she was exposed to all the crosses of
fortune; and her form, which gave a splendor to her rank, her abilities, her
virtues, and her accomplishments, served to ennoble her afflictions. The
incomparable beauty and expression of her countenance, the exquisite propriety
of her stature, and the exact symmetry of her shape, attracted and fixed the
admiration of every beholder. In her air, her walk; her gesture, she mingled
majesty and grace. Her eyes, which were of a dark gray, spoke the situations
and sensibility of her mind; the sound of her voice was melodious and
affecting; and her hair, which was black, improved the brightness of her
complexion. To give the greatest luster to her person, she took a full
advantage of the adventitious aids of dress. She discovered an inexhaustible
fancy in the richness and variety of her garments. She delighted in jewels and
precious stones; and she was anxiously curious in the fineness and fashion of
her linen. But while her mind and her person were so perfect and so alluring,
she was not exempted from frailties. Though capable of dissimulation, and
acquainted with the arts of management and address, she did not sufficiently
accommodate herself to the manners of her people. Her respect for her religion
was too fond and doting, to consist with the policy and the dignity of a great
sovereign. In her counselors she uniformly reposed too unbounded a confidence;
and from the softness of her nature, she could be seduced to give them her
trust even after their demeanor was equivocal and suspicious. Her clemency was
not guided by prudence, and was generally repaid with ingratitude and insult.
To the protestant clergy, whose insolence was inordinate and seditious, she
conducted herself, sometimes with a passion that was unbecoming, and sometimes
with a remissness that detracted from her consequence. A determined contempt or
a vigorous severity would have suited better with her royal condition. She
received her impressions with too much vivacity; and from the delicacy of her
organization, she was disposed to that spirit of caprice which is in some
measure characteristic of her sex; but which, though often pleasant and
delightful in the still and endearing intercourse of private life, betrays in
public concerns the suspicion of inconstancy and indiscretion. Her faults,
however, were the result of amiable weaknesses; and they excite regret rather
than indignation. The most unpardonable error of her life, was the romantic
imprudence with which she ventured into England, and entrusted herself to the
power of Elizabeth. By courage and perseverance she might have defeated the
turbulence and ambition of her nobles; and experience and time would have
opened to her all the arts of government. But by this fatal step she involved
herself in difficulties which she was never able to surmount. Eliz^abeth, to
whom her abilities and beauty were a source of the most unrelenting jealousy
and anger, embraced with a ferocious ardour the opportunity of humbling her
completely as a Queen and as a woman. She was exposed to all the practices of a
cunning and a wicked vengeance. The vilest calumnies, the most insulting
mortifications, the most studied barbarities, were practiced against her. She
was made to exchange a kingdom for a prison! An inclement and suspicious
adversary, who dreaded to encounter her when at liberty, tarnished the glory of
an illustrious reign by trampling upon her scepter, while she was a captive.
The rivalship of beauty, still more perhaps than of talents, softered the
resentments of Elizabeth; and while she made Mary to suffer under her power,
she found the most exquisite delight in overturning the dominion of her charms.
It pleased her, to the greatest degree, that the beauty of the Scottish
Princess should waste itself in solitude; that she should be kept at a distance
from admiration and homage; and that she should never experience, in any
fortunate alliance, the melting tenderness, and the delicate sensibilities of
connubial love. During the long period, which passed from the flight of Mary
into England till her death, her miseries were intense, piercing and
uninterrupted. The bitter cup of her fortune, which often overflowed, never
ceased to be full. But though agonizing with constant afflictions, and though
crowned with thorns, she still remembered that she was a Queen, and maintained
the elevation and the dignity, which became her. To overwhelm her with distress
and anguish, Elizabeth scrupled not to insult and to violate the most
established principles of law and justice, the honor of hospitality, the
reverence of her sex, the holiness of religion, the solemnity of engagements,
the ties of relation, the feelings of humanity, the sanctity of innocence, and
the majesty of Kings. But no insolence of tyranny, no refinement of anger, and
no pang of woe could conquer or destroy her greatness and her fortitude. Her
mind, which grew in its powers under struggles and calamity, seemed even to
take a strain of vigor from the atrocious passions of her rival; and during
her lamentable captivity, and in her dying scene, she displayed a magnanimity
and a heroism, that perhaps may have been equalled, but which has never been
surpassed in any age, or in any nation.

STORY OF AMELIA NEVIL -- FOUNDED IN FACT.
IT was the custom of Mrs. Wormwood to profess the most friendly solicitude for
female youth, and the highest admiration of beauty: she wished to be considered
as their patroness, because such an idea afforded her the fairest opportunities
of secretly mortifying their insufferable presumption. With a peculiar
refinement in malice, she first encouraged, and afterward defeated, those
amusing matrimonial projects, which the young and the beautiful are so apt to
entertain. The highest gratification which her ingenious malignity could
devise, consisted in torturing some lovely inexperienced girl, by playing upon
the tender passions of an open and unsuspect^^^ heart.

Accident threw within her reach a most tempting subject for such fiend-like
diversion, in the person of Amelia Nevil, the daughter of a brave and
accomplished officer, who, closing a laborious and painful life in very
indigent circumstances, had left his unfortunate child to the care of his
maiden sister. The aunt of Amelia was such an old maid as might alone suffice
to rescue the sisterhood from ridicule and contempt. She had been attached, in
her early days, to a gallant youth, who unhappily lost his own life in
preserving that of his dear friend, her brother: she devoted herself to his
memory with the most tender, unaffected, and invariable attachment; refusing
several advantageous offers of marriage, though her income was so narrow, that
necessity obliged her to convert her whole fortune into an annuity, just before
the calamitous event happened, which made her the only guardian of the poor
Amelia. This lovely but unfortunate girl was turned of fourteen on the death of
her father. She found, in the house of his sister, the most friendly asylum,
and a relation, whose heart and mind made her most able and willing to form the
character of this engaging orphan, who appeared to be as highly favored by
nature as she was persecuted by fortune. The beauty of Amelia was so striking,
and the charms of her lively understanding began to display themselves in so
enchanting a manner, that her affectionate aunt could not bear the idea of
placing her in any lower order of life: she gave her the education of a
gentlewoman, in the flattering and generous hope that her various attractions
must supply the absolute want of fortune, and that she should enjoy the delight
of seeing her dear Amelia settled happily in marriage, before her death exposed
her lovely ward to that poverty, which was her only inheritance. Heaven
disposed it otherwise. This amiable woman, after having acted the part of a
most affectionate parent to her indigent niece, died before Amelia attained the
age of twenty. The poor girl was now apparently destitute of every resource,
and exposed to penury, with a heart bleeding for the loss of a most indulgent
protector. A widow lady of her acquaintance very kindly afforded her a refuge
in the first moments of her distress, and proposed to two of her opulent
friends, that Amelia should reside with them by turns, dividing her year
between them, and passing four months with each. As soon as Mrs. Wormwood was
informed of this event, as she delighted in those ostentatious acts of apparent
beneficence, which are falsely called charity, she desired to be admitted among
the voluntary guardians of the poor Amelia. To this proposal all the parties
assented; and it was settled that Amelia should pass the last quarter of every
year, as long as she remained single, under the roof of Mrs. Wormwood. This
lovely orphan had a sensibility of heart, which rendered her extremely grateful
for the protection she received, but which made her severely feel all the
miseries of her dependence. Her beauty attracted a multitude of admirers, many
of whom, presuming on her poverty, treated her with a licentious levity, which
always wounded her ingenuous pride. Her person, her mind, her manners, were
universally commended by the men; but no one thought of making her his wife.
"Amelia," they cried, "is an enchanting creature; but who in these times, can
afford to marry a pretty, proud girl, supported by charity?" Though this
prudential question was never uttered in the presence of Amelia, she began to
perceive its influence, and suffered the painful dread of proving a perpetual
burden to those friends, by whose generosity she subsisted: she wished a
thousand times that her affectionate aunt, instead of cultivating her mind with
such dangerous refinement, had placed her in any station of life, where she
might have maintained herself by her own manual labor: she sometimes
entertained a project of making some attempt for this purpose; and she once
thought of changing her name, and of trying to support herself as an actress on
one of the public theaters; but this idea, which her honest pride had
suggested, was effectually suppressed by her modesty; and she continued to
waste the most precious time of her youth, under the mortification of
perpetually wishing to change her mode of life, and of not knowing how to
effect it. Almost two years had now elapsed since the death of her aunt; and,
without any prospect of marriage, she was in her second period of residence
with Mrs. Wormwood. Amelia's understanding was by no means inferior to her
other endowments. She began to penetrate all the artful disguise, and to gain a
perfect and very painful insight into the real character of her present
hostess. This lady had remarked, that when Miss Nevil resided with her, her
house was much more frequented by gentlemen than at any other season. This,
indeed, was true; and it unluckily happened that these visitors often forgot to
applaud the smart sayings of Mrs. Wormwood, in contemplating the sweet
countenance of Amelia; a circumstance fully sufficient to awaken, in the
neglected wit, the most bitter envy, hatred and malice. In truth, Mrs. Wormwood
detested her lovely guest, with the most implacable virulence; but she had the
singular art of disguising her detestation in the language of flattery: she
understood the truth of Pope's maxim, "He hurts me most who lavishly commends;"
and she therefore made use of lavish commendation as an instrument of
malevolence toward Amelia; she insulted the taste, and ridiculed the choice,
of every new-married man, and declared herself convinced, that he was a fool,
because he had not chosen that most lovely young woman. To more than one
gentleman she said, you must marry Amelia; and, as few men choose to be driven
into wedlock, some offers were possibly prevented by the treacherous vehemence
of her praise. Her malice, however, was not sufficiently gratified by observing
that Amelia had no prospect of marriage. To indulge her malignity, she resolved
to amuse this unhappy girl with the hopes of such an event, and then to turn,
on a sudden, all these splendid hopes into mockery and delusion. Accident led
her to pitch on Mr. Nelson, as a person whose name she might, with the greatest
safety, employ as the instrument of her insidious design, and with the greater
chance of success, as she observed that Amelia had conceived for him a
particular regard.

Mr. Nelson was a gentleman, who, having met with very singular events, had
contracted a great but very amiable singularity of character. He was placed,
early in life, in a very lucrative commercial situation, and was on the point
of settling happily in marriage with a very beautiful young lady, when the
house in which she resided was consumed by fire. Great part of her family, and
among them the destined bride, was buried in the ruins. Mr. Nelson, in losing
the object of his ardent affection, by so sudden a calamity, lost for some time
the use of his reason; and when his health and senses returned, he still
continued under the oppression of the profoundest melancholy, till his fond
devotion to the memory of her, whom he had lost in so severe a manner,
suggested to his fancy a singular plan of benevolence, in the prosecution of
which he recovered a great portion of his former spirits. This plan consisted
in searching for female objects of charity, whose distresses had been
occasioned by fire. As his fortune was very ample, and his own private expenses
very moderate, he was able to relieve many unfortunate persons in this
condition; and his affectionate imagination delighted itself with the idea,
that in these uncommon acts of beneficence, he was guided by the influence of
that lovely angel whose mortal beauty had perished in the flames!

Mr. Nelson frequently visited a married sister who was settled in the town
where Mrs. Wormwood resided. There was also, in the same town, an amiable
elderly widow, for whom he had a particular esteem. This lady, whose name was
Melford, had been left in very scanty circumstances on the death of her
husband, and, residing at that time in London, she had been involved in
additional distress by that calamity to which the attentive charity of Mr.
Nelson was forever directed: he more than repaired the loss which she sustained
by fire, and assisted in settling her in the neighborhood of his sister. Mrs.
Melford had been intimate with the aunt of Amelia, and was still the most
valuable friend of that lovely orphan, who paid her frequent visits, though she
never resided under her roof. Mr. Nelson had often seen Amelia at the house of
Mrs. Melford, which led him to treat her with particular politeness, whenever
he visited Mrs. Wormwood; a circumstance on which the latter founded her
ungenerous project. She perfectly knew all the singular private history of Mr.
Nelson, and firmly believed, like all the rest of his acquaintance, that no
attractions could ever tempt him to marry; but she thought it possible to make
Amelia conceive the hope that her beauty had melted his resolution; and nothing
she supposed, could more effectually mortify her guest, than to find herself
derided for so vain an expectation.

Mrs. Wormwood began, therefore, to insinuate, in the most artful manner, that
Mr. Nelson was very particular in his civilities to Amelia; magnified all his
amiable qualities, and expressed the greatest pleasure in the prospect of so
delightful a match. These petty artifices, however, had no effect on the
natural modesty and diffidence of Amelia: she saw nothing that authorized such
an idea in the usual politeness of a well-bred man of thirty-seven; she pitied
the misfortune, she admired the elegant and engaging, though serious manners,
and she revered the virtues of Mr. Nelson; but, supposing his mind to be
entirely engrossed, as it really was, by his singular charitable pursuits, she
entertained not a thought of engaging his affection. Mrs. Wormwood was
determined to play off her favorite engine of malignity, a counterfeited
letter. She had acquired in her youth, the very dangerous talent of forging any
hand that she pleased; and her passion for mischief had afforded her much
practice in this treacherous art. Having previously and secretly engaged Mr.
Nelson to drink tea with her, she wrote a billet to Amelia, in the name of that
gentleman, and with the most perfect imitation of his hand. The billet said,
that he designed himself the pleasure of passing that afternoon at the house of
Mrs. Wormwood, and requested the favor of a private conference with Miss
Nevil, in the course of the evening; intimating, in the most delicate and
doubtful terms, an ardent desire of becoming her husband. Mrs. Wormwood
contrived that Amelia should not see the billet till just before dinnertime,
that she might not show it to her friend and confidant, Mrs. Melford, and by
her means detect its fallacy before the hour of humiliation arrived.

Amelia blushed in reading the note, and, in the first surprise of unsuspecting
innocence, gave it to the vigilant Mrs. Wormwood, who burst into vehement
expressions of delight, congratulated her blushing guest on the full success of
her charms, and triumphed in her own prophetic discernment. They sat down to
dinner, but poor Amelia could hardly swallow a morsel; her mind was in a
tumultuous agitation of pleasure and amazement. The malicious impostor,
enjoying her confusion, allowed her no time to compose her hurried spirits in
the solitude of her chamber. Some female visitors arrived to tea; and at length
Mr. Nelson entered the room. Amelia trembled and blushed as he approached her:
but she was a little relieved from her embarassment by the business of the
tea-table, over which she presided. Amelia was naturally graceful in every
thing she did; but the present agitation of her mind gave a temporary
awkwardness to all her motions: she committed many little blunders in the
management of the tea-table; a cup fell from her trembling hand, and was
broken; but the politeness of Mr. Nelson led him to say so many kind and
graceful things to her on these petty incidents, that, instead of increasing
her distress, they produced an opposite effect, and the tumult of her bosom
gradually subsided into a calm and composed delight. She ventured to meet the
eyes of Mr. Nelson, and thought them expressive of that tenderness, which
promised a happy end to all her misfortunes. At the idea of exchanging misery
and dependence for comfort and honor, as the wife of so amiable a man, her
heart expanded with the most innocent and grateful joy. This appeared in her
countenance, and gave such an exquisite radiance to all her features, that she
looked a thousand times more beautiful than ever. Mrs. Wormwood saw this
improvement of her charms, and, sickening at the sight, determined to reduce
the splendour of such insufferable beauty, and hastily terminate the triumph of
her deluded guest. She began with a few malicious and sarcastic remarks on the
vanity of beautiful young women, and the hopes which they frequently entertain
of an imaginary lover; but, finding these remarks produced not the effect she
intended, she took an opportunity of whispering in the ear of Amelia, and
begged her not to harbor any vain expectations; for the billet she had
received was a counterfeit, and a mere piece of pleasantry. Amelia shuddered
and turned pale: surprise, disappointment, and indignation, conspired to
overwhelm her. She exerted her utmost power to conceal her emotions; but the
conflict in her bosom was too violent to be disguised. The tears, which she
vainly endeavored to suppress, burst forth, and she was obliged to quit the
room in very visible disorder. Mr. Nelson expressed his concern; but he was
checked in his benevolent inquiries by the caution of Mrs. Wormwood, who said,
on the occasion, that Miss Nevil was a very amiable girl, but she had some
peculiarities of temper, and was apt to put a wrong construction on the
innocent pleasantry of her friends. Mr. Nelson observing that Amelia did not
return, and hoping that his departure might restore the interrupted harmony of
the house, took an early leave of Mrs. Wormwood, who immediately flew to the
chamber of Amelia, to exult like a fiend over that lovely victim of her
successful malignity. She found not the person whom she was so eager to insult.
Amelia had indeed retired to her chamber, and passed there a very miserable
half hour, much hurt by the treacherous cruelty of Mrs. Wormwood, and still
more wounded by reflections on her own credulity, which she condemned with that
excess of severity so natural to a delicate mind in arraigning itself. She
would have flown for immediate consolation to her friend, Mrs. Melford; but she
had reason to believe that lady engaged on a visit; and she therefore resolved
to take a solitary walk for the purpose of composing her spirits: but neither
solitude nor exercise could restore her tranquillity; and, as it grew toward
evening, she hastened to Mrs. Melford's, in hopes of now finding her returned.

Her worthy old confidant was indeed in her little parlour alone, when Amelia
entered the room. The eyes of this lovely girl immediately betrayed her
distress; and the old lady with her usual tenderness exclaimed, "Good Heaven!
my dear child, for what have you been crying?" "Because," replied Amelia in a
broken voice, and bursting into a fresh shower of tears, "because I am a fool."
Mrs. Melford began to be most seriously alarmed; and, expressing her maternal
solicitude in the kindest manner, Amelia produced the fatal paper. "There,"
says she, "is a letter in the name of your excellent friend, Mr. Nelson; it is
a forgery of Mrs. Wormwood's, and I have been such an idiot as to believe it
real." The affectionate Mrs. Melford, who, in her first alarm, had apprehended
a much heavier calamity, was herself greatly comforted in discovering the
truth, and said many kind things to console her young friend. "Do not fancy,"
replied Amelia, "that I am foolishly in love with Mr. Nelson, though I think
him the most pleasing as well as the most excellent of men; and though I
confess to you, that I should certainly think it a blessed lot to find a refuge
from the misery of my present dependence, in the arms of so generous and so
benevolent a protector." "Those arms are now open to receive you," said a voice
that was heard before the speaker appeared. Amelia started at the sound, and
her surprise was not a little increased in seeing Mr. Nelson himself, who,
entering the room from an adjoining apartment, embraced the lovely orphan in a
transport of tenderness and delight. Amelia, alive to all the feelings of
genuine modesty, was for some minutes more painfully distressed by this
surprise, than she had been by her past mortification: she was ready to sink
into the earth, at the idea of having betrayed her secret to a man, from whom
she would have labored most to conceal it. In the first tumult of this
delicate confusion, she sinks into a chair, hides her face in her hankerchief.
Nelson, with a mixture of respect and love, being afraid of increasing her
distress, seizes one of her hands, and continues to kiss it without uttering a
word. The good Mrs. Melford, almost as much astonished, but less painfully
confused than Amelia, beholds this unexpected scene, with that kind of joy,
which is much more disposed to weep than to speak: and, while this little party
is thus absorbed in silence, let me hasten to relate the incidents which
produced their situation.

Mr. Nelson had observed the sarcastic manner of Mrs. Wormwood toward Amelia;
and, as soon as he had ended his uncomfortable visit, he hastened to the worthy
Mrs. Melford, to give her some little account of what had passed, and to
concert with her some happier plan for the support of this amiable, insulted
orphan. "I am acquainted, said he, with some brave and wealthy officers, who
have served with the father of Miss Nevil, and often speak of him with respect;
I am sure I can raise among them a subscription for the maintenance of this
tender, unfortunate girl: we will procure for her an annuity, that shall enable
her to escape from such malignant patronage, to have a little home of her own,
and to support a servant." Mrs. Melford was transported at this idea; and,
recollecting all her own obligations to this benevolent man, wept, and extolled
his generosity; and, suddenly seeing Amelia at some distance, through a bow
window, which commanded the street in which she lived, "Thank Heaven, she
cried, here comes my poor child, to hear and bless you for the extent of your
goodness." Nelson, who delighted most in doing good by stealth, immediately
extorted from the good old lady a promise of secresy: it was the best part of
his plan, that Amelia should never know the persons, to whom she was to owe her
independence. "I am still afraid of you, my worthy old friend, said Nelson;
your countenance or manner will, I know betray me, if Miss Nevil sees me here
tonight." -- "Well, said the delighted old lady, I will humor your delicacy;
Amelia will probably not stay with me ten minutes; you may amuse yourself, for
that time, in my spacious garden: I will not say you are here; and, as soon as
the good girl returns home, I will come and impart to you the particulars of
her recent vexation." -- "Admirably settled," cried Nelson; and he immediately
retreated into a little back room, which led through a glass door into a long
slip of ground, embellished with the sweetest and least expensive flowers,
which afforded a favorite occupation and amusement to Mrs. Melford. Nelson,
after taken a few turns in this diminutive garden, finding himself rather
chilled by the air of the evening, retreated again into the little room he had
passed, intending to wait there till Amelia departed; but the partition between
the parlours being extremely slight, he overheard the tender confession of
Amelia, and was hurried toward her by an irresistible impulse, in the manner
already described.

Mrs. Melford was the first who recovered from the kind of trance into which
our little party had been thrown by their general surprise; and she enabled the
tender pair, in the prospect of whose union her warm heart exulted, to regain
that easy and joyous possession of their faculties, which they lost for some
little time in their mutual embarrassment. The applause of her friend, and the
adoration of her lover, soon taught the diffident Amelia to think less severely
of herself. The warm-hearted Mrs. Melford declared that these occurrences were
the work of Heaven. "That (replied the affectionate Nelson) I am most willing
to allow; but you must grant that Heaven has produced our present happiness, by
the blind agency of a fiend; and, as our dear Amelia has too gentle a spirit to
rejoice in beholding the malignity of a devil converted into the torment of its
possessor, I must beg that she may not return, even for a single night, to the
house of Mrs. Wormwood." Amelia pleaded her sense of past obligations, and
wished to take a peaceful leave of her patroness; but she submitted to the
ardent entreaties of Nelson, and remained for a few weeks under the roof of
Mrs. Melford, when she was united at the altar to the man of her heart. Nelson
had the double delight of rewarding the affection of an angel, and of punishing
the malevolence of a fiend: he announced in person to Mrs. Wormwood his
intended marriage with Amelia, on the very night when that treacherous old maid
had amused herself with the hope of deriding her guest; whose return she was
eagerly expecting, in the moment Nelson arrived to say, that Amelia would
return no more.

The surprise and mortification of Mrs. Wormwood arose almost to frenzy: she
racked her malicious and inventive brain for expedients to defeat the match,
and circulated a report for that purpose, which decency will not allow me to
explain. Her artifice was detected and despised. Amelia was not only married,
but the most admired, the most beloved, and the happiest of human beings; an
event which preyed so incessantly on the spirit of Mrs. Wormwood, that she fell
into a rapid decline, and ended, in a few months, her mischievous and unhappy
life; a memorable example, that the most artful malignity may sometimes procure
for the object of its envy, that very happiness which it labors to prevent!

HISTORY OF MELETINA.
MELETINA is the accomplished daughter of opulent parents. Her mother died when
she was very young. Her father, a man of feeling and liberal mind, devoted
himself entirely to the education of his two lovely children, Meletina and her
brother, who, being nearly of an age, and equal in all the best gifts of
nature, grew up together in the tenderest affection. It happened that Meletina,
now turned of twenty, was on a distant visit, at the house of a female
relation, when she heard that her father, whom she loved most tenderly, was
attacked by a very dangerous disorder. The poor girl hastened home in the most
painful anxiety, which was converted into the bitterest distress, by her
finding, on her return, that her father was dead, and her brother confined by
the malignant distemper, which he had caught in his incessant attendance on the
parent they had lost. The utmost efforts were used to keep Meletina from the
chamber of her brother; but no entreaties could prevail on her to desert the
only surviving object of her ardent affection; and, despising the idea of her
own danger, she attended the unhappy youth, who was now delirious, with such
tender assiduity, that she would not permit him to receive either nourishment
or medicine from any hand but her own. The purity of her constitution, or the
immediate care of Providence, preserved the generous Meletina from infection,
and Heaven granted to her earnest prayers the endangered life of her brother;
but his recovery seemed rather designed as a trial of her fortitude than as a
reward of her tenderness: his bodily health was restored to him, but his mental
faculties were destroyed. The unhappy Meletina, in the place of a lively young
friend and a generous protector, found only a poor babbling idiot, whose
situation appeared to her the more deplorable, because, though he had utterly
lost a solid and a brilliant understanding, he seemed to retain all his
benevolent affections. By one peculiarity which attended him, she was
singularly affected; and perhaps it made her resolve on the extraordinary
sacrifice which she has offered to his calamity. The peculiarity I speak of was
this; he not only discovered great satisfaction in the sight of his sister,
though utterly unable to maintain a rational conversation with her, but if she
^eft him for any considerable time, he began to express, by many wild gestures,
extreme agitation and anxiety, and could never be prevailed on to touch any
food, except in the presence of Meletina. Many experiments were tried to quiet
his apprehensions on this point, and to relieve his sister from so inconvenient
and so painful an attendance. These experiments did not succeed; but two
medical friends of Meletina, who took a generous interest in her health and
happiness, engaged to correct this peculiarity in her poor senseless brother,
and convinced her that for his sake, as well as for her own, she ought to
acquiesce in some painful expedients for this purpose. Her understanding was
indeed convinced by their humane and judicious arguments, but her heart soon
revolted against them; and, after two or three severe but unsuccessful attempts
to correct the obstinate habit of the affectionate idiot, she determined to
irritate him no further, but to make an entire sacrifice of her own convenience
and pleasure to the tranquillity of this unfortunate being. She felt a tender
and melancholy delight in promoting his peace and comfort; but the time now
arrived in which the force and purity of her sisterly attachment was exposed to
a trial perhaps as severe as ever woman sustained. A year and some months had
now elapsed since the decease of her father, when a young soldier, of family
and fortune, who had made a deep impression on her youthful heart, returned to
England from a distant campaign. He was just recovered from a wound, which had
detained him abroad, and returned home in the ardent hope of being completely
rewarded for all his toils and sufferings, by the possession of his lovely
Meletina. She received him with all the frankness and warmth of a sincere and
virtuous affection: but, after they had given to each other a long and
circumstantial account of their past distresses, she answered his eager
proposal of immediate marriage by declaring, that she thought it her duty to
renou^ her fair prospect of connubial happiness, and to devote herself entirely
to that unfortunate brother, who existed only by her incessant attention: She
enumerated the many reasons that inclined her to such a painful sacrifice, with
all the simple and pathetic eloquence of angelic virtue. Her lover, who
possessed that melting tenderness of heart which often accompanies heroic
courage, listen^ to all her arguments with a silent though passionate
admiration; and, instead of attempting to detach (...) thoughts from the
deplorable condition of her brother, he offered to relinquish his own active
pursuits, to engage with her in any plan of sequestered life, and to take an
equal part in the superintendance of that hapless being who had so just a title
to their compassion and their ca^. This generous offer overwhelmed the tender
Meletina* For some time she could answer it only by weeping; (...) they were
tears of mingled agony and delight. (...) last she replied, "My excellent
friend, I shall now, and at all times, have the frankness to avow, that you are
extremely dear to me, and that I feel, as I ought to do the uncommon proof
which you are now giving me of the purest affection; but I must not suffer the
kindness and generosity of your heart to injure your happiness and glory. I
must not be your wife. The peculiarity of my situation calls for so painful a
sacrifice; but great sacrifices have great rewards. I feel that I shall be
supported by the noble pride, not only of discharging my duty, but of
preserving your tender esteem, which I should certainly deserve to forfeit, as
well as my own, if I did not resolutely decline your too generous proposal."
The affectionate young soldier endeavored to shake her resolution, by every
argument that the truth and ardour of his passion could possibly suggest.
Meletina was inflexible; and the utmost that her lover could obtain, was a
promise, that if, by attention, and time, she succeeded in her hope of
restoring the intellects of her brother, she would complete the scene of
general happiness, which that joyful event would occasion, by the immediate
acceptance of that hand which she now rejected only from the just scruples of
genuine affection. Having thus settled their very delicate contest, they
parted. The soldier rejoined his regiment; but, in spite of military
dissipation, continued for a long time to write very tender letters to the
generous Meletina. At last, however, whether his passion was diminished by its
despair of being gratified, or whether the purity of a chaste attachment is
incompatible with a martial life, while he was engaged in dangerous and distant
service, he was deeply involved in a very perplexing illicit intrigue, which
would probably have given him many years of disquietude, had not the chance of
war put an early period to his life. A musket-ball passed through his body; but
he lived long enough to write an affectionate parting letter to Meletina, in
which he confessed his frailties, extolled her angelic purity of heart, and
entreated her to do what he solemnly assured her he did himself -- consider
both the time and the manner of his death, not as a misfortune, but a blessing.
Meletina lamented him when dead, as she had loved him living, with the most
faithful tenderness: she mourned for him as for a husband; and though many
years have elapsed since his decease, a gray silk is to this day her constant
apparel. Nor is there any ostentation in this peculiarity of her dress; for her
attendance on her brother is still so uniform, that she never appears in
public, and indeed is never absent from her own house more than two or three
hours at a time. From habit, and the affectionate cast of her temper, she takes
a pleasure in the petty childish plays by which her hapless companion is
amused; and so far from sinking herself into a state of indolence or apathy,
she possesses great delicacy of manners, and all the strength and luster of a
refined understanding. She is now turned of fifty; and though her countenance
when she is silent, has an air of mild and touching melancholy, her
conversation is animated and cheerful. As her brother pleases himself by the
habit of rising and going to rest with the lark, she has the long winter
evenings entirely to herself; and at this season she has a great share of
social enjoyment, by receiving the visits of her selected friends. To these she
is remarkably open and unreserved, and has a peculiar pleasure in talking over
the extraordinary occurrences of her early life. This circle indeed is small,
though it is justly esteemed an honor to share the friendship of Meletina, and
those who possess it have the happiness of knowing perhaps the most singular
and most interesting of ancient virgins.

DESCRIPTION OF CASOS AND ITS INHABITANTS.
CASOS is one of the cyclades. It received its name from Caso, father of
Cleomachus. This little island sent a colony to Mount Casius, dependent on
Syri^* It is eighty stadia [three leagues] in circumference; on it is a town of
the same name, and round it several smaller islands.

The isle of Casos has suffered the common fate of the Archipelago. It is now
subject to the Turks, but they dare not inhabit it, because it has no fort.
They would be afraid of being made prisoners by the privateers of Malta, as has
happened to them more than once at Antiparos, and other places destitute of
fortresses. This fear is a most fortunate circumstance for the inhabitants, who
owe to that alone, the tranquillity, happiness, and liberty they enjoy.

The day after we cast anchor, I was impatient to go on shore. The boat
accordingly was launched, and we row^ toward the rocks which surrounded the
island, but were at a loss where to land. Every part of the shore was defended
by dangerous shoals, over which the foaming billows broke with great noise and
violence. On whichever side we cast our eyes, Casos appea^ed inaccessible. At
length one of the inhabitants, perceiving our embarrassment, came down from the
village, and pointed out to us, by waving his handkerchief, the place to which
we should direct our course. We reached the place, after coasting about a
league along the island. The ground here becomes lower, and forms a valley, at
the extremity of which a small basin has been dug for the reception of boats.
The entrance is only twelve feet wide, and very difficult of access, as it must
be passed through exactly in the middle. If the boat should touch the sides,
which are sharp rocks, it would be in great danger of being dashed to pieces.
Add to this that, when we arrived before the entrance, a violent swell was
ebbing out of it. The Casiot called one of his countrymen, and placing
themselves on each side, they made a sign to us to pull strong. As soon as our
boat had entered the dangerous pass, they guided it with long poles, to prevent
it from striking against the rocks, and thus conducted it into port. Through
this passage alone is it possible to get on shore in the island. The
inhabitants might widen it if they chose; but they prefer leaving it thus
dangerous, since, while it remains so, they are under little apprehension from
their enemies.

The Casiot who had shown us the harbor politely invited us to go up to the
village, and we followed him with pleasure. I was dressed in the French style,
with a sword, hat, and every other appurtenance of the dress of my nation. The
news of the arrival of strangers soon spread, and the women and children came
out of their houses, and waited for us at the top of the hill. They showed a
great deal of curiosity, and examined us attentively. When we passed them, they
all modestly cast down their eyes. Among the crowd there were some very
handsome. Several of them saluted us, wishing us a good day, saying, "You are
welcome!" and we answered them with the usual eastern expression -- "May the
day be happy for you and for your guests!"

The guide who conducted us was one of the principal inhabitants of the island.
He pressed me to step into his house, and introduced me into a hall, which,
though not magnificently furnished, was sufficiently provided with every thing
conducive to cleanliness and convenience. Around it was a sofa. He seated me on
a raised bench, and placed himself below, while breakfast was preparing. Soon
after, his wife and daughter appeared, with new-laid eggs, figs, and grapes.
The girl blushed at sight of a stranger, whose dress must, no doubt, appear to
her very extraordinary. Whilst we were breakfasting with a good appetite, and
my host was pouring me out some excellent wine in a large glass, most of the
women of the village came to pay him a visit. They saluted us, and seated
themselves without ceremony around the apartment. They had been brought by
curiosity, and soon began to whisper one another, and make their remarks on the
French dress. Europeans rarely land in this ^itary island; and the inhabitants,
accustomed to see nothing but bald heads, wrapped round with shawls, long robes
fastened with sashes, and venerable beards, could not but view with
astonishment a foreigner with lo^^ plaited hair, without mustachios, and
wearing a cocked hat, and short coat that came no lower than his knee^. They
appeared greatly struck with the contrast; and ^ half smile, which was
sometimes visible on their count^nances, was not improbably a sign they were
employ^^ in making satirical observations on the peculiarities of my habit,
while I, on my side, was no less amused with them. My attention was especially
engaged by two young females, who would have been acknowledged to be handsome,
even in Paris.

The least of the two had eyes full of fire, and fin^ black eyebrows, equally
arched. Her complexion was rather brown, but her features extremely animated.
Her cheeks, delicately rounded, were every instant adorned with fresh roses.
Her delicate little mouth seemed formed to say charming things. When she
smiled, teeth white as snow agreeably contrasted the vermillion of her lips;
and a most enchanting vivacity animated her whole countenance, which seemed to
sparkle with wit and repartee. Her ebon locks, fastened (according to the
manner of the country) to the crown of her head, fell negligently on a neck
which seemed of polished ivory. A bodice without sleeves, opening a little
toward the top* afforded a glimpse of the exact proportion of her beautiful
shape. A robe of the whitest and finest cotton, edged with a purple border four
fingers wide, and elegantly embroidered, descended to her feet, and her waist
was loosely girded by a sash which floated around her.

The second disputed with her the palm of beauty. Her shape was more elegant,
and her carriage more noble. Her eyes shone with a soft languor, and seemed
formed to inspire love and delight, while her long eyelashes modestly lowered,
concealed their splendour, as if she were afraid of betraying the secrets of her
soul. Her complexion was fairer; and her cheeks, less colored, displayed the
lily slightly tinctured with the rose. Her features, though scarcely so
expressive as those of her companion, had more regularity, and were models of
symmetry and just proportion. At the first glance she but just appeared what
may be called handsome; but on more mature consideration, the perfection of the
whole of her beauties enforced the highest admiration. The charms of the former
inspired a sudden joy, and it was impossible to look on her without pleasure:
those of the latter made less impression at the first view; but, on
examination, an irresistible attraction forced every heart of sensibility to
pay her the sincerest homage.

All the women, who honored us with their presence, were dressed in the same
manner. They all wore the jacket, the sash, and the long robe of cotton. The
only difference consisted in the embroidery, which varied according to their
different tastes, and in the manner of wearing their hair, which some of them
suffered to flow upon their shoulders in one or more tresses, while others
fastened it to the crown of the head, letting it fall down again upon the neck.
The two I have just mentioned, were not the only ones who were handsome, but
their beauty appeared to me the most attractive.

You may possibly imagine, madam, that, after the sad scenes to which I had
been for some time accustomed, my imagination was inflamed at the sight of
these lovely females, and that I have taken a pleasure in embellishing them.
That may indeed be the case; but if it be, the illusion was of some duration. I
passed eight days in the island, and would not wish to alter a single feature
in the portraits I have drawn. I have described what I saw, and what I felt. I
own to you, however, that my surprise was equal to my pleasure. I expected to
find, on this rock, only miserable slaves, groaning under the oppressions of
the Turks; instead of which, I met with a cheerful and happy people, who were
fortunate enough to be able to preserve their liberty amid the despotism and
tyranny with which they are surrounded.

Desirous of obtaining some knowledge of the island, ^ set out from the
village, and directed my course towa^^ the highest mountain, which I reached in
an hour's wa^^* From hence we may discover Carpathus, which appear^ to be at no
great distance, and extends from east to w^^^* In front of the village, three
little islands situated to (...) east, west, and north, form the extensive road
in whi^^ our vessel lay at anchor. They are uncultivated, (...) produce nothing
but brambles. Below the hill, from which I made my observations, stands a small
chap^^ surrounded by fig trees. Here begin a chain of hill^ that, bending into
a semicircle, leave in the middle ^ plain of a league in circumference, which
has been clea^ed out by the inhabitants, with infinite labor. Th^^ have torn
up large pieces of rock, and removed heaps (...) stones, with which they have
formed the walls of the i^closure. All this space is divided into compartment^
and shared among the Casiots. They sow barley and wheat here at the
commencement of the rainy season^ which lasts from October to February. The
rain is (...) continual in these months, but none falls in any other* the
remainder of the year the air is pure and serene, and both days and nights
continually fine and clear. The heats are moderated by the sea-breezes, and
beneath so beautiful a sky the inhabitants enjoy a delightful temperature, and
are almost strangers to every kind of disease. The sides of the hills are
covered with vineyards, the grapes of which produce a very agreeable wine. ^
could not help admiring the industry, with which th^^^ islanders have been able
to cultivate rocks, hardly cove^ed with a few inches of earth; and rejoiced in
the reflection that they were recompensed for their labors, and that the
island sufficed for their subsistence.

When I had satisfied my curiosity, I returned to the house of my host, where
they were waiting dinner for me. A hen, with rice, new-laid eggs, excellent
pigeons, some cheese, and a glass of good wine, made me amends for the
miserable repasts I had made on board. The men dined together, seated in a
circle on the carpet, and the women in a separate apartment. This is the
custom, and, though not in the French taste, I was obliged to co^form to it.
Toward the end of the meal, the cup was circulated from hand to hand. The
company drank to me, wishing me a prosperous voyage, and I returned the
compliment, by drinking health and happiness to the people of Casos. The guests
were beginning to grow m^^y, when the sound of musical instruments made us rise
from table.

About twenty young girls, dressed all in white, with flowing robes and plaited
locks, entered the apartment, and with them a young man who played on the lyre,
which he accompanied with his voice. Several of them were handsome, all healthy
and lively, and there were among them some, who even rivalled the two belies I
have already described. I must own, madam, that this s^one appeared to me
enchanting. The uniform dress of these nymphs, the modesty which heightened
their charms, their becoming bashfulness, their joyous but dec^^t merriment,
all contributed to make me almost imagine myself suddenly transported to the
island of Calypso. They bgan to range themselves in a ring, and invited me to
dance. I did not wait for many entreaties. The circle we formed is singular,
from the manner in which it is interwoven: the dancer does not give his hand to
the two persons next him, but to those next them, so that you have your hands
crossed before your neighbors, who are thus locked, as it were, in the links
of a double chain. This interweaving is not without pleasure. In the middle of
the circle stood the musician, who played and sang at the same time, while all
the dancers kept exact time in advancing, retreating or turning round him. For
myself, I followed where my partners led me, my mind being less occupied with
the dance, than with the charming females who composed it.

The next day I took a view of the village: it consists of about a hundred
houses, each of them inhabited by a single family: they are all of stone, built
very strong; and contain, in general, two or three lower parlours, with a
couple of rooms above. Each house has its oven and cistern, cut out of the
rock. The latter are filled during the rainy season, and the water is preserved
in them pure and limpid. Besides this, a hundred paces below the village is ^
fine spring, which flows the whole year.

I entered several houses, where I found the wom^^ employed in spinning and
embroidering, and some (...) ^king the fine line^^ wh^^h they wear. Their
fran^^ are small, but well ^ived, and they work with a gr^^^ deal of skill. I
every where met with industry, (...) and neatness. I afterward paid visits to
several of (...) girls I danced with the day before, and was received ^^ry
favorably. I entered into conversation with the^^ and inquired why so many
pretty women were to be s^^^ in the island, and so few men; for I had only met
wi^^ five or six. They answered that, during the spring, (...) summer, and part
of autumn, the men were out at (...) "They trade," said they, "to different
islands of the Archipelago, and return from time to time, to bring their
families the provisions they may stand in need (...) but only pass the winter
with them. They sow the la^^ in November, get in the harvest in March, and
immediately afterward return to sea. The produce of the island not being
sufficient for the maintenance of its inhabitants, they are forced to seek
supplies from other countries, with the assistance of which, if we are not
rich, we live at least in a comfortable mediocrity. The boys accompany their
fathers, and become sailors: while they are absent, we spin cotton, as you see,
and weave a part of it for their clothing and our own."

In these visits, I could not but admire the regularity and wisdom of this
little republic, the peace and harmony that reigned among its members, and,
above all, that cheerfulness and content, which was so visible in their
countenances. "Happy people!" said I to myself, "ambition and intrigue trouble
not your tranquillity; the thirst of gold has not corrupted your manners; the
quarrels, dissensions and crimes with which it has covered the earth are to
you unknown. Here no citizen, proud of his titles or his wealth, tramples under
fo^^ his humble countrymen; no cringing valet flatters the vices of his master;
man is equal to man, nor does the Casiot blush to debase himself before the
Casiot. Respect and mutual esteem unite you. Your enjoyments consist in the
pure pleasures which nature offers to all her children, and your happiness is
founded on the durable basis of mediocrity and equality!"

During my stay at Casos, a bark arrived, laden with rice, melon^,
po^^^ranatos, and various fruits. Immediately almos^ ^ll (...) women haste^^d
down the hill with the greatest ^^p^^^ence; some to m^et a father, others ^
husband, a brother, or a friend. I never witnessed stronger expressions of joy
and tenderness; they embraced them with transport, pressed them to their
bosoms, and thanked Heaven for once more restoring them to their anxious
wishes. Every token of the most heartfelt joy, every expression of the
tenderest love, was lavished on both sides. The scene was indeed most
affecting. These, said I to myself, are the ancient Greeks; such was their
lively imagination, ever ready to take fi^e, and such the exquisite
sensibility, which distinguished them from all the nations of the earth. Thi^
^ock has preserved them from the Turkish yoke, and (...) have retained their
ancient character.

The afternoon of this memorable day was dedicated to pleasure. The Casiot
Captain gave a little ball, and I accepted of his invitation. The hall was
filled with a number of lively girls, with their tresses perfumed, and dressed
in their handsomest boddices, their best embroidered sashes, and their whitest
gowns. Various rounds, such as I have before described, were performed. Two
lyres, and singers placed on a raised seat, animated the motions of the
dancers, and pleasure sparkled in every eye. The young m^n, who, had just
arrived, took their places at the side of their wives or mistresses, clasped
them round the waist in dancing, and felt the palpitation of their hearts,
while joy beamed in their faces. The young Greek females, with downcast eyes,
endeavored to conceal the pleasure they felt; but their blushes sufficiently
showed who were the objects of their affection. How great the pleasure of this
simple recreation! Each motion gave a new sensation of delight. Our artificial
dances may be infinitely more graceful, elegant, or majestic; but how cold are
they when compared to this joyous round; in those, vanity alone is gratified;
in these, heart speaks to heart, by a look, a smile, and, above every thing by
the touch. All-wise nature has implanted the (...) of happiness within
ourselves. The rich man fla^ himself he shall obtain it amid the brilliant
compani^^ (...) assembles; and, by displaying pomp and magnific^^^^* endeavors
to purchase it with gold. Alas! know^^^ not that this inconstant divinity flies
the importunity of ostentation, disdains a bribe, and contemns the pride (...)
vanity of wealth!

The westerly winds have detained us eight days in the road of Casos, and I
thank Heaven for their continuan^^. I have visited countries, on which liberal
nature has lavi^^ed all her treasures. I have seen others where tyrants h^
compelled her to refrain her bounties, and every where have found nations
unhappy, not by their own fault, not by the sterility of the soil, but by the
vices of the government, to which they are subject. In the midst of slaves,
crouching beneath the Ottoman yoke, I have found a rock, only three leagues in
circumference, (...) which the Turk dares not set his foot, and inhabited by a
free and happy people. There each father of a family is a sovereign within his
own house; he decides every difference, and his decrees are laws, which cannot
but (...) equitable, since they are only dictated by paternal tenderness. When
any disputes arise, the priest and the old men assemble and decide them; but
disputes cannot (...) frequent among citizens who are all equal, and ali^
unacquainted with poverty or riches. All the members of this little society are
employed; and I have seen the handsomest of their women go down into the valley
(...) wash their linen at the fountain, as in the days of Hom^^* They cheer
their labors with a song; nor do they imagine themselves disgraced by their
humble employment. It is only in countries where the rich can purchase service
from the hands of the poor, that they blush to make use of their own.

Travelers, who have made observations on the cha^acter of the Greeks under
the Ottoman yoke, justly reproach them with hypocrisy, perfidy, and meanness.
These vices are not inherent in their nature, but are the consequence of the
servitude in which they live. The inhabitants of Casos are also Greeks; but,
enlightened and warmed by a ray of liberty, they possess industry, sensibility,
and integrity. Send them a cadi, a pacha, or a mounteveli, they will become as
perfidious and corrupt as the rest of their nation. From this observation we
may be convinced of the first and most sacred of political truths; that, in
general, man is virtuous in proportion as he preserves his liberty and natural
rights; and that as he is deprived of these, he becomes vicious and degenerate.

DESCRIPTION OF THE PROSPECT FROM THE TOP OF MOUNT ETNA.
IN about an hour's climbing, we arrived at a place where there was no snow;
and where a warm and comfortable vapor issued from the mountain, which induced
us to make another halt. From this spot it was ^^ly about three hundred yards
to the highest summit of the mountain, where we arrived in full time to see the
most wonderful and most sublime sight in nature.

But here description must ever fall short; for no imagination has dared to
form an idea of so glorious and so magnificent a scene. Neither is there on the
surface of this globe, any one point that unites so many awful and sublime
objects. The immense elevation from the surface of the earth, drawn as it were
to a single point, without any neighboring mountain for the senses and
imagination to rest upon, and recover from their astonishment in their way down
to the world: this point or pinnacle, raised on the brink of a bottomless gulf,
as old as the world, often discharging rivers of fire, and throwing out burning
rocks, with a noise that shakes the whole island. Add to this, the unbounded
extent of the prospect, comprehending the greatest diversity and the most
beautiful scenery in nature; with the rising sun, advancing in the east, to
illuminate the wondrous scene.

The whole atmosphere, by degrees, kindled up, a^^ showed dimly and faintly the
boundless prospect around* Both sea and land looked dark and confused, as if
o^^ emerging from their original chaos; and light and darkness seemed still
undivided, till the morning by degrees advancing, completed the separation. The
stars are ^^tinguished and the shades disappear. The forests, whi^^ but now
seemed black and bottomless gulfs, from which no ray was reflected, to show
their form or colors, appear a new creation rising to the sight, catching life
a^^ beauty from every increasing beam. The scene still enlarges, and the
horizon seems to widen and expand itself on all sides; till the sun, like the
great Creator, appears in the east, and with his plastic ray completes the
mighty scene. All appears enchantment; and it is with difficulty we can believe
we are still on earth. The senses, unaccustomed to the sublimity of such a
scene, are bewildered and confounded; and it is not till after some time, that
they are capable of separating and judging of the objects that compose it. The
body of the sun is s^, rising from the ocean, immense tracts both of sea and
land intervening; the islands of Lipari, Panari, Alicudi, Strombolo, and
Volcano, with their smoking summit^, appear under your feet; and you look down
on the whole of Sicily as on a map; and can trace every river through all its
windings, from its source to its mouth. The view is absolutely boundless on
every side; nor is there any one object, within the circle of vision, to
interrupt it; so that the sight is every where lost in immensity: and I am
persuaded it is only from the imperfection of our organs, that the coasts of
Africa, and even of Greece, (...) not discovered, as they are certainly above
the horizon. But the most beautiful part of the scene is certainly the mountain
itself; the island of Sicily, and the numerous islands lying around it. All
these, by a kind of magic in vision, that I am at a loss to account for, seem
as if they were brought close around the skirts of Etna; the distances
appearing reduced to nothing. Perhaps this singular effect is produced by the
rays of light passing from a denser medium into a ra^er; which (from a
well-known law in optics) to an observer in the rare medium, appears to lift up
the objects that are at the bottom of the dense one, as a piece of money placed
in a basin appears lifted up as soon as the basin is filled with water.

It has been observed, and from experience I can say with truth, that on the
tops of the highest mountains, where the air is so pure and refined, and where
there is not that immense weight of gross vapors pressing upon the body, the
mind acts with greater freedom, and all the functions of both soul and body are
performed in a superior manner. It would appear that in proportion as we are
raised above the habitations of men, all low and ^ulgar sentiments are left
behind; and that the soul, in approaching the etherial regions, shakes off its
earthly affections, and already acquires something of their celestial purity.
Here, where you stand under a serene sky, and behold, with equal serenity, the
tempest and storm forming below your feet, the lightning darting from cloud to
cloud, and the thunder rolling around the mountain, and threatening with
destruction the poor wretches below; the mind considers the little storms of
the human passions as equally below her notice.

THE FAMILY PICTURE.
IT was quite dusk when I got ashore, and the evening being delightfully
serene, I was glad, after so long a confinement, to stretch my legs, and
determined to walk home to my lodgings, at the west end of the town.

Having occasion to recur to my snuff box, I found that its contents were
exhausted, by being liberally offered to some of my companions in the hoy; so
it occurred to me to call at my old snuff shop in Covent Garden, and get it
replenished; conceiving I might at the same time pick up a little intelligence
of what was stirring in town.

The shop was lighted up as usual, and two candles standing on the counter; but
the door being bolted, I knocked twice before I gained admission; when the
master, coming from above stairs, complimented me (...) my return home, and on
the good looks I had brought back with me.

I thanked him for his civility; and my nose having become very impatient, I
whipped my snuff box from my pocket, and borrowed a hasty pinch from the jar ^e
had taken down.

I thought, as he was filling my box, that his featu^^ had more than their
usual glow of goodnature; and, ^ the same time hearing a female voice above
stairs, acc^^panied by a guitar -- I fear, said I, that I have called y^^ down
from some convivial meeting: I hate to fu^ any one's pleasure, even for a
moment; so there is ^ money, and now run up again to your friends.

You by no means suspend my pleasure, replied ^ tobacconist; nay you will
increase it, by allowing me ^o tell you what has occasioned it. It is, in
truth, a (...) that might interest your feelings.

Two young men, who have, for a great length of t^, lived with me under this
roof, have endured the severe mortification of seeing a worthy father, whose
ta^ and ingenuity might have entitled him to a better (...), by a series of
misfortunes, thrown into confinement; (...) by the rigor of an unrelenting
creditor, detained there for the greater part of twenty years! Though t^
situation in life denied them the power of rescuing him from his adversity, yet
they have comforted him constantly by their daily visits, and supported both
him and his second wife by the labor of their hands; ever pouring into his
bosom the balm of filial affection. An act of grace has at last set the
distressed parent at liberty; and they have, this evening, been to fetch him
home from the forlorn scene of captivity, which has worn down his gray hairs!
We have made a little supper on the occasion, and had not long finished it,
when you knocked at the door. One of his daughters, whose voice you now hear,
is come to welcome his return; and, as all the family have a musical turn, she
has taken up a guitar to accompany herself. Nothing can, at this moment, exceed
the transport of the father, after experiencing for so many years the severity
of ill-fortune, to find himself at last, housed in security under his
children's roof.

You paint the story, returned I as one who strongly participates in the
general joy. You might well call it a scene to interest the feelings: on my
soul, it has played the dence with mine, insomuch that I would almost give one
eye to peep through a keyhole with the other, and obtain a glimpse of these
happy people, without intruding on their delicious moments.

Why that, Sir, continued the landlord, I could gratify you in, as there can be
no breach either of hospitality or honor, in exhibiting the merits of one's
friends, when their actions may not only bear the view, but claim the applause
of the world. The little room where they are, has a glass folding-door, with a
curtain drawn only across the lower half of it; if you will give yourself the
trouble to step up with me on the second stairs, you may, unperceived, look
over it and indulge your curiosity.

-- I would not have missed the sight, for all I shall ever be worth on this
side the grave! It showed me so lovely a Family Picture, as bid defiance to all
the efforts of art. Even the pencil of a Raphael, a Titian, or a fluido, would
have failed in the attempt; for it was drawn and colored by a greater hand! --
by thy inim^ble hand, O Nature! who shall ever, to the last page I write,
remain the object of my adoration!

I wished a thousand times, my dear Jenny, that thy benevolent heart could have
enjoyed it with me; but I will give you some idea how the canvass was disposed,
and your sensibility will paint the rest.

Imagine the whole family grouped round the table on which they had supped: in
full view before me conceive the portrait of the father, whose features wore
the traces of age and infirmity, possibly somewhat strengthened by the sorrows
of life, but whose countenance was, at the same time, brightened by so placid
an eye, as indicated a mind superior to them all! On either side of him sat his
good sons; and next to them, his wife, the faithful partner of his afflictions.
Opposite to her, appeared the vacant chair from whence I had so abruptly
summoned my conductor, who now stood by me; while the daughter, whose voice I
had heard from below, and the friendly mistress of the house, who had prepared
them this little entertainment, filled up the remainder of this happy circle.

The daughter was still singing to her guitar; they were soothing, plaintive
notes; but my mind was (...) occupied to attend to sounds: it was watching the
characters which composed this singular picture, and marking attentively the
expressions of cordiality and love, which during the song, were shot from eye
to eye. Often did the good old man cast looks of transport on each of b^
family, one after the other; then fix his attention on h^^ child, whose voice
was welcoming his return; while at intervals, his hands and eyes were uplifted
in silent gratitude, to that Providence, who had, after trials so sev^ at last
brought him home in peace.

As soon as the song was ended, he beckoned his daughter to approach him; when,
taking her by the arm, he gently pulled her down to his cheek, and hi^ his face
in her neck. The mistress of the house (...) pushed nearer to him a glass of
wine, which had (...) poured ^^t, and had long stood before him unregarded, on
the table; he placidly drank it off; and surveyi^^ all around him, with a look
of measureless contentment, stretched out his hands to his two sons, who were
beside him, which were instantly pressed in theirs with the utmost fervor;
while, in their features, were pictured all those delicate emotions of the
heart, which nature (...) alone entrusted to the human countenance to expr^s^^
and which the efforts of language are far too feeble to convey.

Believe me, my dear Jenny, there was not a dry (...) in all the room; nay, and
I might add, on the stains neither, for I more than once observed my honest
toba^conist pass his hand before his face. There are tears of pleasure as well
as tears of distress! the latter are excited by our own sufferings, the former
are the involuntary tribute which sensibility pays to virtue!

I lament, said I, turning round to my companion, that this picture you have
shown me, which glows with so many lovely tints that affection has spread over
it, should be concealed in your little apartment; it ought to be exhibited to
the public; the view of it might serve to confirm the good, and shame the
unfeeling! -- Nor could I quit the scene I had been contemplating, without
breathing this benediction over it: --

Heaven prosper you, children of virtue! nay, and it will prosper you, for you
have given the world a noble example of filial piety! and, if lost in its
dissipations, it should overlook the unurged claims you have on it, yet have
you treasured up, in your own bosoms, those enviable feelings of conscious
rectitude, which it never can take from you; and which, without hearts like
yours, it has not in its power to bestow.

I pity, from my soul, the gloomy temperament of the satyrist^ whose delight is
to view only the unfavourable side of ^e. The imperfections of humanity may
never leave his spleen destitute of a subject; yet I am inclined to believe,
for the honor of Providence and Nature, that there ever has been a
proportionate degree of benevolence in the world. Those virtues that most adorn
and endear society, a^e confined to a limited circle. Could we steal in on the
privacies of domestic life, I am confident we should see many more actions and
characters to admire and respect, than we are in general inclined to suppose.

When I arrived at my lodgings, I had nothing to do, but to swallow a mouthful
of refreshment, inquire of my trusty valet the trivial occurrences of the road,
and retire to my chamber.

I do not recollect, in all my life, to have ever passed a more delicious
night; for I slept till late the next morning, without the smallest
interruption, and arose in the finest spirits imaginable: nor will I ever be
persuaded, to this moment, that it was half so much occasioned by the exercise
and fatigue of the preceding day, as it was by my having gone to bed, in
perfect good humor with the world.

THE INDEPENDENT PENSIONER.
A TRAVELLER should think nothing below his notice. Every scene of life is a
picture, where^^ some part or other is worth his attention. The pe^ of the
great Creator has spread before us an eternal variety in his compositions; nor
charmed us more with the sublimity of design, and the splendid coloring of
so^^ pieces, than by the modest tints and unaffected truth (...) which he often
wins our attention to less distinguished subjects. --

The ladies, the other day after dinner at Clermont^^ proposed that we should
drink tea at Draper's: Ame^^ having in her walks found, among the women who
^^habit that foundation, a person whom she remembered for a long course of
years, as servant to an old lady of her acquaintance.

My reader should be informed that Draper's is a ch^^ity, instituted the
beginning of this century by a Quake^, as a kind of asylum for eight women, who
have each ^ distinct house and garden; but they are ranged together so as to
form one large building, in the center of which is a meeting house for people
of the founder's profession; and though originally the charity was intended for
such, yet now those who are of a different persuasion may be admitted members.
It is half a mile distant from Margate, and as most of the women employ
themselves in knitting garters, laces, pincushions, etc. th^^ have every day
visitors and customers, in the ladies (...) that place.

I will show you, says Amelia, as we went along, a very happy old woman: her
father was a considerable trade^man at Canterbury, and educated her well; but
meeting with many losses, and dying insolvent, she was taken ^s an upper
servant and companion by the old lady I mentioned, who knew well her family,
and who, though extremely rich herself, and bountiful in promises, at her death
rewarded a faithful service of near thirty years with a paltry annuity of ten
pounds. Having by her care laid up about two hundred guineas, the added produce
of this sum might have made her easy temper perfectly contented; but trusting
it with a nephew (to whom at her decease she meant to leave it) in order to put
it out on good security, he embezzled the whole, and left her without the hope
of retrieving a shilling of it. By the assistance of a friend at Canterbury,
she got placed in this charity on the first vacancy; and seems, in her little
retirement, to have forgotten the disappointments of life. --

Amelia had drawn the outlines of an interesting portrait, and the sight of the
original proved it a just one: for it presented the figure of a little elderly
woman, with an eye full of vivacity, and such a calmness in all her features,
as bespoke the tranquillity of the mind within. The simple nea^ness of her
person was not more remarkable than that of her little habitation. Every thing
was set in order; every thing rubbed to a polish. In one end of the window lay
her Bible; in the other a basket of silks and worsteds, and the implements for
her work. A j^mine tree, nicely trimmed, and full of bloom, covered the outside
of her dwelling; and before it lay her little garden, where not a weed was to
be seen, sprinkled with common herbs and vegetables, with here and there a
currant-bush, and a few white lilies interspersed among them. --

The pride of man, that is still pursuing happiness amid immense plantations
and extensive territories, must, after all its toils, be mortified to find it
on such a patch of ground as this! --

Amelia, who had sent up her tea chest, made her old acquaintance sit down with
us, and busied herself, as well as Marianne, in looking over some pincushions,
and other trifles, which they had employed her to knit, for presents to their
friends in town. I promised you, says Amelia, that I would one day or other
bring up these gentlemen to see you; and I believe it gives them more real
pleasure than going to the ball-room at Margate. Oh, madam! replied the old
woman, what is there to see in such a cottage as this? --

What a palace will hardly ever show us, returned Amelia -- a contented heart!
--

That indeed, madam, is a blessing that Heaven (...) bestowed on me through
life; though I fear someti^^^ that the conduct of my unfortunate kinsman
disturbed ^e more than it ought; for it grieved me, that what I had been years
saving for the maintenance of my age, should be squandered away in an instant
by profligacy. But i^ pleased God it should be so; and it pleased him also* my
misfortunes to raise me a friend, who, unsolici^^^ obtained for me the
independency I enjoy in this place where I live, madam, without a single care.
If I (...) but little, I want but little: my garden, my work, (...) my book,
fill up the greater part of the day; and (...) most friendly intercourse
subsists among us all, I can (...) out, or converse with women of my own age
and (...) suits, who are drawing, like myself, toward the end of their journey,
and more interested to look forward ^^ another world, than to cast our
attention backward ^^ this. --

Gracious Providence! thought I; how erringly d^^^ man judge of thy
dispensations! not considering th^^ ^^ is from the temper of the heart, not
from the exteri^ ^^rade of fortune, the decision must be made. If the ri^^^^^
and honors of the world are a blessing to some, th^^ prove a burden to more;
and though thrown into the scale of many, thy impartial hand holds the b^l^
and gives in counterpoise the patient mind, that possible outweighs the whole!
--

When I contemplated this happy being at Draper^ and understood that the
independency she boasted of, from that place, was only her little dwelling, six
pounds, and half a chaldron of coals a year, and a stuff go^n and petticoat
every two years -- when I saw such a full stre^^ of content flow from so
shallow a source, my bosom a^proached me with a thousand recollected
weaknesses, and I felt myself ashamed to have been so often put out of humor
by the trivial occurrences of life.

THE BENEVOLENT PRINCESS.
THERE are few characters preserved in anclea^ history more distinguished and
illustrious than that of Moses. But it derives a great part of its luster from
events and actions, which are too far removed from the usual occurrences of
life, and too much elevated above the common standard, to be capable of an easy
application to the purposes of moral instruction. In the life of Moses, the
philosopher will meet with many curious subjects of speculation, the statesman
with many interesting particulars relative to policy and government, and the
divine with many important incidents respecting the history of religion, which
the moralist, who considers characters solely with the view of deducing from
them useful lessons for the conduct of life, will be obliged to pass by without
notice. In this limited view of the actions and character of this great man, we
shall however find them worthy of our serious attention, and capable of
suggesting many important reflections.

The extraordinary circumstances, which attended the birth and early education
of Moses, are too interesting and instructive to be overlooked.

At that time, the Israelites were groaning under the yoke of Egyptian bondage.
The present king, who knew not Joseph, jealous of their increasing numbers and
strength, and fearful lest they should, in some future time, enter into an
alliance with the enemies of Egypt, determined to harass and afflict, and as
much as possible to crush them. "He made their lives bitter with hard bondage
in all manner of service, and set over them tast-masters to afflict them with
their burdens." This rigorous treatment, however, did not produce the effect
which the king designed. Instead of being weakened and diminished by the
hardships which they suffered, "the more he afflicted them the more they
multiplied." Observing this, he now resolved to add cruelty to oppression; and,
effectually to remove every ground of fear from this quarter, he formed and
executed a plan for the total extirpation of their race. He issued an edi^^^
"that every male child born of the Israelites should be cast into the river."

Ye who know the tender sensations and warm attachments of parental affection,
imagine, for ye alone can imagine -- the consternation and horror with which
this barbarous edict must have been received. Imagine the glow of honest
indignation which would be kindled in every father's breast; conceive what
agonizing pan^^ would tear the mother's heart, while the sentence of death was
pronounced upon the dear helpless infant yet unborn. Surely the most refined
philosophy will pardon the equivocation, by which the Hebrew midwives evaded
the king's order: surely the most zealous advocate for implicit obedience to
regal authority will not c^nsure those parents, who, as far as they were able,
disobeyed a command which violated the first law of natu^^ counteracted the
most powerful instinct of humanity, and opposed the sovereign authority of
Heaven.

The mother of Moses, choosing to obey nature and God rather than man, hid her
son three months. And when she found it impossible to conceal him longer, as
the last expedient for his safety, she put him into an art of bullrushes
properly secured against the water, and laid him among the rushes by the river
side, near the place where the king's daughter and her attendants usually came
to bathe. Then leaving the child, doubtless with distressing anxiety, but not
without hope that some fortunate incident might occur, she stationed her
daughter not far from the place to observe the issue.

Soon after, the young princess, Pharaoh's daughter, came with her attendants
to the river side. She immediately cast her eye upon the ark lying among the
rushes, and, curious to know the contents, sent one of her maidens to fetch it.
The mother, to preserve the child as long as she could, had covered it up with
care in its rushy cradle, which, without some friendly hand to save it, must
shortly have been in its grave. The princess removed the covering and found --
a child. "And behold the babe wept." The cries of infants find easy access to
the female heart. Though the helpless innocent knew not its danger, nor was
able to beg for protection; its piteous tears spoke to the feelings of the
young princess with an eloquence, which no prejudice of education, no pride of
rank, no motives of interest or prudence, could withstand.

She soon discovered that it belonged to one of the Hebrews. It was a child of
such mean and ignoble birth, as might seem beneath the notice of a royal
princess, it sprung from a race of strangers, who had no natural claim to
protection and favor in Egypt. It came under the sentence of her father's
edict against the male children of the Israelites. To attempt its rescue might
therefore be construed into an act of disobedience to him, and rebellion
against the government, and might expose her to private resentment and public
censure. Any of these circumstances may be supposed to have arisen in her mind,
upon the discovery of the child; and to a prejudiced and bigoted
understanding, a cowardly and timorous spirit, or a selfish and unfeeling
heart, might have furnished an apology for leaving the helpless infant to
perish. But, either she was so wholly lost in the emotions of pity, which the
incident excited as to be inattentive to every other consideration, or (which
is more probable) the principles of generosity and compassion had such a
commanding power within her, as to overbalance every inferior motive. "She had
compassion on the child."

His sister, who stood near, observing the favorable notice which the princess
took of her infant brother, ventured to speak a word in his behalf, and offered
to go and call one of the Hebrew women to nurse the child for her. The princess
listened to the proposal, which accorded with her benevolent intentions, and
sent her to seek a nurse. The messenger, who was at no loss to whom to apply,
ran and called the child's mother. With what pleasure the mother received and
obeyed the summons, which banished all her fears and placed herself and her son
under the protection of the king's daughter, may be better conceived than
expressed. Doubtless with a joyful heart and eager steps she came to the place;
but probably suppressed the emotions which agitat^^ her mind, that she might
conceal from the princess (...) circumstance of her being the mother of the
child. The princess, with all the dignity and grace which became her rank, and
with all the condescension and sweetne^^ which female tenderness could inspire,
took the child ^^ her arms, and delivered it to the mother, saying, "T^ this
child and nurse it for me, and I will give the wages."

Greatness never appears so truly respectable, as wh^^ employed in acts of
mercy. The daughter of Pharaoh king of Egypt, never shone with half such
attractive charms, when decked with every ornament which the wealth and taste
of Egypt could supply, and surrounded with all the splendors of her father's
court, as at the moment when she uttered these words.

The mother carried home her lovely charge in triumph, and faithfully executed
the pleasing task assigned her. Nor did the princess afterward repent of her
kindness, or desert the child whose life she had saved. When he grew up, she
adopted him as her son, introduced him to the court of Egypt, and obtained for
him the favor of the king. It was through her bounty that he was nursed in his
infancy, and instructed in his childhood and youth, and that he afterward
became "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and mighty in words and
deeds."

THE AFFECTIONATE DAUGHTER.
MR. George Campbell was the youngest son of a wealthy baronet, who having
several livings in his gift, besides good interest at court, brought him up to
the church, with the sanguine expectation of one day seeing him a bishop.

Unfortunately for George, before he had attained his twenty-third year, he
became attached to a young lady, who had every requisite to render the married
state happy, but money; and money being the old gentleman's darling idol, he
consequently thought she possessed no requisite worthy the wife of his son: but
George was too far engaged to retreat with honor; he therefore told his
father, he was resolved upon the union, and in a few days presented his beloved
Louisa to entreat his blessing,

When Sir James found they were really married, he thought it was in vain to
fly in a passion; he received them cordially, and gave them an universal
invitation to his house, but in his heart he never forgave them. The livings
were disposed of to other people, and at his death he left the whole of his
estate to his eldest son.

Mr. Campbell had only a curacy of about eighty pounds a year, and as regular
as the year came round, his wife presented him with a child. Poverty took up
her habitation among them, and he bitterly regretted having, by an act of
disobedience, not only brought on himself his father's displeasure, but
involved an amiable woman, whom he loved, in a scene of penury and distress.
These reflections soured his disposition; he became peevish and morose; nay
sometimes went so far, as to reproach his wife as the cause of his abject
situation.

Mrs. Campbell took great care to instill into the minds of her children, the
respect and affection due from them to their father. "My dear children," she
would often say, "be assured a breach of filial duty is ever attended with
regret, and in general with misfortune."

Louisa was the eldest of five children; she was mild, meek, and affectionate.
She attentively listened to the precepts of her mother, and laid them up in her
heart, as an inestimable treasure. Mr. Campbell's temper grew so extremely bad,
that not only his wife, but his children came in for a share of his ill humor.
Louisa, in particular, was sure to be wrong, in whatever she said or did, and
it was seldom she was favored with a kind or affectionate word; yet her
manners were so amiable and her form so lovely, that though she labored under
the disadvantages of a narrow education and extreme poverty, her company was
courted by some of the genteelest families in the village; but in compliance
with her father's ill humor, she was seldom allowed to stir from home.

When Louisa had reached her seventeenth year, (...) Mary Campbell, a distant
relation of her father's, ca^^ on a visit to a family who resided in the same
village* Louisa's good qualities were resounded to Lady Mary from every mouth,
and all unanimously agreed it was a pity so lovely a girl should be buried in
obscurity, (...) lost for want of a proper education.

Lady Mary was naturally of a humane disposition; (...) expressed a desire to
see Miss Campbell; and when introduced to her, finding her even superior to
what she had been taught to expect, made her an offer of going wh^^ her to
London.

This was a proposal too much to Louisa's advantage to be refused; the
invitation was accepted, and the (...) prolonged for three years, during which
time Louisa (...) an opportunity of improving herself in the ornamental a^ well
as useful branches of education.

Mrs. Campbell, who had for many years labored under an evident decline, was
now summoned home by the Power, who had been pleased, in this life, to try
(...) with long and heavy afflictions. Lady Mary carried Louisa to receive the
dying blessing, and pay the l^^^ duties to her amiable mother. That finished,
she proposed her return to London. The lovely girl, penetrated, with gratitude
for the many favors she had received, and tenderly attached to her genero^^^
benefact^^^, with difficulty restrained her tears, while ^^e thus addressed
her: --

"Think me not ungrateful, dear Madam, if I beg ^^ remain with my father: my
brothers and sisters are engaged in learning occupations, which will enable
them ^^ pass through life with industry and without reproach.

"I cannot leave my father in this solitude, after so recent an affliction: he
has for many years been used to the unremitting attention and tenderness of my
excellent mother; I must not suffer him too severely to feel her loss, but
endeavor, as far as is in my power, by affection and assiduity, to supply her
place."

"And can you, dear Louisa," said her ladyship, "s^ easily forego the ease and
plenty you have enjoyed with me, to live a life of penury and labor, and that
for a man, who, though he is your father, I must say does not deserve such
attention: Did he not always treat you with unmerited-harshness?"

"Hold, my dear Madam," said Louisa, "if, as you think, my father has not
behaved to me with the kindness of a parent, it by no means releases me from my
duty to him; had he a thousand errors, he is still my father; i^ such, I am
called upon by nature and religion to do every thing in my power to render his
life comfortable: if my endeavors to please can awaken his affection, I shall
think myself amply repaid; if not, the consciousness of having performed my
duty, will give me a satisfaction which no future event can ever rob me of."

It was in vain Lady Mary urged her to return: the lovely, elegant,
accomplished Louisa, preferred a low roofed mansion, scanty meals, and
attendance on a sick peevish father, to the lofty apartments, plenteous table,
and variety of amusements she might have enjoyed with Lady Mary. She attended
him to the last, and by her tender solicitude and affection smoothed the
down-hill of his life, and cheered and comforted him in the most painful
illness by her unaffected piety. He was moved by her filial duty; all the
father rushed upon his soul; he blessed her with his parting breath, and
expired in her a^ms!

You may, perhaps, inquire, what benefit Louisa reaped from this rigid
performance of her duty? The question is easily answered. She gained a
contented happy mind, serenity dwelt in her heart, and cheerfulness beame^ from
her eyes.

She had a genteel competency left her at Lady Mary's death; married a
deserving man, and shone as conspicuously in the characters of a wife and
mother, as she had done as a daughter: she lived beloved by all, and died
universally regretted.

SPLENDIDA; OR, CHARITY AND VANITY.
SPLENDIDA, in one of her morning ^i^ings, was solicited for charity by a poor
woman with a^ infant in her arms. "It is not for myself, Madam," said the
wretched creature, "it is for my husband, who li^ under that hedge tormented
with a fever, and dying f^^ want of relief." Splendida directed her eyes
towar^^ the spot, and saw a sickly object stretched upon the ground, clad in
the ta^^ered regimental of a foot soldier her heart was touched, and she drew
out her purse, which was full of guineas. The blood rushed into the begga^^
meagre visage at the sight: Splendida turned over the gold; her hand delayed
for a moment, and the impulse was lost; unhappily for the suppliant, Splendida
(...) alone and without a witness: she put her hand (...) more into her pocket,
and taking out a solitary shillin^^ dropped it into the shrivelled palm, that was
stretched (...) to receive it, and drove on. Splendida returned home dressed
herself, and went to a certain great lady's ass^^bly; a subscription was put
about for the benefit of a celebrated actress; the lady condescended to receive
subscriptions in person, and delivered a ticket to each co^tributor: Splendida
drew forth the same purse, and wrapping twenty guineas in a paper, put them
into the hand of the noble beggar: The room rang with applau^es of her charity.
-- "I give it," says she, "to her virtues, rather than to her talents; I bestow
it on the wife and mother, not upon the actress." Splendida on her ^^turn home
took out her accompt-book, and set do^^ twenty-one pounds one shilling to the
article of charity. The shilling indeed Heaven audited to the score of alms;
the pounds were posted to the account of vani^y.

COQUETRY SOMETIMES JUSTIFIABLE.
ADELISA, possessed of beauty, fortune, rank, and every elegant accomplishment,
that genius and education could bestow, was withal so unsupportably capricious,
that she seemed born to be the torment of every heart, which suffered itself to
be attracted by her charms. Though her coquetry was notorious to a proverb,
such ^^re her allurements, that very few, upon whom she thought fit to practice
them, had ever found resolution to (...) their power. Of all the victims of her
vanity, L^ander seemed to be that, over whom she threw her chain^ with the
greatest air of triumph; he was indeed a conquest to boast of; for he had long
and obstinately defend^^ his heart, and for a time made as many reprisals upon
the tender passions of her sex as she raised contributions upon his. Her better
star at length prevailed a^ she b^^old Leander at her feet; and though her
victory was accomplished at the e^pense of more tender glances than she had
ever bestowed upon the whole se^ collectively, yet it was a victory, which only
piqued Adelis^ to render his slavery the more intolerable for the trouble he
had cost her to reduce him to it. After she had trifled with him and tortured
him, in every way that her ingenious malice could devise, and made such public
display of her tyranny as subjected him to the ridicule and contempt of all the
men, who had envied his success, and every woman who r^^nted his neglect,
Adelisa avowedly dismissed him, as an object, which could no longer furnish
sport to her cr^^lty; and turned to other pursuits with a kind of indifference
as to the choice of them, which seemed to ha^^ no other guide but mere caprice.

Leander was not wanting to himself in the efforts he now made to free himself
from her chains, but it was in vain; the hand of beauty had wrapped them too
closely about his heart, and love had rive^ted them too securely for reason,
pride, or even the strongest struggles of resentment, to throw them off: he
continued to love, to hate, to execrate and adore her. His first resolution was
to ex^ himself from her sight; this was a measure of abso^ necessity, for he
was not yet recovered enough to ab^ the chance of meeting her, and he had
neither (...) nor inclination to start a fresh attachment, by way of ^^periment
upon her jealousy. Fortune, however, befrien^ed him in the very moment of
despair; for no soo^ was he out of her sight, than the coquettish Adelisa (...)
something wanting, which had been so familiar to (...) that Leander, though
despised when possessed, when (...) was regretted. In vain she culled her
numerous ad^^^ers, for some one to replace him. Continually pe^ and
discontented, Adelisa became so intolerable to (...) lovers, that there seemed
to be a spirit conjuring ^ among them, which threatened her with a general
de^^tion. What was to be done? Her danger was alar^ing; it was imminent: she
determined to recall ^^ander: she informed herself of his haunts, and th^^^
herself in the way of a rencontre; but he avoided (...) chance brought them to
an interview, and she began ^ rallying him for his apostasy: there was an
anxiety ^^der all this affected pleasantry, that she could not th^^oughly
conceal, and he did not fail to discover. He instantly determined upon the very
wisest measure, which deliberation could have formed; he combated her with her
own weapons; he put himself apparently so much at his ease, and counterfeited
his part so well, as effe^tually to deceive her: she had now a new task upon
h^^ hands, and the hardest as well as the most hazardous she had ever
undertaken: she attempted to throw him (...) his guard, by a pretended pity for
his past suffering^* and a promise of kinder usage for the future; he deni^^
that he had suffered any thing, and assured her that (...) never failed to be
amused with her humors, which w^^ perfectly agreeable to him at all times.
"Then is ^^plain," replied she, "that you never thought of me as a wife; for
such humors must be insupportable to a husband." "Pardon me," cried Leander,
"if ever I should be betrayed into the idle act of marriage, I must be in one
of those very humors myself! Defend me from that dull uniformity of domestic
life! What can be so insipid^ as the ta^^e strain of nuptial harmony
everlastingly rep^^^d! Whatever other varieties I may then de^^ a^ myself of,
let me at least find a variety of whim in the w^man. I am to be fettered to."
"Upon my word," (...) Adelisa, "you would almost persuade ^e that we were
destined for each other." This she accompanied with one of those looks, in
which she was most expert, and which was calculated at once to inspire and in
betray sensibility. Leander, not yet so certain of his observations as to
confide in them, seemed to receive this overture as a raillery, and affecting
to laugh, replied, "I do not think it is in the power of destiny herself to
determine either of us; for if you was for one moment (...) the humor to
promise yourself to me, I am certain in the next you would retract it; and if I
was fool enough to believe you, I should well deserve to be punished for my
credulity: Hymen will never yoke us to each other, nor to any body else; but if
you are in the (...) to make a very harmless experiment of the little (...) I
put in all such promises, here is my hand; it is fit the proposal should spring
from my quarter and not yours; close with it as soon as you please, and laugh
at me as much as you please, if I ^^^t one murmur wh^^ you break the bargain."
"Well th^n," said Adelisa, "to punish you for the sauciness of your provoking
challenge, and to convince you that I do not credit you for this pretended
indifference to my treatment of you, here is my hand, and with it my promise;
and now I give you warning, that if ever I do keep it, it will be only from the
conviction that I shall torment you more by fulfilling it than by flying from
it." "Fairly declared," cried Leander, "and since my word is passed, I Will stand
to it; but take notice, if I was not perfectly secure of being jilted, I should
think myself in a fair way to be the most egregious dupe in nature."

In this strain of mutual raillery they proceeded to f^^tle the most serious
business of their lives; and whilst neither would venture upon a conf^ssion of
their passion, each seemed to rely upon the other for a discovery of it. They
now broke up their conference in the gayest spirits imaginable, and Leander
upon parting offered to make a bett of half his fortune with Adelisa, that she
did no^ stand to her engagement; at the same time naming a certain day as the
period of its taking place. "And what shall I gain," said she, "in that case by
half you fortune, when I shall have a joint share in possession of the whole?"
"Talk not of fortune," cried Leander, gi^ing loose to the rapture which he
could no longer restrain, "my heart, my happiness, my life itself is yours."
So saying, he hastily embraced her and departed.

No sooner was he out of her sight, than he began to expostulate with himself
upon his indiscretion. In the ecstacy of one unguarded moment he had blasted
all his schemes; and, by exposing his weakness, armed her with fresh engines to
torment him. In these reflections (...) passed the remainder of the night; in
vain he strove to find some justification for his folly: he could not fort^ his
mind to believe that the tender looks she had bestowed upon him were any other
than an experiment upon his heart, to throw him from his guard, and
re-establish her tyranny. With these impressions he presented himself at her
door next morning, and was immediately admitted. Adelisa was alone, and Leander
immediately began by saying to her, "I am now come to receive at your hands the
punishment, which the man who cannot keep his own secret richly deserves. I
surrender myself to you, and I expect you will exert your utmost ingenuity in
tormenting me; only remember that you cannot give a stab to my heart without
wounding your own image, which envelopes every part, and is too deeply impre^^
for even your cruelty totally to extirpate." At the conclusion of this speech,
Adelisa's countenance became serious; she fixed her eyes upon the floor, and
after a pause, without taking any notice of Leander, and as if she had been
talking to herself in soliloquy, repeated in a murmuring tone, "Well, well,
it is all over; but (...) matter." "For the love of Heaven," cried Leander in
alarm, "what is all over?" "All that is most delightful to women," she replied;
"all the luxury, which the vanity of my sex enjoys in tormenting yours: O
Leander! what charming projects of revenge had I contrived to punish your
pretended indifference; and depend upon it I would have executed them to the
utmost rigor of the law of retaliation, had you not in one moment disarmed me
of my malice by a fair confession of your love. Believe me, Leander, I never
was a coquette but in self-defence; sincerity is my natural character; but how
should a woman of any attractions be safe in such a character, when the whole
circle of fashion abounds with artificial coxcombs, pretenders to sentiment,
and professors of seduction? Between you and me, Leander, this has been more a
contest of cunning than an affair of honor, and if you will call your own
conduct into fair review, trust me, you will find little reason to complain of
mine. Naturally disposed to favor your attentions more than any other man's,
it particularly behoved me to guard myself against propensities at once so
pleasing and so suspicious. Let this suffice in justification of what is past;
it now remains that I should explain to you the system I have laid down for the
time to come: if ever I assume the character of a wife, I devote myself to all
its duties; I bid farewell at once to all the vanities, the petulancies, the
coquetries of what is falsely called a life of pleasure; the whole system must
undergo a revolution, and be administered upon other principles and to other
purposes: I know the world too well to commit myself to it, when I have more
than my own conscience to account to, when I have not only truths to study;
suspicions, jealousies, appearances to provide against; when I am no longer
singly responsible on the score of error, but of example also: it is not
therefore in the public display of an affluent fortune, in dress, equipage,
entertainments, nor even in the fame of splendid charities my pleasures will be
found; they will center in domestic occupations; in cultivating nature and the
sons of nature, in benefiting the tenants and laborers of the soil that
supplies us with the means of being useful; in living happily with my
neighbors, in availing myself of those numberless opportunities, which a
residence in the country affords of relieving the untold distresses of those,
who suffer in secret, and are too humble, or perhaps too proud to ask." --

Here the enraptured Leander could no longer keep silence; but, breaking forth
into transports of love and admiration, gave a turn to the conversation, which
is (...) otherwise interesting to relate, than as it proved the prelude to an
union which speedily took place, and h^^ made Leander and Adelisa the fondest
and worthie^^ couple in England.

THE DANGER OF DISSIMULATION.
CHARLOTTE and Maria were educated together at an eminent boarding-school near
London; there was little difference in their age, and their personal
accomplishments were equal: but though their families were of the same rank,
yet, as Charlotte was an only child, she was considerably superior in fortune.

Soon after they were taken home, Charlotte was addressed by Captain Freeman,
who, besides his commission in the guards, had a small paternal estate: but as
her friends hoped for a more advantageous match, the Captain was desired to
forbear his visits, and the lady to think of him no more. After some fruitless
struggles, they acquiesced; but the discontent of both was so apparent, that it
was thought expedient to remove Miss into the country. She was sent to her
aunt, the Lady Meadows, who, with her daughter, lived retired at the family
seat, more than one hundred miles distant from the metropolis. After she had
repined in this dreary solitude from April to August, she was surprised with a
visit from her father, who brought with him Sir James Forest, a young
gentleman who had just succeeded to a baronet's title, and a very large estate
in the same county. Sir James had good nature and good sense, an agreeable
person and an easy address. Miss was insensibly pleased with his company; her
vanity, if not her love, had a new object; a desire to be delivered from a
state of dependence and obscurity, had almost absorbed all the rest; and it is
no wonder that this desire was gratified, when scarce any other was felt; or
that in compliance with the united solicitations of her friends, and her lover,
she suffered herself within a few weeks to become a lady and a wife. They
continued in the country till the beginning of October, and then came up to
London, having prevailed upon her aunt to accompany them, that Miss Meadows,
with whom the bride had contracted an intimate friendship, might be gratified
with the diversions of the town during the winter.

Captain Freeman, when he heard that Miss Charlotte was married, immediately
made proposals of marriage to Maria, with whom he became acquainted during his
visits to her friend, and soon after married her.

The friendship of the two young ladies seemed to be rather increased than
diminished by their marriage; they were always of the same party, both in the
private and public diversions of the season, and visited each other without the
formalities of messages and dress.

But neither Sir James nor Mrs. Freeman could reflect without uneasiness upon
the frequent interviews which this familiarity and confidence produced between
a lover and his mistress, whom force only had divided; and though of these
interviews they were themselves witnesses, yet Sir James insensibly became
jealous of his lady, and Mrs. Freeman of her husband.

It happened, in the May following, that Sir James went about ten miles out of
town, to be present at the election of a member of parliament for the county,
and was not expected to return till the next day. In the evening, his lady took
a chair and visited Mrs. Freeman: the rest of the company went away early; the
Captain was upon guard; Sir James was out of town, and the two ladies after
supper sat down to piquet, and continued the game without once reflecting upon
the hour till three in the morning. Lady Forest would then have gone home; but
Mrs. Freeman, perhaps chiefly to conceal a contrary desire, importuned her to
stay till the Captain came in, and at length with some reluctance she consented.

About five, the Captain came home, and Lady Forest immediately sent out for a
chair: a chair, as it happened, could not be procured; but a hackney-coach
being brought in its stead, the Captain insisted upon waiting on her ladyship
home. This she refused with some emotion; it is probable that she still
regarded the Captain with less indifference than she wished, and was therefore
more sensible of the impropriety of his offer: but her reasons for rejecting
it, however forcible, being such as she could not allege, he persisted, and her
resolution was overborne. By this importunate complaisance he had not only
thrown Lady Forest into confusion, but displeased his wife: she could not,
however, without unpoliteness, oppose it; and, lest her uneasiness should be
discovered, she affected a negligence which in some degree revenged it: she
desired that when he came back he would not disturb her, for that she should go
directly to bed; and added, with a kind of drowsy insensibility, "I am more
than half asleep already."

Lady Forest and the Captain were to go from the Haymarket to Grosvenor
Square. It was about half an hour after five when they got into the coach; the
morning was remarkably fine, the la^e contest had shaken off all disposition to
sleep, and Lady Forest could not help saying, that she had much rather take a
walk in the Park than go home to bed. The Captain zealously expressed the same
sentiment, and proposed that the coach should s^t them down at St. James's
Gate. The lady, however, had nearly the same objections against being seen in
the Mall without any other company than the Captain, that she had against its
being known that they were alone together in a hackney-coach: she, therefore,
to extricate herself from this second difficulty, proposed that they should
call at her father's in Bondstreet, and take her cousin Meadows, whom she knew
to be an early rifer, with them. This project was immediately put in execution;
but Lady Forest found her cousin indisposed with a cold. When she had
communicated the design of this early visit, Miss Meadows entreated her to give
up her walk in the Park, to stay till the family rose, and go home after
breakfast. "No," replied Lady Forest, "I am determined upon a walk; but as I
must first get rid of Captain Freeman, I will send down word that I will take
your advice." A servant was accordingly dispatched to acquaint the Captain, who
was waiting below, that Miss Meadows was indisposed, and had engaged Lady
Forest to breakfast.

The Captain discharged the coach; but being piqued a^ the behavior of his
wife, and feeling that flow of spirits which usually returns with the morning,
even to those who have not slept in the night, he had no desire to go home, and
therefore resolved to enjoy the fine morning in the Park alone.

Lady Forest, not doubting but that the Captain would immediately return home,
congratulated herself upon her deliverance; but, at the same time, to indulge
her desire of a walk, followed him into the Park.

The Captain had reached the top of the Mall, and turning back met her, before
she had advanced two hundred paces beyond the Palace. The moment she perceived
him, the remembrance of her message, the motives that produced it, the
detection of its falsehood, and discovery of its design, her disappointment and
consciousness of that very situation which she had so much reason to avoid, all
concurred to cover her with confusion, which it was impossible to hide: pride
and good-breeding were, however, still predominant over truth and prudence; she
was still zealous to remove from the Captain's mind any suspicion of a design
to shun him, and therefore with an effort perhaps equal to that of a hero, who
smiles upon the rack, she affected an air of gaiety, said she was glad to see
him, and as an excuse for her message and her conduct, prattled something about
the sickleness of woman's mind, and concluded with observing, that she changed
here is too often ever to be mad. By this conduct a retreat was rendered
impossible, and they walked together till between eight and nine: but the
clouds having insensibly gathered, and a sudden shower falling just as they had
reached Spring-Gardens, they went out instead of going back; and the Captain
having put the lady into a chair, took his leave.

It happened that Sir James, contrary to his first purpose, had returned from
his journey at night. He learnt from the servants, that his lady was gone to
Captain Freeman's, and was secretly displeased that she had made this visit
when he was absent; an incident, which, however trifling in itself, was, by the
magic of jealousy, swelled into importance: yet, upon recollection he reproved
himself for this displeasure, since the presence of the Captain's lady would
sufficiently secure the honor of ^e own. While he was struggling with these
suspicions, they increased both in number and strength in proportion as the
night wore away. At one, he went to bed; but he passed the night in agonies of
terror and resentment, doubting whether the absence of his lady was the effect
of accident or design, listening to every noise, and bewildering himself in a
multitude of extravagant suppositions. He rose again at break of day; and after
several hours of suspense and irresolution, whether to wait the issue, or go
out for intelligence, the restlessness of curiosity prevailed, and about eight
he set out for Captain Freeman's; but left word with his servants, that he was
gone to a neighboring coffee-house.

Mrs. Freeman, whose affected indifference and dissimulation of a design to go
immediately to bed, contributed to prevent the Captain's return, had during his
absence suffered inexpressible disquiet: she had, indeed, neither intention to
go to bed, nor inclination to sleep; she walked backward and forward in her
chamber, distracted with jealousy and suspense, till she was informed that Sir
James was below, and desired to see her. When she came down, he discovered that
she had been in tears: his fear was now more alarmed than his jealousy, and he
concluded that some fatal accident had befallen his wife; but he soon learnt
that she and the Captain had gone from thence at five in the morning, and that
he was not yet returned, Mrs. Freeman, by Sir James's inquiry, knew that his
lady had not been at home: her suspicions were, therefore, confirmed; and in
her jealousy, which to prevent a duel she labored to conceal, Sir James found
new cause for his own. He determined, however, to wait with as much decency as
possible, till the Captain came in; and perhaps two persons were never more
embarrassed by the presence of each other. While breakfast was getting ready,
Dr. Tattle came to pay Mrs. Freeman a morning visit; and, to the unspeakable
grief both of the lady and her guest, was immediately admitted. Dr. Tattle is
one of those male gossips who, in the common opinion, are the most diverting
company in the world. The Doctor saw that Mrs. Freeman was low spirited, and
made several efforts to divert her, but without success: at length he declared,
with an air of ironical importance, that he could tell her such news as would
make her look grave for something: "The Captain," says he, "has just huddled a
lady into a chair, at the door of a bagnio, near Spring-Gardens." He soon
perceived that this speech was received with emotions very different from those
he intended to produce; and therefore added, "that she need not however be
jealous; for notwithstanding the manner in which he had related the incident,
the lady was certainly a woman of character, as he instantly discovered by her
mein and appearance." This particular confirmed the suspicion it was intended
to remove; and the Doctor, finding that he was not as good company as usual,
took his leave, but was met at the door by the Captain, who brought him back.
His presence, however insignificant, imposed some restraint upon the rest of
the company; and Sir James, with as good an appearance of jocularity as he
could assume, asked the Captain "What he had done with his wife." The Captain,
with some irresolution, replied, that "he had left her early in the morning at
her father's; and that having made a point of waiting on her home, she sent
down word that her cousin Meadows was indisposed, and had engaged her to
breakfast." The Captain who knew nothing of the anecdote, that had been
communicated by the Doctor, judged by appearances that it was prudent thus
indirectly to lie, by concealing the truth both from Sir James and his wife: he
supposed, indeed, that Sir James would immediately inquire after his wife at
her father's, and learn that she did not stay there to breakfast; but as it
would not follow that they had been together, he left her to account for her
absence as she thought fit, taking for granted that what he had concealed she
would also conceal, for the same reasons; or, if she did not, as he had
affirmed nothing contrary to truth, he might pretend to have concealed it in
jest. Sir James, as soon as he had received this intelligence, took his leave
with some appearance of satisfaction, and was followed by the Doctor.

As soon as Mrs. Freeman and the Captain were alone, she questioned him, with
great earnestness, about the ^dy, whom he had been seen to put into a chair.
When he heard that this incident had been related in the presence of Sir James,
he was greatly alarmed lest Lady Forest should increase his suspicions, by
attempting to conceal that, which, by a series of inquiry to which he was now
stimulated, he would probably discover: he condemned this conduct in himself,
and, as the most effect^^ means at once to quiet the mind of his wife and
obtain her assistance, he told her all that had happened, and his apprehension
of the consequences: he also urged her to go directly to Miss Meadows, by whom
his account would be confirmed, of whom she might learn farther intelligence of
Sir James; and to find some way to acquaint Lady Forest with her danger, and
admonish her to conceal nothing.

Mrs. Freeman was convinced of the Captain's sincerity, not only by the advice
he urged her to give Lady Forest, but by the consistency of the story and the
manner in which he was affected. Her jealousy was changed into pity for her
friend, and apprehension for her husband. She hasted to Miss Meadows, and
learnt that Sir James had inquired of the servant for his lady, and was told
that she had been there early with Captain Freeman, but went away soon after
him: she related to Miss Meadows all that had happened, and thinking it at
least possible that Sir James might not go directly home, she wrote the
following letter to his lady.

"MY DEAR LADY FOREST,
"I AM in the utmost distress for you. Sir James has suspicions, which truth
only can remove, and of which my indiscretion is the cause. If I had not
concealed my desire of the Captain's return, your design to disengage yourself
from him, which I learn from Miss Meadows, would have been effected. Sir James
breakfasted with me in the Haymarket; and has since called at your father's,
from whence I write: he knows that your stay here was short, and has reason to
believe the Captain put you into a chair, some hours afterward, at
Spring-Gardens. I hope, therefore, my dear lady, that this will reach your
hands time enough to prevent your concealing any thing. It would have been
better if Sir James had known nothing, for then you would not have been
suspected; but now he must know all, or you cannot be justified. Forgive the
freedom with which I write; and believe me, most affectionately,

Yours, MARIA FREEMAN.
"P. S. I have ordered the bearer to say he came from Mrs. Fashion, the
milliner."




This letter was given to a chairman, and he was ordered to say he brought it
from the milliner's; because, if it should he known to come from Mrs. Freeman,
and should fall by accident into Sir James's hands, his curiosity might prompt
him to read it, and his jealousy to question the lady, without communicating
the contents.

Sir James being convinced that his lady and the Captain had passed the morning
at a bagnio, by the answer which he received at her father's, went directly
home. His lady was just arrived before him, and had not recovered from the
confusion and dread, which seized her, when she heard that Sir James came to
town the night before, and at the same instant anticipated the consequences of
her own indiscretion.

She was told he was then at the coffee-house, and in a few minutes was thrown
into an universal tremor, upon hearing him knock at the door. He perceived her
distress, not with compassion but rage, because he believed it to proceed from
the consciousness of guilt. He turned pale, and his lips quivered; but he so
far restrained his passion, as to ask her, without invective, "Where and how
she had passed the night." She replied, "at Captain Freeman's; that the Captain
was upon guard; that she sat up with his lady till he came in, and that he then
insisting to see her home, she would suffer ^he coach to go no further than her
father's, where he left her early in the morning." She had not fortitude to
relate the sequel, but stopped with some appearance of irresolution and terror.
Sir James then asked, "If she came directly from her father's home?" This
question, and the manner in which it was asked, increased her confusion. To
appear to have stopped short in her narrative, she thought would be an
implication of guilt, as it would betray a desire of concealment: but the past
could not be recalled, and she was impelled by equivocation to falsehood, from
which, however, she would have been kept back by fear, if Sir James had not
deceived her into a belief that he had been no further than the neighborhood.
After these tumultuous reflections, which passed in a moment, she ventured to
affirm, that "she staid with Miss Meadows till eight, and then came home:" but
she uttered this falsehood with such marks of guilt and shame, which she had,
indeed, no otherwise than by this falsehood incurred or deserved, that Sir
James no more doubted her infidelity than her existence. As her story was the
same with that of the Captain's, and as one had concealed the truth and the
other denied it, he concluded that there was a confederacy between them; and,
determining first to bring the Captain to account, he turned from her abruptly,
and immediately left the house.

At the door he met the chairman, who had been dispatched by Mrs. Freeman to
his lady; and fiercely interrogating him what was his business, the man
produced the letter, and saying, as he had been ordered, that he brought it
from Mrs. Fashion. Sir James snatched it from him, and, muttering some
expressions of contempt and resentment, thrust it into his pocket.

It happened that Sir James did not find the Captain at home; he therefore left
a billet, in which he requested to see him at a neighboring tavern, and added,
that he had put on his sword.

In the mean time, his lady, dreading a discovery of the falsehood which she
had asserted, dispatched a billet to Captain Freeman; in which she conjured him
as a man of honor, for particular reasons not to own to Sir James, or any
other person, that he had seen her after he had left her at her father's: she
also wrote to her cousin Meadows, entreating, that if she was questioned by Sir
James, he might be told that she staid with her till eight o'clock, an hour at
which only herself and the servants were up.

The billet to Miss Meadows came soon after the chairman had returned with an
account of what had happened to the letter; and Mrs. Freeman was just gone in
great haste to relate the accident to the Captain, as it was of importance that
he should know it before his next interview with Sir James: but the Captain had
been at home before her, and received both Sir James's billet and that of his
lady. He went immediately to the tavern, and inquiring for Sir James Forest,
was shown into a back room, one pair of stairs. Sir James received his
salutation without reply, and instantly bolted the door. His jealousy was
complicated with that indignation and contempt, which a sense of injury from a
person of inferior rank never fails to produce: he, therefore, demanded of the
Captain, in a haughty tone, "whether he had not that morning been in company
with his wife, after he had left her at her father's?" The Captain, who was
incensed at Sir James's manner, and deemed himself engaged in honor to keep
the lady's secret, answered, that "after what he had said in the morning, no
man had a right to suppose he had seen the lady afterward; that to insinuate
the contrary was obliquely to charge him with a falsehood; that he was bound to
answer no such questions, till they were properly explained; and that as a
gentleman he was prepared to vindicate his honor." Sir James justly deemed
this reply an equivocation and an insult; and being no longer able to restrain
his rage, he cursed the Captain as a liar and a scoundrel, and at the same time
striking him a violent blow with his fist, drew his sword and put himself in a
posture of defense. Whatever design the Captain might have had to bring his
friend to temper, and reconcile him to his wife, when he first entered the
room, he was now equally enraged, and, indeed, had suffered equal indignity;
he, therefore, drew at the same instant, and, after a few desperate passes on
both sides, he received a wound in his breast, and, reeling backward a few
paces, fell down.

The noise had brought many people to the door of the room, and it was forced
open just as the Captain had received his wound: Sir James was secured, and a
messenger was dispatched for a surgeon. In the mean time, the Captain perceived
himself to be dying: and wha^^ver might before have been his opinion of right
and wrong* and honor and shame, he now thought all dissimulat^ criminal, and
that his murderer had a right to that tru^^ which he thought it meritorious to
deny him when ^e was his friend: he, therefore, earnestly desired to speak a
few words to him in private. This request was im^diately granted; the persons
who had rushed in withdrew contenting themselves to keep guard at the door; a^
the Captain beckoning Sir James to kneel down by hi^* then told him, that
"however his lady might have b^ surprised or betrayed by pride or fear into
dissimulation or falsehood, she was innocent of the crime which he supposed her
solicitous to conceal." He then briefly related all the events as they had
happened; and at last, grasping his hand, urged him to escape from the window
that he might be a friend to his widow and to his child, if its birth should
not be prevented by the death of its father. Sir James yielded to the force of
this motive* and escaped as the Captain had directed. In his way to Dover, he
read the letter which he had taken from the chairman, and by the next post
enclosed it in the following to his lady: "MY DEAR CHARLOTTE,
"I AM the most wretched of all men! But I do not upbraid you as the cause.
Would to God that I were not more guilty than you! We are the martyrs of
dissimulation. By dissimulation dear Captain Freeman was induced to waste those
hours with you, which he would otherwise have enjoyed with the poor unhappy
dissembler, his wife. Trusting in the success of dissimulation, you was tempted
to venture into the Park, where you met him whom you wished to shun. By
detecting dissimulation in the Captain, my suspicions were increased; and by
dissimulation and falsehood you confirmed them. But your dissimulation and
falsehood were the effects of mine; yours were ineffectual, mine succeeded:
for I left word that I was gone no further than the coffee-house, that you
might not suspect I had learned too much to be deceived. By the success of a
lie put into the mouth of a chairman, I was prevented from reading a letter,
which at last would have undeceived me; and by persisting in dissimulation, the
Captain has made his friend a fugitive and his wife a widow. Thus does
insincerity terminate in misery and confusion, whether, in its immediate
purpose, it succeeds or is disappointed. O my dear Charlotte! if ever we meet
again, -- to meet again in peace is impossible -- but if ever we meet again,
let us resolve to be sincere: to be sincere is to be wise, innocent, and safe.
We venture to commit faults, which shame or fear would prevent, if we did not
hope to conceal them by a lie. But in the labyrinth of falsehood, men meet
those evils, which they seek to avoid; and as in the straight path of truth
alone they can see before them, in the straight path of truth alone they can
pursue felicity with success. Adieu! I am -- dreadful! -- I can subscribe
nothing, that does not reproach and torment me! -- Adieu!"




Within a few weeks after the receipt of this letter, the unhappy lady heard
that her husband was cast away in his passage to France.

URGANDA AND FATIMA. AN EASTERN TALE.
IN one of the most beautiful valleys that lie upon the borders of the East,
lived Zegdad, an inoffensive shepherd. He had but one child, and having been
early deprived of his wife, he lavished his whole stock of tenderness on Fatima.

Though fortune had not been lavish of her gifts to the father of Fatima, yet
he wanted not the necessaries or the comforts of life; his cottage was clean,
and furnished with every thing useful; his fields supplied him with food, his
flock with raiment.

Fatima was coarse in her person, but she was cheerful and good-natured; she
rose each morn with the feathered songsters, and cheerfully performed the
duties of her station; her whole study was to please her father, and a smile
from Zegdad was, at any time, ample ^^ompense for the severest fatigue, and
like a cordial served to revive her drooping spirits. She would assist, (...)
asked, in the most laborious employments, and when (...) labor of the day was
past, she would lightly trip over the green turf, with her young companions,
while her father played on the flagelet. The mind of Fati^^ was calm as the
delights of paradise.

One day her father sent her to the Grand Vizier's* with fruit for his
favorite; she was conducted by an eunuch into the garden, where the beautiful
Semira was reposing on a bed of roses, clad in all the pomp of eastern
magnificence, while two slaves were fanning her (...) rest.

Fatima had never before seen aught but simplicity: she was filled with wonder
and astonishment at the surprising beauty and grandeur of Semira; and as she
ga^ed, envy and discontent crept into her hitherto guileless heart.

She returned home with a mind totally altered from what it was. Her rural
pastimes no more delighted her; labor was now a trouble; she had been a
witness to the ease and indolence of Semira. I^ at any time she caught a
glimpse of her person in the stream, she turned from it with disgust. Her days
were joyless, and her nights spent in bewailing her unhappy lot.

One evening, deaf to the solicitations of her young companions, she retired to
a thick grove, and inattentive to the sound of the flagelet, thus gave vent to
her sorrow:

"Oh, wretched Fatima! unhappy maid! Why was I born to so hard a fate? to eat
the bread of labor, to sleep upon a rushy couch, while Semira is surrounded
with splendour, is served by kneeling slaves, and sleep^ on a bed of down! Why
has nature denied me those ravishing beauties, it has so bountifully lavished
on her? her eyes are bright as the stars, her lips like half-blown roses, her
hand and arm like polished ivory. Oh! why was not I lovely as Semira, and
favorite to the Grand Vizier? In this low abject state my being is
intolerable; I will no longer endure it, but in yon limpid stream lose the
remembrance of myself and Semira."

At this moment the Fairy Urganda stood before her.

"Thy complaints are just, oh, Fatima! (said she) and if thou will relinquish
thy home, and forsake thy father, thou shall enjoy the utmost extent of thy
wishes."

Fatima eagerly complied with the offered terms, and the Fairy immediately
sprinkled her with water, at the same time pronouncing some mystic words, when
she was transformed into a virgin of transcendant beauty, and found herself in
the garden of a palace belonging to the Grand Vizier.

The lovely Semira had the day before offended her lord, and was no longer a
favorite. Fatima attracted the notice of the Vizier; he ordered her to be led
into splendid apartments, clothed with costly robes, adorned with jewels, and
appointed slaves to wait on her and comply with all her wishes; and Fatima
supplied the place of the degraded Semira.

She now thought herself the happiest among the happy; but the Vizier was
passionate, capricious, jealous, and extremely cruel; and it was not long
before the disappointed Fatima discovered that to be favorite to the Grand
Vizier was to live only in splendid slavery.

"But (said she often to herself) though the Grand Vizier's favorite is
miserable, how superlatively happy must be the favorite Sultana of my lord the
Emperor! Oh! could I but attain that envied station, how soon should the
imperious Vizier suffer for his barbarity to me."

Again did the bosom of Fatima suffer all the miseries of discontent; the
vaulted roofs, spacious gardens, and rich presents of the Vizier, no longer
charmed her; she sighed for the ensigns of royalty, and her pillow was nightly
bedewed with her tears.

One evening she retired to an arbor, at the extremity of the garden, and
throwing herself on the banks where she had first seen Semira, thus poured
forth her complaints:

"How wretched is the fate of Fatima! condemned to drag a hated being with a
man, who studies only his own gratification, and expects me to be the slave of
his caprice and passion. Oh! could I but get from this detested place, I would
fly to my lord the Emperor, and bow myself low in the dust before him. My
charms might captivate his royal heart, and I might reign Empress of the East."

As she spoke these words, a sudden light entered the arbor, and the Fairy
Urganda again stood before her.

"Beautiful Fatima, (said she) forbear your complaints, the prophet permits you
to enjoy your wish; then rise and follow me."

The Fairy led her to the Emperor's palace, and placed her among a number of
beautiful slaves, from among which the Emperor was next morning to choose a
favorite. In the morning the Emperor passed through the apartment, and his
choice fell on Fatima. She was clothed in the ensigns of royalty, led in state
to the mosque, and in a few hours heard herself proclaimed Empress of the East.

But Fatima had to the idea of royalty annexed the ideas of youth and beauty;
how surprised was she then to find the Emperor old, ugly, and deformed in his
person, morose in his disposition, and jealous in the extreme. She shrunk from
his embraces with horror, and contracted so settled an aversion to him, that
not all the splendour which awaited her could in the smallest degree compensate
for the many tedious hours she was obliged to devote to him.

Among the slaves that attended on Fatima, was the artful Zynina, who had long,
with envious eyes, beheld the love of the Emperor bestowed on others, and only
watched an opportunity to ingratiate herself in his favor, by rendering him
some piece of service. To this end she cultivated the friendship of the new
Queen, and by degrees drew from her the reason of her tears and dejection.

This intelligence was instantly conveyed to the Emperor, with the addition of
Fatima's heart being dedicated to another. Osmin, willing to be convinced of
the truth of Zynina's declaration, desired to be concealed in an apartment
adjoining the Queen's, where he might easily overhear any thing that passed
between her and the deceitful slave, who immediately returned to her mistress,
and artfully renewed the conversation.

Fatima, glad to unburthen her almost bursting heart, confessed her settled
aversion to her lord, and that death itself would be preferable to her present
situation. "Then death be thy portion!" cried the enraged Emperor, furiously
rushing into the apartment, and lifting his glittering scimetar.

Fatima fell upon her knees, and, in an agony of terror exclaimed, "Oh that I
was an humble cottager, and had never known the pangs that wait on greatness."

At that moment she found herself clad in her former homely apparel, standing
at the door of her father's cottage, when the Fairy appeared and thus addressed
her:

"Fatima, I have shown you the vanity of human wishes; learn from hence to be
content with the allotments of Providence. Whatever be your situation in life,
submit to it without repining; and know that our holy prophet, who orders all
things in this terrestrial world, knows what is best for mortals. Fulfill,
therefore, the respective duties of thy station, to the utmost of thy power:
envy not the superior lot of another, but humbly take the blessings within thy
reach, enjoy them, and be happy."

ADDRESS TO THE SUN.
" -- O THOU, that rollest above, round as the shield of my fathers! whence are
thy beams, O Sun! thy everlasting light! Thou come forth in thy awful beauty,
and the stars hide themselves in the sky: the moon, cold and pale, sinks in the
western wave, but thou thyself movest alone: who can be a companion of thy
course? The oaks of the mountain fall; the mo^^tains themselves decay with
years; the ocean shri^^s, and grows again; the moon herself ^s lost in heaven;
but thou art forever the same, rejoicing in the brightness of thy course. When
the world is dark with tempest; when thunder rolls, and lightning flies, thou
looke^ in thy beauty from the clouds, and laughest at the storm. But to Ossian
thou look in vain, for he beholds thy beams no more; whether thy yellow hair
flows on the eastern clouds, or thou tremblest at the gates of the well. But
thou art, perhaps, like me, for a season, and thy years will have an end. Thou
shall sleep in thy clouds, careless of the voice of the morning. Exult then, O
Sun, in the strength of thy youth! age is dark and unlovely; it is like the
glimmering light of the moon, when it shines through broken clouds. The blast
of the north is on the plain, and the traveller shrinks in the midst of his
journey."

FILIAL AFEFCTION AND DUTY EXEMPLIFIED.
MR. Hargrave is one of my earliest friends. Being many years younger than he,
I have ever been accustomed to regard him both as my guardian and my friend:
and the reverence, with which I looked on him in one character, never took from
the tender and affectionate warmth I felt for him in the other. After having
been, for some time, a good deal in the world, he retired to the country, where
he lived with elegance and ease. His wife, a very amiable woman, died soon
after her marriage, leaving one only child, a girl, to the care of whose
education Mr. Hargrave, after her mother's death, devoted his whole attention.
Nature had done much for her; and the instruction she received from an
accomplished father, gave her every grace, which can adorn the female character.

Emily Hargrave was now in her twentieth year. Her father was advanced in life,
and he began to feel the weaknesses of age coming fast upon him. Independent of
the gratification which he used to receive from the observation of his
daughter's virtues and accomplishments, he had come to feel a pleasure somewhat
more selfish from the advantage, which those virtues were of to himself. Her
care and dutiful attention were become almost necessary to him; and the
principal pleasure he received was from her company and conversation. Emily was
sensible of this; and, though she was at pains to conceal her solicitude, it
was plain that her whole care centered in him.

It was impossible that a girl so amiable as Emily Hargrave could fail to
attract attention. Several young men of character and fortune became her
professed admirers. But, though she had a sweetness, which gave her a
benevolent affability to all, she was of a mind too delicate to be easily
satisfied in the choice of a husband. In her present circumstances, she had
another objection to every change of situation. She felt too much anxiety about
her father, to think of any thing which could call off her attention from him,
and make it proper to place any of it elsewhere. With the greatest delicacy,
therefore, and with that propriety with which her conduct was always attended,
she checked every advance that was made her; while, at the same time, she was
at the utmost pains to conceal from her father the voluntary sacrifice, which
she was resolved to make on his account.

About a month ago, I paid a visit to Mr. Hargrave's family. The imbecilities
of age, which were beginning to approach the last time I had seen him, had now
made great advances. Formerly Mr. Hargrave used to be the delight of every
company, and he never spoke without being instructing or entertaining. Now he
spoke little; when he did, it was with feebleness both of voice and manner.
Feeling his memory declining, sensible that he was not so acute as he once was,
and unable to keep up his attention to a continued discourse, though his
understanding was still perfectly good, he was afraid to venture his opinion,
or to take any decided measure. He was too conscious of his own infirmities;
and that consciousness led him to think that his failure was greater than it
really was. In this situation, his whole dependence was upon Emily, and she was
his only support. Never, indeed, did I see any thing more lovely, more engaging.

To all her other charms, the anxious solicitude she felt for her father had
stamped upon her countenance "That expression sweet of melancholy
Which captivates the soul."


There is something in the female character, which requires support. That
gentleness, that delicate softness approaching to timidity, which forms its
most amiable feature, makes it stand in need of assistance. That support and
assistance Emily had received in the completest manner from her father. What an
alteration now! Instead of receiving support herself, she was obliged to give
it; she was under the necessity of assisting, of counselling, and of
strengthening the timid resolutions of him, who had been, in her earlier years,
her instructor and her guide, and to whom, next to Heaven, she had ever looked
up. Emily felt all this; but feeling took not from her the power of acting.

Mr. Hargrave is abundantly sensible of his daughter's goodness. Her
consciousness of this, and of how much importance her attentions are to her
father, gives her the best consolation.

While I was at his house, he hardly ever spoke of himself. Once, indeed, I
remember he said to me, "I am become a strange being; even the goodness of that
girl distresses me; it is too much for me to bear: it is," added he, in a very
faint and broken voice, "like to overwhelm me."

I have often observed, that there is a perseverance in virtue, and a real
magnanimity in the other sex, which is scarcely to be equalled in our's. In the
virtue of men, there are generally some considerations not altogether pure,
attending it, which though they may not detract from, must certainly diminish
our wonder at their conduct. The heroic actions of men are commonly performed
upon the great theater, and the performers have the applauses of an attending
and admiring world to animate and support them. When Regulus suffered all the
tortures which cruelty could invent, rather than give up his honor or his
country, he was supported by the conscious admiration of those countrymen, whom
he had left, and of those enemies in whose hands he was. Wh^ Cato stabbed
himself, rather than give up the cause (...) liberty, he felt a pride which
told him, " Cato's would (...) no less honored than Caesar's sword;" and when
the " self devoted Decii died," independent of their love for Rome, they had
every motive of applause to animate their conduct; but when Emily Hargrave
sacrifices every thing to filial goodness and filial affection, she can have no
concomitant motive, she can have no external circumstance to animate her. Her
silent and secret virtue is the pure and unmingled effect of tenderness, of
affection, and of duty.

AN AFFECTING SCENE.
THE consideration of death has been always made use of, by the moralist and
the divine, as a powerful incentive to virtue and to piety. From the
uncertainty of life, they have endeavored to sink the estimation of its
pleasures, and, if they could not strip the seductions of vice of their present
enjoyments, at least to load them with the fear of their end.

But, though neither the situation of the world, nor the formation of our
minds, allow the thoughts of futurity or death a constant or prevailing effect
upon our lives, they may surely sometimes, not unseasonably, press upon our
imagination: even exclusive of their moral or religious use, there is a
sympathetic enjoyment, which often makes it not only better, but more
delightful to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting.

Perhaps I felt it so, when, but a few days since, I attended the funeral of a
young lady, who was torn, in the bloom of youth and beauty, from the arms of a
father, who doated on her, of a family by whom she was adored: I think I would
not have exchanged my feelings, at that time, for all the mirth which gaiety
could inspire, or all the pleasure which luxury could bestow.

Maria was in her twentieth year. To the beauty of her form, and excellence of
her natural disposition, a parent equally indulgent and attentive had done the
fa^^est justice. To accomplish her person, and to cultivate her mind, every
endeavor had been used; and they had been attended with that success, which
they commonly meet with, when not prevented by mistaken fondness or untimely
vanity. Few young ladies have attracted more admiration; none ever felt it
less. With all the charms of beauty, and the polish of education, the plainest
were not less affected, nor the most ignorant less assuming. She died when
every tongue was eloquent of her virtues, and every hope was ripening to reward
them.

It is by such private domestic distresses, that the softer emotions of the
heart are most strongly excited. The fall of more important personages is
commonly distant from our observation; but even where it happens under our
immediate notice, there is a mixture of other feelings, by which our compassion
is weakened. The eminently great, or extensively useful, leave behind them a
train of interrupted views, and disappointed expectations, by which the
distress is complicated, beyond the simplicity of pity. But the death of one
who, like Maria, was to shed the influence of her virtues over the age of her
father and the childhood of her sisters, presents to us a little view of family
affliction, which every eye can perceive, and every heart can feel. On scenes
of public sorrow and national regret, we gaze as upon those gallery pictures,
which strike us with wonder and admiration; domestic calamity is like the
miniature of a friend, which we wear in our bosoms, and keep for secret looks
and solitary enjoyment.

The last time I saw Maria was in the midst of a crowded assembly of the
fashionable and the gay, where she fixed all eyes by the gracefulness of her
motions, and the native dignity of her mien; yet so tempered was that
superiority, which they conferred, with gentleness and modesty, that not a
murmur was heard, either from the rivalship of beauty, or the envy of
homeliness. From that scene the transition was so violent to the hearse and the
pall, the grave and the sod, that once or twice my imagination turned rebel to
my senses: I beheld the objects around me as the painting of a d^eam, and
thought of Maria as still living.

I was soon, however, recalled to the sad reality. The figure of her father
bending over the grave of his darling child; the silent suffering composure, in
which his countenance was fixed; the tears of his attendants, whose grief was
light and capable of tears; these gave me back the truth, and reminded me that
I should see her no more. There was a f^ow of sorrow with which I suffered
myself to be borne along, with a melancholy sort of indulgence; but when her
father dropped the cord, with which he had helped to lay his Maria in the
earth, its found on the coffin chilled my heart, and horror for a moment took
place of pity!

It was but for a moment. He looked eagerly into the grave; made one
involuntary motion to stop the assistants, who were throwing the earth into it;
then suddenly recollecting himself, clasped his hands together, threw up his
eyes to Heaven; and then first I saw a few tears drop from them. I gave
language to all this. It spoke a lesson of faith, and piety, and resignation. I
went away sorrowful, but my sorrow was neither ungentle nor unmanly. I cast on
this world a glance rather of pity than of enmity; on the next, a look of
humbleness and hope!

VISIT TO BEDLAM. DISTRESSES OF A DAUGHTER.
-- SEPARATE from the rest stood one, whose appearance had something of
superior dignity. Her face, though pale and wasted, was less squalid than those
of the others, and showed a dejection of that decent kind, which moves our
pity, unmixed with horror: upon her, therefore, the eyes of all were
immediately turned. The keeper, who accompanied them, observed it: "This," said
he, "is a young lady, who was born to ride in a coach and six. She was beloved,
if the story I have heard is true, by a young gentleman, her equal in birth,
though by no means her match in fortune: but love, they say, is blind, and so
she fancied him as much as he did her. Her father, it seems, would not hear of
the marriage, and threatened to turn her out of doors, if ever she saw him
again. Upon this, the young gentleman took a voyage to the West Indies, in
hopes of bettering his fortune, and obtaining his mistress; but he was scarce
landed, when he was seized with one of the fevers, which are common in those
islands, and died in a few days, lamented by every one that knew him. This news
soon reached his mistress, who was at the same time pressed by her father to
marry a rich miserly f^^low, who was old enough to be her grandfather. The
death of her lover had no effect on her inhuman parent: he was only the more
earnest for the marriage with the man he had provided for her; and what between
(...) despair at the death of one, and her aversion to the other, the poor
young lady was reduced to the condition you see her in. But God would not
suffer such cruelty: her father's affairs soon after went to wreck, and he died
almost a beggar."

Though this story was told in very plain language, it had particularly
attracted Harley's notice; he had given it the tribute of some tears. The
unfortunate young lady had till now seemed entranced in thought, with her eyes
fixed on a little garnet ring she wore on her finger: she turned them now upon
Harley. "My Billy is no more!" said she, "do you weep for my Billy? Blessings
on your tears! I could weep too, but my brain is dry; and it burns, it burns,
it burns!" She drew nearer to Harley. "Be comforted, young lady," said he,
"your Billy is in heaven." "Is he, indeed? and shall we meet again? and shall
that frightful man (pointing to the keeper) not be there? Alas! I am grown
naughty of late; I have almost forgotten to think of heaven: yet, I pray
sometimes; when I can, I pray; and sometimes I sing; when I am saddest, I sing;
-- you shall hear me -- hush!

"Light be the earth on Billy's breast,
And green the sod that wraps his grave!"
There was a plaintive wildness in the air, not to be withstood; and, except
the keeper's, there was not an vnmoistened eye around her.

"Do you weep again?" said she; "I would not have you weep; you are like my
Billy: you are, believe me; just so he looked when he gave me this ring; poor
Billy! it was the last time ever we met! -- "

"'It Was when the seas were roaring -- I love you for resembling my Billy; but I
shall never love any man like him." She stretched out her hand to Harley; he
pressed it between both his, and bathed it with tears. "Nay, that is Billy's
ring; you cannot have it, indeed; but here is another, look here, which I
plaited today of some gold thread from this bit of stuff; will you keep it for
my sake? I am a strange girl; but my heart is harmless: my poor heart; it will
burst some day; feel how it beats!" She pressed his hand to her bosom, then
holding her head in the attitude of listening -- "Hark! one, two, three! be
quiet, thou little trembler; my Billy is cold! but I had forgotten the ring."
She put it on his finger. "Farewell! I must leave you now." She would have
withdrawn her hand; Harley held it to his lips. "I dare not stay longer; my
head throbs sadly: farewell!" She walked with a hurried step to a little
apartment at some distance. Harley stood fixed in astonishment and pity; his
friend gave money to the keeper. Harley looked on his ring. He put a couple of
guineas into the man's hand: "Be kind to that unfortunate." He burst into
tears, and left them.

ISAAC AND REBEKAH.
THE sweetest simplicity that can be conceived in composition, distinguishes,
in general, the tender narratives of the Bible, from the love-tales of modern
writers; nor does any author approach, in any degree, near them in this
respect, except some parts in the works of the immortal Shakespeare; and one
would think, in some places where he treated of the tender attachment of the
sexes, that he had an eye to the unaffected beauties of the Scripture. The
history of Rebekah and Rachel are both related in a language, and in a manner
beyond description, fine and natural: every syllable has its charm, and the
whole is a feast for the fancy and the heart. Let us select a few passages from
each story; and first from that of Rebekah.

"And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that behold Rebekah came
out with her pitcher upon her shoulder; and the damsel was very fair to look
upon* and a virgin; and she went down to the well and fille^ her pitcher, and
came up; and the servant of Abraham ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray
thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher."

Could any incident he possibly introduced with more simplicity? or could any
be more favorable to begin the conversation? As if the servant, on seeing her
approach, had said to himself -- Before I enter upon a more important subject,
before I touch upon the point in which my master and his son are so tenderly
interested, I will begin to try her disposition by slighter circumstances; and
being a traveller and a stranger, I will examine her hospitality. Let me, I
pray thee, fair damsel, refresh myself amidst the fatigue of a long journey, by
a cool draught of the water which thou have just drawn from the well. What can
be more courteous than her answer? "Drink, my lord!" There is an elegance in
the brevity of this reply. An ordinary writer would have made her stand
curtesying and complimenting for many an idle minute, with the pitcher in her
hand, and at last made many excuses that she had no cup ready to present it
more politely. Such is the abominable parade of literary refinement! But with
equal frankness and prettiness Rebekah only said, "Drink, my lord." And then,
instead of entering into prolix civilities, she hasted, i. e. she set down her
pitcher as expeditiously as possible, and gave him drink: and when he had done,
(but not till then) she said, "Now will I draw water for thy camels also, till
they have done drinking."

The urbanity of a court could not have exceeded this; nor could any character
more sweetly explain itself. Having had sufficient evidence of her kind temper
and gentle heart, the servant now vent^^ed to inquire after her family -- And
whose fair daughter art thou, obliging damsel? tell me, I pray thee, for thy
goodness has made me not a little solicitous about thee: is there room in thy
father's house for us to lodge? Her answer to this does her fresh honor; for,
persisting in her amiable humor, she told him she was the daughter of Bethuel,
the son of Milcah, and that she had both straw and provender enough, and room
to lodge in. And the damsel ran show the spirit of the character is preserved!)
to tell those of her mother's house the request of the traveller, speaking no
doubt, as favorably of him as she could. Her intelligence soon brought forth
her brother, who had been informed by his sister that he was the servant of the
celebrated Abraham: and the brother, whose name was Laban, invited him in, with
the most friendly cordiality; and pressed him much to eat such delicacies as
were most speedily provided. But the servant, willing to take advantage of so
fair an opportunity, and improve the moment of benevolence, declared his
resolution to refuse food till he had told his errand. This message is
delivered with the utmost perspicuity, honesty, and exactness. After he had
finished, he requested an immediate answer. "And now," said he, "I beseech
thee, deal kindly and truly with my master." Then the brothers of the damsel
answer in a remarkable but very affectionate manner. -- The thing proceeds
from the Lord, we cannot answer thee bad or good; i. e. it appears to be a
pre-determined matter of the Deity: to refuse thee, therefore, might seem
presumptuous; and yet as brothers, having no authority over the affections of
the maid, whose happiness is dear to us, how shall we speak absolutely in thy
master's favor? Perhaps, however, Abraham could not possibly have dispatched a
more trusty messenger; for, having received this ambiguous reply, by which
nothing was determined, he tries, in the next place, a stroke of policy worthy
to ^e recorded. As soon as he had bowed himself in ^eful acknowledgment to
Heaven, for so much good fortune, he very j^diciously turns his efforts toward
obtaining the consent of the virgin: and he first begins his attack upon (...)
vanity, from which, with all her courtesy, one cannot suppose her to have been
totally exempt: he brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment, and gave them to Rebekah. The man discovered no small knowledge of
human nature (ever operating, in many cases alike) in this conduct; and still
more, when desirous to get all the family on his side, he gave precious things
to the brothers and mother. Surely an amor by proxy was never better or more
skilfully carried on, from the beginning to the end.

When he had made the presents, he did not improperly press for a direct
reward, nor indeed so much as mention the matter farther at that time; but
leaving the damsel to meditate upon her ornaments, he ate and drank and passed
the night socially, and suspended the delicate subject. Here was a sagacity
displayed, to the despair of our dealers in romance, who preposterously jumble
together inconsistences, and deviate eternally from prudence and nature. In the
morning, however, he desired his answer. Whatever were the sentiments of the
fair virgin, the brother and mother relented; and, desiring her company a few
days longer, they promised she should go. In this request there is a surprising
sweetness: how the relation speaks in it! At any rate, she must abide with us a
little while, at the least ten days: we cannot part without some endearing
preparations; it would break our hearts. I pray thee, therefore, allow thus
much to our kindred feelings; and if thou find the maid nothing reluctant,
why, after that she shall go back with thee, to thy master and his son. But,
possibly, the servant did not wish to trust the thing so many days undecided;
and he might understand enough of human sickleness to apprehend strange changes
of mind in the course of that time. However this be, he strongly urged an
instant reply. The whole matter was drawing to a crisis. They called the
damsel, and put to her the decisive question; and the result was, her consent
to the suit: in consequence of which, she set off with the man, attended by a
favorite servant, (her nurse) for the house of Abraham. In the mean time,
Isaac was not indifferent to the event of the transaction; for he went out in
the field at eventide, to meditate, as we are told; but, more probably, to meet
his destined bride; and when he saw the camels were coming, he was, no doubt,
much affected with the approaching interview.

There is great delicacy preserved in the character of Rebekah, in the
description of this interview. As soon as she saw her future lord, she lighted
off her camel; and when the servant informed her it was Isaac, with a modesty
truly feminine, and beyond the mere force of custom, she covered herself with a
veil. When the servant communicated to Isaac the whole of the circumstances, he
was charmed with her conduct; and the last verse of this interesting history
represents the lover tenderly leading her into the tent of his mother; soon
after which, he courted her heart, and she became his wife, and was beloved.
What a noble poem, or rather, what a poetical fact, is here exhibited in a
single leaf! Tenderness, sweetness, and the most delicate assemblage of images
are judiciously blended, without the least appearance of affectation, or the
smallest want of advantageous language.

STORY OF NAOMI AND RUTH.
PASSAGE.
And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after
thee; for whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge:
thy people shall be my people, and thy God, my God.
THERE never was any thing more happily conceived, or more sweetly told than
the book of Ruth. It seems chiefly designed to exhibit to us a lively and
high-colored picture of the force of female friendship on the one hand, and
the weakness of resolution, when opposed by custom on the other. The general
circumstances of the story being uncommonly fine, will spe^^ best for
themselves, and afford proper comments in the progress of reciting them.

When the famine raged with much severity in her native land, Naomi and her
husband Elimelech, and their two sons, went to sojourn in the country of Moab;
but Elimelech died, and Naomi, the widow, was left with her children. Soon
after this, those children "took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of
the one was Orpah, and the other Ruth." It came to pass that the young men,
their husbands, died also, both of them; and now the poor widow was bereaved of
her sons and her husband. Unable, therefore, to bear any longer a place in
which every scene presented some image of lost endearment, or revived some
distracting idea of conjugal or maternal tenderness, she resolved to seek
solace from her sorrow, by change of residence. So she arose with her
daughters-in-law, Orpah and Ruth, that she might return from the country of
Moab. It presently occurred to the poor woman, as she was journeying on her
way, that if she was unhappy, it was no testimony of her affection to involve
her sons' wives in equal calamities; and judging the reception she would be
likely to meet in the land of Judah, entering it desolate, unfriended, and
unadorned, she paused a moment, and thus pathetically addressed the young
widows: "Go, my children, each of you return to your mother's house; the Lord
deal kindly with you, as you have dealt with the dead, and with me. The Lord
grant that ye may find rest, each of you, in the house of your dear deceased
husband." Having uttered this short prayer for their happiness, she kissed
them, and prepared to depart alone. How tr^^ to nature was their reply! They
did not pour forth unmeaning compliments of condolence: they did not
interchange any idle civilities of sorrow, for their anguish was too sincere
for ceremony; neither did they enter into the parade of promising future
interviews; for they spoke not at all.

The extreme of grief has, at the first surprise, little to do with language:
at the most, it bursts into short exclamations, as if it would show the
impossibility of proceeding: for our alleviation, therefore, in these cases,
that Power, who to every wound has provided something ^^erewith to heal it,
gave the comfort of tears, so that the fullness of the sad heart is, in part,
discharged by that kindly effusion which Providence has intended as a fountain
to relieve the excesses of nature; either in the surplus of misery or
transport. "They lifted up their voice and wept." -- A folio could not so well
display their condition. After some time passed in this significant silence,
they said unto her, "Surely we will return with thee unto thy people." Here,
again, genuine grief discovers itself: one tender sentence, and one only,
expresses their designs and wishes to attend her. In such cases, conciseness is
nature, and circumlocution mere art and affectation. Perceiving the design of
the daughters, the widow-woman Naomi again began to dissuade them, and to press
their speedy return. She painted the various disasters they would be liable to,
in her company; told them she had no more sons to give them for husbands; nor
even a ^ut, however uncheary and forlorn, to accommodate them with in her own
country: and, furthermore, that she had not wherewithal to repose her own head
upon, if, after the fatigues of travel, she should happily arrive safe. And now
she once more pressed the women in a farewell embrace, whilst she closed her
argument with another blessing, more melting even than the first. -- "Nay, my
daughters, weep not, I entreat you. It grieveth me more for your sakes than my
own, that the hand of the Lord has gone out against me." This was the
touchstone: she had now fairly discovered all the horrors of her situation, and
showed herself a woman without accommodation; a traveller, without hope of rest
at the end of her journey; and a widow, without one to take her by the hand,
and say unto her, Welcome unfortunate! welcome again to thine own country. The
picture was too deeply shaded for Orpah. The dread of poverty, and all its
sable catalogue of terrors, struck her at once: she shed the tribute of a few
more tears, sacrificed a few more sighs, and went her way. Not so the
affectionate Ruth. How excellently marked, and that, by a single word, is the
conduct of each. "Orpah kissed her mother-in-law; but Ruth clave unto her." The
sentence, though thus compressed, is emphatically copious in p^^^ of meaning:
but, indeed, the multum in parvo, should be one characteristic of the sacred
writings. "Orpah kissed her mother-in-law," i. e. she gave her a farewell
embrace, wept a woman's sorrow, and left her mother (...) wander over the
world. "But Ruth clave unto her." i. e. clung around her neck, kissed her with
ardour, as if she designed to leave the seal of her very soul impressed on her
lips forever. In vain did the noble minded Naomi exhibit to her the various
miseries which were at hand, and against which there was no comfortable
provision. In vain did she point to the example, the politic, the prudent
example of Orpah, her sister. In scorn of such conduct, and to close at once
all future dissuasions, she th^^ declared, to the eternal honor of her sex,
the glowing resolutions of her soul. -- "Entreat me not to leave thee, for
whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodge^. I will lodge; thy people
shall be my people, and thy God, my God: where thou die will I die, and there
will I be buried." The whole beauty and force of this passage is not seen at
once: it is a very fine climax, and there i^ amazing elegance in the
gradations. The full sense implied, seems to branch out in this manner. She
begins with desiring Naomi to urge the subject of separation no longer, since
she has completely made up her mind upon it. This is the first and slightest
part. In the next place, she unfolds her first design to follow her fortunes in
whatever part of the habitable globe she thinks proper to pursue them: but not
thinking this sufficiently expressive of her affection, she resolves to take up
her abode in the same house with her; to lodge under the same roof, however
poor, and to share the same bed, however inelegant. After this, she resolves to
know no other people, than such as are equally the common friends of both; to
enter into no attachments, but those which are united by the same tender ties
to her dear Naomi; and to form no connexions whatever, that can, in the least,
derogate from the love she bore her. But she is not contented with having
delivered these assurances, for she goes on, that her very religion shall be
the religion of her friend; that one faith and one hope shall animate their
devotion, and the God of one shall be the God of the other. Even this does not
satisfy her: for she next determines not only to go with her the pilgrimage of
life, but attend her beyond the gate of death; to die with her Naomi, should it
be Naomi's lot to fall first; and to be buried at last in the same grave: and
this she confirmed by an immediate oath of the utmost importance and sanctity
amongst the daughters of Judah: "The Lord God do so to me, and more also, if
aught but death part thee and me."

"When Naomi saw that she was steadfastly minded to go, she left off persuading
her; so they went until they came to Bethlehem; and when they arrived, it came
to pass, that all the city were moved about them, and they said, Is this
Naomi?" Here are fresh morals and fresh elegancies opened upon us: the
disconsolate Naomi had no sooner set her foot upon her own land, than all those
little passions, which lie lurking in the bosoms of the illiberal and the
inhospitable, were instantly awakened. Curiosity surveyed the tatters which she
had not the soul to repair. Ill Nature was, we may be sure, officious enough to
throw in her bitter sarcasm. Pride was ready with her insulting offer of pity.
Avarice lamented his incapacity to answer the good wishes of his heart; and in
short, every arrogant, every paltry propensity was in arms against our
defenseless travelers. But as Naomi originally lived in some degree of comfort
and credit in her own country, and was now reduced; she, of course, more
particularly was the mark of their obloquy and conversation.

She soon found, that to rely upon the kindness of old friends, was but a
preca^ious mercy. Ill used by the world therefore, she began to lose the hope
of such resources. The benevolence of distant relations, in whose memory she
might be able to revive the images of tenderness, was likewise a fond idea,
that was born and buried almost in the same instant. Nothing of comfort seemed
to remain in reserve, till the excellent Ruth, the faithful partner of her
sufferings, suggested an expedient. And she said unto her friend -- I perceive,
oh my dear Naomi, that our conveniences must depend upon ourselves, and that
(...) ^^st owe our daily bread to (...) daily labor: as it is now the
beginning of the harve^^^ behold the opportunity of exerting ourselves is at
(...) Thou, indeed, art too much afflicted to toil: but for my part, much and
tenderly as I sympathize with thee, I am in the prime of my youth, and able to
gather something from the field: "Let me now therefore go and glean ears of
corn after him, in whose fight I may f^ grace."

"Now it was so that Naomi had a kinsman of (...) husband's, a mighty man of
wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz:" and it happened as
Ruth was gleaning after the reapers, she was sit^^^^on a part of the field
belonging to Boaz. This circumstance occasioned a turn of fortune perfectly
dramatic. For, Boaz, coming to take a view of his reapers, perceiving the
stranger, said unto the servant, who was set over the reapers, "Whose damsel is
this?" The servant's answer is penned with the most natural simplicity. -- "It
i^ the Moabitish damsel, that came back with Naomi, out of the country of Moab:
and she said, I pray you let me glean, and gather after the reapers, among the
sheaves; so she came and has continued amongst (...) even from the morning
till now, that she tarried a little in the house." Something there was, either
in this account, or in the appearance of the object, which w^^ much upon the
favor of the landlord: for it is surely a softer voice even than the voice of
hospitality, that speaks in the sequel. "Hear thou not my daughter ^ go not
I charge you to glean in any other field, neither go from hence, but abide here
fast by my maidens." I have given particular injunctions to "the young men,
that they shall not touch thee. And when thou art athirst, go to the vessels
and drink of that which the young men have drawn." Here began the first fruits
of her fidelity; and the partiality of Boaz made a very rapid progress, for in
his second address he was more benevolent than in the first; he invited her to
consider herself as one of his own people, to "eat of the bread, to dip her
welcome morsel in the vinegar" at meal-times, and to sit cheerfully beside the
reapers. Nay, more, with his own hand -- (surely the heart extended it) -- "he
reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was suf^^ed, and left." Now it
was that Boaz began to discover more evidently, that the spring of this
generous current lay very near the heart. When she was risen up to glean, after
her repast, he commanded the young men to show her all possible marks of
courtesy and distinction. His strict orders were, not to suffer her to gather
the scanty pittance, ear by ear, after the cautious rake had gone over the
ground, but to let her glean unquestioned, even amongst the sheaves. Nay, more,
they were to let some handfulls fall on purpose for her, and leave them for her
particular gleaning: and indeed, such was the successful consequences of these
indulgencies, that after she had beat out what she had been permitted to glean
in one single day, "it was about an ephah of barley." This the kind creature
carried with all the expedition of affection to her friend: and when Naomi saw
it -- when the soul of the sorrowful widow sang for joy; then Ruth related to
her the whole history of her good fortune, and concluding that the name of the
hospitable owner of the had was Boaz. This intelligence revived her spirits
like a cordial, and she exclaims with the most animated transport -- "The man
is near a kin to us," my beloved Ruth -- "one of our next kinsmen." Often, and
with equal success, she went, after this, into the field, and continued there
to earn a very comfortable living for herself and her friend, even to the close
of the harvest. In the mean time, the passion of Boaz had made a very great
progress, and the result of it was, that he became the honorable lover of our
fair gleaner, and renewed his acquaintance with his relation Naomi, to whom he
made, we are told, various presents. Boaz and Ruth were soon united; and, as a
convincing instance of the harmony in which the family lived together, we find,
highly to the gratification of every benevolent heart, that when Ruth presented
to Boaz a child -- her firstborn -- Naomi, after all the peri^s of her past
life, re-enjoyed the sweets of privacy and peace: "for she took the babe, and
laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it." And I must not forget to add,
that this very child, whose name was Obed, was the grandfather of the famous
David, to whose p^^^, the Psalms are attributed; which, both as pieces of
scripture and of writing, are totally ^^rivalled, in point of energy and
sublimity, by any composition that has yet been, or that probably ever will
be, produced in h^^ man language.

THE DOVE.
PASSAGE.
He sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were ^^^ed from off the
face of the ground.

But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and (...) returned unto
him into the ark: and the waters were on the face of the whole earth. Then he
put forth his hand a^^ took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.

And he stayed yet other seven days, and again he sent forth (...) dove out of
the ark.

And the dove came in unto him in the evening, and lo, in (...) mouth was an
olive leaf plucked off: so Noah knew the the waters were abated.

And he stayed yet other seven days, and sent forth the dove, which returned
not again to him any more.


THERE is a peculiar beauty, not only in the sentiment and language of these
verses, but in the thing itself.

The transactions and friendly intercourse of Noah and his Dove have a
tenderness and ceremony in them, truly delightful. The eye melts at the
simplicity, and the heart warms at the sentiment. Poetry, in her happiest
flight, could imagine nothing more interesting to the fancy.

Hail, gentlest of birds! Hail, messenger of security* Through thy means was
the dry ground discovered; and the gratitude of man shall not easily forget the
fidelity of the Dove!

He sent forth the Dove to see if the waters were abated. What an important
errand for so small an express! Yet the industrious little wing flew over the
watery universe, and employed every feather in the service of man: after a vain
excursion, she returned; for the waters were still without a shore. Methinks I
see the patriarch stand upon the deck, to wait the return of the messenger; and
as soon as she rests her fatigued foot upon the ark, he tenderly puts forth his
hand and pulls her to him: th^s rewarded for her labors, after seven days'
repose, her assistance being again summoned, she trusts to her pinion; and lo,
in the evening she came. By mention of the evening, it should appear that she
was dispatched in the morning, or at least very early in the day. What a task
of toil must it then have been! how many billowy leagues must she have
traveled, ere she found that of which she was in search! Linger upon the land
I can never believe she did, however the verdure and vegetable novelty might
charm her. No! it was not until the evening she succeeded in her endeavors,
and then, upon the wings of kindness, she hasted to satisfy the impatience of
her master. Upon her second return, behold, a leaf was in her mouth! What a
sweet way is here of communicating the happy tidings. But, indeed, every
syllable of this matter has a grace and consequence peculiar to it: it was an
olive leaf which she bore, the leaf of amity, the emblem of peace; as much as
to say, Lo, master, the waters are abated, and I have plucked a leaf as a
testimony of my truth. The Power, who commands the waves to dry up and
disappear, has ordained me to bear to thee this olive branch; happily it is the
pledge of promise and conciliation betwixt him and thee, and thou shall not
only set thy foot safely upon land, but there prosper, and enjoy the pardon of
thy God.

And after seven days more, he sent her forth again, and she returned no more.
One is divided here betwixt smiles and tears: it is an exquisite passage. The
land and earth had, by this time, resumed their accustomed beauties; the trees
displayed a greener glory, the flowers sprung brighter from the wave, and the
Dove, having performed her duty, enjoyed, as nature directed, the beauties of
renovated verdure: yet she returned (...) more. Noah, though he knew the cause
of her delay, had lost his favorite bird. Alas! it was a draw-back upon the
felicity of the new appearing world. Fie upon the heart that has not a feeling
upon such occasions. The softness of the dove, however, is still had, among the
children of men, in grateful remembrance. She is equally celebrated in profane
and sacred history, and every epithet of endearment is allotted to her. She is
considered as favorable to love, and propitious to every tender undertaking;
nor can we, at any time, express a courteous character, without giving to it,
among other qualities, the gentleness and truth of a Dove.

THE DEAN OF BADAJOZ; OR, INGRATITUDE DETECTED AND PUNISHED. -- A TALE.
THE Dean of the cathedral of Badajoz was more learned than all the Doctors of
Salamanca, Coimbra, and Aleala, united. He understood all languages, living and
dead, and was perfect master of every science, divine and human; except that,
unfortunately, he had no knowledge of magic, and was inconsolable when he
reflected on his ignorance in that divine art. He was told that a very able
Magician resided in the suburbs of Toledo, named Don Torribio. Immediately he
saddled his mule, departed for Toledo, and alighted at the door of no very
superb dwelling, the habitation of that great man.

"Most reverend Magician," said he, addressing himself to the sage, "I am the
Dean of Badajoz. The learned men of Spain all allow me their superior; but I am
come to request from you a far greater honor, that of becoming your pupil.
Deign to initiate me in the mysteries of your art, and doubt not but you shall
receive a grateful acknowledgment, suitable to the benefit conferred, and your
own extraordinary merit."

Don Torribio was not very polite, though he valued himself on being intimately
acquainted with the best company in the infernal regions. He told the Dean he
was welcome to seek elsewhere for a master in magic; for that, for his part, he
was weary of an occupation, which produced nothing but compliments and
promises; and that he would not dishonor the occult sciences, by prostituting
them to the ungrateful.

"To the ungrateful!" cried the Dean: "has then the great Don Torribio met with
persons who have proved ungrateful! and can he so far mistake me as to rank me
with such monsters?" He then repeated all the maxims and apophthegms, which he
had read, on the subject of gratitude, and every refined sentiment his memory
could furnish.

In short, he talked so well that the Conjurer, after having considered a
moment, confessed he could refuse nothing to a man of such abilities and so
ready at pertinent quotations. "Jacintha," said he, calling to his old woman,
"lay down two partridges to the fire; I hope my friend the Dean will do me the
honor to sup with me to night." At the same time he takes him by the hand, and
leads him into his cabinet; there he touches his forehead, muttering three
mysterious words, which I must request the reader not to forget, Ortobolan,
Pistafrier, Onagrious; then, without further preparation, he began to explain,
with all possible perspicuity, the introductory elements of his profound
science.

His new disciple listened with an attention, which scarcely permitted him to
breathe; when, on a sudden, Jacintha enters, followed by a little man, in
monstrous boots, and covered with mud up to the neck, who desired to speak with
the Dean on very important business.

This was the postillion of his uncle, the bishop of Badajoz, who had been sent
express after him, and had galloped quite to Toledo, before he could overtake
him; he came to bring him information that, some hours after his departure, his
Grace had been attacked by so violent an apoplexy that the most terrible
consequences were to be apprehended. The Dean heartily cursed (inwardly that
is, and so as to occasion no scandal) at once the disorder, the patient, and
the courier, who had certainly all three chosen the most impertinent time
possible. He dismissed the postillion, telling him to make haste back to
Badajoz, whither he would presently fo^low him: after which he returned to his
lesson, as if there were no such things as either uncles or apoplexies.

A few days after he again received news from Badajoz, but such as was well
worth hearing. The principal Chanter and two old Canons came to inform the Dean
that his uncle, the right reverend Bishop, had been taken to heaven to receive
the reward of his piety; and, that the Chapter, canonically assembled, had
chosen him to fill the vacant bishopric; and humbly requested he would console,
by his presence, the afflicted church of Badajoz, now become his spiritual
bride.

Don Torribio, who was present at this harangue of the deputies, endeavored to
derive advantage from what he had learned; and, taking aside the new Bishop,
after having paid him a well turned compliment on his promotion, proceeded to
inform him that he had a son, named Benjamin, possessed of much ingenuity and
good inclination; but in whom he had never perceived either taste or talents
for the occult sciences; he had therefore, he said, advised him to turn his
thoughts toward the church, and had now, he thanked Heaven, the satisfaction
to hear him commended as one of the most deserving divines among all the clergy
of Toledo: he, therefore, took the liberty, to request his Grace to bestow on
Don Benjamin the deanery of Badajoz, which he could not retain together with
his bishopric.

I am very unfortunate, replied the Prelate, apparently somewhat embarrassed;
you will, I hope, do me the justice to believe that nothing could give me so
great a pleasure as to oblige you in every request. But, the truth is, I have a
cousin, to whom I am heir, an old ecclesiastic, who is good for nothing but to
be a Dean; and if I do not bestow on him this preferment, I must embroil myself
with my family, which would be far from agreeable. But, continued he, in an
affectionate manner, will you not accompany me to Badajoz? Can you be so cruel
as to forsake me just at the moment when it is in my power to be of service to
you? Be persuaded, my honored master: we will go together; think of nothing
but the improvement of your pupil, and leave me to provide for Don Benjamin,
nor doubt, but sooner (...) later, I will do more for him than you expect. A
^^ltry deanery, in the remotest part of Estramadura, is not a benefice suitable
to the son of such a man as yourself.

The canon law would, no doubt, have construed this offer of the Prelate's into
simony. The proposal, however, was accepted; nor was any scruple made by either
of these two very intelligent persons. Don Torribio followed his illustrious
pupil to Badajoz, where he had an elegant apartment assigned him in the
episcopal palace, and was treated with the utmost respect, by all the diocese,
as the favorite of his Grace, and a kind of Grand Vicar.

Under the tuition of so able a master, the Bishop of Badajoz made a rapid
progress in the occult sciences. At first he gave himself up to them, with an
ardour which might appear excessive; but this intemperance: grew by degrees
more moderate, and he pursued them with so much prudence that his magical
studies never interfered with the duties of his diocese. He was well convinced
of the truth of a maxim, very important to be remembered by ecclesiastics,
whether addicted to sorcery, or only philosophers, and admirers of literature,
that it is not sufficient to assist at learned nocturnal meetings, or adorn the
mind with the embellishments of human science; but that it is also the duty of
divines to point out to others the way to heaven, and plant, in the minds of
their hearers, wholesome doctrine and Christian morality.

Regulating his conduct by these commendable principles, the learned Prelate
was celebrated throughout Christendom for his merit and piety, and promoted,
when he least expected such an honor, to the archbishopric of Compostella.

The people and clergy of Badajoz lamented, as may be supposed, an event by
which they were deprived of so worthy a Pastor; and the Canons of the
cathedral, to testify their respect, unanimously conferred on him the right of
naming his successor.

Don Torribio did not neglect so alluring an opport^^ty to provide for his son.
He requested the bishopric (...) the new Archbishop, and was refused with all
imaginable politeness. He had, he said, the greatest veneration (...) his old
master, and was both sorry and ashamed it was not in his power to grant a
thing, which appeared so very a trifle; but, in fact, Don Ferdinand de Lara,
Constable of Castile, had asked this same bishopric for his natural son; and,
though he had never seen that nobleman, he had, he said, some secret,
important, and what was more, very ancient obligations to him. It was,
therefore, an indispensable duty to prefer an old benefactor to a new one: but
that he ought not to be discouraged at this proof of his justice, as he might
learn, by that, what he had to expect when his turn arrived; which it certainly
would the very first opportunity.

This anecdote, concerning the ancient obligations of the Archbishop, the
Magician had the goodness to believe; and rejoiced, as much as he was able,
that his interests were sacrificed to those of Don Ferdinand.

Nothing, therefore, was thought of but preparations for their departure to
Compostella, where they were now to reside. Though these were scarc^ly worth
the trouble, considering the short time they were destined to remain there;
for, at the end of a few months, one of the Pope's Chamberlains arrived, who
brought the Archbishop a Cardinal's cap, with an epistle, conceived in the most
respectful terms, in which his Holiness invited him to assist, by his counsel,
in the government of the Christian world; permitting him, at the same time, to
dispose of his mitre in favor of whom he pleased.

Don Torribio was not at Compostella when the courier of the holy father
arrived. He had been to see his son, who still continued a Priest in a small
parish at Toledo; but he presently returned, and was not put to the trouble of
asking for the vacant archhishopric. The Prelate ran to meet him with open arms.

My dear master, said he, I have two pieces of good news to relate at once.
Your disciple is created a Cardinal, and your son shall -- shortly be advanced
to the (...) dignity. I had intended, in the mean time, to have bestowed on him
the archbishopric of Compostella; but, unfortunately for him, or rather for me,
my mother, whom we left at Badajoz, has, during your absence, written to me a
cruel letter, by which all my measures have been disconcerted. She will not be
pacified, unless I appoint for my successor the Archdeacon of my former church,
Don Pablos de Salazar, her intimate friend and Confessor; she tells me it will
occasion her death, if she should not be able to obtain preferment for her dear
father in God; and I have no doubt but what she says is true. Imagine yourself
in my place, my dear master: shall I be the death of my mother?

Don Torribio was not a person who would incite or urge his friend to be guilty
of parricide; nor did he indulge himself in the least resentment against the
mother of the Prelate.

To say the truth, however, this mother he talked of was a good kind of woman,
nearly superannuated, who lived quietly with her cat and maidservant, and
scarcely knew the name of her Confessor. Was it likely, then, that she had
procured Don Pablos his archbishopric? Was it not far more probable that he was
indebted for it to a Gallician lady, his cousin, a young widow, at once devout
and handsome, in whose company his Grace the Archbishop had frequently been
edified, during his residence at Compostella? Be it as it may, Don Torribio
followed his Eminence to Rome. Scarcely had he arrived in that city before the
Pope died. It is easy to imagine the consequence of this event. The Conclave
met. All the voices of the sacred college were unanimous in favor of the
Spanish Cardinal. Behold him, therefore, Pope!

Immediately after the ceremony of his exaltation, Don Torribio, admitted to a
secret audience, wept with joy, while he kissed the feet of his dear pupil,
wh^m he saw fill, with so much dignity, the pontifical throne. He modestly
represented his long and faithful services. He reminded his Holiness of his
promises: those inviolable promises he had renewed before he entered the
Conclave. He hinted at the hat which he had quitted* on receiv^^ the tiara;
but, instead of demanding that hat for (...) Benjamin, he finished, with the
most exemplary moderation, by renouncing every ambitio^s hope. He and (...)
son, he said, would both esteem themselves too happy, if his Holiness would
bestow on them, together with his benediction, the smallest temporal benefit.
Such as an annuity for life, sufficient for the few wants of an ecclasiastic
and a philosopher.

During this ha^angue, the sovereign Pontiff considered within himself how to
dispose of his preceptor. He ^^flected that he was no longer very necessary;
that he already knew more of magic than was sufficient for a Pope; that it must
be highly improper for him to appe^^ at the nocturnal assemblies of sorcerers,
and assist at their indecent ceremonies. After weighing every circumstance, his
Holiness concluded that Don Torribio was not only a useless but a troublesome
dependant; and, this point decided, he was no longer in doubt what answer to
return: accordingly he replied in the following words; "We have learned, with
concern, that, under the pretext of cultivating the occult sciences, you
maintain a horrible intercourse with the spirit of darkness and deceit;
wherefore we exhort you, as a father, to expiate your crime by a repentance
proportionable to its enormity. Moreover, we enjoin you to depart from the
territories of the church, within three days, under pain of being delivered
over to the secular arm, and its merciless flames."

Don Torribio, without being disconcerted, immediately repeated aloud the three
mysterious words which the reader was desired to remember; and, going to the
window, cried out, with all his force, "Jacintha, you need spit but one
partridge; for my friend, the Dean, will not sup here tonight." This was a
thunderbolt to the imaginary Pope: he immediately recovered from a kind of
trance^ into which he had been thrown by the three magic w^rds, when they were
first pronounced, and perceived that, inste^d of being in the Vatican, he was
still at Toledo, in the closet of Don Torribio, and saw, by the clock, it was
not yet a complete hour since he first entered that fatal cabinet, where he had
been entertained w^^^ such pleasant dreams. In that short time he had imagined
himself a Magician, a Bishop, an Archbishop, a Cardinal, a Pope; and, at last,
found he was only a ^^pe and a knave. All was illusion, except the proof^ ^e
had given of his deceitfulness and evil heart. He in^^^tly departed, without
speaking a word; and, finding his mule where he had left her, he returned to
Badajoz, without having made the smallest progress in the sub^^me science, in
which he had proposed to become an ^dept.

CAUTIONARY HINTS TO LEARNED LADIES.
TO be affected in any way, is, at all times, in all places, and in all degrees
to be disagreeable. But affectation of learning and authorship, in a woman of
very little merit, draws upon itself the contempt and hatred of both sexes.
They who excel most in either sex, are found by experience to be most candid
and modest, to assume least, and to join in conversation with others without
displaying the sense of their superiority. Indeed it often happens, that there
is an amiable humility in true genius and learning, which compels the possessor
of them to think diffidently of his own character, amid the united praises of
all around. Let her, then, who possesses the bright jewels of genius and
learning, take care to set them in a plain manner, and their luster will
display additional brilliancy.

In the embel^^^^ment of the person, a sufficient degree of care is usually
taken, that nothing unbecoming shall have a place in it. A regard is commonly
paid to age, rank, and every circumstance which can point out the line of
propriety. Yet there is certainly a kind of sexual difference in the minds of
the sexes, which admits and requires a different species of intellectual
accomplishment. Economy is said indeed to be the peculiar province of women;
yet surely, as rational beings, their reason may properly receive the highest
kind of culti^^tion. Nor should their seize occasion contempt or neglect,
unless they are sullied by obtruding a^gance, by a masculine boldness, a
critical severity, and an ill-timed and injudicious ostentation.

THE VALUE OF RECIPROCAL ATTENTIONS.
HOWEVER just the complaints of the misery of life, yet great occasions for the
display of beneficence and liberality do not often occur. But there is a^
hourly necessity for the little kind offices of mutual civ^^ity. At the same
time that they give pleasure to others, they add to our own happiness and
improvement. Habitual acts of kindness have a powerful effect in softening the
heart. An intercourse with polished and human^ company tends to improve the
disposition, because it requires a conformity of manners. And it is certain,
that a sense of decorum, and of a proper external behavior, will restrain
those, whose natural temper would otherwise break out in acrimonious and
petulant conversation. Even the affectation of philanthropy will in time
contribute to realize it. The pleasure resulting from an act of kindness
naturally excites a wish to repeat it; and indeed the general esteem which the
character of benevolence procures, is sufficient to induce those to wish for
it, who act only from the mean motives of self-interest.

As we are placed in a world where natural evil abounds, we ought to render it
supportable to each other, as far as human endeavors can avail. All that can
add a sweet ingredient to the bitter cup must be infused. Amid the multitude of
thorns, every flower that will grow must be cultivated with care. But neither
pomp nor power are of themselves able to alleviate the load of life. The heart
requires to be soothed by sympathy. A thousand little attentions from all
around us are necessary to render our days agreeable. The appearance of neglect
in any of those with whom we are connected, chills our bosom with chagrin, or
kindles the fire of resentment. Nothing, therefore, seems so likely to ensure
happiness, as our mutual endeavors to promote it. Our single endeavors,
originating and terminating in ourselves, are usually unsuccessful. Providence
has taken care to secure that intercourse which is necessary to the existence
of society, by rendering i^ the greatest sweetener of human life.

By reciprocal attentions we are enabled to become beneficent without expense.
A smile, an affable address, a look of approbation, are often capable of giving
a greater pleasure than pecuniary benefits can bestow. The mere participation
of the studies and amusements of others, at the same time that it gratifies
ourselves, is often an act of real humanity; because others would not enjoy
them without companions. A friendly visit in a solitary hour is often a greater
act of kindness than a valuable present.

GOODNESS OF HEART.
WHOEVER has made accurate observations on men and manners, will easily
perceive, that the praise of goodness of heart is usually accompanied with an
oblique insinuation of intellectual imbecility. I be^^eve him to be a
well-meaning man, says the malignant panegy^ist, and if there is any fault in
him, it will be found rather in his head than in his heart. Nothing could be
better contrived by a crafty and envious world, to render this amiable quality
contemptible, than to represent it as the effect or as the companion of folly.

It is, indeed, true, that innocence and integrity are usually accompanied with
simplicity; not, however, with that sort of simplicity which is sometimes
synonimous with folly; but with an amiable openness of manners, which had
rather lose its objects than obtain them by deceit; which leads the tongue
boldly to speak what the heart honestly conceives. If we weigh the satisfaction
of an open and upright conduct, of a clear conscience, and of that liberty
which we enjoy by thinking, speaking, and acting, without mean and servile
restraints, it will, I ^^lieve, be found, that this simplicity is true wisdom,
and that the cunning of the worldly wise is real and ^gr^gious imprudence.

Goodness of heart, whether it be a natural or acquired goodness, is indeed, in
every respect, the highest excellence. It is the only quality which can rescue
hum^^ nature from the disgrace and misery of its wretched weaknesses, and its
powerful tendencies to evil. It rai^ the poor worm, that otherwise crawls on a
dunghill, and stings and bites his wretched companions, to an exalted place in
the scale of being, and causes him to assimulate with the divine nature.

Whatever the short-sighted votaries of avarice and ambition may assert, there
is no doubt, but that r^^^ goodness of heart is the noblest ornament of human
nature, and the least fallible source of permanent satisfaction. In truth,
learning and abilities, without goodness of heart, constitute that kind of
wisdom, which is foolishness in the sight of reason and God. Without goodness
of heart, man, however accomplished, is so far from being little lower than the
angels, that he is scarcely above the accursed spirits, and by no means equal
to many of the brutes, who often exhibit most amiable instances of a good heart
in the virtues of gratitude, sincere affection, and fidelity.

THE IMPORTANCE OF GOVERNING THE TEMPER.
NOTWITHSTANDING the many complaints of the calamities of human life, it is
certain, that more constant uneasiness arises from ill temper than from ill
fortune. In vain has Providence bestowed every external blessing, if care has
not been taken by ourselves to smooth the asperities of the temper. Bad temper
embi^ters every sweet, and converts a paradise into a place of ^ment.

The government of the temper then, on which the happiness of the human race so
greatly depends, can never ^e too frequently or too forcibly recommended.
Culture of the understanding is one of the best methods of subduing the heart
to softness, and redeeming it from that savage state, in which it too often
comes from the hands of nature. The more our reason is strengthened, the better
^he is enabled to keep her seat on the throne, and to govern those passions
which were appointed to be her subjects; but which too often rebel, and succeed
in their unnatural revolt. But besides the effect of mental culture, in calling
forth and increasing the powers of the reasoning faculty, it seems to possess
an influence in humanizing the feelings, and meliorating the native
disposition. Music, painting, and poetry, teach the mind to select the
agreeable parts of those objects which surround us; and by habituating it to a
pure and permanent delight, gradually superinduces an habitual good humor.

So much of the happiness of private life, and the virtues of mothers and
daughters in particular, depends on the government of the temper, that the
temper ought to be a principal object of regard in a well-conducted education.
The suffering of children to tyrannize without control, over servants and
inferiors, is, I am convinced, the ruin of many an amiable disposition. The
virtues of humanity, benevolence and humility cannot be too early enforced; at
the same time care should be taken that an infant of two or three years old,
should never be beaten or spoken to harshly for any offense ^t can possibly
commit. In short, let every method be used which reason, religion, prudence and
experience can suggest, to accomplish the purpose of sweetening the temper, and
banishing the furies from society. May the endeavors be successful; and may we
only read, that there have indeed been such animals as shrews and viragos, but
that the breed is extinct in America, like the breed of mammoths!

I have been much pleased with the lovely picture of Serena, in Mr. Hayley's
instructive poem, the Triumphs of Temper; and I cannot conclude, without
earnestly entreating the ladies to view it as a looking-glass, b^ which they
may learn to dress their minds, in a manner which can never be out of fashion;
but which will enable them to secure as well as extend their conquests, and to
charm, even when the lilies and roses are all withered.

SENSIBILITY.
SENSIBILITY, with all its inconveniences, is to be cherished by those who
understand and wish to maintain the dignity of their nature. To feel for
others, disposes us to exercise the amiable virtue of charity, which our
religion indispensably requires. It constitutes that enlarged benevolence,
which philosophy inc^lcates, and which is indeed comprehended in Christian
charity. It is the privilege and the ornament of man; and the pain which it
causes is abundantly recompensed by that sweet sensation which ever accompanies
the exercise of beneficence.

To feel our own misery in a lively manner is not to be deprecated. Affliction
softens and improves the heart. Tears, to speak in the style of figure,
fertilize the soil in which the virtues grow. And it is the remark of one who
understood human nature, that the faculties of the mind, as well as the
feelings of the heart, are meliorated by adversity.

But in order to promote these ends, our sufferings must not be permitted to
overwhelm us. We must oppose them with the arms of reason and religion* and to
express the idea in the language of the philosopher, as well as the poet, of
nature; every one, while he is compelled to feel his misfortunes like a man,
should resolve also to bear them like a man.

THE WANT OF PERSONAL BEAUTY A FREQUENT CAUSE OF VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS.
IT has been justly said, that no one ever despised beauty who possessed it. It
is indeed a noble privilege to be able to give pleasure wherever one goes,
merely by one's presence, and without the trouble of exertion. The respect
which is paid to beauty, and the recommendation it gives to all our good
qualities, are circumstances sufficiently advantageous to render the person,
who has been blessed with it, sincerely grateful.

But the majority of mankind, if they are not deformed, are yet not beautiful.
And this is a wife and benevolent dispensation of Providence; for,
notwithstanding the just pretensions of beauty, I am convinced that ^he want of
it is often attended with great benefit to society. Man is naturally desirous
of rendering himself, in some respect, valuable and amiable; and, if he has
nothing external to recommend him, will endeavor to compensate his defect by
the acquisition of internal excellence. But that the virtues of the heart, and
the abilities of the understanding, contribute much more to public benefit than
any personal grace or accomplishment, is a truth which needs no confirmation.

It is indeed a well known fact, that many of the best poets, philosophers,
writers, and artists, have been of the number of those who were, in some
measure, prevented in their youth from indulging idleness and profligacy,
either by some constitutional infirmity, or by the want of those personal
graces, which are the greatest allurements to a life of dissipation. Among a
thousand instances, in confirmation of this truth, I will select that of Pope;
to the deformity and imbecility of whose body we may attribute his early and
constant application to poetry. Where there are powerful solicitations to the
pleasures of sense, very little attention will be paid to the pure delights of
contemplation and benevolence.

But it is more particularly my design to point o^^ some advantages attending
the want of beauty in women* a want which will always be considered by them as
a misfortune. But all misfortunes admit of consolation; and many of them, under
a judicious conduct, may be metamorphosed into blessings. While, however, I
consider the advantages attending the want of personal charms, I must not be
understood to undervalue beauty. If we admire the lifeless works of art, much
more should we be delighted with the assemblage of living features, in which
are united symmetry and expression. It is Nature's command that we should be
charmed with her productions, both animate and inanimate; and our hearts are
most willingly obedient, when she bids us admire beauty in our own species.
Taste, fancy and affection, are then all at once most powerfully assaulted, and
it would be as unnatural, as it is vain, to resist, by refusing our admiration.

But after our admiration is over, we shall find, when we exercise our
reflec^^on and judgment, what experience has indeed proved, that plain women
are often entitled to the most esteem. It may appear paradoxical, but I will
assert it to be true, that women who have no great pretensions to beauty, are
usually found, as the companions of life, the most agreeable. They are, indeed,
for the most part, I do not say always, the best daughters, the best wives, the
best mothers; most important relations, and most honorable to those who
support them with propriety. They who aim not at such characters, but live only
to display a pretty face, can scarcely rank higher than a painted doll, or a
blockhead, placed with a cap on it, in a millener's window.

There is something of an irritability in the constitution of women, whose
minds are uncultivated, which, when increased by opposition, and confirmed by
habit, usually produces a termagant, a shrew, or a virago; characters which,
from the torment they occasion, may be said greatly to participate of an
infernal nature. Nothing but reading, reflection, and indeed what is called a
liberal education, can, in general, smooth this natural asperity. A woman, who,
by attending to her face, is led to neglect the mind, and who, besides, has
been flattered in her youth by the admirers of her beauty, seldom fails, in the
more advanced periods of her life, to vent the virulence of her temper, now
soured and blackened by neglect, on all who have the misfortune to approach
her. Her husband (if she has, peradventure, entangled some miserable ^ight)
undergoes such torments as might justly rescue him from purgatory, by the plea
of having suffered it already.

But folly and ignorance are almost as pregnant with domestic misery as a bad
temper. And how shall she avoid folly and ignorance, with all their train of
whims, sickleness, fears, false delicacies, vanity, pride, affectation, envy,
peevishness, fretfulness, childishness, and weakness of ^^^es, who has spent
all the days when she was young, and all the days she thought herself young, at
her ^^^lette, and under the hands of the f^izeur? She found herself admited
wherever she went, without saying or doing any thing admirable. She has
therefore saved herself the trouble of forming a taste for reading, or a habit
of thinking. But beauty is a rose, which soon withers. She loses the power of
pleasing others; and, alas! possesses none to please herself, which can supply
the place of flat^ery and pretended adoration. As her life began and continued
in folly, so it ends in misery. If she married, she was useless at least, if
not a torment to her husband. If she continued unmarried, she possessed few
qualities to render her acquaintance solicited, and none that could afford her
a rational amusement in solitude.

It may indeed happen, that a beautiful woman may be educated with uncommon
vigilance, that she may possess a remarkably good understanding, and as good a
disposition. In this case, her beauty will be doubly valuable, not only from
its real excellence, when combined with a cultivated understanding, but from
the difficulty of attending to the graces of the mind, amidst the cares of the
person, and the flattery of foolish admirers. It is certainly possible, that a
beautiful woman may be as accomplished as a plain woman; and I know that, in
this age, there are many instances of it; but I am speaking of probabilities,
and I think it much more probable, that women who are not remarkably beautiful,
will be, in ^ral, better furnished with th^se two necessary ingr^ to domestic
happiness, a corrected temper, and an un^standing adorned by culture.

Let us suppose a case, for the sa^e of exemplifying (...) subject; and let it
be something like the following: (...) young lady, whose person is plain,
cannot help obser^^^^ how much she is neglected at public assemblies, and (...)
universal attention is paid to beauty. She will naturally feel a desire to
partake of the respect. She revolves in her mind the most likely methods of
accomplishing (...) purpose. As to her features, it is vain to think of
^^tering them. She must draw her resources from (...) mind and her temper. She
will study to collect ideas, in order to render her conversation agreeable. She
will therefore read, and observe, and reflect, and remember. H^^ eager desire
to gain esteem will stimulate her indus^^^ and give steadiness to her
application. With these (...) cannot fail to succeed. Her mind will be stored
(...) knowledge, which will produce itself in conversation with all the graces
of ease and elegance. The improv^^^^^ of her mind will have a natural effect in
the improvement of her temper; for every part of polite learning tends to
soften and humanize the disposition. But she will also pay particular attention
to the regulation of h^^ temper; for she will justly argue, that envy and
ill nature will add distortion and ugliness to a set of features originally not
worse than plain or indifferent. She will st^dy to compensate her defects, not
only by rendering herself intelligent and good-tempered, but useful. She will
therefore study the practical parts of domestic economy* those parts of humble
but valuable knowledge, with which a proud lady, with a fine face, would scorn
to meddle, lest she should be defiled. Thus sensible, good-tempered and useful,
her company would be sought by men of sense and character; and, if any one of
them should be disposed to marry, I have little doubt but that she would be his
choice, in preference to a mere beauty, who has scarcely one excellent or
useful quality to render her a good wife, mother, and mistress of a family.

Juvenal, in his celebrated satire on the vanity of human wishes, laments that
the accomplishment of our wish^^ would often be the cause of our destruction;
and that (...) are our prayers, that if Heaven were always propi^, it would
often be unkind. Who wishes not beauty in his children? yet beauty has been the
bane of myr^^^, whom plainness, or even deformity might have sav^^ from ruin,
and rendered useful, happy, and respecta^^^.

ON THE LITERARY EDUCATION OF WOMEN.
THERE are many prejudices entertained against the character of a learned lady;
and, perhaps, if all ladies were profoundly learned, some inconveniences might
arise from it: but, I must own, it does not appear to me, that a woman will be
rendered less acceptable in the world, or worse qualified to perform any part
of her duty in it, by having employed the time, from six to sixteen, in the
cultivation of her mind. Time enough will remain, after a few hours every day
spent in reading, for the improvement of the person, and the acquisition of the
usual accomplishments. With respect to these accomplishments, I will not
presume to direct the method of pursuing them. I will not so far intrude on a
province, which by no means belongs to me. The ladies themselves, and their
instructors, want no directions in matters of external ornament, the end of
which is to please on intuition. However arrogant the men have been in their
clai^^ of superiority, they have usually allowed the ladies the possession of a
delicate taste in the improvement and perception of all kinds of beauty.

The literary education of women ought indisputably to be varied according to
their fortunes and their expectations. Much refinement, and a taste for books,
will injure her, whose time, from prudential motives, must be entirely
engrossed by economy. Few women are, indeed, exempted from all attention to
domestic care; but, yet, the unmarried, and those who enjoy opulence, find many
intervals which they often devote to some species of ^^^^ing. And there is no
doubt, but that the reading would be selected with more judgment, and would
afford mo^e pleasure and advantage, if the taste were formed by early culture.

It is well known, that internal beauty contributes much to perfect external
grace. I believe it will also be favorable to virtue, and will operate greatly
in restraining from any conduct grossly indelicate, and obviously improper.
Much of the profligacy of female manners has proceeded from a levity occasioned
by a want of a proper education. She, who has no taste for well written books,
will often be at a loss how to spend her time; and the consequences of such a
state are too frequent not to, be known, and too fatal not to be dreaded and
avoided*

PART II. Letters -- elegant and entertaining.
LETTER I. -- ALCANDER TO OPHELIA.
DEAR OPHELIA,
AMONG all the deities worshipped by man^^^d, there is none who has a greater
number of vota^ies than Fortune. She is, however, the most capricious of the
whole set. It is her favorite amusement to sport with her worshippers, and to
cut the most antic capers imaginable with them. Today she smiles; and while we
bask in the delusive beams of her favor, we think her a very clever girl.
Tomorrow she frowns; and we immediately call her a dozen opprobrious names,
for her inconstancy. Notwithstanding these daily proofs of her extreme levity,
we still court her, as if our happiness was ^^tirely dependent on her gracious
nod. If she reject our suit today, we prefer it again tomorrow; if she fly
from us with a coquettish disdain, we still follow her with all the ardour of a
lovesick youth; and cannot be persuaded to give up the pursuit, even when we
have quite lost sight of her. Sometimes, however, she will throw herself in our
way, when we are not seeking for her, and be uncommonly liberal of her favors.
In a word, she is a most arrant coquette, and I long ago determined to have
little to do with her. Her proffered civilities I accept with becoming marks of
gratitude; but take care never to put it in her power to give me any
considerable mortification, by disappointing my expectations.

But there is another lady, (I don't know whether (...) the family of the
goddesses, sylphs, or fairies) of wh^^ I have a much better opinion. It Is true
she is not equally liberal of her favors to all her votaries, nor (...)
individuals of them at all times. But if she be treat^^ with proper attention,
it is no fault of here is, if her vi^^ants retire from her presence disgusted.
She is by o^^^pation a limner, and a very ingenious one too. Did I possess any
talent at description, I would point out to you her habitation. But as I cannot
do it justice, let i^ suffice to say, it is the most romantic and agreeable
th^^ can well be conceived. It stands on a sublime eminence, is open on all
sides, and commands a full and clear pro^pect of all the works of nature and
art. By her side are placed, in proper order, the implements of her profession,
together with all the colors, with which the ini^^itable pencil of nature has
tinctured her works. With these she paints not only every thing that exists,
but by combining a number of distinct images, she presents her vi^^ants with an
endless variety of pleasing pictures. Th^^^, with a most obliging
condescension, she adapts to the h^mour of individuals, whom she always
consults before (...) draws even the outlines of the piece. Let it be ever ^o
ugly and deformed, therefore, (and Hogarth himself w^^ not half so ingenious in
striking out caricatures) no bla^^ can be thrown on the painter, her votary
alone is in fault; for he chooses the ground, and directs what colors he will
have employed.

If I am not mistaken, Ophelia, you are one of this l^dy's favorites, and from
my description, imperfect as it is, have anticipated her name; so that I hardly
need (...) you it is Fancy. Is she not an ingenious and amusing companion? For
my part, I cannot boast of any intim^cy with her; but sometimes, however, find
her tolerably condescending, and favorable to my views. At my request, she
lately constructed a balloon, in which we took a flight together far enough
above the highest of Charles or Montgolfier. In fact, we traversed the
universe. An account of this tour you may some time or another peruse.

At present I shall give you the outlines of a pretty picture she drew for me
last evening. In the first place, (...) painted a number of sprightly,
sensible, and amiable ^g ladies, in whose countenances innocence, health, (...)
happiness were at an amicable strife for precedence, which I thought neither of
them would soon obtain. I (...) much pleased with the several portraits, as
they were severally presented to my view; but much more so when, by a kind of
magic flourish of her pencil, fancy had grouped them together, in the fore part
of an evening ^end a cheery fire. From the perfect harmony and good humor that
reigned among them, and the tender ^^^ndship they discovered for each other, I
took them to (...) a number of intimates, collected from the vicinity to (...)
the evening together, in the enjoyment of those en^^nting pleasures, which
arise, among persons formed for society, from an easy exercise of the social
affections. The prospect, you may well suppose, delighted me; and made me
ardently wish to be admitted to the friendly and agreeable circle, though I
could not boast an ac^^^tance with any one of them. But how agreeable (...) my
surprise, when fancy added to the company an old friend of my own sex, and my
amiable Ophelia, from this circumstance I suspected what I soon discovered to
be fact, that this group of females, whose mutual friendship I had been
admiring, were also sisters. Shame, shame on the world, said I to myself, that
a family of sisters, living together in perfect harmony and love, should be a
sight so rare as to excite surprise. If before, I felt interested in their
happiness, and perceived a kindly affection for them arising in my breast, I
now loved them most cordially. Turn hither your eyes, ye sisters, whom envy,
jealousy, or any such rascally passion so often embroils, and learn the beauty,
the excellency, and felicity of loving each other as friends.

In the course of the evening, Fancy introduced two of three young gentlemen of
the vicinity, who increased, while they enjoyed, the festivity of the company.
She also sketched out the amusements that took place in the intervals of
conversation. At one time, she represented you as listening with pleased
attention, to a sprightly or sentimental song warbled out by one of the young
ladies; and then instantly placed you all on the floor, tracing out the
intricacies of the mazy dance. The sportive (...) even went so far as to paint
the refreshments that (...) liberally offered you; among which she did not
forg^^ the server of "wine, which makes glad the heart of man," though she
hinted, as she introduced it, that, i^ this case, it was quite unnecessary for
that purpose; because the cheerfulness of the company could receive ^^
additions from it.

I could not help observing that the painter took particular care to keep an
empty chair in the circle. It was a circumstance I could not well account for.
I ^^ last conjectured that it was designed as an emblem of hospitality; and
fancy confirmed me in it. How happy should I be, thought I, could I but occupy
it for the evening! To have been a witness to, and partaker of the pleasures of
a mixed company, where each one was more solicitous to communicate than to
receive happiness, for one hour, would have been worth more than a common
month. By this time, fancy had wrought up the col^^^ing of the piece to such a
height, that I was afraid ^^ga^e upon it any longer, lest I should be
involuntarily seized with the hateful passion, which, according to Milton, made
the old fellow with the bad character, avert hi^ eyes from Adam and Eve in
paradise.

It was not till the close of the evening that fancy introduced into the
company the respectable father of the family. He came not even then to spoil,
but only to temper and enjoy their festivity. Recollecting the days of his
youth, when the genial blood flowed warm in his veins, he knew how to indulge
the innocent gaiety of his children and their companions; and therefore, "his
easy presence checked no decent joy." This was Fancy's la^^ labor; for when
she had added this figure to the group, she threw aside her pencil -- said, it
is completed! and politely dismissed me from her presence.

And here, my dear friend, I shall take my leave of you; not, however, without
an honest assurance that I am, most sincerely and faithfully, yours,

ALCANDER.

LETTER II. -- THE RURAL TASTE OF A TRADESMAN'S WIFE EXPOSED.
SIR,
NEVER was any poor devil of a husband plagued in the manner I am with the
singularities of a wife. You must know, Sir, though her father was a
carcass-butcher in White-Chapel, though she was educated at a boarding-school
in Thames Street, and never traveled farther than Bethnal-Green, or Hoxton, or
Hackney, or Newington-Butts; yet she affects such a taste and passion for the
country, as would have ruined the patience of all the heathen philosophers put
together: every room in my house, from the cellar to the garrets, bears
testimony to her rural ideas in some way or other: the leads of my house, and
the rails of my windows, are crowded with pots and pans, and vegetables and
evergreens, like the shop of a botanist or seedsman. When I go into the
kitchen, I find the light, which is none of the liveliest at the best, totally
shut out by a range of physic phials, huddled together as close as they can
s^ick, and filled with mint, to give the windows a rural appearance. Then, Sir,
the dining room windows, in summer time, are so crossed and crowded with
pack-threads, fastened like bars from the top to the bottom of them, that if it
were not for the French beans, which cluster round the strings, it would
enliven my mind with the pleasing imagination of being cooped up in a
spunging-house. Every chimney corner is then set out, as it is called, with
bough-pots, and not a china jar in my house escapes an ornament from
Covent Garden market. I have been, you must know, severely lectured for this
week past, for spoiling a charming bed of parsley, as my wife calls it, upon
the leads, while I was giving a brick-layer orders to make some repairs to the
chimney; and what is still more provoking, upon inquiring for my best wig-box,
a few days ago, I was told, by the maid, that the box was put to a much better
use; for that her mistress had sown a sallad in it of mustard and crese, which
would be fit to cut in a few days. Sir, this passion (...) the vegetable world
is so predominant in my wife's min^, that not a broken pot, is free from some
cultivation or other. As I hope to be saved, she had some time since a geranium
in full blossom, which, to save expense, was stuck fast in a c -- e f -- l pan;
a myrtle in a butter firkin; an orange-tree in a washing-tub; a tulip in a
salt-box, and a young gooseberry bush in a punch-bowl. Nay, to such a pitch of
extravagance does this enthusiastic helpmate of mine carry this gardening taste
of here is, that the house was thrown into convulsions three days ago, upon a
report that the cat had kittened upon the grass-plot, which grew upon the top
shelf of the pantry. Then, Sir, to add to my vexation, I have had the happiness
to be threatened with an indictment for being a nuisance to my neighbors and
the public, as hardly a week passes without some pan or pot tumbling upon the
heads of the passengers, and doing some mischief or other. If I expostulate, I
have no taste; if I threaten, I have no humanity; if I coax her, I have no
influence; and if I give way to her, I can expect no comfort. My very bed-room,
in summer, Sir, is so filled with flowers, that I am in nightly dread of being
perfumed to death before morning. Then I never must stir out without a nosegay
in my button-hole, because it makes so rural and so countrified an appearance.
In short, what with rural sights, and rural smells, and rural conversation,
rural ornaments, and rural nonsense, of one kind or another, my patience is
quite exhausted: therefore I take this public method of giving my wife warning,
that unless there is a thorough reformation in her manners, I am determined to
assert some spirit, to turn the grass-plot out of the house at a minute's
notice send the parsley bed into the dust tub, pack up her shrubbery in an
hamper, and restore my wig-box to its proper use.

I am, Sir, yours, etc. HOMO.

LETTER III. -- JULIA MONTAGUE TO EMILY BEAUMONT.
MY DEAR EMILY,
HAVE you then forgotten your promise to come down to the country, and spend a
few days with me in the beginning of spring? Perhaps the fine folks in town do
not suppose that the spring is come yet. I can account for their mistake.
Nothing but the sun can convince them of its approach; and they keep themselves
so mewed up in their apartments, that they think very little of consulting him.
As for us, we enjoy his kindly beams already. The country, which was so dull
for some months, has reassumed all its charms. The trees, have shaken off
winter's squalid dress, to put on, once more, the livery of spring. The birds,
returning in crowds, form the most agreeable concerts; while they hide their
nests under the thick foliage of the groves. What can you be doing in town?
Were you to pass the whole day at your window, breathing the fresh air, would
you suppose that you enjoyed the spring? Cast your eyes, round you, what do you
see? A sky clouded with smoke; dirty streets; in short, the same objects that
you have seen all winter. The house-tops, it is true are no longer covered with
snow and icicles, but your dun tiles, even with this advantage, afford no very
brilliant prospect. Do you see, as I do, the sun's rising beams deck the fresh
leaf with purple and gold? do you see the dew-drops shine like pearls, before
his warmth dries them up? do you see him, when he emerges from behind the hill,
inundate the vast horizon with a torrent of light? I suppose your town idlers,
who have stuck so long to their fire-sides, begin to trust themselves at length
to the park, though they still shudder with the cold, that they have felt; but
look at them attentively, you will find that one winter has made them old.
Here, on the contrary, every thing seems to have grown young again. The brooks
have purged their muddy waters; the meadows are enamelled with new flowers; the
p^^^ primrose adorns every bank; and even the prickly ha^^ thorn prepares to
dress itself in the blossoms of May, in order to soften its rugged aspect. How
pleasing, after the dull silence that reigned throughout all nature, to hear
the bleating of the flocks, that are seen climbing up the green slopes; and the
clamorous joy of the children and youth, who come out to enjoy their accustomed
sports in the fields! Our house is built upon an e^inence, exposed to the
earliest beams of the sun. I might, if I chose, receive his morning visits in
my chamber* but I like better to rise with the dawn, and pay him my respects in
person, upon the top of the hill; and thither I repair in the evening also, to
take my leave of him.

These, my dear Emily, are some of the pleasures of the season; but I feel the
want of a friend to enjoy them with me. Make haste, therefore, and come down.
Do not suppose, that whatever time you spend here will be lost to your
improvement: I learn here a th^sand things, of which I am ashamed that I have
hitherto been so ignorant. Our little accomplishments too, I am very sure, will
not contract rust in this air. The sweet song^ of the nightingale will remind
us of cultivating our voices more attentively. The little lambs, that bound and
frisk around their mothers, will give us an example of ease, grace, and
agility; while the landscape, varying before us at every step, will invite us
to exercise our p^^cils, and vie with the coloring of nature: such rivals ^s
these may, perhaps, humble our vanity, but they take ^o pride to themselves,
from our inferiority; and therefore we can forgive their excelling us. Try to
prevail upon your mamma to come down along with you: we expect you both, with
the most earnest impatience. Adieu, my dear Emily. Believe me unalterable in
the friendship, which I have vowed to maintain for you, while I remain

JULIA MONTAGUE.

LETTER IV. -- TO THE AUTHOR OF THE MIRROR.
SIR,
SOME time ago I troubled you with a letter, giving an account of a particular
sort of grievance felt by the families of men of small fortunes, from their
acquaintance with those of great ones. I am emboldened, by the favorable
reception of my first letter, to write you a second upon the same subject.

You will remember, Sir, my account of a visit my daughters paid to a great
lady in our neighborhood, and of the effects which that visit had upon them. I
was beginning to hope that time, and the sobriety of manners, which home
exhibited, would restore them to their former situation, when, unfortunately, a
circumstance happened, still more fatal to me than their expedition to --.
This, Sir, was the honor of a visit from the great lady in return.

I was just returned from the superintendance of my ploughs in a field I have
lately enclosed, when I was met on the green, before my door, by a gentleman
(for such I took him to be) mounted upon a very handsome gelding, who asked me
by the appellation of honest friend, if this was not Mr. Homespun's; and in the
same breath, whether the ladies were at home? I told him, my name was Homespun,
the house was mine, and my wife and daughters were, I believed, within. Upon
this, the young man, pulling off his hat, and begging my pardon for calling me
honest, said he was dispatched by Lady --, with her compliments to Mrs. and
Misses Homespun, and that if convenient, she intended herself the honor of
dining with them, on her return from B -- park (the seat of another great and
rich lady in our neighborhood.)

I confess, Mr. Mirror, I was struck somewhat of an ^eap with the message; and
it would not, in all probability, have received an immediate answer, had it not
b^^^ overheard by my eldest daughter, who had come to the window on the
appearance of a stranger. "Mr. Papillot," said she immediately, "I rejoice to
see you; I hope your Lady and all the family are well." "Very much at your
service Ma'am," replied he, with a low bow; "my Lady sent me before, with the
offer of her best compliments, and that, if convenient," -- and so forth,
repeating his words to me. "She does us infinite honor," said my young madam;
"let her Ladyship know how happy her visit will make us; but in the mean time,
Mr. Papillot, give your horse to one of the servants, and come in and have a
glass of something after your ride." "I am afraid," answered he, (pulling out
his right hand watch) for, would you believe it, Sir? the fellow had one in
each fob, "I shall hardly have time to meet my Lady at the place she appointed
me." On a second invitation, however, he dismounted, and went into the house,
leaving his horse to the care of the servants; but the servants, as my daughter
very well knew, were all in the fields at work; so I, who have a liking for a
good horse, and cannot bear to see him neglected, had the honor of putting Mr.
Papillot's in the stable myself.

After about an hour's stay, (for the gentleman seemed to forget his hurry
within doors) Mr. Papillot departed. My daughters, I mean the two polite ones,
observed how handsome he was; and added another observation, that it was only
to particular friends my Lady sent messages by him, who was her own body
servant, and not accustomed to such offices. My wife seemed highly pleased with
this last remark: I was about to be angry, but on such occasions it is not my
way to say much; I generally shrug up my shoulders in silence; yet, Mr. Mirror,
I would not have you think me hen-peck'd.

By this time, every domestic about my house, male and female, were called from
their several employments to assist in the preparation for her Ladyship's
reception. It would tire you to enumerate the various shifts that were made, by
purchasing, borrowing, etc. to furnish out a dinner suitable to the occasion.
My little gray poney, which I keep for sending to market, broke his wind in the
cause, and has never been good for any thing since. ^^r was there less ado in
making ourselves and our attendants fit to appear before such company. The
female p^^t of the family managed the matter pretty easily: ^ome^, I observe,
have a natural talent that way. My wife took upon herself the charge of
apparelling me for the occasion. A laced suit, which I had worn at my marriage,
was got up for the purpose; but the breeches ^t a seam at the very first
attempt of putting them (...), and the sleeves of the coat were also
impracticable; so she was forced to content herself with clothing me in my
Sunday's coat and breeches, with the laced waist-coat of the abovementioned
suit, slit in the back, to set them off a little. My gardener, who has been
accustomed, indeed, to serve in many capacities, had his head craped, curled,
and powdered, for the part of butler; one of the best looking plough-boys had a
yellow cape clapped to his Sunday's coat to make him pass for a servant in
livery; and we borrowed my son-in-law the parson's man for a third hand.

All this was accomplished, though not without some tumult and disorder, before
the arrival of the great Lady. She gave us, indeed, more time for the purpose
than we looked for, as it was near six o'clock before she arrived. But this was
productive of a misfortune on the other hand: the dinner my poor wife had
bustled, sweated, and scolded for, was so over-boiled, over-stewed, and
over-roasted, that it needed the appetite of so late an hour to make it go well
down, even with me, who am not very nice in these matters: luckily, her
Ladyship, as I am told, never eats much, for fear of spoiling her shape, now
that small waists have come into fashion again.

The dinner, however, though spoiled in the cooking, was not thrown away, as
her Ladyship's train made shift to eat the greatest part of it. When I say her
train, I do not mean her servants only, of which there were half a dozen in
livery, besides the illustrious Mr. Papillot, and her Ladyship's maid,
(gentlewoman, I should say) who had a table to themselves. Her parlour
attendants were equally numerous, consisting of two ladies and six gentlemen,
who had accompanied (...) Ladyship in this e^cursion, and did us the honor o^
coming to eat and drink with us, and bringing their servants to do the same,
though we had never seen or heard^ of them before.

During the progress of this entertainment, there were several little
embarrassments, which might appear ridiculous in description, but were matters
of serious distress to us; soup was spilled, dishes overturned, and glasses
broken, by the awkwardness of our attendants; and things were not a bit mended
by my wife's solicitude (who to do her justice had all her eyes about her) to
correct them.

From the time of her Ladyship's arrival, it was impossible that dinner could
be over before it was dark; this, with the consideration of the bad road she
had to pass through in her way to the next house she meant to visit, produced
an invitation, from my wife and daughters, to pass the night with us; which,
after a few word^ of apology for the trouble she gave us, and a few m^ of the
honor we received, was agreed to. This gave rise to a new scene of
preparation, rather more difficult than that before dinner. My wife and I were
dislodged from our own apartment, to make room for our noble guest. Our four
daughters were crammed in by us, and slept on the floor, that their rooms might
be left for the two ladies and four of the gentlemen, who were entitled to the
degree of respect; for the remaining two, we found beds at my son-in-law's. My
two eldest daughters had, indeed, little time to sleep, being closetted the
greatest part of the night with their right honorable visitor. My offices were
turned topsy-turvey for the accommodation of the servants of my guests, and my
own horses turned into the fields, that their's might occupy my stable.

All these are hardships in their kind, Mr. Mirror, which the honor that
accompanies them seems to me not fully to compensate; but these are slight
grievances, in comparison with what I have to complain of as the effects of
this visit. The malady of my two eldest daughters is not only returned, with
increased violence, upon them, but has now communicated itself to every other
branch of my family. My wife, formerly a decent, discreet woman, who liked her
own way indeed, but was a notable manager, now talks of this and that piece of
expense as necessary to the rank of a gentlewoman, and has lately dropped some
broad hints, that a winter in town is necessary to the accomplishment of one.
My two younger daughters have got the heads that formerly belonged to their
elder sisters, to each of whom, unfortunately, the great Lady presented a set
of feathers, for which new h^^ds were essentially requisite.

The inside of all of them has undergone a very striking metamorphosis, from
this one night's instruction of their visitor. There is, it seems, a fashion in
morality, as well as dress; and the present mode is not quite so strait-lac'd
as the stays are. My two fine ladies talked, a few mornings ago, of such a
gentleman's connection with Miss C --, and such another's arrangement with Lady
G --, with all the ease in the world. I sometimes remonstrate warmly especially
when I have my son-in-law to bac^ me, against these newfangled freedoms: but
another doctrine they have learned, is, that a father and a parson may ^^^ch as
they please, but are to be followed only according to the inclination of their
audience.

This contempt of authority, and affectation of fashion, has gone a step lower
in my household. My gardener has tied his hair behind, and stolen my flour to
powder it, ever since he saw Mr. Papillot; and yesterday he gave me warning
that he should leave me next term, if I did not take him into the house, and
provide another hand for the work in the garden. I found a great hoyden, who
washes my daughters' linens, sitting the other afternoon, dressed in one of
their cast fly-caps, entertaining this same oaf of a gardener, and the wives of
two of my farm-servants, with tea, forsooth; and when I quarrelled with her for
it, she replied, that Mrs. Dimmity, my Lady's gentlewoman, told her all the
maids at -- had tea, and saw company of an afternoon.

But I am resolved on a reformation, Mr. Mirror; and shall let my wife and
daughters know, that I will be master of my own house and my own expenses, and
will neither be made a fool nor a beggar, though it were after the manner of
the greatest lord in christendom. Yet I confess I am always for trying gentle
methods first. I beg, therefore, that you will insert this in your next paper,
and add to it some exhortations of your own, to prevail on them, if possible,
to give over a behavior, which I think, under favor, is rather improper even
in great folks, but is certainly ruinous to little ones.

I am, etc. JOHN HOMESPUN.

LETTER V. -- TO THE AUTHOR OF THE MIRROR.
SIR,
I AM one of the young women mentioned in a letter which you published in your
25th number, though I did not know, till very lately, that our family had been
put into print in the Mirror. Since it is so, I think I too may venture to
write you a letter, which, if it be not quite so well written as my father's,
will at least be as true.

Soon after my Lady -- 's visit at our house, of which my father's letter
informed you, a sister of his, who is married to a man of business here in
Edinburgh, came with her husband to see us in the country; and, though my
sister Mary and I soon discovered many vulgar things about them, yet, as they
were both very good-humoured sort of people, and took great pains to make
themselves agreeable, we could not help looking with regret to the time of
their departure. When that drew near, they surprised us, by an invitation to
me, to come and spend some months with my cousins in town, saying, that my
mother could not miss my company at home, while she had so good a companion and
assistant in the family as her daughter Mary.

To me there were not so many allurements in this journey as might have been
imagined. I had lately been taught to look on London as the only capital worth
visiting; besides that, I did not expect the highest satisfaction from the
society I should meet with at my aunt's, which, I confess, I was apt to suppose
none of the most genteel. I contrived to keep the matter in suspense (for it
was left entirely to my own determination) till I should write for the opinion
of my friend, Lady --, on the subject; for, ever since our first acquaintance,
we had kept up a constant and regular correspondence. In our letters, which
were always written in a style of the warmest affection, we were in the way of
talking with the greatest freedom of every body of our acquaintance. It was
delightful, as her Ladyship expressed it, "to unfold one's feelings in the
bosom of friendship." To prevent discovery, we corresponded under signatures of
Hortensia and Leonora; and some very particular intelligence her Ladyship
taught me not to commit to ink, but to set down in lemon juice. I wander from
my story, Mr. Mirror; "but I cannot help fondly recalling (as Emily in the
novel says) those halcyon days of friendship and felicity."

When her Ladyship's answer arrived, I found her clearly of opinion that I
ought to accept of my aunt's invitation. She was very jocular on the manners
which she supposed I should find in that Lady's family; but she said I might
take the opportunity of making some acquirements, which, though London alone
could perfect, Edinburgh might, in some degree, communicate. She concluded her
letter with requesting the continuation of my correspondence, and a narrative
of every thing that was passing in town, especially with regard to some ladies
and gentlemen of her acquaintance, whom she pointed out to my particular
observation.

To Edinburgh, therefore, I accompanied my aunt, and found a family very much
disposed to make me happy. In this they might, perhaps, have succeeded more
completely, had I not acquired, from the instruction of Lady --, and the
company I saw at her house, certain notions of polite life, with which I did
not find any thing at Mr. -- 's, correspond. It was often, indeed, their
good humor which offended me as coarse, and their happiness that struck me as
vulgar. There was not such a thing as hip or low spirits among them, a sort of
finery which, at --, I found a person of fashion could not possibly be without.

They were at great pains to show me any sights that were to be seen, with some
of which I was really little pleased, and with others I thought it would look
like ignorance to seem pleased. They took me to the playhouse, where there
there was little company, and very little attention. I was carried to the
concert, where the case was exactly the same. I found great fault with both;
for though I had not much skill, I had got words enough for finding fault from
my friend Lady --: upon which they made an apology for our entertainment, by
telling me, that the playhouse was, at that time, managed by a fiddler, and
the concert was allowed to manage itself.

Our parties at home were agreeable enough. I found Mr. -- 's and my aunts
visitors very different from what I had been made to expect, and not at all the
cocknies my Lady -- and some of her humourous guests used to describe. They
were not, indeed, so polite as the fashionable company I had met at her
Ladyship's; but they were much more civil. Among the rest was my uncle-in-law's
partner, a good looking young man, who, from the first, was so particularly
attentive to me that my cousins, jokingly, called him my lover; and even my
aunt sometimes told me she believed he had a serious attachment to me; but I
took care not to give him any encouragement, as I had always heard my Lady --
talk of the wife of a burgeois as the most contemptible creature in the world.

The season at last arrived, in which, I was told, the town would appear in its
gaiety, a great deal of good company being expected at the races. For the races
I looked with anxiety, for another reason; my dear Lady -- was to be here at
that period. Of this I was informed by a letter from my sister. From her
Ladyship I had not heard for a considerable time, as she had been engaged in a
round of visits to her acquaintance in the country.

The very morning after her arrival (for I was on the watch to get intelligence
of her) I called at her lodgings. When the servant appeared, he seemed doubtful
about letting me in; at last he ushered me into a little darkish parlour,
where, after waiting about half an hour, he brought me word, that his Lady
could not try on the gown I had brought then, but desired me to fetch it next
day at eleven. I now perceived there had been a mistake as to my person; and
telling the fellow, somewhat angrily, that I was no mantua-maker, desired him
to carry to his Lady a slip of paper, on which I wrote with a pencil the well
known name of Leonora. On his going up stairs, I heard a loud peal of laughter
above, and soon after he returned with a message, that Lady -- was sorry she
was particularly engaged at present, and could not possibly see me. Think, Sir,
with what astonishment I heard this message from Hortensia. I left the house, I
know not whether most ashamed or angry; but afterward I began to persuade
myself, that there might be some particular reasons for Lady -- 's not seeing
me at that time, which she might explain at meeting; and I imputed the terms of
the message to the rudeness or simplicity of the footman. All that day, and the
next, I waited impatiently for the note of explanation or inquiry from her
Ladyship, but was a good deal disappointed when I found the second evening
arrive, without having received any such token of her remembrance. I went,
rather in low spirits, to the play. I had not been long in the house, when I
saw Lady -- enter the next box. My heart fluttered at the sight; and I watched
her eyes, that I might take the first opportunity of presenting myself to her
notice. I saw them soon after turned toward me, and immediately curtsied, with
a significant smile, to my noble friend, who being short-sighted, it would
seem, which, however, I had never remarked before, stared at me for some
moments, without taking notice of my salute, and at last was just putting up a
glass to her eye, to point it at me, when a lady pulled her by the sleeve, and
made her take notice of somebody on the opposite side of the house. She never
afterward happened to look to that quarter where I was seated.

Still, however, I was not quite discouraged; and, on an accidental change of
places in our box, contrived to place myself at the end of the bench next her
Ladyship's, so that there was only a piece of thin board between us. At the end
of the act, I ventured to ask her how she did, and to express my happiness at
seeing her in town, adding, that I had called the day before, but had found her
particularly engaged. "Why yes," said she, "Miss Homespun, I am always
extremely hurried in town, and have time to receive only a few visits; but I
will be glad if you will come some morning and breakfast with me -- but not
tomorrow, for there is a morning concert; nor next day, for I have a musical
party at home. In short, you may come some morning next week, when the hurry
will be over, and, if I am not gone out of town, I will be happy to see you." I
don't know what answer I should have made; but she did not give me an
opportunity; for a gentleman in a green uniform coming into the box, she
immediately made room for him to sit between us. He, after a broad stare full
in my face, turned his back my way, and sat in that posture all the rest of the
evening.

I am not so silly, Mr. Mirror, but I can understand the meaning of all this.
My Lady, it seems, is contented to have some humble friends in the country,
whom she does not think worthy of her notice in town; but I am determined to
show her, that I have a prouder spirit than she imagines, and shall not go near
her, either in town or country. What is more, my father shall not vote for her
friend at next election, if I can help it.

What vexes me beyond every thing else, is, that I had often been telling my
aunt and her daughters of the intimate footing. I was on with Lady --, and what
a violent friendship we had for each other; and so, from envy, perhaps, they
used to nickname me the countess, and Lady Leonora. Now that they had got this
story of the mantua-maker and the playhouse, (for I was so angry I could not
conceal it) I am ashamed to hear the name of a lady of quality mentioned, even
if it be only in a book from the circulating library. Do write a paper, Sir,
against pride and haughtiness, and people forgetting their country friends and
acquaintance; and you will very much oblige

Yours, etc. ELIZABETH HOMESPUN.

LETTER VI. -- IGNATIUS SANCHO TO MR. STERN.
REVEREND SIR,
IT would be an insult to your humanity (or perhaps look like it) to apologize
for the liberty I am taking. I am one of those people, whom the vulgar and
illiberal call negroes. The first part of my life was rather unlucky, as I was
placed in a family, who judged ignorance the best and only security for
obedience. A little reading and writing I got by unwearied application. The
latter part of my life has been, through God's blessing, truly fortunate,
having spent it in the service of one of the best and greatest families in the
kingdom. My chief pleasure has been books -- philanthropy I adore. How very
much, good Sir, am I (amongst millions) indebted to you for the character of
your amiable uncle Toby! I declare I would walk ten miles in the dog days, to
shake hands even with the honest corporal, his servant. Your sermons have
touched me to the heart, and I hope have amended it; which brings me to the
point. In your tenth discourse is this very affecting passage -- "Consider how
great a part of our species, in all ages, down to this, have been trod under
the feet of cruel and capricious tyrants, who would neither hear their cries,
nor pity their distresses! Consider slavery, what it is -- how bitter a
draught, and how many millions are made to drink of it!" Of all my favorite
authors, not one has drawn a tear, in favor of my miserable black brethren,
except yourself and the humane author of Sir George Ellison. I think you will
forgive me; I am sure you will applaud me for beseeching you to give one
half-hour's attention to slavery, as it is this day practiced in our
West Indies: that subject, handled in your striking manner, would ease the
yoke, perhaps, of many; but, if only one -- gracious God! what a feast to a
benevolent heart! and sure I am, you are an epicurian in acts of charity. You,
who are universally read, and as universally admired, you could not fail. Dear
Sir, think in me you behold the uplifted hands of thousands of my brother
Moors. Grief, you pathetically observe, is eloquent: figure to yourself their
attitudes! hear their supplicating addresses! -- Alas! you cannot refuse;
humanity must comply: in which hope, I beg permission to subscribe myself,
Reverend Sir, etc.

LETTER VII. -- MR. STERN TO IGNATIUS SANCHO.
THERE is a strange coincidence, Sancho, in the little events, as well as in
the great ones, of this world: for I had been writing a tender tale of the
sorrows of a friendless poor negro girl, and my eyes had scarce done smarting
with it, when your letter of recommendation, in behalf of so many of her
brethren and sisters, came to me. But why her brethren, or yours, Sancho, any
more than mine? It is by the finest tints, and most insensible gradations, that
nature descends from the fairest face about St. James's, to the sootiest
complexion in Africa: -- at which tint of these is it, that the ties of blood
are to cease? and how many shades must we descend lower still in the scale, ere
mercy is to vanish with them? But it is no uncommon thing, my good Sancho, for
one half of the world to use the other half of it like brutes, and then
endeavor to make them so. For my own part, I never look westward (when I am in
a pensive mood, at least) but I think of the burdens which our brothers and
sisters are there carrying; and could I ease their shoulders from one ounce of
them, I declare I would set out this hour upon a pilgrimage to Mecca for their
sakes -- which, by the bye, Sancho, exceeds your walk of ten miles in about the
same proportion ^^at a vi^^t of humanity should one of mere form. However, if
you meant my uncle Toby more, he is your de^tor. If I can weave the tale I have
wrote, into the work I am about -- it is at the service of the afflicted -- and
a much greater matter; for, in serious truth, it casts a sad shade upon the
world, that so great a part of it are, and have been, so long bound in chains
of darkness, and in chains of misery; and I cannot but both respect and
felicitate you, that by so much laudable diligence you have broke the one --
and that, by falling into the hands of so good and merciful a family,
Providence has rescued you from the other.

And so, good-hearted Sancho, adieu! and believe me, I will not forget your
letter. Yours, etc.

LETTER VIII. -- DR. JOHNSON TO MISS SUSANNA THRALE.
DEAREST MISS SUSAN,
WHEN you favored me with your letter, you seemed to be in want of materials
to fill it, having met with no great adventures, either of peril or delight,
nor done or suffered any thing out of the common course of life.

When you have lived longer, and considered more, you will find the common
course of life very fertile of observation and reflection. Upon the common
course of life must our thoughts and our conversation be generally employed.
Our general course of life must denominate us wise or foolish; happy or
miserable: if it is well regulated, we pass on prosperously and smoothly; as if
it is neglected, we live in embarrassment, perplexity, and uneasiness.

Your time, my love, passes, I suppose, in devotion, reading, work, and
company. Of your devotions, in which I earnestly advise you to be very
punctual, you may not perhaps think it proper to give me an account; and of
work, unless I understood it better, it will be of no great use to say much;
but books and company will always supply you with materials for your letters to
me, as I shall always be pleased to know what you are reading, and with what
you are pleased; and shall take great delight in knowing what impression new
modes and new characters make upon you, and to observe with what attention you
distinguish the tempers, dispositions, and abilities of your companions.

A letter may be always made out of the books of the morning, or talk of the
evening; and any letters from you, my dearest, will be welcome to

Yours, etc.

LETTER IX. -- FROM MISS TALBOT TO A NEWBORN CHILD.
YOU are heartily welcome, my dear little cousin, into this unquiet world; long
may you continue in it, in all the happiness it can give, and bestow enough on
all your friends to answer fully the impatience with which you have been
expected. May you grow up to have every accomplishment, that you good friend,
the Bishop of Derry, can already imagine in you; and, in the mean time, may you
have a nurse with a tuneable voice, that may not talk an immoderate deal of
nonsense to you. You are, at present, my dear, in a very philosophical
disposition; the gaieties and follies of life have no attraction for you; its
sorrows you kindly commiserate! but, however, do not suffer them to disturb
your slumbers, and find charms in nothing but harmony and repose. You have as
yet contracted no partialities, are entirely ignorant of party distinctions,
and look with a perfect indifference on all human splendor. You have an
absolute dislike to the vanities of dress; and are likely for many months to
observe the Bishop of Bristol's first rule of conversation, silence; though
tempted to transgress it by the novelty and strangeness of all objects around.
As you advance farther in life, this philosophical temper will, by degrees,
wear off: the first object of your admiration will probably be the candle; and
thence (as we all of us do) you will contract a taste for the gaudy and the
glaring, without making one moral reflection upon the danger of such false
admiration, as leads people many a time to burn their fingers. You will begin
to show great partiality for some very good aunts, who will contribute all they
can toward spoiling you; but you will be equally fond of an excellent mamma,
who will teach you, by her example, all sorts of good qualities; only let me
warn you of one thing, my dear, and that is, not to learn of her to have such
an immoderate love of home, as is quite contrary to all the privileges of this
polite age, and to give up so entirely all those pretty graces of whim,
flutter, and affectation, which so many charitable poets have declared to be
the prerogative of our sex: oh! my poor cousin, to what purpose will you boast
this prerogative, when your nurse tells you with a pious care, (to sow the
seeds of jealousy and emulation as early as possible) that you have a fine
little brother come to put your nose out of joint? There will be nothing to be
done then but to be mighty good, and prove what, believe me, admits of very
little dispute, (though it has occasioned abundance) that we girls, however
people give themselves airs of being disappointed, are by no means to be
despised. Let the men unenvied shine in public; it is we that must make their
homes delightful to them; and if they provoke us, no less uncomfortable.

I do not expect you to answer this letter yet awhile; but as I dare say you
have the greatest interest with your papa, will beg you to prevail upon him
that we may know by a line that you and your mamma are well. In the mean time,
I will only assure you, that all here rejoice in your existence extremely; and
that I am, my very young correspondent, most affectionately

Yours, etc.

LETTER X. -- TO THE AUTHOR OF THE LOUNGER.
SIR,
THAT distress finds some consolation from revealing its misfortunes, is a
trite observation, which perhaps is in no instance, more strongly felt, than
where we have ourselves to blame for our calamities. There is something in
making a confession, though but on paper, (even if it should never be
communicated to any one) which unloads the mind of a weight, that bears it down
in secret; and though it cannot pluck the thorn from memory, has certainly the
effect of blunting its poignancy. Suffer me then, Sir, to tell you, or to write
as if I were telling you, how unhappy I am, and by what means I have become so.

I was left by my father at the age of thirteen, the eldest of two daughters,
under the charge of one of the best and most indulgent of mothers. Our
circumstances were affluent; our society respectable; and our education, from
its very commencement, had been attended to with care, and provided for with
the utmost liberality. No instruction was neglected, no accomplishment
unattended to. In attaining these, my sister was not quite so fortunate as I.
Born, as I have been often told, with uncommon quickness of parts, I found no
difficulty in mastering the studies that were taught me, or of acquiring the
embellishments it was wished I should acquire. My sister was often deficient in
the one and awkward at the other. She possessed, however, a sound, plain
understanding, and an excellent temper. My superiority never excited envy in
her, and I think never vanity in me. We loved one another most sincerely; and
after some years had blunted the grief, which my mother felt for her husband's
death, there were, I believe, few happier families than our's.

Though our affections were cordial, however, our dispositions were very
different. My sister was contented to think as other people thought, and to
feel as other people felt; she rarely ventured to speculate in opinion, or to
soar in fancy. I was often tempted to reject, if not to despise the common
opinions of mankind, and to create to myself a warm, and, I am afraid, a
visionary picture of happiness, arising from a highly refined sensibility. My
mother was at pains to discourage these enthusiastic ideas, and to represent
the danger of indulging in them. From a desire, perhaps, of overcoming that
tendency toward them which she perceived in me, her discourse, when we were
alone, almost constantly turned on this subject. As she always allowed us the
liberty of argument with her, I stood up, in these conversations, the warm
defender of my own maxims, in contradiction to those prudent ones, which she
recommended. Here Is, I am persuaded, admitted of better reasoning; but my cause
gave greater room for eloquence. All my little talents were exerted in the
contest; and I have often since thought that my mother had, from nature, a bent
to my side of the question, which all her wisdom and experience had not been
able to overcome; that though she constantly applauded the prudent system of my
sister, she was, in truth, rather partial to mine, and vain of that ability
with which I defended it: however that might be, I myself always arose from the
dispute more and more convinced of the justness of my own opinions, and proud
of that superiority which I thought they conferred on me.

We had not long attained a marriageable age, when we found ourselves
surrounded with those whom the world terms admirers. Our mother's benevolence
and sweetness of temper inclined her to society, and we were too innocent for
prudery; we had, therefore, a number of visitors of the other sex, many of whom
were so particular in their attentions, that women who wished to boast of
conquests, would have called them lovers. With us they did not always assume
that title; my sister was too prudent, and I was too nice, easily to believe a
man a lover.

Among those, however, were two gentlemen, whose attachment was declared to me
in terms too strong to be misunderstood. Florio's person was universally
allowed to be handsome; many, of whom I was one, thought it elegant. With
external accomplishment his education had furnished him; his manner was easy
and unembarrassed; some called it assuming, I thought it natural. His
conversation was full of the language of sensibility; in my idea it spoke a
mind replete with sensibility itself. Other people sometimes suspected him of
shallowness and affectation; I praised him for avoiding the pedantry of
knowledge, and the rusticity of men proud of its acquirements.

Alcander was the only son of a particular friend of my mother, and therefore
on a very intimate footing in our family. My mother, with whom he was a
favorite, discovered in him a great fund of good sense and useful knowledge. I
was struck with the inelegance of his appearance and address, and the want of
refinement in his sentiments and conversation. His goodness and candor were
often the topics of my mother's commendation; I remarked his want of
discernment, and the coldness of his attachments and aversions. My mother often
repeated her own eulogiums of Alcander, and the criticisms of the world on
Florio; I always heard her with a determined opposition of sentiment, and
therefore arose from the conversation more averse to the first, and more
attached to the latter. Alcander, after persisting for some time under a very
marked disinclination to him, gave up the pursuit; but as he still continued
his visits to the family, particularly during any occasional absence of mine,
he transferred by degrees his affections to my sister. When he had ceased to be
my lover, I was very willing to be very much his friend: my mother had always
shown her partiality in his favor; my sister was won by his virtues, and after
some time became his wife.

Florio's suit to me was opposed by my mother, with rather more vehemence than
was natural to her. She often insisted on the infatuation, as she called it, of
that deception which I was under, with regard to him; a deception which she
predicted I should one day be convinced of. Her opposition, however, though it
overruled my conduct, never overcame my attachment: I would not be his without
the consent of my mother; but my affection it was not in her power to shake.
Her love for me overcame her resolution; and at last she gave, however
unwillingly, my hand to Florio.

I was now the happiest of women. The scenes I had often pictured of conjugal
tenderness and domestic happiness, I thought now realized in the possession of
a man, who, I had taught myself to believe, was to love me forever, and was
himself every thing I ought to love; and I often looked with a degree of pity
on the situation of my sister, whose happiness (for she called it happiness)
with Alcander was of a kind so inferior to mine.

How long this lasted I cannot exactly say. I fear I began to be unhappy long
before I would allow myself to believe it. I have often wept alone at the
coldness and neglect of Florio, when on meeting him, a few words of seeming
tenderness and affection made me again reproach my doubts of his love, and
think my own situation the most enviable of any. Alas! he at length drove me
from this last strong hold, in which my affection for him had entrenched
itself. It is now three years since he has treated me in such a manner as to
leave no apology for his treatment. During the last, my mother's death has
deprived me of one of the few comforts I had left. From my mother I carefully
concealed my distress; but I believe in vain: she lived to guess at my misery;
and I fear her sense of it added to the pressure of that which brought her to
the grave.

After the loss of my husband's love, it is little to talk of my disappointment
in his talents and accomplishments. It was long, however, before I allowed
myself to see defects, which less penetration than I have been flattered with
possessing ^^d long before discovered. My mother had often, before our
marriage, expressed her surprise that one of my abilities should be so
deceived, as not to see his inferiority. I believe it is by these abilities
that the deception is aided: they are able to form a picture to which more
ordinary minds are unequal; and in the weakness of their rash attachment, they
find the likeness where they wish to find it.

I was interrupted by my sister. Why are her looks so serene? and why does she
tell me how much mine are altered? I am too proud to allow a witness to my
distresses; and from her, of all womankind, I would conceal them. This
dissimulation is due to my pride, perhaps to my duty; yet if you knew, Sir,
what it is to smile in public, to seem to be happy with such feelings as mine;
to act contentment all day long, and retire at night to my lonely pillow, with
the anguish my heart has treasured up all the while! -- but the subject
overpowers me! -- Farewell.

CONSTANTIA.

LETTER XI.
MY DEAR FRIEND,
MY fair companion still improves in my esteem; the more I know her mind, her
beauty becomes more poignant; she appears charming even among the daughters of
Circa^^ia.

Yet were I to examine her beauty with the art of a statuary, I should find
numbers here, that far surpass her; nature has not granted her all the boasted
Circassian regularity of feature, and yet she greatly exceeds the fairest of
the country, in the art of seizing the affections. Whence, I have often said to
myself, this resistless magic, that attends even moderate charms? Though I
regard the beauties of the country with admiration, every interview weakens the
impression; but the form of Zelis grows upon my imagination: I never behold her
without an increase of tenderness and respect. Whence this injusti^^ of the
mind in preferring imperfect beauty to that which nature seems to have finished
with care? Whence the infatuation, that he, whom a comet could not amaze,
should be astonished at a meteor? When reason was thus fatigued to find an
answer, my imagination pursued the subject, and this was the result -- I
fancied myself placed between two landscapes, this called the region of beauty,
and that the valley of the graces; the one embellished with all that luxuriant
nature could bestow; the fruits of various climates adorned the trees; the
grove resounded with mu^^^; the gale breathed perfume; every charm that could
arise from symmetry and exact distribution were here conspicuous; the whole
offering a prospect of pleasure without end. The valley of the graces, on the
other hand, seemed by no means so inviting; the streams and the groves appeared
just as they usually do in frequented countries: no magnificent parterres; no
concert in the grove: the rivulet was edged with weeds; and the rook joined its
voice to that of the nightingale. All was simplicity and nature.

The most striking objects ever first allure the traveller. I entered the
region of beauty with increased curiosity, and promised myself endless
satisfaction, in being introduced to the presiding goddess. I perceived several
strangers, who entered with the same design; and what surprised me not a
little, was to see several others hastening to leave this abode of seeming
felicity.

After some fatigue, I had at last the honor of being introduced to the
goddess, who represented beauty in person. She was seated on a throne, at the
foot of which stood several strangers lately introduced like me, all gazing on
her form with ecstasy. "Ah what eyes! what lips! how clear her complexion! how
perfect her shape!" At these exclamations, beauty with downcast eyes, would
endeavor to counterfeit modesty, but soon again looking round as if to confirm
every spectator in his favorable sentiments, sometimes she would attempt to
allure us by smiles; and at intervals would bridle back, in order to inspire us
with respect as well as tenderness.

This ceremony lasted for some time, and had so much employed our eyes, that we
forgot all this while that the goddess was silent. We soon, however, began to
perceive the defect: "What," said we, among each other, "are we to have nothing
but languishing airs, soft looks, and inclinations of the head? will the
goddess only deign to satisfy our eyes?" Upon this, one of the company stepped
up to present her with some fruits he had gathered by the way. She received the
present, most sweetly smiling, and with one of the whitest hands in the world;
but still not a word escaped her lips.

I now found that my companions grew weary of their homage; they went off one
by one; and, resolving not to be left behind, I offered to go in my turn; when
just at the door of the temple, I was called back by a female, whose name was
Pride, and who seemed displeased with the behavior of the company. "Where are
you hastening?" said she to me, with an angry air, "the goddess of beauty is
here." I have been to visit her, Madam, replied I, and I find her more
beautiful even than report had made her. "And why then will you leave her?"
added the female. I have seen her long enough, returned I; I have got all her
features by heart. Her eyes are still the same. Her nose is a very fine one,
but it is still just such a nose now as it was half an hour ago: could she
throw a little more mind into her face, perhaps I should be for wishing to have
more of her company. "What signifies," replied my female, "whether she has a
mind or not; has she any occasion for a mind, so formed as she is by nature? If
she had a common face, indeed, there might be some reason for thinking to
improve it; but when features are already perfect, every alteration would but
impair them. A fine face is already at the point of perfection, and a fine lady
should endeavor to keep it so; the impression it would receive from thought,
would but disturb its whole economy."

To this speech I gave no reply, but made the best of my way to the valley of
the graces. Here I found all those, who before had been my companions in the
region of beauty, now upon the same errand.

As we entered the valley, the prospect insensibly seemed to improve; we found
every thing so natural, so domestic and pleasing, that our minds, which before
were congealed in admiration, now relaxed into gaiety and good humor. We had
designed to pay our respects to the presiding goddess, but she was no where to
be found. One of our companions asserted, that her temple lay to the right;
another to the left; a third insisted that it was straight before us; and a
fourth that we had left it behind. In short, we found every thing familiar and
charming, but could not determine where ^o seek for the grace in person.

In this agreeable incertitude we passed several hours; and, though very
desirous of finding the goddess, by no means impatient of the delay. Every part
of the valley presented some minute beauty, which, without offering itself, at
once stole upon the soul, and captivated us with the charms of our retreat.
Still, however, we continued to search, and might still have continued, had we
not been interrupted by a voice, which, though we could not see from whence it
came, addressed us in this manner:

"If you would find the goddess of grace, seek her not under one form, for she
assumes a thousand. Ever changing under the eye of inspection, her variety,
rather than her figure, is pleasing. In contemplating her beauty, the eye
glides over every perfection with giddy delight, and capable of fixing no
where, is charmed with the whole. She is now contemplation with solemn look,
again compassion with humid eye; she now sparkles with joy, her countenance
beaming with sensibility; soon every feature speaks distress; her looks at
times invite our approach, at others repress our presumption; the goddess
cannot be properly called beautiful under any one of these forms, but, by
combining them all, she becomes irresistibly pleasing." Adieu.

C. W.

LETTER XII. -- TO THE RAMBLER.
SIR,
YOU have very lately observed that, in the numerous subdivisions of the world,
every class and order of mankind have joys and sorrows of their own; we all
feel hourly pain and pleasure from events which pass unheeded before other
eyes, but can scarcely communicate our perceptions to minds pre-occupied by
different objects, any more than the delight of well-disposed colors or
harmonious sounds can be imparted to such as want the senses of hearing or of
sight.

I am so strongly convinced of the justness of this remark, and have on so many
occasions discovered with how little attention pride looks upon calamity of
which she thinks herself not in danger, and indolence listens to complaint when
it is not echoed by her own remembrance, that though I am about to lay the
occurrences of my life before you, I question whether you will condescend to
peruse my narrative, or without the help of some female speculatist, be able to
understand it.

I was born a beauty. From the dawn of my reason I had my regard turned wholly
upon myself; nor can I recollect any thing earlier than praise and admiration.
My mother, whose face had luckily advanced her to a condition above her birth,
thought no evil so great as deformity. She had not the power of imagining any
other defect than a cloudy complexion, or disproportionate features; and
therefore contemplated me as an assemblage of all that could raise envy or
desire, and predicted, with triumphant fondness, the extent of my conquests,
and the number of my slaves.

She never mentioned any of my young acquaintance before me, but to remark how
much they fell below my perfection; how one would have had a fine face but that
her eyes were without luster; how another struck the sight at a distance, but
wanted my hair and teeth at a nearer view; another disgraced an elegant shape
with a a brown skin; some had short fingers, and others dimples in a wrong
place.

As she expected no happiness nor advantage but from beauty, she thought
nothing but beauty worthy of her care; and her maternal kindness was chiefly
exercised in contrivances to protect me from any accident, that might deface me
with a scar, or stain me with a freckle: she never thought me sufficiently
shaded from the sun, or screened from the fire. She was severe or indulgent
with no other intention than the preservation of my form: she excused me from
work, lest I should learn to hang down my head, or harden my finger with a
needle: she snatched away my book, because a young lady in the neighborhood
had made her eyes red, with reading by a candle; but she would scarce^y suffer
me to eat, lest I should spoil my shape; nor to walk, lest I should swell my
ancle with a sprain. At night I was accurately surveyed from head to foot, lest
I should have suffered any diminution of my charms in the adventures of the
day; and was never permitted to sleep, till I had passed through the cosmetic
discipline, part of which was a regular lustration performed with bean-flower
water and may-dews; my hair was perfumed with variety of unguents, by some of
which it was to be thickened, and by others to be curled. The softness of my
hands was secured by medicated gloves, and my bosom rubbed with a pomade
prepared by my mother, of virtue to discuss pimples, and clear discolorations.

I was always called up early, because the morning air gives a freshness to the
cheeks; but I was placed behind a curtain in my mother's chamber, because the
neck is easily tanned by the rising sun. I was then dressed with a thousand
precautions, and again heard my own praises, and triumphed in the compliments
and prognostications of all that approached me.

My mother was not so much prepossessed with an opinion of my natural
excellencies as not to think some cultivation necessary to their completion.
She took care that I should want none of the accomplishments included in female
education, or considered as necessary in fashionable life. I was looked upon in
my ninth year as the chief ornament of the dancing-master's ball; and Mr. Ariet
used to reproach his other scholars with my performances on the harpsichord. At
twelve, I was remarkable for playing my cards with great elegance of manner,
and accuracy of judgment.

At last the time arrived when my mother thought me perfect in my exercises,
and qualified to display, in the open world, those accomplishments which had
yet been only discovered in select parties, or domestic assemblies.
Preparations were therefore made for my appearance on a public night, which she
considered as the most important and critical moment of my life. She cannot be
charged with neglecting any means of recommendation, or leaving any thing to
chance, which prudence could ascertain. Every ornament was tried in every
position every friend was consulted about the color of my dress; and the
mantua-makers were harassed with directions and alterations.

At last the night arrived, from which my future life was to be reckoned. I was
dressed and sent out to conquer, with a heart beating like that of an old
knight errant at his first sally. Scholars have told me of a Spartan matron,
who, when she armed her son for battle, bade him bring back his shield or be
brought upon it. My venerable parent dismissed me to a field, in her opinion of
equal glory, with a command to show that I was her daughter, and not to return
without a lover.

I went, and was received like other pleasing novelties, with a tumult of
applause. Every man, who valued himself upon the graces of his person, or the
elegance of his address, crowded about me, and wit and splendor contended for
my notice. I was delightfully fatigued with incessant civilities, which were
made more pleasing by the apparent envy of those, whom my presence exposed to
neglect, and returned with an attendant equal in rank and wealth to my utmost
wishes, and from this time stood in the first rank of beauty, was followed by
gazers in the Mall, celebrated in the papers of the day, imitated by all who
endeavored to rise into fashion, and censured by those whom age or
disappointment forced to retire.

My mother, who pleased herself with the hopes of seeing my exaltation, dressed
me with all the exuberance of finery; and when I represented to her that a
fortune might be expected proportionate to my appearance, told me that she
should scorn the reptile, who could inquire after the fortune of a girl like
me. She advised me to prosecute my victories, and time would certainly bring me
a captive, who might deserve the honor of being enchained forever.

My lovers were indeed so numerous, that I had no other care than that of
determining to whom I should seem to give the preference. But having been
steadily and industriously instructed to preserve my heart from any impressions
which might hinder me from consulting my interest, I acted with less
embarrassment, because my choice was regulated by principles more clear and
certain than the caprice of approbation. When I had singled out one from the
rest as more worthy of encouragement, I proceeded in my measures by the rules
of art; and yet, when the ardour of the first visits was spent, generally found
a sudden declension of my influence: I felt in myself the want of some power to
diversify amusement, and enliven conversation; and could not but suspect that
my mind failed in performing the promises of my face. This opinion was soon
confirmed by one of my lovers, who married Lavinia with less beauty and fortune
than mine, because he thought a wife ought to have qualities, which might make
her amiable when her bloom was past.

I had now completed my nineteenth year: if my charms had lost any of their
softness, it was more than compensated by additional dignity; and if the
attractions of innocence were impaired, their place was supplied by the arts of
allurement. I was therefore preparing for a new attack, without any abatement
of my confidence, when in the midst of my hopes and schemes, I was seized with
that dreadful malady, which has so often put a sudden end to the tyranny of
beauty. I recovered my health after a long confinement; but when I looked again
on that face, which had often been flushed with transport at its own
reflection, and saw all that I had learned to value, all that I had endeavored
to improve, all that had procured me honors or praises, irrecoverably
destroyed, I sunk at once into melancholy and despondence. My pain was not much
consoled or alleviated by my mother, who grieved that I had not lost my life
together with my beauty.

Having thus continued my relation to the period from which my life took a new
course, I shall conclude it in another letter, if by publishing this you show
any regard to the correspondence of,

Sir, etc. VICTORIA.

LETTER XIII. -- TO THE RAMBLER.
SIR,
YOU have shown, by the publication of my letter, that you think the life of
Victoria not wholly unworthy of the notice of a philosopher: I shall therefore
continue my narrative, without apology for unimportance which you have
dignified, or for inaccuracies which you are to correct.

When my life appeared to be no longer in danger, and as much of my strength
was recovered as enabled me to bear the agitation of a coach, I was placed at a
lodging in a neighboring village, to which my mother dismissed me with a faint
embrace, having repeated her command not to expose my face too soon to the sun
or wind, and told me, that with care I might perhaps become tolerable again.
The prospect of becoming tolerable had very little power to elevate the
imagination of one, who had so long been accustomed to praise and ecstasy; but
it was some satisfaction to be separated from my mother, who was incessantly
ringing the knell of departed beauty, and never entered my room without the
whine of condolence, or the growl of anger. She often wandered over my face, as
do travelers over the ruins of a celebrated city, to note every place which
had once been remarkable for a happy feature. She condescended to visit my
retirement, but always left me more melancholy; for after a thousand trifling
inquiries about my diet, and a minute examination of my looks, she generally
concluded with a sigh, that I should never more be fit to be seen.

At last I was permitted to return home, but found no great improvement of my
condition; for I was imprisoned in my chamber as a criminal, whose appearance
would disgrace my friends, and condemned to be tortured into new beauty. Every
experiment which the officiousness of folly could communicate, or the credulity
of ignorance admit, was tried upon me. Sometimes I was covered with emollients,
by which it was expected that all the scars would be filled, and my cheeks
plumped up to their former smoothness; and sometimes I was punished with
artificial excoriations, in hopes of gaining new graces with a new skin. The
cosmetic science was, exhausted upon me; but who can repair the ruins of
nature? My mother was forced to give me rest at last, and abandon me to the
fate of a fallen toast, whose fortune she considered as a hopeless game, no
longer worthy of solicitude or attention.

I was so little able to find entertainment for myself, that I was forced in a
short time to venture abroad, as the solitary savage is driven by hunger from
his den. I entered with all the humility of disgrace into assemblies, where I
had lately sparkled with gaiety, and towered with triumph. I was not wholly
without hope, that dejection had misrepresented me to myself, and that the
remains of my former face might yet have some attraction and influence: but the
first circle of visits convinced me, that my reign was at an end; that life and
death were no longer in my hands; that I was no more to practice the glance of
command, or the frown of prohibition, to receive the tribute of sighs and
praises, or to be soothed with the gentle murmurs of amorous timidity. My
opinion was now unheard, and my proposals were unregarded; the narrowness of my
knowledge, and the meanness of my sentiments, were easily discovered, when the
eyes were no longer engaged against the judgment; and it was observed, by those
who had formerly been charmed with my vivacious loquacity, that my
understanding was impaired as well as my face, and that I was no longer
qualified to fill a place in any company but a party at cards.

Though the negligence of the men was not very pleasing, when compared with
vows and adoration, yet it was far more supportable than the insolence of my
own sex. For the first ten months after my return into the world, I never
entered a single house, in which the memory of my downfall was not revived. At
one place I was congratulated on my escape with life; at another I heard of the
benefits of early inoculation; by some I have been told in express terms, that
I am not yet without my charms; others have whispered, at my entrance -- This
is the celebrated beauty. One told me of a wash that would smooth the skin; and
another offered me her chair that I might not front the light. Some soothed me
with the observation that none can tell how soon her case may be my own; and
some thought it proper to receive me with mournful tenderness, formal
condolence, and consolatory blandishments.

Thus was I every day harassed with all the stratagems of well-bred malignity;
yet insolence was more tolerable than solitude, and I therefore persisted to
keep my time at the doors of my acquaintance, without gratifying them with any
appearance of resentment or depression. I expected that their exultation would
in time vapor away; that the joy of their superiority would end with its
novelty; and that I should be suffered to glide along in my present form among
the nameless multitude whom nature never intended to excite envy or admiration,
nor enable to delight the eye or inflame the heart.

This was naturally to be expected, and this I began to experience. But when I
was no longer agitated by the perpetual ardour of resistance and effort of
perseverance, I found more sensibly the want of those entertainments, which had
formerly delighted me: the day rose upon me without an engagement; and the
evening closed in its natural gloom, without summoning to a concert or a ball.
None had any care to find amusements for me, and I had no power of amusing
myself. Idleness exposed me to melancholy, and life began to languish in
motionless indifference.

Misery and shame are nearly allied. It was not without many struggles that I
prevailed on myself to confess my uneasiness to Euphemia, the only friend who
had never pained me with comfort or with pity. I at last laid my calamities
before her, rather to ease my heart than to receive assistance.

We must distinguish, (said she) my Victoria, those evils which are imposed by
Providence, from those to which we ourselves give the power of hurting us. Of
your calamity, a small part is the infliction of Heaven, the rest is little
more than the corrosion of idle discontent. You have lost that which may indeed
sometimes contribute to happiness, but to which happiness is by no means
inseparably annexed. You have lost what the greater part of the human race
never have possessed; what those on whom it is bestowed for the most part
possess in vain; and what you, while it was yours, knew not how to use: you
have only lost early what the laws of nature forbid you to keep long, and have
lost it while your mind is yet flexible, and while you have time to substitute
more valuable and more durable excellencies. Consider yourself, my Victoria, as
a being born to know, to reason, and to act: rise at once from your dream of
melancholy to wisdom and to piety; you will find that there are other charms
than those of beauty, and other joys than the praise of fools.

I am, Sir, etc. VICTORIA.

PART III. Dialogues and Dramatic Pieces.
DIALOGUE I. -- ON DIFFERENT STATIONS IN LIFE.
LITTLE Sally Meanwell had one day been to pay an afternoon's visit to Miss
Harriet, the daughter of Sir Thomas Pemberton. The evening proving rainy, she
was sent home in Sir Thomas's coach; and on her return, the following
conversation passed between her and her mother.

Mrs. Meanwell. Well, my dear, I hope you have had a pleasant visit.


Sally. O yes, mamma, very pleasant; you cannot think what a great many fine
things I have seen. And then it is so charming to ride in a coach!


Mrs. M. I suppose Miss Harriet showed you all her play-things.


Sally. O yes, such fine large dolls, so smartly dressed, as I never saw in my
life before. Then she has a baby-house and all sorts of furniture in it; and a
grotto all made of shells, and shining stones. And then she showed me all her
fine clothes for the next ball: there is a white slip all full of spangles, and
pink ribbons; you cannot think how beautiful it looks.


Mrs. M. And what did you admire most of all these fine things?


Sally. I don't know -- I admired them all; and I think I liked riding in the
coach better than all the rest. Why don't we keep a coach, mamma? and why have
not I such fine clothes and play-things as Miss Harriet?


Mrs. M. Because we cannot afford it, my dear. Your papa is not so rich, by a
great deal as Sir Thomas; and if we were to lay out our money upon such things,
we should not be able to procure food and raiment and other necessaries for you
all.


Sally. But why is not papa as rich as Sir Thomas?


Mrs. M. Sir Thomas had a large estate left him by his father, but your papa
has little but what he gains by his own industry.


Sally. But why should not papa be as rich as any body else? I am sure he
deserves it as well.


Mrs. M. Do you not think that there are a great many people poorer than he,
that are also very deserving?


Sally. Are there?


Mrs. M. Yes, to be sure. Don't you know what a number of poor people there are
all around us, who have very few of the comforts we enjoy? What do you think of
Plowman the labourer? I believe you never saw him idle in your life.


Sally. No; he is gone to work long before I am up, and he does not return till
almost bedtime, unless it be for his dinner.


Mrs. M. Well; how do you think his wife and children live? Should you like
that we should change places with them?


Sally. O, no! they are so dirty and ragged.


Mrs. M. They are, indeed, poor creatures! but I am afraid they suffer worse
evils than that.


Sally. What, mamma?


Mrs. M. Why I am afraid they often do not get as much victuals as they could
eat. And then, in winter, they must be half starved for want of fire and warm
clothing. How do you think you could bear all this?


Sally. Indeed I don't know. But I have seen Plowman's wife carry great brown
loaves into the house; and I remember once eating some brown bread and milk,
and I thought it very good.


Mrs. M. I believe you would not much like it constantly: besides, they can
hardly get enough of that. But you seem to know almost as little of the poor as
the young French Princess did.


Sally. What was that, mamma?


Mrs. M. Why there had been one year so bad a harvest in France, that numbers
of the poor were famished to death. This calamity was so much talked of, that
it reached the Court, and was mentioned before the young Princesses. Dear me!
said one of them, how silly that was! Why, rather than be famished, I would eat
bread and cheese. Her governess was then obliged to acquaint her, that the
greatest part of her father's subject's scarcely ever eat any thing better than
black bread all their lives; and that vast numbers would now think themselves
very happy to get only their usual pittance of that. Such wretchedness as this
was what the Princess had not the least idea of; and the account shocked her so
much, that she was glad to sacrifice all her finery to afford some relief to
the sufferings of the poor.


Sally. But I hope there is nobody famished in our country.


Mrs. M. I hope not; for we have laws by which every person is entitled to
relief from the parish, if he is unable to gain a subsistence; and were there
no laws about it, I am sure it would be our duty to part with every superfluity
rather than let a fellow creature perish for want of necessaries.


Sally. Then do you think it was wrong for Miss Pemberton to have all those
fine things?


Mrs. M. No, my dear, if they are suitable to her fortune, and do not consume
the money which ought to be employed in more useful things for herself and
others.


Sally. But why might she not be contented with such things as I have; and give
the money that the rest cost to the poor?


Mrs. M. Because she can afford to be both charitable to the poor, and also to
indulge herself in these pleasures. But do you recollect, that the children of
Mr. White, the baker, and Mr. Shape, the tailor, might just ask the same
questions about you?


Sally. How so?


Mrs. M. Are you not as much better dressed, and as much more plentifully
supplied with play-things than they are, as Miss Pemberton is than you?


Sally. Why, I believe I am; for I remember Polly White was very glad of one of
my old dolls; and Nancy Shape cried for such a sash as mine, but her mother
would not let her have one.


Mrs. M. Then you see, my dear, that there are many who have fewer things to be
thankful for than you have; and you may also learn what ought to be the true
measure of the expectations of children, and the indulgencies of parents.


Sally. I don't quite understand you, mamma.


Mrs. M. Every thing ought to be suited to the station in which we live, or are
likely to live, and the wants and duties of it. Your papa and I do not grudge
laying out part of our money to promote the innocent pleasure of our children;
but it would be very wrong in us to lay out so much on this account as would
oblige us to spare in more necessary articles, as in their education, and the
common household expenses required in our way of living. Besides, it would be
so far from making y^^ happier, that it would be doing you the greatest injury.


Sally. How could that be, mamma?


Mrs. M. If you were now to be dressed like Miss Pemberton, don't you think you
should be greatly mortified at being worse dressed, when you come to be a young
woman?


Sally. I believe I should, mamma; for then perhaps I might go to assemblies;
and to be sure I should like to be as smart then as at any time.


Mrs. M. Well, but it would be still more improper for us to dress you then
beyond our circumstances, because your necessary clothes will then cost more,
you know. Then if we were to hire a coach or chair for you to go a visiting in,
should you like to leave it off ever afterward? But you have no reason to
expect that you will be able to have those indulgencies when you are a woman.
And so it is in every thing else. The more fine things, and the more
gratifications you have now, the more you will require hereafter; for custom
makes things so familiar to us, that while we enjoy them less, we want them
more.


Sally. How is that, mamma?


Mrs. M. Why, don't you think you have enjoyed your ride in the coach this
evening more than Miss Harriet would have done?


Sally. I suppose I have; because if Miss Harriet liked it so well, she would
be always riding, for I know she might have the coach whenever she pleased.


Mrs. M. But if you were both told that you were never to ride in a coach
again, which would think it the greater hardship? You could walk, you know, as
you have always done before; but she would rather stay at home, I believe, than
expose herself to the cold wind, and trudge through the wet and dirt in pattens.


Sally. I believe so too; and now, mamma, I see that all you have told me is
very right.


Mrs. M. Well, my dear, let it dwell upon your mind, so as to make you cheerful
and contented in your station, which you see is so much happier than that of
many and many other children. So now we will talk no more on this su^^ect.


DIALOGUE II. -- ON PRESENCE OF MIND.
MRS. F. one day having occasion to be blooded, sent for the surgeon. As soon
as he entered the room, her young daughter, Eliza, started up, and was hastily
going away, when her mother called her back.

Mrs. F. Eliza, do not go; I want you to stay by me.


Eliza. Dear mamma! I can never bear to see you blooded.


Mrs. F. Why not? what harm will it do you?


Eliza. O dear! I cannot look at blood. Besides, I cannot bear to see you hurt,
mamma!


Mrs. F. O, if I can bear to feel it, surely you may to see it. But come -- you
must stay, and we will talk about it afterward.


Eliza then, pale and trembling, stood by her mother, and saw the whole
operation. She could not help, however, turning her head away when the incision
was made, and the first flow of blood made her start and shudder: When all was
over, and the surgeon gone, Mrs. F. began. Well. Eliza! what do you think of
this mighty matter now? would it not have been very foolish to have run away
from it?

Eliza. O, mamma! how frightened I was when he took out his lancet! Did it not
hurt you a great deal?


Mrs. F. No, very little. And if it had, it was to do me good, you know.


Eliza. But why should I stay to see it? I could do you no good.


Mrs. F. Perhaps not; but it will do you good to be accustomed to such sights.


Eliza. Why, mamma?


Mrs. F. Because instances are every day happening in which it is our duty to
assist our fellow creatures in circumstances of pain and distress; and, if we
were to indulge a reluctance to come near to them on those occasions, we should
never acquire either the knowledge or the presence of mind necessary for the
purpose.


Eliza. But if I had been told how to help people in such cases, could not I do
it without being used to see them.


Mrs. F. No; we have all naturally a horror at every thing which is the cause
of pain and danger to ourselves and others; and nothing but habit can give most
of us the presence of mind necessary to enable us, in such occurrences, to
employ our knowledge to the best advantage.


Eliza. What is presence of mind, mamma?


Mrs. F. It is the steady possession of ourselves in cases of alarm, that
prevents us from being flurried and frightened. You have heard the expression
of having all our wits about us. This is the effect of presence of mind, and a
most inestimable quality it is; for without it, we are full as likely to run
into danger as to avoid it. Do you not remember of hearing of your cousin
Mary's cap taking fire in the candle?


Eliza. O yes, very well.


Mrs. F. Well, the maid, as soon as she saw it, set up a great scream, and ran
out of the room; and Mary might have been burnt to death for any assistance she
could give her.


Eliza. How foolish that was.


Mrs. F. Yes. The girl had not the least presence of mind, and the consequence
was, depriving her of all recollection, and making her entirely useless. But as
soon as your aunt came up, she took the right method for preventing the
mischief. The cap was too much on fire to be pulled off, so she whipped a quilt
from the bed, and flung it round Mary's head, and thus stifled the flame.


Eliza. Mary was a good deal scorched, though.


Mrs. F. Yes; but it was very well that it was no worse. If the maid, however,
had acted with any sense at first, no harm at all would have been done, except
burning the cap. I remember a much more fatal example of the want of presence
of mind. The mistress of a family was awakened by flames bursting through the
wainscot into her chamber. She flew to the staircase; and, in her confusion,
instead of going up stairs to call her children, who slept together in the
nursery over-head, and who might all have escaped by the top of the house, she
ran down, and, with much danger, made way through the fire into the street.
When she had got thither, the thought of her poor children rushed into her
mind, but it was too late; the stairs had caught fire, so that nobody could get
near them, and they were burned in their beds!


Eliza. What a sad thing!


Mrs. F. Sad, indeed! Now I will tell you of a different conduct. A lady was
awakened by the crackling of fire, and saw it shining under her chamber floor.
Her husband would immediately have opened the door, but she prevented him,
since the smoke and flame would then have burst in upon them. The children,
with a maid, slept in a room opening out of theirs. She went and awakened them;
and, tying together the sheets and blankets, she sent down the maid from the
window first, and then let down the children, one by one, to her; last of all
she descended herself. A few minutes after the floor fell in, and all the house
was in flames.


Eliza. What a happy escape!


Mrs. F. Yes; and with what cool recollection of mind was it managed! For
mothers to love their children, and be willing to run any hazards for them, is
common; but in weak minds that very love is apt to prevent exertions in time of
danger. I have heard a remarkable story of the mother of that Mr. Day who wrote
Sanford and Merton. She was distinguished, as he so was, for courage and
presence of mind. When a young woman, she was one day walking in the fields
with a companion, when they perceived a bull coming to them, roaring and
tossing about his horns in the most tremendous manner.


Eliza. O, how I should have screamed!


Mrs. F. I dare say you would; and so did her companion. But she bid her walk
away behind her as gently as she could, whilst she herself stopped short, and
faced the bull, eyeing him with a determined countenance. The bull, when he had
come near, stopped also, pawing the ground and roaring. Few animals will attack a
man who steadily waits for them. In a while, she drew back some steps, still
facing the bull. The bull followed. She stopped, and then he stopped. In this
manner, she made good her retreat to the style over which her companion had
before got. She then turned and sprung over it, and got clear out of danger.


Eliza. That was bravely done indeed! but I think very few women could have
done as much.


Mrs. F. Such a degree of cool resolution, to be sure, is not very common. But
I have read of a lady in the East Indies who showed, at least, as much. She was
sitting out of doors with a party of pleasure, when they were aware of a huge
tiger that had crept through a hedge near them, and was just ready to make his
fatal spring. They were struck with the utmost consternation; but she, with an
umbrella in her hand, turned to the tiger, and suddenly spread it full in his
face. This unusual assault so terrified the beast, that taking a prodigious
leap, he sprung over the fence, and plunged out of sight into the neighboring
thicket.


Eliza. Well, that was the boldest thing I ever heard of. But is it possible,
mamma, to make one's self courageous?


Mrs. F. Courage, my dear, is of two kinds; one the gift of nature, the other
of reason and habit. Men have naturally more courage than women; that is, they
are less affected by danger; it make a less impression upon them, and does not
flutter their spirits so much. This is owing to the difference of their bodily
constitution; and, from the same cause, some men and some women are more
courageous than others. But the other kind of courage, may, in some measure, be
acquired by every one. Reason teaches us to face smaller dangers, in order to
avoid greater, and even to undergo the greatest, when our duty requires it. The
courage of women is chiefly tried in domestic dangers. They are attendants on
the sick and dying; and they must qualify themselves to go through many scenes
of terror, in these situations, which would alarm the stoutest hearted man, who
was not accustomed to them.


Eliza. I have heard that women generally bear pain and illness better than men.


Mrs. F. They do so, because they are more used to them, both in themsel^es and
others.


Eliza. I think I should not be afraid again to see any body blooded.


Mrs. F. I hope not. It was for that purpose I made you stand by me. And I
would have you always force yourself to look on and give assistance in cases of
this kind, however painful it may at first be to you, that you may, as soon as
possible, gain that presence of mind which arises from habit.


DIALOGUE III. -- ON FLATTERY.
LADY DOWNRIGHT, MATILDA her Daughter. Matilda. O DEAR mamma, kiss me for the
good news that I have to tell you.


Lady D. What is it, my dear?


Mat. I am just going to introduce you to the most agreeable acquaintance in
the world, Miss Sacharissa Bland, a sweet girl: she is to be here presently.


Lady D. Here! I imagined that to visit in this house, the person should be
first introduced to me.


Mat. Very true, mamma, but I was so sure of your liking her company, that I
thought it no harm to dispense with ceremony for this time.


Lady D. Do you give the name of ceremony to your duty? this shows you as
heedless as usual: but the young lady's behavior has not that reserve or
discretion that I could wish in the person whom you desire to make your friend.
I think she should have waited for my invitation.


Mat. Why, she was so impatient to pay you her respects -- you cannot think how
highly she speaks of you.


Lady D. How can she know me? I never saw her but once, and then by chance at a
third person's.


Mat. Well, that interview was enough to form her opinion of you. She has drawn
so favorable a picture of your good qualities, that I shall always be proud of
having such a mother.


Lady D. And no doubt, too, her skilful hand has drawn a fair portrait of your
accomplishments.


Mat. I don't know how it is; but you cannot imagine how many happy qualities
she discovered in me -- more than I myself was aware of.


Lady D. But which you are now clearly convinced belong to you.


Mat. Yes, it is so plain! so striking!


Lady D. I shall be apt to fear that she did not reckon diffidence among the
number of your happy qualities.


Mat. Perhaps you are joking, and yet she was almost tempted to chide me for
having too much. However, she agreed at the last, that diffidence was more
necessary to me than another, to disarm the envy of such as do not possess
equal accomplishments.


Lady D. Really I wish you joy of these fine discoveries.


Mat. Why mamma, she was so just in her panegyric upon you, that I am the more
apt to give her credit with regard to myself! Oh! she is a sweet girl!


Lady D. I don't wonder that you are so much taken with her.


Mat. How can one help loving her! she is of so amiable a temper, you never
hear a word from her lips but is perfectly obliging.


Lady D. Have you been often in her company?


Mat. Only twice with the Miss Delmores, at their house. She has a great deal
of friendship for them, but they do not seem sufficiently to return it. Do you
think that the Miss Delmores possess much penetration? I have visited them
these four years, and in that time they have not been able to know me as
perfectly as Miss Bland in three days.


Lady D. What makes you imagine so?


Mat. Because they have sometimes taken upon them to find little defects in me,
which however I flatter myself do not belong to me. I should suppose them to be
something envious.


Lady D. It happens pretty often that I take the same liberties with you. Do
you imagine me also to be jealous of your merit?


Mat. Oh! that is quite different. You only speak to me out of friendship, and
for my good: but --


Lady D. Why cannot you suppose your friends to have the same motive? Without
being so strongly interested in your improvement as your own family, may they
not wish it nevertheless very affectionately, in order that you may be more
worthy a continuance of that intimacy which has subsisted between you from your
childhood? Besides, I know them sufficiently to be convinced, that in their
remarks and advice to you, they have always preserved the discretion of
friendship.


Mat. But then they chid me for such trifles.


Lady D. Your self-love is ingenious enough to impeach their delicacy; however,
I see for my part, stronger reason from their behavior, for your valuing their
attachment. I am persuaded that nobody in the world, next to your relations,
can be more worthy of a distinguished place in your friendship.


Mat. Oh! I am sure Miss Bland has already as much friendship for me as they
have. But I hear somebody coming up stairs. It is she! It is she! How happy I
am! Now you will see her.


Miss Bland. (Approaching Lady Downright with an assumed ^ir of respect.) Your
Ladyship will pardon my taking the liberty of introducing myself thus abruptly;
but in all companies I have heard your estimable qualities mentioned so
handsomely, that I could not resist the desire I felt of paying you the tribute
of my respects. I am no longer surprised that Miss Downright is already possessed
of such splendid accomplishments.


Mat. (Whispering her mother.) There, mamma!


Lady D. Miss, your compliment is very pretty. It would have come indeed with
more weight from a person better qualified, by age or intimacy, to form an
opinion of us; especially if she had had the delicacy to express it in any
other manner than bluntly to our faces.


Miss B. (A little disconcerted.) Who can suppress the sentiments you inspire
even at first sight? Ah! had I so amiable a mother!


Lady D. Do you think, Miss, that this wish testifies much respect to your
mother?


Miss B. Pardon me, Madam, I cannot tell how to express my admiration of your
character. Look where I will, I find none that can be compared with your
Ladyship: and, as to Miss Downright, what young lady of her age can dispute the
palm with her for wit, grace, or accomplishments! I am not apt to be blindly
partial even to those that I esteem; for instance, I have the greatest
friendship for the Miss Delmores, and wish to shut my eyes to all their faults,
but how awkward, stiff* and i^imate they are, when compared to your daughter!


Lady D. You certainly forget that they are her friends, and this description
of them cannot be agreeable to us, particularly as they by no means deserve it.
Besides, I hear that you have a thousand times, complimented the^ on their
agreeable qualities, and that in the most po^pous style.


Mat. Indeed so she has, mamma; this change surprise^ me. It is no longer ago
than yesterday, that she said all manner of fine things to them.


Lady D. I see that is no reason why the lady should treat them as favorably
behind their b^cks.


Miss B. One does not like to mention disagreeable truths. For my part, I tell
none their faults except my real friends.


Lady D. I do not know whether my daughter should think very highly of that
distinction; but I should ^e much afraid, were I in her place, of becoming the
subject of the same sort of confidence with some other of your real friends;
for I suppose you have a good many of that description.


Miss B. Bless me! what an opinion your Ladyship entertains of me! I have too
sincere a love for Mis^ Downright.


Lady D. Well, ma'am, as you are so sincere, I must also be sincere with you on
my side; and assure you, that as I did not, nay, could not expect this visit, I
had set apart this evening for the purpose of conversing with my daughter on
several important points of education. I see every reason not to delay a moment
longer what I have to say to her, concerning the danger of silly credulity, as
well as the meanness of servile flattery; and I should fear that such topics
might not be agreeable to you. When my daughter and I shall be so near
perfection as you are pleased to suppose, we shall then receive your
compliments without scruple. I shall give you notice, ma'am, when that period
arrives; and, in the mean time, your most obedient.


Miss B. (Retiring in confusion.) Your Ladyship's humble servant.


Mat. Oh! mamma, what a reception you have given her!


Lady D. Should I keep any measures with a person who comes to insult us in our
own house?


Mat. Insult us, mamma?


Lady D. Is it not an insult to put a cheat upon us? And is it not putting a
gross cheat on us, to load us with compliments and praises the most false and
ridiculous possible? Do you think that she really takes you for a prodigy of
graces and accomplishments, as she did not blush to call you to your face? Did
she not speak in the same style to the Miss Delmores, and have you not heard
how she treated them? Did you not mark with what unnatural adulation she would
have complimented me, at the expense of her own mother? I do not know how I
refrained treating such an instance of meanness with all the contempt and
indignation that it merited.


Mat. A shocking character indeed!


Lady D. It is the character of all flatterers who dare t^ aim at governing
others, while their littleness and servility sink them to the lowest rank of
the human species.


Mat. How? Do you think that Miss Bland would have aimed at governing me?


Lady D. Your inexperience hindered you from seeing through her artifices,
coarse as they were. But while she insinuated herself into your favor, by
praising you at the expense of truth, what were her views? To gain an ascendant
over your understanding, by reducing you at length to the habitual necessity of
being flattered. That she might rule you with more absolute dominion, did she
not endeavor to alienate your friendship from two amiable young ladies, by
ridiculing them, or by hinting them to be secretly envious of those imaginary
perfections that she ascribed to you? Had she succeeded in thus intoxicating
your mind, who knows if she would not have attempted to sap the foundation of
all your duties, by representing my advice to you as harshness and reproach,
the anxiety of my affection for you as a splenetic humor, and my authority as
tyranny? What would then have become of you, abandoned by your friends and your
parents?


Mat. (Throwing herself into her mother's (...).) O my dearest mamma, I see it
plainly; without you I should have been lost. From what a dangerous
acquaintance have you saved me!


Lady D. (Embracing her tenderly.) Yes, my dear, we are now reunited forever. I
perceived your surprise at seeing me treat Miss Bland with so much freedom and
seeming incivility; but you know that all my happiness is centered in you;
judge then of my feelings, when I saw it so near being embittered by her
seducing arts. You have as yet no idea of the unhappy condition of a woman, who
is early spoiled by flattery. Coming into the world with pretensions that
nothing can justify, and an opinion of her own merit, in which nobody else
joins her, what mortifications must she experience! As to the homage she
expected, the more her pride exacts it, the more she finds it withheld, and the
sneer of contempt supply its place. If, blinded as she is by self-opinion, a
transient ray of reflection should enlighten her for a moment, and show her the
true state of herself, what shame must she feel on finding herself destitute of
a claim to those qualities, which she imagined herself to possess, and what
regret at having lost the opportunities of acquiring them! On what should she,
for the future, found her pretensions to public esteem, to the love of her
husband, or the respect of her family? To stifle the reproaches of her mind as
well as the troublesome consciousness of her own want of merit, she can suffer
none about her, but despicable flatterers of the same stamp with those, who
first corrupted her understanding; and to crown her disgrace, while she
contemns them, she feels herself worthy of their contempt. Irritated by all
these mortifications, she is still farther tortured at the sight of desert in
another, even in her own children. If she distinguishes any by her regard, it
is those whom she has tutored to a servile compliance with her folly; and thus
she is condemned to the crime of corrupting their veracity, in order to make
them worthy o^^ects of her affection.


Man. Dear Madam, turn away this picture; it fills me with horror.


Lady D. Well then, in order to rest your imagination upon more agreeable
objects, picture to yourself a young woman adorned with that modesty, which is
so graceful, and with that diffidence in her powers of pleasing, which gives
them their highest charm. Even the flatterers respect her, even the envious
receive her with a smile. By modestly yielding to her rivals all that they
assume, she takes the surest way to gain a superiority over them. She seems to
appear every day with a constant addition of good qualities, as the esteem
which she inspires puts people upon finding new graces in her character.
Assisted by the advice of her friends, which her diffidence induces her to
accept, she is beloved by them as the creature of their good wishes. The homage
addressed to her, from all quarters, enhances her value in the eyes of her
husband, who therefore studies to become more worthy of her affection by his
constancy and attention. Her children nourished by her virtues, look up to no
other pattern; and indeed the experience of her own success will make her the
more proper to direct their education. She will be able to qualify them for the
happiness which she herself enjoys. More and more pleased every day with
herself, and with every thing that is around her, she will be happy in the
prime of life, and secure to herself in a more advanced age the grateful esteem
of her acquaintance, those attachment her merit will have rendered both zealous
and sincere.


Mat. Dear Madam, make me that happy woman. Henceforth I shall distrust the
most dexterous flattery; and if ever my self-love becomes blind, I will look up
to your prudence and affection to enlighten it.


DIALOGUE IV.
Enter TONY and Miss CONSTANTIA NEVILLE, followed by Mrs. HARDCASTLE and
HASTINGS. Tony. WHAT do you follow me for, cousin Con? I wonder you're not
ashamed to be so very engaging.


Miss Neville. I hope, cousin, one may speak to one's own relations, and not be
to blame.


Tony. Aye, but I know what sort of a relation you want to make me, though; but
it will not do. I tell you, cousin Con, it will not do; so I beg you will keep you
distance; I want no nearer relationship. (She follows, co^ting him to the back
scene.)


Mrs. Hardcastle. Well! I vow, Mr. Hastings, you are very entertaining. There Is
nothing in the world I love to talk of so much as London, and the fashions,
though I was never there myself.


Hastings. Never there! you amaze me! from your air and manner, I concluded you
had been bred all your life either at Ranelagh, St. James's, or Tower Wharf.


Mrs. H. O! Sir, you're only pleased to say so. We country persons can have no
manner at all. I Am in love with the town, and that serves to raise ^e above
some of our neighboring rustics; but who can have a manner that has never seen
the pantheon, the grotto gardens, the borough, and such like places, where the
nobility chiefly resort? All I can do is to enjoy London at second hand. I take
care to know every tete-a-^e from the Scandalous Magazine, and have all the
fashions, as they come out, in a letter from the two Miss Rickets of
Crooked-Lane. Pray how do you like this head, Mr. Hastings?


Have. Extremely elegant and degagee, upon my word, Madam. Your fri^eur is a
Frenchman, I suppose!


Mrs. H. I protest I dressed it myself from a print in the ladies'
memorandum-book for the last year.


Have. Indeed! Such a head in a side-box, at the playhouse, would draw as many
gazers as my lady Mayoress at a city ball.


Mrs. H. I vow, since inoculation began, there is no such thing to be seen as a
plain woman; so one must dress a little particular, or one may escape in the
crowd.


Have. But that can never be your case, Madam, in any dress. (Bowing.)


Mrs. H. Yet, what signifies my dressing, when I have such a piece of antiquity
by my side as Mr. Hardcastle? All I can say will never argue down a single
button from his clothes. I have often wanted him to throw off his great flaxen
wig, and where he was bald, to plaster it over like my lord Pately, with powder.


Have. You are right, Madam; for, as among the ladies, there are none ugly, so
among the man there are ^one old.


Mrs. H. But what do you think his answer was? Why, with his usual Gothic
vivacity, he said I only wanted him to throw off his wig, to convert it into
a^tete for my own wearing.


Have. Intolerable! at your age you may wear what you please, and it must
become you.


Mrs. H. Pray Mr. Hastings what do you take to be the most fashionable age
about town?


Have. Some time ago forty was all the mode; but I Am told the ladies intend to
bring up fifty for the ensuing winter.


Mrs. H. (Seriously.) Then I shall be too young for the fashion.


Have. No lady begins now to put on jewels, till she is past forty. For
instance, Miss there, in a polite circle, would be considered as a child, as a
mere maker of sample^s.


Mrs. H. And yet Mrs. niece thinks herself as much a woman, and is as fond of
jewels, as the oldest of us all.


Have. Your niece, is she? And that young gentleman a brother of yours, I
should presume?


Mrs. H. My son, Sir. They are contracted to each other. Observe their little
sports. They fall in and out ten times a day, as if they were man and wife
already. (To them.) Well, Tony, child, what soft things are you saying to your
cousin Constance this evening?


Tony. I have been saying no soft things; but that its very hard to be followed
about so* Ecod! I Have not a place in the house now, that is left to myself, but
the stable.


Mrs. H. Never mind him, Con, my dear; he is in another story behind your back.


Miss N. There Is something generous in my cousin's manner. He falls out before
faces to be forgiven in private.


Tony. That Is a confounded -- crack.


Mrs. H. Ah! he is a sly one. Don't you think they are like each other about the
mouth, Mr. Hastings? The Blenkinsop mouth to a T. They Are of a size too. Back
to back, my pretties, that Mr. Hastings may see you. Come, Tony.


Tony. You had as good not make me, I tell you. (Measuring.)


Miss N. O lud! he has almost cracked my head.


Mrs. H. O the monster! For shame, Tony. You a man, and behave so!


Tony. If I Am a man, let me have my fortune. Ecod! I Will not be made a fool of
no longer.


Mrs. H. Is this, ungrateful boy, all that I Am to get for the pains I have
taken in your education? I that have rocked you in your cradle, and fed that
pretty mouth with a spoon! Did I not work that waistcoat to make you genteel?
Did I not prescribe for you every day, while the receipt was operating?


Tony. Ecod! you had reason to weep, for you have been do^ng me ever since I
was born. I have g^^e through every receipt in the Complete Housewife ten times
over; and you have thoughts of coursing me through Quincy next spring. But
ecod! I tell you, I Will not be made a fool of no longer.


Mrs. H. Was'n't it all for your good, viper? Was'n't it all for your good?


Tony. I wish you would let me and my good alone, then. Snubbing this way when
I Am in spirits. If I Am to have any good, let it come of itself; not to keep
dinging it, dinging it into one so.


Mrs. H. That Is false; I never see you when you're in spirits. No, Tony; you
then go to the alehouse or kennel. I Am never to be delighted with your
agreeable, wild notes, unfeeling monster!


Tony. Ecod! mamma, your own notes are the wildest of the two.


Mrs. H. Was ever the like? but I see he wants to break my heart; I see he does.


Have. Dear Madam, permit me to lecture the young gentleman a little. I Am
certain I can persuade him to his duty.


Mrs. H. Well! I must retire. Come, Constance, my love. You see, Mr. Hastings,
the wretchedness of my situation. Was ever poor woman so plagued with a dear,
sweet, pretty, undutiful boy.


DIALOGUE V.
Enter Mr. DELVILLE, Mr. BRIGGS, and CECILIA. Mr. B. SO! what is all this? hey?
Where are going? -- a coach at the door! -- horses to every wheel! -- servants
fine as lords! what is in the wind new? -- think to chouse me out of my
belongings?


Cec. I thought, Sir, I explained, before I left you, that I should not return.


Mr. B. Didn't, didn't; waited for you three days; -- dressed a breast of
mutton of purpose; -- got in a lobster and two crabs; -- all spoilt by keeping;
-- stink already: weather quite muggy -- forced to souse them in vinegar: one
expense brings on another; -- never begin the like age^.


Cec. I am very sorry, indeed, if there has been any mistake through my
neglect; but I had hoped I was understood, and I have been so much occupied --


Mr. B. Ay, ay, -- fine work! rare doings! -- a merry ^^^^halling, with pistols
at all your noddles! -- thought as much -- thought he would tip the perch -- saw he
was not ^aunch -- knew he would go by his company -- a set of jackanapes! -- all
black legs! -- nobody warm among 'em -- follows with a month's good living upon
their backs, and not sixpence for the hangman in their pockets!


Cec. I will not, Sir, as your time is precious, detain you here; but as soon
as it is in my power, I will wait upon you in the city.


Mr. B. Well I Would all your cash myself -- seized that else! -- run out the
constable for you next, and made you blow your own brains out for company. Mind
what I say, never give your mind to a gold-laced hat; many a one wears it don't
know five farthings from twopence. A good man always wears a bob-wig; make
that your rule. Ever see master Harrel wear such a thing; -- no, I Will warrant.
Better if he had kept his head on his own shoulders. And now pray how does he
cut up? -- what has he left behind him? a ^wey case I suppose, and a bit of a
hat will not go on a man's head!


Cec. At present, Sir, we are all going out of town; the carriage is waiting at
the door, and therefore --


Mr. B. No such thing -- shall not go -- come for you myself -- take you to my own
house. Got every thing ready -- been to the broker's -- bought a nice blanket
-- hardly a brack in it. Pick up a table soon -- one in my eye.


Cec. I am sorry you have so totally mistaken me, Sir; for I am now going into
the country with Mr. and Mrs. Delville.


Mr. B. Will Not consent, will not consent. What will you go there, for? -- hear of
nothing but dead Dukes -- as well visit an old tomb.


Mr. D. Miss Beverly, if this person wishes for a longer conference with you, I
am sorry you did not appoint a more seasonable hour for your interview.


Mr. B. Ay, ay -- want to hurry her off! see that. But 'twon't do -- a'n't to
be nicked -- choose to come in for my thirds -- will not be gulled -- shall not have
more than your share.


Mr. D. Sir!


Mr. B. What! all above it, hey? warrant your Spanish Don never thinks of such
a thing! Don't believe 'em, my duck! great cry and little wool -- no more of
the ready than other folks -- mere puff and gone.


Mr. D. This is language, Sir, so utterly incomprehensible, that I presume you
do not intend it should be understood: otherwise, I should very little scruple
to inform you, that no man of the name of Delville brooks the smallest
insinuation of dishonor.


Mr. B. Don't he? why how will he help it? will the old grandees jump out of
their graves to frighten us?


Mr. D. What old grandees, Sir? to whom are you pleased to allude?


Mr. B. Why all them grandfathers and aunts you brag of; a set of poor souls
you will not let rest in their coffins; mere clay and dirt! fine things to be
proud of! a parcel of old moldy rubbish quite departed this life! taking up
bones and dust, nobody knows for what! -- ought to be ashamed; who cares for
dead carcasses? nothing but carrion. My little Tom's worth forty of 'em.


Mr. D. I can so ill make out, Miss Beverly, what this person is pleased to
drive at, that I cannot pretend to enter into any sort of conversation with
him; you will therefore be so good as to let me know when he has finished his
discourse, and you are at leisure to set off.


Mr. B. Ay, ay, Don Duke, poke in the old charnel houses by yourself; none of
your defunct for me! did not care if they were all hung in a string. Who Is the
better for 'em?


Mr. D. Pray, Sir, to whom were you pleased to address that speech?


Mr. B. To one Don Puffendorf -- ever know such a person, hey?


Mr. D. Don who? Sir, I must trouble you to say that name over again.


Mr. B. Suppose don't choose it? how then?


Mr. D. I am to blame to suffer myself to be irritated so unworthily; and I am
sorry in my own house, to be compelled to hint that the sooner I have it to
myself, the better I shall be contented with it.


Mr. B. Ay, ay, want to get me off; want to have her to yourself! will not be so
soon choused; who is the better man, hey? which do you think is warmest? and all
got by myself; obliged to never a grandee for a penny; what do you say to that?
will you cast an account with me?


Mr. D. Very extraordinary this! the most extraordinary circumstance of the
kind I ever met with! a person to enter my house in order to talk in this
incomprehensible manner! a person too I hardly know by sight!


Mr. B. Never mind, old Don, know me better another time!


Mr. D. Old who, Sir! -- what?


Mr. B. Come to a fair reckoning, suppose you were in my case, and had never a
farthing but of your own getting; where would you be then? What would become of
your fine coach and horses? you might stump your feet off before you would ever get
one. Where would be all this smart crockery work for your breakfast? you might
pop your head under a pump, or drink out of your own paw. What would you do for
that fine jemmy tie? Where would you get a gold head to your stick? You might
dig long enough in them cold vaults, before any of your old grandfathers would
pop out to give you one. (Mr. Delville rings a bell with great violence.) And
as to ringing a bell, you would never know what it was in your life, unless you
could make interest to be a dustman.


Mr. D. A dustman! I protest -- (Biting his lips and ^^opping short.)


Mr. B. Ay, love it, don't you? suits your taste; why not one dust as well as
another? Dust in a cart as good as dust in a charnel; don't smell half so bad.


Mr. D. (To a servant.) Is every thing ready?


Serve. Yes Sir.


Mr. D. Desire Mrs. Delville to get into the coach; (To Cecilia) and please to
follow, Miss Beverly, when you are at leisure. Exit.


Cecilia. (To Mr. Delville.) I will come immediately, Sir. (To Mr. Briggs.) I
am sorry to leave you, and much concerned you have had this trouble; but I can
detain Mr. Delville no longer. Exit.


DIALOGUE VI.
Mr. BRIGGS, Mr. HOBSON, CECILIA -- enter to them Mr. ALBANY, speaking to
CECILIA. ONCE more I am come to prove thy sincerity. Now will thou go with me
where sorrow calls thee? sorrow thy charity can mitigate!

Cecilia. I am very much concerned, but indeed at present it is utterly
impossible.


Albany. Again thou failest me! what wanton trif^ing! Why should thou elate a
worn-out mind, only to make it feel its lingering credulity? or why, teaching
me to think I had found an angel, so unkindly undeceive me?


Cec. Indeed if you knew how heavy a loss I had personally suffered --


Alb. I do know it, and I grieved for thee when I heard it. Thou have lost a
faithful old friend, a loss which with every setting sun thou may mourn, for
the rising sun will never repair it! But was that a reason for shunning the
duties of humanity? Was the sight of death a motive for neglecting the claims
of benevolence? Ought it not rather to have hastened your fulfilling them? And
should not your own suffering experience of the brevity of human life have
taught you the vanity of all things but preparing for its end?


Cec. Perhaps so; but my grief at that time made me think only of myself.


Alb. And of what else do thou think now?


Cec. Most probably of the same person still! but yet, believe me, I have real
business to transact.


Alb. Frivolous, unmeaning, ever-ready excuses! What business is so important
as the relief of a fellow creature.


Cec. I shall not, I hope, there be backward; but at least for this morning I
must beg to make you my almoner. (Taking out her purse.)


Mr. Hobson. (In a whisper to Mr. Briggs.) This, you must know, is, I am told,
a very particular old gentleman; quite what I call a genius. He comes often to
my house, to see my lodger Miss Henny Belfield, though I never happened to
light upon him myself, except once in the passage: but what I hear of him is
this -- he makes a practice, as one may say, of going about into people's
houses, to do nothing but find fault.


Mr. B. Shall Not get into mine! promise him that! don't half like him; be bound
he is an old sharper.


Cec. (To Mr. Albany.) How much money do you wish for, Sir?


Alb. Half a guinea.


Cec. Will that do?


Alb. For those who have nothing, it is much. Hereafter you may assist them
again. Go but and see their distresses, and you will wish to give them every
thing*


Mr. B. (To Cecilia, twitching her sleeve.) Don't give it! don't let him have
it! chouse him, chouse him! nothing but an old bite.


Cec. Pardon me, Sir, his character is very well known to me. (Presenting the
money to Mr. Albany.)


Mr. B. Be ruined! see it plainly; be fleeced! be robbed! will not have a gown to
your back! will not have a shoe to your foot! will not have a rag in the world! be a
beggar in the street! come to the parish! rot in a jail! -- half a guinea at a
time! -- enough to break the Great Mogul!


Alb. Inhuman spirit of selfish parsimony! repinest thou at this loan, given
from thousands to those who have worse than nothing? who pay to day in hunger
for bread they borrowed yesterday from pity? who, to save themselves from the
deadly pangs of famine, solicit but what the rich know not when they possess,
and miss not when they give?


Mr. B. Anan! what do you say?


Alb. If to thyself distress may cry in vain, if thy own heart resists the
suppliant's prayer, callous to entreaty, and hardened to the world, suffer, at
least, a creature yet untainted, who melts at sorrow, and who glows with
charity, to pay, from her vast wealth, a generous tax of thankfulness, that
fate has not reversed her doom, and those whom she relieves, relieve not her.


Mr. B. Anan!


Mr. H. Pray, ma'am if it is no offense, was the gentleman ever a player?


Cec. I fancy not, indeed!


Mr. H. I ask pardon, then, ma'am; I meant no harm; but my notion was, the
gentleman might be speaking something by heart.


Alb. Is it but on the stage, humanity exists? Oh, thither hasten, then, ye
monopolizers of plenty! ye selfish, unfeeling engrossers of wealth, which ye
dissipate without enjoying, and of abundance, which ye waste while ye refuse to
distribute! thither, thither haste, if there humanity exists!


Mr. H. As to engrossing, it is what I never approved myself. My maxim is this;
if a man makes a fa^^ penny, without any underhand dealings, why he has as much
a title to enjoy his pleasure as the Chief Justice, or the Lord Chancellor; and
it is odds but he is as happy as a greater man. Though what I hold to be best of
all, is a clear conscience, with a neat income of two or three thousand pounds
a year. That Is my notion; and I don't think it is a bad one.


Alb. Weak policy of short-sighted ignorance! to wish for what, if used, brings
care; and if neglected, remorse! have you not now beyond what nature craves?
why then still sigh for more?


Mr. B. Why? why to buy in, to be sure! ever hear of stocks, eh? -- know any
thing of money?


Alb. Still to make more and more, and wherefore? to spend in vice and
idleness, or hoard in cheerless misery! not to give succor to the wretched;
not to support the falling; all is for self, however little wanted; all goes to
added stores, or added luxury; no fellow creature served, nor even one beggar
relieved!


Mr. B. Glad of it! glad of it; would not have them relieved; don't like 'em;
hate a beggar; ought to be all whipped; live upon spunging.


Mr. H. Why as to a beggar, I must needs say, I am by no means an approver of
that mode of proceeding; being I take 'em all for cheats; for what I say is
this, what a man earns, he earns; and it is no man's business to inquire what he
spends; for a freeborn Englishman is his own master, by the nature of the law.
But as to a beggar, it is quite another thing; he comes and asks me for money;
but what has be to show for it? what does he bring me in exchange? why a long
story that he i'n't worth a penny! what is that to me? nothing at all. Let every
man have his own; that is my way of arguing.


Alb. Ungentle mortals! in wealth exulting, exulting even in inhumanity! think
you these wretched outcasts have less sensibility than yourselves; think you,
in cold and hunger they lose those feelings, which even in voluptuous
prosperity from time to time disturb you? You say they are all cheats? it is but
the niggard cant of avarice, to lure away remorse from obduracy. Think you the
naked wanderer begs from choice? give him your wealth and try.


Mr. B. Sha'n't have a sous! give him a whip! send him to bridewell! nothing
but a pauper; hate 'em; hate 'em all! full of tricks; break their own legs, put
out their arms, cut off their fingers, snap their own ancles, -- all for what?
to get at the chink! to chouse us of cash! ought to be well flogged; have 'em
all sent to the Thames; worse than the convicts.


Alb. Poor subterfuge of callous cruelty! you cheat yourselves to shun the
fraud of others! and, how better do you use the wealth so guarded? what nobler
purpose can it answer you, than even a chance to snatch some wretch from
sinking? think less how much ye save, and more for what; and then consider how
thy full coffers may hereafter make reparation for the empty catalogue of thy
virtues.


Mr. B. Anan!


Alb. (Turning toward Cecilia.) Oh, yet, preach not here the hardness which ye
practice: rather amend yourselves than corrupt her; and give with liberality
what ye ought to receive with gratitude.


DIALOGUE VII. TRUDGE, WOWSKI, AND RUNNER.
Enter TRUDGE and WOWSKI, as from the Ship, with a dirty Runner to one of the
Inns. Runner. THIS way, Sir; if you will let me recommend --


Trudge. Come along Wows! take care of your furs and feathers, my girl.


Wowski. Iss.


Trudge. That Is right. -- Somebody might steal 'em, perhaps.


Wow. Steal! -- What that?


Trudge. O Lord! see what one loses by not being born in a Christian country.


Run. If you would, Sir, but mention to your master, the house that belongs to
my master; the best accommodations on the Quay.


Trudge. What is your sign, my lad?


Run. The Crown, Sir -- here it is,


Trudge. Well, get us a room for half an hour, and we'll come; and, hark'es!
let it be light and airy, dy'e ^^ar? my master has been used to open apartments
lately.


Run. Depend upon it. Much obliged to you, Sir.


Exit. Wow. Who be that fine man? he great Prince?


Trudge. A Prince! -- ha! ha! -- no, not quite a Prince, but he belongs to the
crown. But how do you like this, Wows -- is'n't it fine?


Wow. Wonder!


Trudge. Fine men, eh!


Wow. Iss! All white like you.


Trudge. Yes, all the fine men are like me; as different from your people as
powder and ink, or paper and blacking.


Wow. And fine lady, face like snow?


Trudge. What! the fine ladies complexions? Oh, yes, exactly; for too much heat
often dissolves them! Then their dress too.


Wow. Your countrymen dress so.


Trudge. Better, better a great deal. Why a young flashy Englishman will
sometimes carry his whole fortune on his back. But did you mind the women? All
here and there; they have it all from us in England -- And then the fine things
they carry on their heads.


Wow. Iss. One lady carry good fish, so fine she call every body to look at her.


Trudge. Pshaw! an old woman bawling flounders. But the fine girls we meet here
on the Quay -- so round and so plump.


Wow. You not love me now!


Trudge. Not love you! You talk like a simpleton* Wows.


Wow. Now you get here, you forget poor Wowsky!


Trudge. Not I: I will stick to you like wax.


Wow. Ah, I fear! -- what make you love me now?


Trudge. Gratitude, to be sure.


Wow. What that?


Trudge. Ha! that is now to live without education. The poor dull devils of her
country are all in the practice of gratitude, without finding out what it
means; while we can tell the meaning of it with a little or no practice at all.
Lord, Lord, what a fine advantage Christian learning is! Hark'ee, Wows!


Wow. Iss.


Trudge. Now we have accomplished our landing, I Will accomplish you. You remember
the instructions I gave you on the voyage?


Wow. Iss.


Trudge. Let Us see now -- What are you to do, when I introduce you to the
nobility, gentry, and others of my acquaintance?


Wow. Make believe sit down, then get up.


Trudge. Let me see you do it. (She makes a low cur^se^.) Very well; and how
are you to recommend your self, when you have nothing to say, amongst all our
great friends.


Wow. Gria -- show my teeth.


Trudge. Right! they will think you have lived with people of fashion: but suppose
you meet an old shabby friend in misfortune, that you don't wish to be seen to
speak to -- what would you do?


Wow. Look blind -- not see him.


Trudge. Why would you do that?


Wow. 'Cause I cannot bear to see good friend in distress.


Trudge. That Is a good girl; and I wish every body could boast of so kind a
motive for such cruel behavior. But come, though we have got among fine folks
here in an English settlement, I will not be ashamed of my old acquaintance; yet
for my own part I should not be sorry now to see my old friend with a new face.


DIALOGUE VIII.
SCENE -- A Cave, decorated with skin of wild (...) feathers, etc. Enter INKLE
and TRUDGE, as from the mouth of the Cavern. Trudge. WHY, Sir, Sir, you must be
man to go any farther.


Ink. So far at least we have proceeded with safety. Ha! no bad specimen of
savage elegance. Those ornaments would be worth something in England. We have
little to fear here. I hope this cave rather (...) the pleasing face of a
profitable adventure.


Trudge. Very likely, Sir, but for a pleasing ^^ce it has the most ugly mouth,
I ever saw in my life. Now, do Sir, make off as fast as you can. If we once get
clear of the natives' houses, we have little to fear from the lions and
leopards; for by the appearance of their parlours, they seem to have killed all
the wild beasts in the country. Now pray do, my good master, take my advice and
run away.


Ink. Rascal! talk again of going out, and I Will ^y you alive.


Trudge. That Is just what I expect for coming in. All that enter here appear to
have had their skin stripped over their ears; and our's will be kept for
curiosities.


Ink. This curtain seems to lead to another apartment: I Will draw it.


Trudge. No, no, no; don't, don't. We may be called to account for disturbing
the company -- you may get a curtain lecture, perhaps, Sir.


Ink. Peace, booby, and stand on your guard.


Trudge. O! what will become of us! some grim seven-foot fellow ready to scalp
us.


Ink. By heaven! a woman.


As the curtain draws, Yaric^ and Wowski discovered asleep. Trudge. A woman!
(Aside.) (Loud.) But let him come on: I Am ready; I don't fear facing the devil
himself. Faith, it is a woman -- fast asleep, too.


Ink. And beautiful as an angel.


Trudge. And there seems to be a nice little plump bit in the corner, only
she is an angel of rather a darker sort.


Ink. Hush! keep back, she wakes. (Yarico comes forwa^.)


SONG. -- YARICO.
When the chase of the day is done.
And the shaggy lion's skin,
Which for us our warriors win.
Decks our cell at set of sun,
Worn with toil, with sleep oppressed,
I press my mossy bed, and sink to rest.
Ink. Our language!


Trudge. (...) ^ne has thrown me into a cold strea^.


Yar. (...) a noise! Wowski, awake! whence can it proceed* (^^e wakes Wowski,
and they both (...) forward.)


Trudge. Madam, your very humble servant.


Yar. Ah! what form is this* -- are you a man?


Ink. True flesh and blood, my charming heathen, I promise you.


Yar. What harmony in his voice! what a shape! How fair his skin, too! (Gazing.)


Trudge. This must be a lady of quality, by her staring.


Yar. Say, stranger whence come you?


Ink. From a far distant island, driven on this craft by distress, and deserted
by my companions.


Yar. And do you know the danger that surrounds you here? Our woods are filled
with beasts of prey. My countrymen too -- (yet I think they could not find the
heart) might kill you. It would be a pity if you fell in their way -- I think I
should weep if you come to any harm.


Ink. How wild and beautiful! sure there is magic in her shape, and she has
rivetted me to the place; but where shall I look for safety? let me fly and
avoid my (...)*


Yar. Oh, no, but, -- (p^^^^^ed) well then di^, stranger, but don't depart. I
will try to preserve you, and if you are killed, Yarico must die too! -- yes
it is I alone can save you; your death is certain without my assistance, and
indeed you shall not want it.


Ink. My kind Yarico! but what means must be used for my safety?


Yar. My cave must conceal you: None enter in it since my father was slain in
battle. I will bring you food by day, then lead you to our unfrequented groves
by moonlight, to listen to the nightingale. If you should sleep, I Will watch
you, and wake you when there is danger.


Ink. Generous maid! then to you I will owe my life; and while it lasts nothing
shall part us.


Yar. And sha'n't it, sha'n't it, indeed?


Ink. No, my Yarico, for when an opportunity offers to return to my country,
you shall be my companion.


Yar. What, cross the seas?


Ink. Yes, help me to discover a vessel, and you shall enjoy wonders: you shall
be decked in silks, my brave maid, and have a house drawn with horses to carry
you.


Yar. Nay, do not laugh at me -- But is it so?


Ink. It is, indeed.


Yar. Oh wonder! I wish my countrywomen could see me. But will not your warriors
kill us?


Ink. No, our only danger on land is here.


Yar. Then let us retire further into the cave. Come, -- your safety is in my
keeping.


Ink. I follow you.


DIALOGUE IX. AESOP AND MRS. RIOT.
Aesop. SHIELD me, and defend me! Another fine lady!


Enter Mrs. RIOT. Mrs. R. A monster! a filthy brute! Your watermen are as
unpolite upon the Styx as upon the Tham^s. -- Stow a lady of fashion with
tradesmen and mechanics -- (...) what is this, Serburus, for Plutus! (Seeing
Aesop) Am I to be frighted by all the monsters of this internal world?


Aesop. What Is the matter, lady?


Mrs. R. Every thing is the matter -- my spirits are uncompos'd, and every
circumstance about me in a (...) dilemma.


Aesop. What has disordered you thus?


Mrs. R. Your filthy boatman, Scarroon there.


Aesop. Charon, lady, you mean.


Mrs. R. And who are you, you ugly creature you? If I see any more of you, I
shall die with temerity.


Aesop. The wife think me handsome, Madam.


Mrs. R. I hate the wise; but who are you?


Aesop. I am Aesop, Madam, honored this day by Proserpina with the
distribution of the waters of L^th^. Command me.


Mrs. R. Show me to the pump-room then, fellow -- where is the company? I die in
solitude.


Aesop. What company?


Mrs. R. The best company! people of fashion! the beau-monde! Show me to none
of your gloomy souls, who wander about in your groves and streams! show me to
glittering balls, enchanting masquerades, ravishing operas, and all the polite
enjoyments of Elysian.


Aesop. This is a language unknown to me, lady -- No such fine doings here, and
very little good company (as you call it) in Elysian.


Mrs. R. What! no operas! eh! no Elysian then! (Sings fantastically in
Italian.) 'Sfortunato Monticelli! banished Elysian, as well as the Hay-market!
your taste here, I suppose, rises no higher than your Shakespeares and your
Johnsons: oh you Goats and Vandals! in the name of barbarity, take 'em to
yourselves; we are tired of 'em upon earth: -- one goes indeed to a playhouse
sometimes, because one does not know how else one can kill one's time -- every
body goes, because all the world's there -- but for my part -- call Scarroon,
and let him take me back again, I Will stay no longer here -- stupid immortals!


Aesop. You are a happy woman, that have neither cares nor follies to disturb
you.


Mrs. R. Cares! ha! ha! ha! nay, now I must laugh in your ugly face, my dear;
what cares, does your wisdom think, can enter into the circle of a fine lady's
enjoyments?


Aesop. By the account I have just heard of a fine lady's life, her very
pleasures are both follies and cares; so drink the water, and forget them,
Madam.


Mrs. R. Oh, gad! that was so like my husband now ^forget my follies! I forget
the fashions! forget my being, the very quincet^ence and emptity of a fine
lady^ The fellow would make me as great a brute as my husband.


Aesop. You have an husband, then, Madam?


Mrs. R. Yes -- I think so -- an husband and no husband -- come, fetch me some
of your water; if I must forget something, I had as good forget him, for he is
grown insufferable of late.


Aesop. I thought, Madam, you had nothing to complain of.


Mrs. R. One's husband, you know, is almost next to nothing.


Aesop. How has he offended you.


Mrs. R. The man talks of nothing but his money, and my extravagance -- will not
remove out of the filthy city, though he knows I die for the other end of the
town; nor leave off his nasty merchandising, though I Have labored to convince
him he loses money by it. The man was once tolerable enough, and let me have
money when I wanted it; but now he is never out of a tavern, and is grown so
valiant, that, do you know, he has presumed to contradict me, and refuse me
money upon every occasion.


Aesop. And all this without any provocation on your side?


Mrs. R. I keep the best company, Sir, and daylight is no agreeable sight to a
polite assembly: the sun is very well and comfortable, to be sure, to the lower
part of the creation; but to ladies, who have a true taste of pleasure, wax
candles or no candles are preferable to all the sunbeams in the universe.


Aesop. Preposterous fancy!


Mrs. R. And so, most delicate sweet Sir, you don't approve my scheme; ha! ha!
ha! -- oh you ugly devil you! have you the vanity to imagine people of fashion
will mind what you say? or that to learn politeness and breeding, it is
necessary to take a lesson of morality out of Aesop's Fables -- ha! ha! ha!


Aesop. It is necessary to get a little reflection somewhere; when these
spirits leave you, and your senses are furfeited, what must be the consequence?


Mrs. R. Oh, I have the best receipt in the world for the vapors; and lest the
poison of your precepts should taint my vivacity, I must beg leave to take it
now, by way of anecdote.


Aesop. Oh by all means -- ignorance and vanity!


Mrs. R. (Drawing out a cord.) Lady Rantan's compliments to Mrs. Riot.


SONG.
The card invites, in crowds we fly,
To join the jovial rout, full cry;
What joy from cares and plagues all day,
To hie to the midnight hark-away.
Nor want, nor pain, nor grief, nor care,
Nor dronish husbands enter there;
The brisk, the bold, the young, the gay,
All hie to the midnight hark-away.
Uncounted strikes the morning clock,
And drowsy watchmen idly knock;
Till day light peeps, we sport and play,
And roar to the jolly hark-away.
When tired with sport, to bed we creep,
And kill the tedious day with sleep;
To morrow's welcome call obey,
And again to the midnight hark-away.
Mrs. R. There Is life for you, you old fright! so trouble your head no more
about your betters. I am so perfectly satisfied with myself, that I will not
alter an atom of me, for all you can say; so you may bottle up your
philosophical waters for your own use, or for the fools that want 'em -- Gad's
my life! there is Billy Butterfly in the grove -- I must go to him -- we shall
so rally your wisdom between us -- ha! ha! ha!

The bold, the brisk, the young, the gay,
All hie to the midnight hark-away.

Exit singing. Aesop. Unhappy woman! nothing can retrieve her; when the head
has once got a wrong bias, it is ever obstinate, in proportion to its weakness.


DIALOGUE X. -- THE FORCE OF VIRTUE IN MISFORTUNE. BETWEEN A HUSBAND AND WIFE.
Lucinda. GOOD morning, my dear husband. (Taking him by the hand.) I rejoice to
see you, with all my heart.


Erastus. (Embracing her.) I thank you, my dear. -- How have you passed your
time since I left you?


Luc. Very agreeably. I have been as happy as I could be, deprived of your
company. I have amused myself with a song while engaged in my little
occupations.


Eras. How I admire your firmness under misfortune! In you I behold a true
heroine.


Luc. My happiness consists in possessing you and a virtuous mind, which will
ever be a support to our courage^. I am never unhappy but when you appear so.


Eras. Heavens, what tenderness for me! and yet this very tenderness has placed
you in your present situation, which is such as would reduce an ordinary soul
to despair.


Luc. I conjure you, by all that is sacred, not to disturb our repose by such
unjust reproaches: I protest, and call Heaven to witness, that my tranquillity
is not pretended, but real. I am happy in possessing you, (...) without you
life would be insupportable.


Eras. Is it possible, that in spite of our extreme poverty, in spite of our
desperate situation, the air of content, which I observe in you, is not assumed
to conceal from me your true feelings? Is it possible that your ea^ness can
proceed from a mind at ease?


Luc. I repeat it again, I feel no uneasiness b^^ that arise from seeing you
unhappy.


Eras. What goodness!


Luc. Call to mind that there are a thousand person much more unfortunate than
we are. Shall we, by nourishing discontent, render ourselves more unhappy than
we really are?


Eras. It cannot make us poorer, my dear. The bi^ of heaven are less so than
we. There is nothing in our cottage which can serve us for food. I have been
climbing the mountains in quest of a supply, but have returned unsuccessful.
What frightful indigence? I will, however, endeavor to support myself; your
courage is sufficient to animate mine: yet, when I contemplate our dear
children, when I see the tears ready to start from their eyes, but which they
endeavor to restrain, lest they should add to our affliction, great God! what
bitter pangs pieroe my inmost soul!


Luc. My friend, a misfortune, which exists only in imagination, ought not to
deprive you of all your courage. Our eldest son is gone into the forest to
gather fruit, and he will not return empty handed: we may besides hope much
from the care of Simon, whom I expect every moment from the city.


Eras. I am greatly mortified that fear should have (...) much power over me.


Luc. (Showing him a piece of embroidery.) Besides this, here is a piece of
work which I have just finished. Simon shall carry it to the city, where it
will fetch a good price, as my work has always done. Do not be impatient, my
dear, but look back upon the past. We have often been in desperate situations,
and as often had relief when we least expected it.


Eras. The greatness of your soul is to you an inexhaustible source of
consolation: but for me, I cannot bear the idea of the miseries, which our
children, th^^ abandoned by every body, must inevitably experience. What way
can we point out to them, by which they can obtain an honorable support?


Luc. The way of virtue, my dear, which is ever infallible.


Eras. Yes* but virtue under a suffering form, is nevertheless a sad spectacle.
O how difficult it is to preserve virtue unspotted in the soul, when we are
assailed by all sorts of misfortunes. Ah! ^ll the happiness which I desire, is,
that they may pass through life without being unfounded with the vi^e populace*
Alas! they will be ^ enough below the rank to which their birth entit^es them.
I pray Heaven, O my father, that the sighs, which the severity draws from me,
may never be a torment to ^y soul, and that thou never may behold thy
grandson begging his bread unknown at thy door.


Luc. Why increase this misery, from which futurity may shield them? Providence
can open an infinite number of ways, which may lead to fortune.


Eras. Without doubt; but how is it possible to follow (...), when one has, for
a long time, been plunged in the d^epest misery. Hardly had my father abandoned
us; hardly had our necessities consumed our little ^ore, and left us in extreme
poverty, when all the world appeared to be against us. What resource is there
now left?


Luc. The only part we can take, is to quit the ^rld, hide ourselves in
solitude, fix our residence in one of the most beautiful countries on earth,
and resign ourselves wholly to the care of Providence.


Eras. Very well, my dear; but this is not the happiness I wish for my
children. What enjoyment, gracious Heaven, can we expect in a situation, where
all the strength of reason can hardly prevent our falling into despair?


Luc. The situation in which Providence has seen ^it to place us, is not so
desperate as many others. It is unjust to murmur at his decrees. I have just
returned from visiting a poor neighbor: are not her misfortunes much greater
than ours? For many years has she felt ^he griping hand of poverty, and been
tormented a long time by a painful illness. Alas! the whole course of her life
has been one continued scene of affliction; yet rarely have I known her
discover any sighs of impatience. She has no hope but in death, which, perhaps,
will not terminate her life, until after a much longer period of suffering.
Shall we, then, who have had the advantage of a better education, and whose
minds are much more highly cultivated, render ourselves more unhappy than she
is, by our weakness, and want of fortitude under misfortune*


Eras. No, this must not be, my dear.


Luc. Let us, then, learn to adore the wisdom of Providence, who directs all
for the best ends. He loves his creatures, and will take equal care of the
little and the great. He preserves the birds which sing in ou^ groves, the be
that hums around us, and the worm which crawls under our feet: and shall we
murmur against his ways, because we are not placed in a situation to attract
envy? Take courage, then, my dear, behold this beautiful country which smiles
upon us. A clear sky and a charming evening are prepared to embellish the
declining day, a day which has advanced our journ^y, and brought us nearer to
the developement of our fortune.


Eras. I thank you a thousand times, my dear Lucinda. How great is my happiness
in possessing you! you have supported my weak reason; you have infused serenity
into my soul. You calm continually my agitating fears that my father has
abandoned me, and banished me entirely from his heart.


Luc. O best of husbands! your reason would of itself have banished these
gloomy ideas. I have only placed before your eyes the motives we have for
consolation, which, at any other time, you yourself would readily have
discovered.


DIALOGUE XI.
SIGISMUNDA alone. AND am I then alone? The most undone,
Most wretched being now beneath the cope
Of this affrightning gloom, that wraps the world!
I said I did not fear -- Ah me! I feel
A shivering horror run through all my powers!
O, I am naught but tumults, fears and weakness!
And yet how idle fear when hope is gone,
Gone, gone forever! -- Oh thou gentle scene (Looking toward her bed.)
Of sweet repose, where by the oblivious draught
Of each sad toilsome day, to peace restored,
Unhappy mortals lose their woes awhile,
Thou have no peace for me! -- What shall I do?
How pass this dreadful night, so big with terror?
Here, with the midnight shades, here will I sit,
A prey to wild despair, and ceaseless weep
The hours away -- Bless me! I heard a noise --
No -- I mistook -- Nothing but silence reigns
And awful midnight round -- Again -- O heavens!
My lord the king!

Enter TANCRED. Tancred. Be not alarmed, my love!

Sigismunda. My royal lord! why at this midnight hour,
How came you hither?

Tan. By that secret way
My love contrived, when we in happier days,
Used to devote these hours, so much in vain,
To vows of love and everlasting friendship.

Sig. Why will you thus persist to add new stings
To her distress, who never can be thine?
O fly me! fly! -- you know --

Tan. I know too much.
O how I could reproach thee, Sigismunda!
Pour out my injured soul in just complaints!
But now the time permits not, these swift moments!
I told thee how thy father's artifice
Forced me to seem perfidious in thine eyes.
Ever since -- a dreadful interval of care! --
My thoughts have been employed, not without hope,
How to deseat Siffredi's barbarous purpose;
But thy credulity has ruined all.

Sig. Ah, generous Tancred! ah thy truth destroys me!
Yes, yes, it is I, it is I alone am false!
My hasty rage, joined to my tame submission,
More than the most exalted filial duty
Could ever demand, has dashed our cup of fate
With bitterness unequalled -- But, alas!
What are thy woes to mine? -- to mine! just Heaven! --
Now is thy turn of vengeance -- hate, renounce me!
O leave me to the fate I well deserve,
To sink in hopeless misery! -- at least,
Try to forget the worthless Sigismunda!

Tan. Forget thee! No! thou art my soul itself!
I have no thought, no hope, no wish but thee!
Ah, how forget thee! -- much must be forgot,
Ere Tancred can forget his Sigismunda!

Sig. But you, my lord, must make that great effort.

Tan. Can Sigismunda make it?

Sig. Ah! I know not
With what success -- But all that feeble woman
And love-entangled reason can perform,
I, to the utmost, will exert to do.

Tan. Fear not -- It Is done! --
Success is sure -- I am forgot already!

Sig. Ah Tancred! -- But, my lord, respect me more.
Think who I am -- What can you now propose?

Tan. To claim the plighted vows which heaven has heard.
To vindicate the rights of holy love,
By faith and honor bound, to which compared
These empty forms, which have ensnared thy hand,
Are impious guile, abuse, and profanation --
Nay, as a king, whose high prerogative
By this unlicens'd marriage is affronted,
To bid the laws themselves pronounce it void.

Sig. Honor, my lord, is much too proud to catch
At every slender twig of nice distinction.
These for the unfeeling vulgar may do well:
But those, whose souls are by the nicer rules
Of virtuous delicacy nobly swayed,
Stand at another bar than that of laws.
Then cease to urge me -- since I am not born
To that exalted state to be your queen --
Or, yet a dearer name -- to be your wife! --
I am the wife of an illustrious lord
Of your own princely blood; and what I am,
I will with proper dignity remain.
Retire, my royal lord -- There is no means
To cure the wounds this fatal day has given.
We meet no more!

Tan. O barbarous Sigismunda!
And can thou talk thus steadily? Thus treat me
With such unpitying, unrelenting rigor?
Poor is the love, that rather than give up
A little pride, a little formal pride,
The breath of vanity, can bear to see
The man, whose heart was once so dear to thine,
A prey to anguish, fury and distraction!
Thou can not surely make me such a wretch;
Thou can not, Sigismunda! Yet relent,
O save us yet! -- Rodolpho, with my guards,
Waits in the garden -- Let us seize the moments
We never may have again -- With more than power
I will assert thee mine, with fairest honor.
The world shall even approve; each honest bosom
Swell with a kindred joy to see us happy.

Sig. The world approve! -- What is the world to me?
The conscious mind is its own awful world.
And mine is fixed -- distress me then no more;
Not all the heart can plead
Shall ever shake the unalterable dictates
That tyrannize my breast.

Tan. It Is well -- No more --
I yield me to my fate -- yes, yes, inhuman!
Since thy barbarian heart is steeled by pride,
Shut up to love and pity, here behold me
Cast on the ground, a vile and abject wretch!
Lost to all cares, all dignities, all duties!
Here will I grow, breathe out my faithful soul
Here at thy feet -- Death, death alone shall part us!

Sig. Have you then vowed to drive me to perdition?
What can I more? -- yes, Tancred! once again
I will forget the dignity my station
Commands me to sustain -- for the last time,
Will tell thee, that I fear no ties, no duty
Can ever root thee from my hapless bosom.
Retire my lord; and if you truly love me;
If you respect my honor, nay, my peace,
Retire! for though the emotions of my heart
Can never alarm my virtue; yet, alas!
They tear it so, they pierce it with such anguish --
Oh it is too much! -- I cannot bear the conflict!

DIALOGUE XIII.
LEONTINE and his Daughter ATHENAIS. Leontine. SO Athen^is, now our compliment
To the young Persian Prince is at an end:
What then remains but that we take our leave,
And bid him everlastingly farewell?

Athenais. My lord!

Leon. I say that decency requires
We should be gone; nor can you stay with honor.

Ath. Most true, my lord.

Leon. The court is now at peace,
The emp'ror's sisters are retired forever,
And he himself composed. What hinders then,
But that we bid adieu to Prince Varanes?

Ath. Ah, Sir! why will you break my heart?

Leon. I would not.
Thou art the only comfort of my age:
Like an old tree, I stand amongst the storms;
Thou art the only limb that I have left me; (She kneels.)
My dear green branch! and how I pri^e thee, child,
Heaven only knows. Why do thou kneel and weep?

Ath. Because you are so good, and will, I hope,
Forgive my fault, who first occasioned it.

Leon. I charged thee to receive and hear the Prince.

Ath. You did; and O my lord, I heard too much,
Too much, I fear, for my eternal quiet!

Leon. Rise, Athenais; credit him who bears
More years than thou: Varanes has deceived thee.

Ath. How do we differ then? you judge the Prince
Impious and base; while I take Heaven to witness,
I think him the most virtuous of men:
Therefore, take heed, my lord, how you accuse him
Before you make the trial. Alas, Varanes!
If thou art false, there is no such thing on earth
As solid goodness, or substantial honor.
A thousand times, my lord, he has sworn to give me*
(And I believe his oaths) his crown and empire,
That day I make him master of my heart.

Leon. That day he will make thee mistress of his power,
Which carries a soul name among the vulgar.
No, Athenais, let me see thee dead,
Borne a pale corpse, and gently laid in earth;
So I may say -- she is chaste, and died a virgin,
Rather than view thee with these wounded eyes,
Seated upon the throne of Isdigerdes,
The blast of common tongues, the nobles' scorn,
Thy father's curse, that is, the Prince's mistress.

Ath. O horrid supposition! how I detest it!
Be witness, Heaven, that sees my secret thoughts!
Have I, for this, my lord, been taught by you
The nicest justice, and severest virtue?
No, Athenais: when the day beholds thee
So scandalously raised, pride cast thee down,
The scorn of honor, and the people's prey!
No, cruel Leon^e, not to redeem
That aged head from the descending ax*
Would I for empire, to the man I love,
Be made the object of unlawful pleasure.

Leon. Oh, greatly said! and by the blood which warms me,
Which runs as rich as any Athens holds,
It would improve the virtue of the world,
If every day a thousand votaries,
And thousand virgins, came from far to hear thee!

Ath. Look down, ye powers, take notice, we obey
The rigid principles ye have infused;
Yet, O my noble father! to convince you,
Since you will have it so, propose a marriage;
Though with the thought I Am covered over with blushes;
Not that I doubt the Prince; that were to doubt
The heavens themselves. I know he is all truth;
But modesty, the virgin's constant guest,
That, that alone forbids.

Leon. I wish to Heaven
There prove no greater bar to my relief.
Behold the Prince. I will retire awhile,
And, when occasion calls, come to thy aid. Exit Leon.

Enter VARANES and ARANTHES. Var. To fix her on a throne, to me seems little.
This is the nature of thy Prince. But, Oh!
As to the world, thy judgment soars above me,
And I am dared, with this gigantic honor;
Glory forbids her prospect to a crown,
Nor must she gaze that way; my haughty soul,
That day when she ascends the throne of Cyrus,
Will leave my body pale, and to the stars
Retire in blushes, and quite lost forever.

Aran. What then do you propose?

Var. I know not what.
But see, she comes, the glory of my arms,
The only business of my instant thought,
My soul's best joy, and all my true repose.

Ath. What have you found, my lord,
In me so harsh or cruel, that you fear
To speak your griefs?

Var. First let me kneel and swear,
And on thy hand seal my religious vow:
Strait let the breath of gods blow me from earth,
If I prefer thee not, O Athenais,
To all the Persian greatness.

Ath. I believe you;
For I have heard you swear as much before.

Var. Have thou? O why then did I swear again,
But that my love knew nothing worthier of thee,
And could no better way express my passion.

Ath. O rise, my lord!

Var. I will do every thing
Which Athenais orders; if there be more
In nature to convince thee of my love,
Whisper it, O some god, into my ear,
And on her breast, thus to her listening soul
I Will breathe the inspiration. Will thou not speak?

Ath. My lord, I dare not hear you.

Var. Why do thou frown at what thou do not know?
It Is an imagination never pierced thee;
Yet as it is ravishing, it is full of honor.

Ath. I must not doubt you, Sir: but, ah! I tremble
To think, if Isdigerdes should behold you,
Should hear you thus protesting to a maid
Of no degree, but virtue, in the world.

Var. No more of this -- no more; for I disdain
All pomp when thou art by. Far be the noise
Of kings and courts from us, whose gentler souls
Our kinder stars have steered another way.
Free as the forest birds we'll pair together,
Without rememb'ring who our fathers were;
Fly to the arbours, grotts, and flowery meads,
Together drink the crystal of the stream,
Or taste the yellow fruit which Autumn yields;
And when the golden evening calls us home,
Wing to our downy nest, and sleep till morn.

Ath. Ah! Prince, no more! Forbear, forbear to charm me,
Since I am doomed to leave you, Sir, forever.

Var. Hold, Athenais --

Ath. I know your royal temper,
And that high honor reigns within your breast,
Which would disdain to waste so many hours
With one of humble blood compared to you;
Unless strong passion swayed your thoughts to love her.
Therefore receive, O Prince! and take it kindly,
For none on earth but you could win it from me,
Receive the gift of my eternal love:
It Is all I can bestow, nor is it little;
For sure a heart so coldly chaste as mine,
No charms but yours, my lord, could ever have warmed.

Var. Well have you made amends by this last comfort,
For the cold dart you shot at me before.
For this last goodness, O my Athenais!
(For now, methinks, I ought to call you mine)
I empty all my soul in thanks before you.
Yet, oh, one fear remains! like death it chills me,
Why my relenting love did talk of parting!

Ath. Look there, and cease your wonder: I have sworn
To Obey my father, and he calls me hence --

Enter LEONTINE. Var. Ha, Leontine! by which of all my actions
Have I so deeply injured thee, to merit
The smartest wound revenge could form to end me?

Leon. Answer me now, O Prince! for virtue prompts me,
And honestly will dally now no longer.
What can the end of all this passion be?
Glory requires the strict account, and asks
What you intend at last to Athenais?

Var. How, Leontine?

Leon. You saw her, Sir, at Athens; said you loved her.
I charged her humbly to receive the honor,
And hear your passion. Has she not, Sir, obeyed me?

Var. She has, I thank the gods; but whither would thou?

Leon. Having resolved to visit Theodosius,
You swore you would not go without my daughter;
Whereon I gave command that she should follow.

Var. Yes, Leontine, my old remembrancer,
Most learned of all philosophers, you did.

Leon. Thus long she has attended; you have seen her,
Sounded her virtues and her imperfections;
Therefore, dread Sir, forgive this bolder charge
Which honor sounds; and now let me demand you --

Var. Now help, Aranthes, or I Am dashed forever.

Aran. Whatever happens, Sir, disdain the marriage.

Leon. Can your high thoughts so far forget themselves,
TO admit this humble virgin to your bride?

Var. Ha!

Ath. He blushes, gods, and stammers at the question!

Leon. Why do you walk, and chase yourself, my lord?
The business is not much.

Var. How, Leontine!
Not much! I know that she deserves a crown;
Yet it is to reason much, though not to love.
And s^re the world would blush to see the daughter
Of a philosopher upon the throne of Cyrus.

Ath. Undone forever?

Leon. Is this your answer, Sir?

Var. Why do thou urge me thus, and push me to
The very brink of glory? Where, alas!
I look, and tremble at the vast descent;
Yet, even there, to the vast bottom, down
My rash adventurer, love, would have me leap,
And grasp my Athenais with my ruin.

Leon. It Is well, my lord --

Var. Why do thou then provoke me!
I thought that Persia's court had store of honor
To satisfy the height of thy ambition.
Besides, old man, my love is too well grown
To want a tutor for his good behavior:
What he will do, he of himself will do,
And not be taught by you --

Leon. I know he will not;
Fond tears away! I know, I know he will not;
But he would buy, with his old man's preferment,
My daughter's shame.

Var. Away, I say! my soul disdains the motion.

Leon. The motion of a marriage; yes, I see it:
Your angry looks, and haughty words betray it:
I found it at the first. I thank you, Sir.
You have at last rewarded your old tutor
For all his cares, his watchings, services.
Yet let me tell you, Sir, this humble maid,
This daughter of a poor philosopher,
Shall, if she please, be seated on a throne
As high as that of the immortal Cyrus.

Var. I think that age and deep philosophy
Have cracked thy brain: farewell, old Leontine;
Retire to rest; and when this brawling humor
Is rocked asleep, I Will meet my Athenais,
And clear the accounts of love, which thou have blotted.

Exit. Leon. Old Leontine! perhaps I Am mad indeed.
But hold, my heart, and let that solid virtue,
Which I so long adored, still keep the reins.
O Athenais! but I will not chide thee:
Fate is in all our actions; and, methinks,
At least a father judges so, it has
Rebuked thee smartly for thy easiness:
There is a kind of mournful eloquence
In thy dumb grief, which shames all clamorous sorrow.

Ath. Is there, O speak, a possibility
To be forgiven?

Leon. Thy father does forgive thee,
And honor will; but on this hard condition,
Never to see him more --

Ath. See him! O heavens!

Leon. Unless it be, my daughter, to upbraid him;
Not though he should repent, and strait return,
Nay, proffer thee his crown -- No more of that.
Honor too cries, revenge, revenge thy wrongs,
Revenge thyself, revenge thy injured father.
For it is revenge so wise, so glorious too,
As all the world shall praise --

Ath. Oh, give me leave;
For yet I am all tenderness: the coward woman
The weak, the mild, the fond, the coward woman,
Dares not look forth; but runs about my breast,
And visits all the warmer mansions there,
Where she so often has harbored false Varanes!
Cruel Varanes! false, forsworn Varanes!

Leon. Is this forgetting him? Is this the course
Which honor bids thee take?

Ath. Ah, Sir, allow
A little time for love to make his way:
Hardly he won the place, and many sighs,
And many tears, and thousand oaths it cost him;
And, oh! I find he will not be dislodged
Without a groan at parting hence forever.

Leon. No woman, sure, but thou, so low in fortune,
Therefore the nobler is thy fair example,
Would thus have grieved, because a Prince adored her;
Yet do I still advise -- preserve thy virtue:
And since he does disdain thee for his bride,
Scorn thou to be --

Ath. Hold, Sir; oh, hold -- forbear;
For my nice soul abhors the very sound:
Yet with the shame of that, and the desire
Of an immortal name, I am inspired!

Leon. Oh Athenais! on; it is bright before thee,
Pursue the track, and thou shall be a star.

Ath. O Leontine! I swear, my noble father,
That I will starve, ever once forego my virtue:
And thus let us join to contradict the world:
That empire could not tempt a poor old man
To sell his Prince the honor of his daughter:
And she too matched the virtue of her father.
Though humbly born, and yet more humbly bred;
She for her fame refused a royal bed;
Who, though she loved, yet did put off the hour,
Nor could her virtue be betrayed by power.
Patterns like these will guilty courts improve,
And teach the fair to blush at conscious love.

PART IV. Poetry.
AN ELEGY, DESCRIBING THE SORROW OF AN INGENUOUS MIND, ON THE MELANCHOLY EVENT
OF A LICENTIOUS AMOR.
WHY mourns my friend? why weeps his downcast eye?
That eye where mirth, where fancy used to shine?
Thy cheerful meads reprove that swelling sigh;
Spring never enameled fairer meads than thine.
Art thou not lodged in fortune's warm embrace?
Were thou not formed by nature's partial care?
Blessed in thy song, and blessed in every grace
That wins the friend, or that enchants the fair?
Damon, said he, thy partial praise restrain;
Not Damon's friendship can my peace restore;
Alas! his very praise awakes my pain,
And my poor wounded bosom bleeds the more.
For oh! that nature on my birth had frowned!
Or fortune fixed me to some lowly cell!
Then had my bosom 'scap'd this fatal wound,
Nor had I bid these vernal sweets farewell.
But led by fortune's hand, her darling child,
My youth her vain licentious bliss admired;
In fortune's train, the syron flattery smiled,
And rashly hallowed all her queen inspired.
Of folly studious, even of vices vain,
Ah vices! gilded by the rich and gay!
I chased the guileless daughters of the plain,
Nor dropped my chase, till Jessy was my prey.
Poor artless maid! to stain thy spotless name,
Expense, and art, and toil, united strove?
To lure a breast that felt the purest flame,
Sustained by virtue, but betrayed by love.
Schooled in the science of love's mazy wiles,
I clothed each feature with affected scorn;
I spoke of jealous doubts, and fickle smiles,
And, feigning, left her anxious and forlorn.
Then, while the fancied rage alarmed her care,
Warm to deny, and zealous to disprove;
I bade my words their wonted softness wear,
And seized the minute of returning love.
To thee, my Damon, dare I paint the rest?
Will yet thy love a candid ear incline?
Assured that virtue by misfortune pressed,
Feels not the sharpness of a pang like mine.
Nine envious moons matur'd her growing shame;
Ere while to flaunt it in the face of day;
When scorned of virtue, stigmatized by fame,
Low at my feet desponding Jessy lay.
"Henry," she said, "by thy dear form subdued,
"See the sad relics of a nymph undone!
"I find, I find this rising sob renewed:
"I sigh in shades, and sicken at the sun.
"Amid the dreary gloom of night, I cry,
"When will the morn's once pleasing scenes return?
"Yet what can morn's returning ray supply,
"But foes that triumph, or but friends that mourn?
"Alas! no more that joyous morn appears
"That led the tranquil hours of spotless same;
"For I have steeped a father's couch in tears,
"And tinged a mother's glowing cheek with shame.
"The vocal birds, that raise their mattin strain,
"The sportive lambs increase my pensive moan;
"All seem to chase me from the cheerful plain,
"And talk of truth and innocence alone.
"If through the garden's flowery tribes I stray,
"Where bloom the jess'mines, that could once allure,
"Hope not to find delight in us, they say,
"For we are spotless, Jessy; we are pure.
"Ye flowers! that well reproach a nymph so frail,
"Say, could ye with my virgin fame compare?
"The brightest bud, that scents the vernal gale,
"Was not so fragrant, and was not so fair.
"Now the grave old alarm the gentler young;
"And all my fame's abhorred contagion flee;
"Trembles each lip, and falters every tongue,
"That bids the morn propitious smile on me.
"Thus, for your sake I shun each human eye;
"I bid the sweets of blooming youth adieu;
"To die I languish, but I dread to die,
"Lest my sad fate should nourish pangs for you.
"Raise me from earth; the pains of want remove;
"And let me silent seek some friendly shore;
"There only, banished from the form I love,
"My weeping virtue shall relapse no more.
"Be but my friend; I ask no dearer name;
"Be such the meed of some more artful fair;
"Nor could it heal my peace, or chase my shame,
"That pity gave what love refused to share.
"Force not my tongue to ask its scanty bread;
"Nor hurl thy Jessy to the vulgar crew;
"Not such the parent's board at which I fed;
"Not such the precept from his lips I drew!
"Happily when age has silvered over my hair,
"Malice may learn to scorn so mean a spoil;
"Envy may slight a face no longer fair;
"And pity welcome to my native soil."
She spoke -- nor was I born of savage race;
Nor could these hands a niggard boon assign;
Grateful she clasped me in a last embrace,
And vowed to waste her life in prayers for mine.
I saw her foot the lofty bark ascend;
I saw her breast with every passion heave;
I left her -- torn from every earthly friend;
Oh! my hard bosom, which could bear to leave!
Brief let me be; the fatal storm arose;
The billows raged; the pilot's art was vain;
Over the tall mast the circling surges close;
My Jessy floats upon the watery plain!
And see my youth's impetuous fires decay;
Seek not to stop reflection's bitter tear;
But warn the frolic, and instruct the gay,
From Jessy floating on her watery bier!
OPHELIA'S URN. -- AN ELEGY.
THROUGH the dim veil of ev'ning's dusky shade,
Near some lone fane, or yew's funereal green,
What dreary forms has magic fear surveyed!
What shrouded specter superstition seen!
But you secure shall pour your sad complaint,
Nor dread the meagre phantom's wan array;
What none but fear's officious hand can paint,
What none but superstition's eye survey.
The glimmering twilight and the doubtful dawn
Shall see your step to these sad scenes return:
Constant, as crystal dews impearl the lawn,
Shall Strephon's tear bedew Ophelia's urn.
Sure naught unhallowed shall presume to stray
Where sleep the relics of that virtuous maid:
Nor aught unlovely bend its devious way,
Where soft Ophelia's dear remains are laid.
Happily thy muse, as with unceasing sighs
She keeps late vigils on her urn reclined,
May see light groups of pleasing visions rise;
And phantoms glide, but of celestial kind.
T^ fame, her clarion pendant at her side,
^ll seek forgiveness of Ophelia's shade;
'Why has such worth without distinction died;
'Why, like the desert's lily, bloomed to fade?'
Then young simplicity, averse to feign,
Shall unmolested breathe her softest sigh:
And candor with unwonted warmth complain,
And innocence indulge a wailful cry.
Then elegance, with coy judicious hand,
Shall cull fresh flowerets for Ophelia's tomb!
And beauty chide the fate's severe command,
That showed the frailty of so fair a bloom!
And fancy then, with wild ungoverned woe,
Shall her loved pupil's native taste explain:
For mournful sable all her hues forego,
And ask sweet solace of the muss in vain!
Ah! gentle forms, expect no fond relief;
Too much the sacred nine their loss deplore:
Well may ye grieve, nor find an end of grief --
Your best, your brightest favorite is no more.
THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH. A BALLAD ALLUDING TO A STORY RECORDED OF HER, WHEN SHE
WAS PRISONER AT WOODSTOCK, 1554.
WILL you hear how once repining
Great Eliza captive lay;
Each ambitious thought resigning,
Foe to riches, pomp and sway?
While the nymphs and swains delighted,
Tript around in all their pride;
Envying joys by others slighted,
Thus the royal maiden cried:
'Bred on plains, or born in valleys,
'Who would bid those scenes adieu?
'Stranger to the arts of malice,
'Who would ever courts pursue?
'Malice never taught to treasure;
'Censure never taught to bear:
'Love is all the shepherd's pleasure;
'Love is all the damsel's care.
'How can they of humble station
'Vainly blame the Powers above?
'Or accuse the dispensation,
'Which allows them all to love?
'Love like air is widely given;
'Pow'r nor chance can these restrain;
'Truest, noblest gift of Heaven!
'Only purest on the plain!
'Peers can no such charms discover,
'All in stars and garters dressed;
'As, on Sunday, does the lover,
'With his nosegay in his breast.
'Pinks and roses in profusion,
'Said to fade when Chloe's near;
'Fops may use the same allusion;
'But the shepherd is sincere.
'Hark to yonder milk-maid singing
'Cheerly over the brimming pail;
'Cowslips, all around her springing,
'Sweetly paint the golden vale.
'Never yet did courtly maiden
'Move so sprightly, look so fair;
'Never breast with jewels laden
'Pour a song so void of care.
'Would indulgent Heaven had granted
'Me some rural damsel's part!
'All the empire I had wanted
'Then had been my shepherd's heart.
'Then, with him, over hills and mountains,
'Free from fetters, might I rove:
'Fearless taste the crystal fountains;
'Peaceful sleep beneath the grove.
'Rustics had been more forgiving;
'Partial to my virgin bloom;
'None had envied me when living;
'None had triumphed over my tomb.'
THE ROSE, TO DR. PRIESTLY. ON HIS EXPERIMENTS, PROVING THAT EVEN THE MOST
AGREEABLE VEGETABLE ODOURS RENDER THE AIR LESS FIT FOR RESPIRATION.
AH! once to purest unpolluted fame
I, fairest flower, with ardent hope aspired;
Once every Muse revered my honored name,
And every eye my blushing charms desired.
My blooming race the immortal bard has sung,
That first in groves of Paradise we grew;
That there we, lovelier blossomed, fairer sprung,
Our verdant stems no thorny briars knew.
My fame the animated canvass speaks;
Descriptive beauty borrows charms from me;
Behold my hues displayed in Hebe's cheeks!
The radiant morn with rosy fingers see!
Unblemished long my modest beauties glowed,
Unblemished sweets those beauties shed around,
And wafted odours, by the breeze bestowed,
Were balmy treasures in my bosom found.
The nymphs and swains delighted to inhale
So pure a breath, often wooed the vernal air;
Presumptuous science now defames that gale
Whose rich effluvia gods might deign to share.
Ah! should persuasion crown thy learned lore,
And fame applaud thy scientific taste;
An exile I from this luxuriant shore,
On barren mountains may my odours waste.
No more of summer's chosen bowers the pride,
My leaves expanding to the orient sun;
No more on beauty's snowy breast reside;
Beauty shall learn my baleful charms to shun.
Nor ever transplant me to the embellished room,
In China's splendid vases to appear;
Nor round her couch admit my dread perfume,
Nor dare to slumber if the Rose be near.
No more shall luxury, to give me birth,
Raise the warm ^ile, excluding winter's cold;
Nor, mid the dreary scenes of frozen earth,
Court my reluctant graces to unfold.
Yet, know -- whatever thy celebrated art,
Whatever thy volumes may presume to show,
The Rose shall grateful pleasure still impart,
And still a welcome fragrance shall bestow.
Remote from science, in the unlettered plain,
Where no philosopher our fame assails,
There, unreproach'd, shall bloom the vernal train,
There, unimpeach'd, shall flow our spicy gales.
ATHEISM PUNISHED.
WHERE England stretched toward the setting sun,
Narrow and long, o'erlooks the western wave,
Dwelt young Misagathus. A scorner he,
Of God and goodness, atheist in ostent,
Vicious in act, in temper savage fierce.
He journey'd, and his chance was, as he went,
To join a trav'ller of far different note,
Evander, famed for piety, for years.
Deserving honor, but for wisdom more.
Fame had not left the venerable man
A stranger to the manners of the youth,
Whose face too was familiar to his view.
Their way was on the margin of the land,
Over the green summit of the rocks, whose base
Beats back the roaring surge, scarce heard so high,
The charity that warmed his heart was moved
At sight of the man-monster. With a smile,
Gentle, and affable, and full of grace,
As fearful of offending whom he wished
Much to persuade, he plied his ear with truths,
Not harshly thundered forth, or rudely pressed,
But, like his purpose, gracious, kind, and sweet.
and do thou dream, the impenetrable man
^im'd, that me, the lullabies of age,
And fantasies of dotards, such as thou,
Can cheat, or move a moment's fear in me?
Mark now the proof I give thee, that the brave
Need no such aid as superstition lends,
To steel their hearts against the dread of death.
He spoke, and to the precipice at hand
Pushed with a madman's fury. Fancy shrinks,
And the blood thrills and curdles at the thought*
Of such a gulf, as he designed his grave.
But though the felon on his back could dare
The dreadful leap, more rational, his steed
Declined the death, and wheeling swiftly round,
Or ere his hoof had pressed the crumbling verge,
Baffled his rider, saved against his will.
The frenzy of the brain may be redressed
By medicine well applied, but, without grace,
The heart's insanity admits no cure.
Enraged the more, by what might have reformed
His horrible intent; again he sought
Destruction, with a zeal to be destroyed,
With sounding whip, and rowels died in blood.
But still in vain. The Providence that meant
A longer date to the far nobler beast,
Spared yet again the ignobler for his sake.
And now, his prowess proved, and his sincere
Incurable obduracy evinced,
His rage grew cool; and pleased, perhaps to have earned,
So cheaply, the renown of that attempt,
With looks of some complacence, he resumed
His road, deriding much the blank amaze
Of good Evander, still where he was left,
Fixed motionless, and petrified with dread.
So on they fared; discourse on other themes
Ensuing, seemed to obliterate the past,
And tamer far for so much fury shown,
(As is the course of rash and fiery men)
The rude companion smiled, as if transformed.
But 'twas a transient calm; a storm was near,
An unsuspected storm. His hour was come.
The impious challenger of power divine
Was now to learn, that Heaven, though slow to wrath,
Is never with impunity defied.
His horse, as he had caught his master's mood,
Snorting, and starting into sudden rage,
Unbidden, and not now to be controlled,
Rushed to the cliff, and having reached it, stood.
At once the shock unseated him. He flew
Sheer over the craggy barrier, and immersed
Deep in the flood, found, when he sought it not,
The death he had deserved, and died alone.
So God wrought double justice; made the fool
The victim of his own tremendous choice,
And taught a brute the way to safe revenge.
DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.
DOMESTIC happiness, thou only bliss
Of Paradise that has survived the fall!
Though few now taste thee unimpair'd and pure,
Or tasting, long enjoy thee, too infirm
Or too incautious to preserve thy sweets
Unmixt with drops of bitter, which neglect
Or temper sheds into thy crystal cup --
Thou art the nurse of virtue. In thine arms
She smiles, appearing, as in truth she is,
Heaven born and destined to the skies again.
Thou art not known where pleasure is adored,
That reeling goddess, with the zoneless waist,
And wandering eyes, still leaning on the arm
Of novelty, her fickle frail support;
For thou art meek and constant, hating change,
And finding, in the calm of truth-tied love,
Joys that her stormy raptures never yield.
VIRTUE AND ORNAMENT.
THE diamond's and the ruby's rays
Shine with a milder, finer flame,
And more attract our love and praise
Than beauty's self, if lost to fame.
But the sweet tear in pity's eye
Transcends the diamond's brightest beam^;
And the soft blush of modesty
More precious than the ruby seems.
The glowing gem, the sparkling stone,
May strike the sight with quick surprise;
But truth and innocence alone
Can still engage the good and wise.
No glittering ornament or show
Will aught avail in grief or pain:
Only from inward worth can flow
Delight that ever will remain.
A FAIRY TALE.
IN Britain's Isle, and Arthur's days,
When midnight fairies danced the mare,
Lived Edwin of the green;
Edwin, I wis, a gentle youth,
Endowed with courage, sense, and truth,
Though badly shaped he been.
His mountain back mote well be said
To measure height against his head,
And lift itself above;
Yet, spite of all that nature did
To make his uncouth form forbid,
This creature dared to love.
He felt the charms of Edith's eyes,
Nor wanted hope to gain the prize,
Could ladies look within;
But one Sir Topaz, dressed with art;
And, if a shape could win a heart,
He had a shape to win.
Edwin, if right I read my song,
With slighted passion paced along,
All in the moony light;
'Twas near an old enchanted court,
Where sportive fairies made resort,
To revel out the night.
His heart was drear, his hope was crossed;
'Twas late, 'twas far, the path was lost
That reached the neighbor town;
With weary steps he quits the shades,
Resolved, the darkling dome he treads,
And drops his limbs adown.
But scant he lays him on the floor,
When hollow winds remove the door,
A trembling rocks the ground:
And, well I ween, to count aright,
At once a hundred tapers light
On all the walls around.
Now sounding tongues assail his ear,
Now sounding feet approache^ near,
And now the sounds increase:
And from the corner where he lay,
He sees a train profusely gay
Come prankling over the place.
But (trust me gentles) never yet
Was dight a masquing half so neat,
Or half so rich, before;
The country lent the sweet perfumes,
The sea the pearl, the sky the plumes,
The town its silken store.
Now, while he gazed, a gallant, dressed
In flaunting robes above the rest,
With awful accent cried,
"What mortal of a wretched mind,
"Whose sighs infect the balmy wind,
"Has here presumed to hide?"
At this, the swain, whose venurous soul
No fears of magic art control,
Advanced in open sight;
"Nor have I cause of dread," he said,
"Who view, by no presumption led,
"Your revels of the night.
"'It Was grief for scorn of faithful love,
"Which made my steps unweeting rove
"Amid the nightly dew."
"'It Is well," the gallant cries again,
"We fairies never injure men,
"Who dare to tell us true.
"Exalt thy love-dejected heart;
"Be mine the task, or ere we part,
"To make thee grief resign;
"Now take the pleasure of thy chance;
"Whilst I with Mab, my partner, dance,
"Be little Mable thine."
He spoke, and all a sudden, there
Light music flo^^s in wanto^ air;
The monarch leads the queen:
The rest their fairy partners found:
And Mable trimly tript the ground,
With Edwin of the green.
The dancing past, the board was laid,
And fiker such a feast was made
As heart and lip desire:
Withouten hands the dishes fly,
The glasses with a wish come nigh,
And with a wish retire.
But now, to please the fairy king,
Full every deal they laugh and sing,
And antic feats devise;
Some wind and tumble like an ape,
And other-some transmute their shape
In Edwin's wondering eyes.
Till one at last, that Robin hight,
Renowned for pinching maids by night,
Has hent him up aloof;
And full against the beam he ^^ung,
Where, by the back, the youth he hung,
To sprawl unneath the roof.
From thence, "reverse my charm," he cries,
"And let it fairly now suffice
"The gambol has been shown;"
But Oberon answers with a smile,
"Content thee, Edwin, for a while,
"The vantage is thine own."
Here ended all the phantom play;
They smelt the fresh approach of day,
And heard a cock to crow;
The whirling wind, that bore the crowd,
Has clapped the door, and whistled loud,
To warn them all to go.
Then, screaming all at once, they fly,
And, all at once, the tapers die;
Poor Edwin falls to floor;
Forlorn his state, and dark the place,
Was never wight in such a case
Through all the land before.
But, soon as ^an Apollo rose,
Full jolly creature home he goes,
He feels his back the less;
His honest tongue and steady mind
Had rid him of the lump behind,
Which made him want success.
With lusty livelyhed he talks,
He seems a dancing as he walks;
His story soon took wind;
And beauteous Edith sees the youth
Endowed with courage, sense, and truth,
Without a bunch behind.
The story told, Sir Topaz moved,
The youth of Edith erst approved,
To see the revel scene:
At close of eve he leaves his home,
And wends to find the ruined dome
All on the gloomy plain.
As there he bides, it so befell,
The wind came rustling down a dell,
A shaking seized the wall:
Up sprung the tapers as before,
The fairies bragly foot the floor,
And music fills the hall.
But, certes, society s^^nk with woe,
Sir Topaz seen the e^p^^in show,
His spirits in him dye:
When Oberon crie^, "a man is near;
"A mortal passion, clepped fear,
"Hangs flagging in the sky."
With that Sir Topaz, hapless youth
In accents falt'ring, ay for ruth,
Entreats them pity grant,
For als he been a ^^i^^er wight,
Betrayed by wandering in the night
To tread the circled haunt;
"Ah losell (...)" at once they roar;
"And little skilled of fa^ry lo^^,
"Thy cause to come we know:
"Now has thy ^est^ell courage fell;
"And fairies, fi^ a lie you tell,
"Are free to work thee woe."
Then Will, who bears the wispy fire,
To trail the swa^ns among the mire,
The captive upward flung:
There, like a tortoise in a shop,
He dangled from the chamber top,
Where, whilom, Edwin hung.
The revel now proceeds apace,
Deftly they frisk it over the place,
They sit, they drink, and eat;
The time with frolie mirth beguile,
And poor Sir Topaz h^ngs the while,
Till all the rout retreat.
By this the stars began to wink,
They shriek, they fly, the tapers sink,
And down ydrops the knight:
For never spell by fairy laid
With strong enchantment, bound a glade
Beyond the length of night.
Chill, dark, alone, adreed, he lay,
Till up the welkin rose the day,
Then deemed the dole was over:
But wot ye well his harder lot;
His seely back the bunch had got
Which Edwin lost before.
This tale a sybil-nurse ared;
She softly stroak'd my youngling head;
And, when the tale was done,
"Thus some are born, my son," she cries,
"With base impediments to rise,
"And some are born with none.
"But virtue can itself advance
"To what the favorite fools of chance
"By fortune seemed designed;
"Virtue can gain the odds of fate,
"And from itself shake off the weight
"Upon the unworthy mind."
WRITTEN AT MIDNIGHT, IN A THUNDER STORM.
LET coward guilt, with pallid fear,
To sheltering caverns fly,
And justly dread the vengeful fate
That thunders through the sky.
Protected by that hand, whose law
The threatening storms obey,
Intrepid virtue smiles secure,
As in the blaze of day.
In the thick cloud's tremendous gloom,
The light'ning's lurid glare,
It views the same all-gracious Power
That breathes the vernal air.
Through Nature's ever-varying scene,
By different ways pursued,
The one eternal end of Heaven
Is universal good.
With like beneficent effect
Over flaming ether glows,
As when it tunes the linnet's voice,
Or blushes in the rose.
By reason taught to scorn those fears
That vulgar minds molest,
Let no fantastic terrors break
My dear Narcissa's rest.
Thy life may all the tenderest care
Of Providence defend;
And delegated angels round
Their guardian wings extend!
When through creation's vast expanse
The last dread thunders roll,
Untune the concord of the spheres,
And shake the rising soul;
Unmoved may thou the final storm
Of jarring worlds survey,
That ushers in the glad serene
Of everlas^^ng day!
THE THREE WARNINGS. A TALE.
THE tree of deepest root is found
Least willing still to quit the ground;
'Twas therefore said by ancient sages,
That love of life increased with years:
So much, that in our latter stages,
When pains grow sharp, and sickness rages,
The greatest love of life appears.
This great affection to believe,
Which all confess, but few perceive,
If old assertions cannot prevail,
Be pleased to hear a modern tale.
When sports went round, and all were gay,
On neighbor Dobson's wedding day,
Death called aside the jocund groom
With him into another room;
And, looking grave, 'you must,' says he,
'Quit your sweet bride, and come with me.' --
'With you! and quit my Susan's side!
'With you!' the hapless husband cried:
'Young as I am! it is monstrous hard!
'Besides, in truth, I Am not prepared:
'My thoughts on other matters go;
'This is my wedding night, you know.'
What more he urged, I have not heard;
His reasons could not well be stronger:
So death the poor delinquent spared,
And left to live a little longer.
Yet calling up a serious look,
His hourglass trembled while he spoke,
'Neighbour,' he said, 'farewel; no more
'Shall Death disturb your mirthful hour:
'And farther; to avoid all blame
'Of cruelty upon my name,
'To give you time for preparation,
'And fit you for your future station,
'Three several Warnings you shall have,
'Before you're summoned to the grave:
'Willing for once I Will quit my pr^y,
'And grant a kind reprieve;
'In hopes you will have no more to say,
'But when I call again this way,
'Well pleased the world will leave.'
To these conditions both consented,
And parted perfectly contented.
What next the hero of our tale befell,
How long he lived, how wise, how well,
How roundly he pursued his course,
And smok'd his pipe, and strok'd his horse,
The willing muse shall tell:
He chaffer'd then, he bought, he sold,
Nor once perceived his growing old,
Nor thought of Death as near;
His friends not false, his wife no shrew,
Many his gains, his children few,
He passed his hours in peace:
But while he viewed his wealth increase,
While thus along life's dusty road
The beaten track content he trod,
Old Time whose haste no mortal spares,
Uncalled, unheeded, unawares,
Brought on his eightieth year.
And now, one night, in musing mood,
As all alone he sat,
The unwelcome messenger of Fate
Once more before him stood.
Half killed with anger and surprise,
'So soon returned!' old Dobson cries.
'So soon, do you call it!' Death replies:
'Surely, my friend, you're but in jest!
'Since I was here before
''Tis six-and-thirty years, at least,
'And you are now fourscore.'
'So much the worse, the clown rejoined;
'To spare the aged would be kind:
'However, see your search be legal;
'And your authority -- is it regal?
'Else you are come on a fool's errand,
'With but a Secretary's warrant.
'Besides, you promised me Three Warnings,
'Which I have looked for nights and mornings!
'But for that loss of time and ease,
'I can recover damages.'
'I know,' cries Death, 'that at the best
'I seldom am a welcome guest;
'But don't be captious, friend, at least:
'I little thought you would still be able
'To stump about your farm and stable;
'Your years have run to a great length:
'I wish you joy, though of your strength!'
'Hold,' says the farmer, 'not so fast,
'I have been lame these four years past.'
'And no great wonder,' Death replies;
'However, you still keep your eyes;
'And sure, to see one's loves and friends,
'For legs and arms would make amends.'
'Perhaps,' says Dobson, 'so it might,
'But latterly I Have lost my sight.'
'This is a shocking story, faith!
'Yet there is some comfort still,' says Death;
'Each strives your sadness to amuse;
'I warrant you hear all the news.'
'There's none,' cries he; 'and if there were,
'I'm grown so deaf, I could not hear.'
'Nay, then,' the spectre stern rejoined,
'These are unjustifiable yearnings;
'If you are lame, and deaf, and blind,
'You've had your Three sufficient Warnings.
'So come along; no more we'll part:'
He said, and touched him with his dart;
And now old Dobson, turning pale,
Yields to his sat -- so ends my tale.
PSALM 148th. PARAPHRASED.
BEGIN, my soul, the exalted lay!
Let each enraptured thought obey,
And praise the Almighty's name:
Lo! heaven and earth, and seas and skies,
In one melodious concert rise,
To swell the inspiring theme.
Ye fields of light, celestial plains,
Where gay transporting beauty reigns,
Ye scenes divinely fair!
Your Maker's wondrous power proclaim,
Tell how he formed your shining frame,
And breathed the fluid air.
Ye angels, catch the thrilling sound!
While all the adoring thrones around
His boundless mercy sing:
Let every listening saint above
Wake all the tuneful soul of love,
And touch the sweetest string.
Join, ye ^^d spheres, the vocal chair;
Thou drinking ^^b of liquid (...)
The mighty chorus aid:
Soon as gray evening spreads the plain*
Thou, moon, protract the melting strain*
And praise him in the shade.
Thou heaven of heavens, his vast abode,
Ye clouds, proclaim your forming God,
Who called you worlds from night:
"Ye shades dispel!" -- the Eternal said;
At once the involving darkness fled,
And Nature sprung to light.
Whatever a blooming world contains,
That wings the air, that skims the plains,
United praise bestow:
Ye dragons, sound his awful name
To heaven aloud; and r^a^ acclaim
Ye swelling d^ops below.
Let every element rejoice:
Ye thunders, burst with awful voice
To him who bids you roll;
His praise in softer notes declare,
Each whispering breeze of yielding air,
And breathe it to the soul.
To him, ye graceful cedars, bow;
Ye towering mountains, bending low,
You: great Creator own;
Tell, when affrighted Nature shook,
How Sinai kindled at his look,
And trembled at his frown.
Ye flocks that h^unt the humble vale,
Ye insects fluttering on the gale,
In mutual concourse rise;
Crop the gay rose's vermil bloom,
And waft its spoils, a sweet perfume,
In incense to the skie^.
Wake, all ye mounting tribes, and sing;
Ye plumy warblers of the spring,
Harmonious anthems raise
To him who shaped your ^^ner mould,
Who tipp'd your glittering wings with gold,
And tuned your voice to praise.
Let man, by nobler passions swayed,
The feeling heart, the judging head,
In heavenly praise employ;
Spread his tremendous name around,
Till heaven's broad arch rings back the sound,
The general burst of joy.
Ye whom the charms of grandeur please,
Nursed on the downy lap of ease,
Fall prostrate at his throne:
Ye princes, rulers, all adore;
Praise him, ye kings, who makes your power
An image of his own.
Ye fair, by nature formed to move,
O praise the eternal Source of love,
With youth's enlivening fire:
Let age take up the tuneful lay,
Sigh his blessed name, then soar away,
And ask an angel's lyre.
CHARITY. A PARAPHRASE ON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE
CORINTHIANS.
DID sweeter sounds adorn my flowing tongue,
Than ever man pronounced, or angel sung:
Had I all knowledge, human and divine,
That thought can reach, or science can define;
And had I power to give that knowledge birth,
In all the speeches of the b^bbling earth:
Did Shadrach's ^eal my glowing breast inspire,
To weary tortures, and rejoice in fire:
Or had I faith like that which Israel saw,
When Moses gave them miracles, and law:
Yet, gracious Charity, indulgent g^^^t,
Were not thy power ^ro^^d in my breast*
Those speeches would send up unheeded prayer*
That scorn of life would be but wild despair:
A tymbal's sound were better than my voice:
My faith were form; ^y eloquence were noise.
Charity, decent, modest, easy, kind,
Softens the high, and ^e^r^ the object mind*
Knows with just reins, and gentle hand, to gui^^
Betwixt vile shame, and arbitrary pride:
Not soon provoked, she easily forgives,
And much she suffers, as she much believes:
Soft peace she brings, wherever she arrives:
She builds our quiet, as she forms our lives;
Lays the rough path of peevish nature even,
And opens in each heart a little heaven.
Each other gift, which God on man bestow^,
Its proper bounds and d^^ restriction knows;
To one fixed purpose dedic^ its power*
And finishing its act, exists no more.
Thus, in obedience to what Heaven decrees,
Knowledge shall fall, and prophecy shall cease*
But lasting Charity's more ample sway,
Nor bound by time, nor subject to decay,
In happy triumph shall forever live,
And endless good diffuse, and endless praise receive.
As through the artist's intervening glass
Our eye observes the distant planets pass;
A little we discover; but allow,
That more remains unseen, than ar^ can show:
So whilst our mind its knowledge would improve,
(Its feeble eye intent on things above)
High as we may, we lift our reason up,
By faith directed, and confirmed b^ ho^^*
Yet are we able only to survey
Dawnings of (...), and promises of day,
Heaven's fuller effluence moc^s our d^^^led sight;
Too great its swiftness, and too strong its light,
But soon the mediate clouds shall be disp^ll'd:
The sun shall soon be face to face behold,
In all his robes, with all his glory on,
Seated sublime on his meridian thro^e.
Then constant Faith, and holy Hope shall die,
One lost in certainty, and one in joy:
Whilst thou, more happy power, fair Charity,
Triumphant sister, greatest of the three,
Thy office and thy nature still the same,
Lasting thy lamp, an^ unconsum'd thy flame,
Shall still survive --
Shall stand before the host of heaven confessed,
Forever blessing, and forever blessed.
A PRAYER FOR INDIFFERENCE.
OFTEN I Have implored the gods in vain,
And prayed till I Have been weary;
For once I Will try my wish to gain
Of Oberon, the Fairy.
Sweet airy being, wanton sprite,
That lurk'st in woods unseen,
And often, by Cynthia's silver light,
Tripp'st gaily over the green;
If ever thy pitying heart was moved,
As ancient stories tell,
And for the Athenian maid, who loved,
Thou sought'st a wondrous spell;
O deign once more to exert thy power;
Happily some herb or tree,
Sovereign as juice of western flower,
Conceals a balm for me.
I ask no kind return of love,
No tempting charm to please:
Far from the heart those gifts remove,
That sighs for peace and ease.
Nor peace nor ease that heart can know,
Which, like the needle true,
Turns at the touch of joy or woe,
But, turning, trembles too.
Far as distress the soul can wound,
It Is pain in each degree:
It Is bliss but to a certain bound:
Beyond, is agony.
Take then this treacherous sense of mine,
Which dooms me still to smart;
Which pleasure can to pain refine,
To pains new pangs impart.
Oh! haste to shed the sacred balm!
My shattered nerves new string;
And for my guest, serenely calm,
The nymph Indifference bring.
At her approach, see Hope, see Fear,
See Expectation fly;
And Disappointment in the rear,
That blasts the promised joy.
The tear which pity taught to flow,
The eye shall then disown;
The heart that melts for others' woe,
Shall then scarce feel its own.
The wounds, which now each moment bleed,
Each moment then shall close,
And tranquil days shall still succeed
To nights of calm repose.
O fairy elf! but grant me this,
This one kind comfort send;
And so may never fading bliss
Thy flowery paths attend!
So may the glow-worm's glimmering light
Thy tiny footsteps lead
To some new region of delight,
Unknown to mortal tread.
And be thy acorn goblet filled
With heaven's ambrosial dew;
From sweetest, freshest flowers distilled,
That shed fresh sweets for you.
And what of life remains for me,
I Will pass in sober ease;
Half pleased, contented will I be,
Content b^^ half to please.
THE FAIRY'S ANSWER.
WITHOUT preamble to my friend,
These hasty lines I Am bid to send,
Or give, if I am able:
I dare not hesitate to say,
Though I have trembled all the day --
It looks so like a fable.
Last night's adventure is my theme;
And should it strike you as a dream,
Yet soon its high import
Must make you own the matter such,
So delicate, it were too much
To be composed in sport.
The moon did shine serenely bright,
And every star did deck the night,
While zephyr fanned the trees;
No more assailed my mind's repose,
Save that you stream, which murmuring flows,
Did echo to the breeze.
Enwrapt in solemn thoughts, I sat,
Revolving over the turns of fate,
Yet void of hope or fear;
When lo! behold an aerie throng,
With lightest steps, and jocund song,
Surprised my eye and ear.
A form, superior to the rest,
His little voice to me addressed,
And gently thus began --
"I Have heard strange things from one of you,
"Pray tell me if you think it is true --
"Explain it if you can.
"Such incense has perfumed my throne!
"Such eloquence my heart has won!
"I think I guess the hand:
"I know her wit and beauty too;
"But why she sends a prayer so new,
"I cannot understand.
"To light some flames, and some revive,
"To keep some others just alive,
"Full often I am implored;
"But, with peculiar power to please,
"To supplicate for naught but ease --
"'It Is odd, upon my word!
"Tell her, with fruitless care I Have fought,
"And though my realms, with wonders fraught,
"In remedies abound,
"No grain of cold Indifference
"Was ever yet allied to sense
"In all my fairy round.
"The regions of the sky I Would trace,
"I Would ransack every earthly place,
"Each leaf, each herb, each flower,
"To mitigate the pangs of fear,
"Dispel the clouds of black despair,
"Or lull the restless hour.
"I would be generous, as I Am just,
"But I obey, as others must,
"Those laws which Fate has made.
"My tiny kingdom how defend,
"And what might be the horrid end,
"Should man my state invade?
"'Twould put your mind into a rage,
"And such unequal war to wage
"Suits not my regal duty!
"I dare not change a first decree,
"She Is doomed to please, nor can be free,
"Such is the lot of beauty."
This said, he darted over the plain,
And after followed all his train;
No glimpse of him I find;
But sure I am, the little sprite
These words, before he took his flight,
Imprinted on my mind.
LEDYARD'S PRAISE OF WOMEN.
THROUGH many a land and clime a ranger,
With toilsome steps I Have held my way.
A lonely unprotected stranger,
To all the stranger's ills a prey.
While steering thus my course precarious,
My fortune still has been to find
Men's hearts and dispositions various,
But gentle woman ever kind.
Alive to every tender feeling,
To deeds of mercy always prone;
The wounds of pain and sorrow healing,
With soft compassion's sweetest tone.
No proud delay, no dark suspicion,
Stints the free bounty of their heart;
They turn not from the sad petition,
But cheerful aid at once impart.
Formed in benevolence of nature,
Obliging, modest, gay, and mild,
Woman's the same endearing creature
In courtly town and savage wild.
When parched with thirst, and hunger wasted,
Her friendly hand refreshment gave;
How sweet the coarsest food has tasted!
What cordial in the simple wave!
Her courteous looks, her words caressing,
Shed comfort on the fainting soul;
Woman's the stranger's general blessing,
From sultry India to the Pole.
ODE TO WISD^M.
THE solitary bird of night
Through the thick shades now wings his flight,
And quits his time-shook tower;
Where, sheltered from the blaze of day,
In philosophic gloom he lay,
Beneath his ivy bower.
With joy I hear the solemn sound,
Which midnight echoes waft around,
And sighing gales repeat.
Favorite of Pallas! I attend,
And faithful to thy summons, bend
At Wisdom's awful seat.
She loves the cool, the silent eve,
Where no false shows of life deceive,
Beneath the lunar ray.
Here folly drops each vain disguise,
Nor sport her gaily-coloured dies,
As in the beam of day.
O Pallas! queen of every art,
That glads the sense, and mends the heart,
Blessed source of purer joys:
In every form of beauty bright,
That captivates the mental sight
With pleasure and surprise:
At thy unspotted shrine I bow;
Attend thy modest suppliant's vow,
That breathes no wild desires:
But taught by thy unerring rules,
To shun the fruitless wish of fools,
To nobler views aspires.
To me thy better gifts impart,
Each moral beauty of the heart,
By studious thoughts refined:
For wealth the smiles of glad content;
For power, its amplest, best extent;
An empire over the mind.
When fortune drops her gay parade,
When pleasure's transient roses fade,
And wither in the tomb;
Unchanged is thy immortal prize,
Thy ever verdant laurels rise
In undecaying bloom.
Thy breath inspires the poet's song,
The patriot's free, unbiased tongue,
The hero's generous strife;
Thine are retirement's silent joys,
And all the sweet engaging ties
Of still domestic life.
No more to fabled names confined,
To the supreme all-perfect Mind
My thoughts direct their flight*
Wisdom's thy gift, and all her force
From thee derived, eternal Source
Of intellectual light.
O send her sure, her steady ray,
To regulate my doubtful way,
Through life's perplexing road:
The mists of error to control,
And through its gloom direct my soul
To happiness and good.
Beneath her clear discerning eye
The visionary shadows fly
Of folly's painted show:
She sees through every fair disguise,
That all but virtue's solid joys
Are vanity and woe.
THE ORIGIN OF THE FAN.
ONCE in Arcadia, that famed seat of love,
There lived a nymph, the pride of all the grove,
A lovely nymph, adorned with every grace,
An easy shape, and sweetly blooming face;
Fanny the damsel's name, as chaste as fair,
Each virgin's envy, and each swain's despair:
To charm her ear the rival shepherds sing,
Blow the soft flute, and wake the trembling string:
For her they leave their wandering flocks to rove,
Whilst Fanny's name resounds through every grove,
And spreads on every tree, enclosed in knots of love;
As Fielding's now, her eyes all hearts inflame,
Like her in beauty, as alike in name.
'Twas when the summer sun, now mounted high,
With fiercer beams had scorched the glowing sky,
Beneath the covert of a cooling shade,
To shun the heat, this lovely nymph was laid;
The sultry weather over her cheeks had spread
A blush, that added to their native red;
Aeolus the mighty god, whom winds obey,
Observed the beauteous maid, as thus she lay,
Over all her charms he gazed with fond delight,
And sucked in poison at the dangerous sight:
He sighs, he burns; at last declares his pain,
But still he sighs, and still he woos in vain;
The cruel nymph, regardless of his moan,
Minds not his flame, uneasy with her own;
But still complains, that he who ruled the air
Would not command one zephyr to repair
Around her face, nor gentle breeze to play
Through the dark glade to cool the sultry day.
By love incited, and the hopes of joy,
The ingenious god contrived this pretty toy,
With gales incessant to relieve her flame;
And called it PAN, from lovely Fanny's name.
TO A YOUNG LADY, WITH SOME FLOWERS.
TO thee, sweet smiling maid, I bring
The beauteous progeny of spring:
In every breathing bloom I find
Some pleasing emblem of thy mind.
The blushes of that opening rose
Thy tender modesty disclose.
These snow-white lilies of the vale
Diffusing fragrance to the gale,
No ostentatious tints assume,
Vain of their exquisite perfume;
Careless, and sweet, and mild, we see
In them a lovely type of thee.
In yonder gay enameled field,
Serene that azure blossom smiled:
Not changing with the changeful sky,
Its faithful tints inconstant fly;
For, unimpair'd by winds and rain,
I saw the unaltered hue remain.
So were thy mild affections proved,
Thy heart by fortune's frown unmoved,
Pleased to administer relief,
In times of woe would solace grief.
These flowers with genuine beauty glow;
The tints from nature's pencil flow:
What artist could improve their bloom?
Or sweeter make their sweet perfume?
Fruitless the vain attempt. Like these
Thy native truth, thine artless ease,
Fair unaffected mind, can never fail to please.
THE GUARDIAN GENIUS OF FEMALE EXCELLENCE.
BENEATH the lucid arch, in robes of gold,
A youth appears of more than mortal mould;
His yellow tresses over his shoulders stray,
Kiss the loose wind, and negligently play;
His feet like silver gleam, a taper wand
Of adamant sustains his bette^ band;
Over his fair temples wreathing myrtles twine,
And all around him beaming glories shine:
The scene is changed, the caverns melt in air,
Her well-known roofs rise slowly round the fair;
Then thus the genius. "Nymph, dismiss thy fear;
No evil can approach while I am near.
Behold the Guardian Power whose secret sway
The wiser females of the world obey;
I bid them cast each woman toy behind,
And raise to nobler views the aspiring mind;
'Twas I that gave to Dudley's beauteous wife,
Whom Mary's cruel hand deprived of life,
A nobler fortitude than heroes reach,
And virtue, greater than the sages teach,
Sweetness of soul beyond what mortals show,
And piety like that which seraphs know.
And now, in modern days, though rare to see,
Behold accomplished beauty led by me.
Streatfield, the learned, the gay, in blooming years
Forsakes the dance to dry a widow's tears:
When hoary age her Tutor's brows overspread,
And sickness bowed his venerable head,
Over the pale couch she hung with filial care,
And plucked the thorn disease had planted there.
My voice inspires the cultivated mind,
Whose polished page instructs and charms mankind;
'Twas I directed Carter's piercing eyes
To roll inquisitive through starry skies;
To her the lore of Grecian schools I brought,
And rooted in her heart the truths she taught.
I, to Chapone, the important task assigned,
To smooth the temper and improve the mind.
Through Moore I pointed to the paths of truth,
And raised her voice to guide unthinking youth:
That sensibility, allied to Heaven,
That sacred pen she boasts, by me were given.
I stood, a favoring muse, at Burney's side,
To lash unfeeling wealth and stubborn pride.
Soft affectation, insolently vain,
And wild extravagance, with all her sweeping train,
Led her that modern hydra to engage,
And point a Harrel to a mad'ning age:
Then bade the moralist, admired and praised,
Fly from the loud applause her talent raised.
Even Montague my aiding hand must own,
That placed her high on learning's polished throne;
That taught her arm the critic spear to wield,
Foiled the fly Gaul, and drove him from the field:
I bade her liberal care receive, caress
That struggling merit which the proud depress,
That bashful want, which, bending to the grave,
Shrinks from the pitying hand held out to save.
Nor think that she alone my aid acquires,
Whom learning tutors or whom genius fires;
On all the smile of favor I bestow,
Who fly from fashion, vanity and show.
THE ROSE. -- A SONG.
THE Rose had been washed, lately washed in a shower*
That Mary to Anna conveyed;
A plentiful moisture encumbered the flower,
And weighed down its beautiful head.
The cup was all filled; the leaves were all wet;
And seemed, at a fanciful view,
To weep for the buds it had left with regret,
On the flourishing bush where it grew.
I hastily siez'd it, unfit as it was
For a nosegay, so dripping and drowned;
And, shaking it rudely, too rudely, alas!
I snapp'd it! it fell to the ground!
And such, I exclaimed, is the pitiless part
Some act by the delicate mind;
Regardless of wringing and breaking the heart
Already to sorrow resigned!
This delicate rose, had I shaken it less,
Might have bloomed with the owner a while:
And the tear that is wiped with a little address,
May be followed, perhaps, with a smile!
EXTRACTS FROM A SATIRE ON WOMEN.
SOME nymphs prefer astronomy to love;
Elope from mortal men, and range above,
The fair philosopher to Rowley flies,
Where in a box the whole creation lies.
She sees the planets in their turns advance;
And scorns, Duport, thy sublunary dance.
Of Desagulier she bespeaks fresh air,
And Whiston has engagements with the fair,
To F -- turn she never took the height
Of Saturn, yet is ever in the right;
She strikes each point with native force of mind,
While puzzled learning blunders far behind.
Graceful to sight, and elegant to thought,
The great are vanquished, and the wise are taught.
Her breeding finished, and her temper sweet,
When serious, easy; and when gay, discreet;
In glittering scenes, over her own heart severe;
In crowds, collected; and in courts, sincere;
Sincere, and warm, with zeal well understood*
She takes a noble pride in doing good.
Yet not superior to her sex's cares,
The mo^e she fixes by the gown she wears:
Of silks, and chin^ she is the last appeal;
In these great points she leads the commonweal;
And if disputes of empire rise between
Mechlin the queen of lace, and Colberteen,
It Is doubt! it is darkness! 'till suspended fate
Assumes her nod to close the grand debate.
When such her mind, why will the fair express
Their emulation only in their dress.
The languid lady next appears in state,
Who was not born to carry her own weight;
She lolls, reels, staggers, 'till some foreign aid
To her own stature lifts the feeble maid.
Then, if ordained to so severe a doom,
She by just stages journeys round the room:
But knowing her own weakness, she despairs
To scale the Alps -- that is, ascend the stairs.
My fan! let others say, who laugh at toil;
Fan! hood! glove! scarf! is her laconic style.
And that is spoke with such a dying fall,
That Betty rather sees, than hears the call:
The motion of her lips, and meaning eye
Piece out the idea her faint words deny.
O listen with attention most profound!
Her voice is but the shadow of a sound.
And help! O help! her spirits are so dead,
One hand scarce lifts the other to her head.
If there, a stubborn pin it triumphs over,
She pants! she sinks away! and is no more.
Let the robust, and the gigantic carve;
Life is not worth so much; she would rather starve:
But chew she must, herself; ah cruel fate!
That Rosalinda cannot by proxy eat.
An antidote in female caprice lies
(Kind Heaven!) against the poison of their eyes.
Thalestris triumphs in a manly mein,
Loud is her accent, and her phrase obscene.
(Vain is the task to petticoats assigned,
If wanton language shows a naked mind.)
And now and then to grace her eloquence,
An oath supplies the vacancies of sense.
Hark! the shrill notes transpierce the yielding air,
And teach the neighboring echoes how to swear.
But though the volley rattles in your ear,
Believe her dress, she is not a grenadier.
If thunder's awful, how much more our dread,
When Jove deputes a lady in his stead?
A lady! pardon my mistaken pen,
A shameless woman is the worst of men.
Few to good-breeding make a just pretense,
Good-breeding is the blossom of good sense;
The last result of an accomplished mind,
With outward grace, the body's virtue, joined.
A violated decency now reigns.
And nymphs for failings take peculiar pains:
They throw their persons, with a hoyden air,
Across the room, and toss into the chair.
So far their commerce with mankind is gone,
They for our manners, have exchanged their own.
The modest look, the castigated grace,
The gentle movement, and slow-measur'd pace,
For which her lovers died, her parents paid,
Are indecorums with the modern maid.
Stiff forms are bad, but let not worse intrude,
Nor conquer art and nature, to be rude.
Aspasia's highly born, and nicely bred,
Of taste refined, in life and manners read,
Yet reaps no fruit from her superior sense,
But to be teased by her own excellence.
"Folks are so awkward! things so unpolite!"
She Is elegantly pained from morn to night.
Her delicacy's shocked wherever she goes,
Each creature's imperfections are her woes.
Heaven by its favors has the fair distressed,
And pours such blessings -- that she cannot be blessed.
Ah! why so vain, though blooming in thy spring,
Thou shining, frail, adored, and wretched thing!
Old age will come, disease may come before,
Fifteen is full as mortal as threescore.
Thy fortune and thy charms may soon decay;
But grant these fugitives prolong their stay,
Their basis totters, their foundation shakes,
Life, that supports them, in a moment breaks;
Then, wrought into the soul let virtue shine,
The ground eternal, as the work divine.
But Clio thus. "What, railing without end?
Mean task! how much more generous to commend!"
Yes, to commend as you are wont to do,
My kind instructor, and example too.
"Daphnis, says Clio, has a charming eye:
"What pity it is her shoulder is awry?
"Aspasia's shape indeed -- but then her air --
"The man has parts who finds destruction there.
"Almeria's wit has something that is divine;
"And wit's enough -- how few in all things shine?
"Selina serves her friends, relieves the poor --
"Who was it said Selina's near threescore?
"At Lucia's match I from my soul rejoice,
"The world congratulates so wise a choice;
"His Lordship's rent-roll is exceeding great,
"But mortgages will sap the best estate.
"In Shirley's form might cherubims appear,
"But then -- she has a freckle on her ear."
Without a but, Hortensia she commends,
The first of women, and the best of friends;
Owns her in person, wit, fame, virtue, bright;
But how comes this to pass? -- she died last night.
Thus nymphs commend who yet at satire rail;
Indeed that is needless, if such praise prevail:
And whence such praise? our virulence is thrown
On other's fame, through fondness for our own.
A VERNAL SHOWER.
THE north-east spends his rage; he now shuts up,
Within his iron cave, the effusive south
Warms the wide air, and over the void of heaven
Breathes the big clouds with vernal showers distent.
At first a dusky wreath they seem to rise,
Scarce staining either; but by swift degrees,
In heaps on heaps, the doubling vapor sails
Along the loaded sky, and mingling deep
Sits on the horizon round a settled gloom:
Not such as wintry storms on mortals shed,
Oppressing life; but lovely, gentle, kind,
And full of every hope and every joy,
The wish of nature. Gradual sinks the breeze
Into a perfect calm: that not a breath
Is heard to quiver th^^ the closing woods.
Or rustling turn the many-twinkling leaves
Of aspin tall. The un^^rling floods, diffused
In glassy breadth, seem through delusive lapse
Forgetful of their course. It Is silence all,
And pleasing expectation. Herds and flocks
Drop the dry sprig, and mute-imploring eye
The falling verdure. Hushed in short suspense,
The plumy people streak their wings with oil,
To throw the lucid moisture trickling off;
And wait the approaching sign to strike, at once,
Into the general choir. Even mountains, vales,
And forests seem impatient to demand
The promised sweetness. Man superior walks
Amid the glad creation, musing praise,
And looking lively gratitude. At last,
The clouds consign their treasures to the fields;
And softly shaking on the dimpled pool
Prelusive drops, let all their moisture flow,
In large effusion, over the freshen'd world.
The stealing shower is scarce to patter heard,
By such as wander through the forest-walks,
Beneath the umbrageous multitude of leaves.
But who can hold the shade, while heaven descend^
In universal bounty, shedding herbs,
And fruits, and flowers, on Nature's ample lap?
Swift fancy fired anticipates their growth;
And, while the milky nutriment distills,
Beholds the kindling country color round.
A FLOWER GARDEN.
AT length the finished garden to the view
Its vistas opens, and its alloys green.
Snatched through the verdant maze, the hurried eye
Distracted w^nders; now the bowery wal^
Of covert close, where scarce a speck of day
Falls on the lengthened gloom, protracted sweeps;
Now meets the bending sky; the river now
Dimpling along, the breezy-ruffled lake,
The forest darkening round, the glittering spire,
The ethereal mountain, and the distant main.
But why so far excursive? when at hand,
Along these blushing borders, bright with dew,
And in you mingled wilderness of flowers,
Fair-handed Spring unbosoms every grace;
Throws out the s^ow-drop, and the crocus first;
The daisy, primrose, violet darkly blue,
And polyanthus of unnumber'd dies;
The yellow wall-flower, stained with iron brown;
And lavish stock that scents the garden round:
From the soft wing of vernal breezes shed,
Anemonies; auricul^s, enriched
With shining meal over all their velvet leaves;
And full ranunculas, of glowing red.
Then comes the tulip race, where beauty plays
Her idle freaks; from family diffu^'d
To family, as flies the father-dust,
The varied colors run; and, while they break
On the charmed eye, the exulting florist marks,
With secret pride, the wonders of his hand.
No gradual bloom is wanting: from the bud,
Firstborn of Spring, to Summer's musky tribes:
Nor hyacinths, of purest virgin white,
Low-bent, and blushing inward; nor jonquil^,
Of potent fragrance; nor narcissus fair,
As over the fabled fountain hanging still;
Nor broad carnations, nor gay spotted pinks;
Nor, shower'd from every bush, the damask rose.
Infinite numbers, delicacies, smells,
With hues on hues expression cannot paint,
The breath of Nature, and her endless bloom.
Hail, Source of Being! Universal Soul
Of heaven and earth! Essential Presence, hail!
To thee I bend the knee! to thee my thoughts,
Continual, climb; who, with a master-hand,
Have the great whole into perfection touched.
By thee the various vegetative tribes,
Wrapped in a filmy net, and clad with leaves,
Draw the live either, and imbibe the dew:
By thee disposed into congenial soils,
Stands each attractive plant, and suc'^s, and swells
The juicy tide; a twining mass of tubes.
At thy command, the vernal sun awakes
The torpid sap, detruded to the root
By wint'ry winds; that now in fluent dance,
And lively fermentation, mounting, spreads
All this innumerous-colour'd scene of things.
FEMALE AMUSEMENTS AND EMPLOYMENT.
BUT if the rougher sex by this fierce sport
Is hurried wild, let not such horrid joy
Ever stain the bosom of the British fair.
Far be the spirit of the chase from them!
Uncomely courage, unbeseeming skill;
To spring the fence, to rein the prancing steed:
The cap, the whip, the masculine attire
In which they roughen to the sense, and all
The winning softness of their sex is lost.
In them it is graceful to dissolve at woe;
With every motion, every word, to wave
Quick over the kindling cheek, the ready blush;
And from the smallest violence to shrink,
Unequal, then the loveliest in their fears;
And by this silent adulation, soft,
To their protection more engaging man.
O, may their eyes no miserable sight,
Save weeping lovers, see! a nobler game,
Through love's enchanting wiles pursued, yet fled,
In chase ambiguous. May their tender limbs
Float in the loose simplicity of dress!
And, fashioned all to harmony, alone
Know they to seize the captivated soul,
In rapture warbled from soft-breathing lips;
To teach the lute to languish; with smooth step,
Disclosing motion in its every charm,
To swim along and swell the mazy dance;
To train the foliage over the snowy lawn;
To guide the pencil, turn the tuneful page;
To lend new flavor to the fruitful year,
And heighten nature's dainties; in their race
To rear their graces into second life;
To give society its highest taste;
Well ordered home man's best delight to make;
And by submissive wisdom, modest skill,
With every gentle care-eluding art,
To raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils of human life:
This be the female dignity and praise.
MORAL REFLECTIONS ON THE WINTER OF LIFE.
IT IS done! dread Winter spreads his latest glooms,
And reigns tremendous over the conquered year.
How dead the vegetable kingdom lies!
How dumb the tuneful! Horror wide extends
His desolate d^main. Behold, fond man!
See here thy pictured life; pass some few years,
Thy flowering Spring, thy Summer's ardent strength,
Thy sober Autumn fading into age,
And pale concluding Winter comes at last,
And shuts the scene. Ah! whither now are fled
Those dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopes
Of happiness? those longings after fame?
Those restless cares? those busy bustling days?
Those gay spent festive nights? those veering thoughts,
Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?
All now are vanished! Virtue sole survives,
Immortal never-failing friend of man,
His guide to happiness on high. And see!
It Is come, the glorious morn! the second birth
Of heaven and earth! Awakening nature hears
The new-creating word, and starts to life,
In every heightened form, from pain and death
Forever free. The great eternal scheme,
Involving all, and in a perfect whole
Uniting, as the prospect wider spreads,
To reason's eye refined, clears up apace.
Ye vainly wise! ye blind presumptuous! now,
Confounded in the dust, adore the Power
And Wisdom often arraigned: see now the cause,
Why unassuming worth in secret lived,
And died, neglected: why the good man's share
In life was gall and bitterness of soul:
Why the lone widow and her orphan pined
In starving solitude; while luxury,
In palaces, lay straining her low thought,
To form unreal wants: why heaven-born truth,
And moderation fair, wore the red marks
Of superstition's scourge: why licensed pain,
That cruel spoiler, that embosom'd foe,
Embitter'd all our bliss. Ye good distressed!
Ye noble few! who here unbending stand
Beneath life's pressure, yet bear up a while,
And what your bounded view, which only saw
A little part, deemed evil, is no more:
The storms of wint'ry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded Spring encircle all.
CONCLUSION. A SHORT SYSTEM OF VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS.
I WILL suppose a virtuous young lady forming in her mind the principles of her
future conduct, and uttering the result of her reflections in the following
soliloquy.

"At the time when I am approaching to maturity of reason, I perceive myself
placed in a world abounding with external objects, and I also perceive within
me faculties and passions formed to be powerfully excited by them. I am
naturally tempted to interrogate myself, What am I? Whence came I? and, Whither
am I going?

"With a view to satisfy my own inquiries, I consider others who appear to be
just like myself; I listen to the instruction of those who are older and wiser
than I am; and I examine, with serious attention, the volumes of divine
inspiration.

"The result of the whole inquiry is a sincere conviction, that I am placed
here to perform many duties; that I originate from a supreme Creator; and that
I am going on in the journey of life, to accomplish some of his gracious
purposes at the close of it, as well as in its progress.

"I divide my duty into three parts, according to the suggestions of my own
reason, and the instruction of books. They consist of the obligations which I
owe to myself, to others, and to him, in whose hands are both they and I, the
great Lord of the universe.

"With respect to myself, as I consist of two parts, a body and a mind, my duty
to myself divides itself into two parts also. My body is a machine curiously
organized, and easily deranged by excess and irregularity. When disturbed in
its economy, it subjects me to pain, and disables me from all necessary and
pleasant exertion. I owe it therefore to myself to live a regular, orderly, and
industrious life; neither to turn night into day, by keeping late hours, nor to
enter into gaming, which keeps the passions constantly irritated; not to
indulge in eating or drinking to excess, nor to give myself up to sloth and
indolence, which would unnerve every faculty of the mind, and prevent my making
a progress in any virtuous or laudable pursuits. I further learn from the
religion of my country, that my body is the temple of the Holy Spirit:
consequently it is my duty to live according to the strictest rules of chastity
and virtue; a violation of which is not only injuring myself, but also sinning
against my great Creator.

"But I have a mind also capable of great improvement by culture, or of
becoming vain, foolish, and stupid, by neglect. I will not lose any of the
advantages of my education. I will not waste my time in reading novels, which
serve either to corrupt the mind, or to convey false ideas of life and manners.
But I will devote my leisure hours to reading books of real instruction, and to
reflection; for whatever tends to improve the mind, tends also to sweeten the
temper and refine the manners.

"My mind as well as my body is concerned in avoiding every kind of
intemperance. Sensual indulgencies debase and corrupt the mind. Their delights
are transient, their pains severe, and of long duration.

"Inexperienced youth is surrounded with temptations. I will fly from the
conflict in which my own passions would fight against me, and perhaps betray me
to the enemy. I will pray to be delivered from temptation; for alas! I am too
much inclined to vice, from the imperfection of my nature, and the violence of
my passions. But I will not be a recluse. The world abounds in innocent
enjoyments, and the kind God of nature intended I should taste them; but
moderation is essential to true pleasure. My own experience, and the experience
of mankind from their origin, has declared, that whenever pleasure exceeds the
bounds of moderation, it is not only highly injurious, but disgustful. In order
to enjoy pleasure, I see the necessity of devoting part of my time to useful
employments, becoming my sex and situation. The vicissitude is necessary to
excite an appetite and give a relish. Nay, the very performance of necessary
duties, is attended with a delightful satisfaction, which few of the most
boasted amusements are able to confer.

"While I take care of myself, of my health, of my improvement in morals and
understanding, I will not harbor pride, or look down with superciliousness or
ill nature on those who live, as it were, at random, and who acknowledge no
other guide of their conduct but the sudden impulse of a temporary inclination.
With all my improvements and endeavors, I shall still feel imperfections
enough to humble me. Candor and humility are some of the least fallible marks
of sound sense and sincere virtue. I shall have sufficient employment in
correcting myself; nor shall I presume to censure others, unless my duty
renders it necessary. My duty to myself is, indeed, intimately connected with
my duty to others. By preserving the faculties of the mind and body, and by
improving them to the utmost, I am enabled to exert them with effect in the
service of those around me.

"I am connected with others by the ties of consanguinity and friendship, and
by the common bond of partaking in the same humanity. As a daughter, I shall be
tender and dutiful; as a sister, uniformly affectionate; as a wife, faithful
and friendly; as a mother, kind and attentive; as one of the human kind,
benevolent to all persons in whatever circumstances, and however separated from
me by country or religion.

"But universal benevolence must not be an inactive principle. If it proceed
not to real beneficence, I fear it will have more in it of ostentation than of
sincerity. I will then prove its sincerity by doing good, and removing evil of
every kind, as far as my abilities allow me, and my influence extends.

"But before I pretend to generosity, I will be strictly just. Truth shall
regulate my words, and equity my actions. In all my intercourse with society, I
will recollect that heavenly precept, of doing to others as I wish they should
do to me, and will endeavor to obey it. I may, I certainly shall offend from
the violence of my passions, the weakness of my judgment, the perverseness of
my will, and from mistake and misapprehension. But while I keep the evangelical
rule in view, and sincerely labor to conform to it, I shall seldom commit such
offenses against others, as will be either permanently or deeply injurious.

"With respect to my duty to my Creator, I derive an argument in favor of
religion, from the feelings of my own bosom, superior to the most elaborate
subtilties of human ingenuity. In the hour of distress, my heart as naturally
flies for succor to the Deity, as when hungry and thirsty I seek food and
water; or when weary, repose. In religion I look for comfort, and in religion I
always find it. Devotion supplies me with a pure and exalted pleasure. It
elevates my soul, and teaches me to look down with a proper contempt upon many
objects which are eagerly sought, but which end in misery. In this respect, and
in many others, it effects, in the best and most compendious method, what has
been in vain pretended to by proud philosophy.

"And in selecting a mode or peculiar system of religion, I shall consider what
that was in which my ancestors lived and died. I find it to have been the
religion of Christ. I examine it with reverence. I feel within me an internal
evidence, which, uniting its force with the external, forbids me to disbelieve.
When involuntary doubts arise, I immediately silence their importunity by
recollecting the weakness of my judgment, and the vain presumption of hastily
deciding on the most important of all subjects, against such powerful evidence,
and against the major part of the civilized world.

"I will learn humility of the humble Jesus, and gratefully accept the
beneficial doctrines, and glorious offers which his benign religion reaches out
to all who sincerely seek him by prayer and penitence.

"Human life abounds with evil. I will seek balsams for the wounds of the
heart, in the sweets of innocence and in the consolations of religion. Virtue,
I am convinced, is the noblest ornament of humanity, and the source of the
sublimest and the sweetest pleasure; and piety leads to that peace, which the
world, and all it possesses cannot bestow. When the gaudy glories of fashion
and of vain philosophy shall have withered like a short-lived flower, sincere
piety and true virtue shall flourish like the cedar of Lebanon. But I repress
my triumphs. After all my improvements, and all my desires of perfection, I
shall still be greatly defective. Therefore, to whatever degree of excellence I
advance, let me never forget to show to others that indulgence which my
infirmities, my errors, and my voluntary misconduct will require both from
them, and from mine and their almighty and most merciful Father."

THE END.

