GRASVILLE ABBEY: A ROMANCE. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

See yonder hallowed fane! the pious work
Of names once famed, now dubious or forgot,
And buried 'midst the wreck of things which were.
THE GRAVE. SALEM: PRINTED BY JOSHUA CUSHING, FOR T. C. CUSHING, AND B. B.
MACANULTY. 1799.

GRASVILLE ABBEY.
CHAPTER I. MORTALITY.
-- The grave, dread thing!
"Men shiver, when thou'r^ named.
THE GRAVE.
"THE blessed Virgin aid and protect thee! and when this poor frame, now worn
out with infirmities, and sinking in the grave, shall, ere tomorrow's sun,
rise before its Creator in an immortal state -- oh! may I then be placed over
thee as a guardian angel, though invisible to my child! -- Weep not, Matilda,
but" --

Such were the words delivered by madame Maserini to her daughter, as the
latter held the dying hand of her mother, and in an agony of grief listened to
those instructions, which she was certain would be the last she ever should
receive from a parent, whose maternal tenderness and affection were the most
sincere, and of which she now would severely feel the loss. Madame Maserini
immediately after fell into a fainting fit, which lasted so long, that the
nurse as well as Matilda thought she was no more; but in this they were
mistaken; for to the joy of all her attendants she recovered, and inquired, as
she had (...) done before, whether her son (who was an officer) was yet
arrived; they answered her in the negative; for as he had been informed several
times that it was thought his mother's disorder would prove fatal, it was known
he might obtain leave of absence from his regiment, which was then stationed in
Flanders. But some little time before, an express had been sent to him, setting
forth that madame Maserini was much worse, and they thought her life in great
danger; they also mentioned that it was her particular desire to see him; he
was therefore now expected every hour: but after this fit she said she should
not survive that evening, and seemed extremely impatient to see her son; she
said she had something of the greatest importance to communicate to him, which
she refused to relate to her daughter; but still finding that he did not
arrive, she asked for her confessor, when to her inexpressible surprise and
grief she was informed that he was sent for, that morning, by a sick relation,
ten miles off, and was not yet returned; she called for pen and ink, and though
so weak as hardly able to be supported in her bed, with great pain and
difficulty she wrote several lines, then dropped her pen, clasped hold of
Matilda's hand, and expired.

The grief of all who were present was most poignant; but particularly that of
Matilda; she now beheld herself an orphan with a very small fortune, which was
not sufficient to support her genteelly without some other addition; she was
bere^t (...) a mother whose good instructions and advice she could now no
longer receive; in short, she was distracted.

Not many minutes after the dissolution of madame Maserini, the physician came
in; he found the attendants stupefied with grief, and Matilda in the same
posture as she was at the moment her mother expired; he parted her hand from
that of the corpse, which she (...) to her bosom, and bathed with tears; but
she had the presence of mind to take up the paper on which her mother had
wrote, and when she entered her chamber, threw it carelessly in the escritoire,
without once looking at the writing* in short, her mind was in such a state
that for many hours she had not the least remembrance of the affair.

About half an hour after the decease of madame Maserini, Alfred her son
arrived. When he first heard of his mother's illness, he would have set off for
Paris directly, but was prevented by the indisposition of a superior officer.
Immediately as he received the last express, he obtained leave of absence for a
month, and left Flanders the day after; but, unfortunately, in one part of his
journey, where he was obliged to ride on horseback, the animal took fright and
threw him; he was taken up for dead; but being only stunned by the blow, he
soon recovered; yet it served to detain him a few days; as soon as he was able
to stand, he made the best of his way to the city, but arrived too late to
receive the important secret that madame Maserini so much wished to impart to
him.

Madame Maserini was the youngest daughter of a nobleman whose power and
dignity were well known in all parts of France; having no son, he resolved to
aggrandise his name through his eldest daughter; for which purpose, he
determined to place his two youngest in a convent; and, if possible, to prevail
on them to take the veil: in this case, the fortune he would have been
necessitated to have given them, might be added to that of their eldest sister,
which most likely would procure her a husband of great note; he could then have
his* name transferred to his son-in-law, and by that means the family honors
would descend to posterity, the same as by male issue: -- thus did the unjust
marquis intend to bury from the world two amiable young women, to satisfy an
empty and ridiculous ambition.

The marchioness died when the children were very young, and it was reported,
through his ill (...); -- the marquis now thought it full time to put his
scheme in execution; he accordingly persuaded the young (...) to ^e boarders
for a few months, which they both readily agreed to; he accompanied them
himself to the conv^nt of N****, and affected the greatest grief at parting
from them; in private he begged the lady abb^ss to let no opportunity pass that
might hasten their desire of taking the veil. Felicia, the youngest, seemed
perfectly contented with her situation; but her sister, who was of a more
lively disposition, very much disliked it; and though the greatest art was used
in order to make her take to a religious life, yet it all proved ineffectual;
for, at the year's end, though the former determined to comply with their
wishes, yet Clementina declared her aversion to them, and proved obstinate in
her opinion; she used all the arguments in her power to persuade her sister to
relinquish the thoughts of making such a place a residence for life; but
Felicia was so charmed with the convent and its inhabitants, that the
constantly replied, nothing in the world should ever tempt her to leave them;
she accordingly took the white veil. Her father (who constantly received
intelligence) read the news with the greatest pleasure; but it was in some
measure damped by hearing that Clementina had so great a dislike to follow her
example, and that she wished much to be permitted to return home: -- this
request he resolved not to grant; as he thought time, and a little more use to
the rules and orders of the place, might work an entire change in her
sentiments.

It was at this period Louis XIV ascended the throne of France; and, among
others who had business to transact at court on that occasion, was a young
gentleman, the son of an Italian of large fortune. He brought with him from
Italy his sister, whom, ^y order of his father, he was to place in the convent
of N****; the day she was introduced, he had an opportunity of seeing
Clementina; he was struck with her beauty, and delighted with her conversation,
and afterward had several other interviews; for by the orders of the marquis
^he was permitted to see any one in company with the lady abbess, or any other
person whom she could depend upon; this kind of behavior, he thought, would be
more likely to win her over to their purpose, than by laying her under any
restraint; her disposition being naturally good, and by far more inclined to
yield to entreaty than force. Signor Maserini often came on visits to his
sister, who was placed with her ladyship, and the chosen companion and friend
of Clementina: -- it was at these times, when no one was present (which would
often happen, the marquis's orders not being strictly attended to), that he
would declare his passion, which he might plainly perceive was not listened to
with dislike, Clementina felt a strong partiality for him, which soon ripened
into love: she told him the state of her affairs; but when he entreated her to
elope with him from the convent, she always reminded him that they must expect
nothing in point of fortune from the marquis. That, he answered, would not give
him the least concern; for his father, who had no children except his sister
and himself, was worth a considerable deal of money, and had often told him,
provided he could meet with a wife, whose birth, virtues and accomplishments,
would bring no disgrace upon their house, that wealth would be no object with
him, as he should be able to give him enough to keep them not only in plenty,
but in affluence.

Clementina's mind was on the rack which way to resolve; if she rejected the
proposal, she would most likely be obliged to remain in the convent for life,
and be constantly harassed with the importunities of all about her to take the
veil; which would be worse than death; on the contrary, if she consented to fly
with signor Maserini to Italy, she must run the hazard of traveling many
miles, and when she arrived in that country, would see no one that she knew,
except himself and his sister; -- the thoughts of leaving Felicia, the
difficulty of escaping, and the idea of what would be the consequence if they
were discovered, made her shrink with horror from the thoughts of leaving her
present habitation. Thus she delayed coming to a resolution for near six
months; when one morning as she entered a closet belonging to the lady abbess,
she perceived on the floor a letter, directed to her ladyship; it was her
father's s^al, and was broken; -- she at first hesitated whether she should
read it; but at length determined to see the contents; which were, "that the
marquis thought the manner in which she was treated was too mild, and begged
that for the future she might be closely kept to her chamber, and stricter
methods had recourse to." -- Ready to faint, she ran to signora Maserini, who
was equally surprised at the discovery, and wished her to comply with her
brother's solicitations. -- Clementina, after some little time, resolved to
accept his proposals -- in the afternoon he was expected, and they thought that
would be a good opportunity to inform him of their determination.

CHAPTER II.
SIGNOR Maserini called in the afternoon, as was expected -- he only saw his
sister, those measures being already put in execution which the marquis had
mentioned in his letter. She informed her brother of the circumstances that had
happened in the morning, and also acquainted him with Clementina's resolution
to leave the convent. At these words he was in raptures; but they were soon
subdued by the thoughts of what difficulties must be surmounted to escape from
it; for Clementina was totally confined to her chamber; not even signora
Maserini was permitted to see her -- these orders had been given about an hour
before -- the young friends had therefore only time to fix, that whatever
resolutions the latter intended to put in practice, she was to write them down,
and contrive to drop them in the hand of the former at evening vespers. But
both the brother and the sister were at loss how to elude the watchful
vigilance of the different people belonging to the convent, till a scheme,
proposed by signora, seemed as if it would prove favorable. She told her
brother to go to the house of father Absalom, (a priest) who was expected that
night at a late hour to have a conference with the lady abbess, and to tell him
her ladyship could not receive him; he should then procure a dress as much like
father Absalom's as possible, and, at the same time when he was to have
attended, to come to the gate of the convent, through which he might pass
unnoticed, if he would hold up his handkerchief so as to cover his face, which
the reverend father generally did to avoid the night air. By this means he
might get to the lady abbess's apartments; but instead of entering them, to
turn round a contrary way, that would take him to a winding staircase, which,
after descending some time, would terminate in a large vaulted chamber; and in
this place he was to wait the arrival of Clementina and his sister.

"But how is it possible," returned signor Maserini, "if you should be able to
meet me there, that we can escape? You will certainly be known."

"Leave to me," said the lady. We shall also be (...): and when you again pass
the atten^^ ^^sted by us* they will naturally suppose you (...) her ladyship,
and are returning with two of (...) be sure to have a carriage at a little
(...) by daybreak convey us a few miles (...) table walls; and by tomorrow
evening we (...) at some little village, where we may, (...), remain in safety
till the pursuit that is partly over; and we shall then be able to ^^ourney to
Italy without interruption."

(...), after having thanked his sister a (...) excellent scheme, took his
leave, in (...) or the elopement. Immediately after he (...) wrote down those
particulars they had (...) on, and the exact manner in which (...). At evening
vespers they met; and (...) was over, she received from her friend (...) at
discovery. As soon as she entered her (...) was the place where she was
confined) (...). Felicia, who had not been able to (...) account of an
indisposition which obliged (...), was astonished, and begged to know, (...),
the cause of her grief, But (...) to speak.

(...) had now done ringing -- all was silent, (...) which howled through the
apartments. (...) at hung in Felicia's cell was obliged to (...) hanging too
near a casement, it was in (...) extinguished. Clementina placed it on (...)
bed, and by its light observed in her (...)-like paleness. She pressed
Clemen^^^ (...) bosom, and once more begged to know why she wept. The latter,
by degrees, and with the greatest circumspection, informed her of her
intentions of leaving the convent. Horror showed itself in every feature of
Felicia while she listened to the relation; at length, overcome by surprise,
grief and weakness, she fainted. Water stood by; her sister, hardly able to
support herself, applied it to her relief, and had the presence of mind not to
make any noise. After some minutes, she recovered, but was almost too ill to
speak. Clementina supported her in her bed, and received the last words of her
sister with a look of anguish and madness.

"Clementina," said Felicia, whose voice was hardly articulate, "Heaven
preserve you in this ha^ardous attempt! O! my sister, may you see many happy
years; and when the sunshine of prosperity sheds its beams upon thee, may they
never be obstructed by the chilling wind of adversity. Almighty Father!" she
exclaimed, (and crossed herself with the greatest fervency) "in this my last
hour of dissolution, when the soul is near parting from the mortal dust, to fly
unsullied to a merciful and heavenly Creator, vouch^afe to incline thine ear to
my last prayer and dying supplication! Preserve, O Lord! my sister, through
that part of life in which it shall please thee to place her, from the
temptations and snares of the wicked; and when she is under the rod of
affliction, inspire her with fortitude and resignation to bear it without
murmuring, that with religion and piety she may descend into the grave, and
rise again an angel of purity, ready to fly into the arms of her Savior, her
Re^^^mer and her God!"

Clementina supported her as well as she was able. She spoke no more, but
survived about five minutes, and expired in her arms.

CHAPTER III.
THE situation of Clementina was now dreadful beyond expression. The distant
tinkling of a clock at a remote part of the monastery proclaimed the hour to be
ten. The wind, which had been so very high, had entirely dropped, and the moon,
quite obstructed by heavy clouds, could not be discerned; large drops of hail
beat against the windows, and by degrees increased to a violent storm; the most
tremendous claps of thunder followed fast on each other; flash after flash of
vivid lightning darted through the shattered casements, which had no shutters.
This war of elements was far more dreadful, it being an uncommon time of the
year, the latter end of January. The body of Felicia lay still in the arms of
her sister, who, totally insensible, rested her hand on the same pillow, till a
violent clap of thunder, which shook the convent, roused her from this reverie.
She started up, and at first hardly knew where she was; but recollection soon
came with redoubled force; it wanted but one hour to the time when she was to
meet her friend; she was unable to come to a resolution in what manner to act.
She took up the letter she had received from signora Maserini, and read it once
more over.

She still considered, that, if she escaped, she might once more be happy; but
if she remained in the convent, there was not the slightest hope that she
should ever enjoy another hour of peace or comfort. She had now no one to
leave, that could any way claim her regard or tenderness: the maternal love and
affection of a mother she had never known; her father had not fulfilled that
tender name, by either assiduity or kindness; her eldest sister she hardly ever
saw, as she was placed, before her remembrance, with a relation of her mother's
in Germany, who took the care of her education. The old lady visited the
marquis but once only, accompanied by his daughter, and then made but a short
stay; yet, in ^his little time, the lady Eleanor's behavior to her sisters was
proud and disdainful, so as not to call forth either esteem or fondness. As to
friends, she had none except signora, for the marquis never suffered them to
cultivate any acquaintance. Felicia would have been the only cause that could
have made her leave the convent with regret; she, alas! was now no more; she
had conceived a sincere friends^ip for signora Maserini, and her heart plainly
told her, her affections were placed on her brother; she therefore thought it
would be more prudent to run the hazard of elopement with two persons by whom
she was certainly beloved, than remain in a place where her life would be made
uncomfortable. But still she was chilled with horror at the thoughts of being
discovered; and the loss of her sister greatly preyed upon her spirits.

It was now near the time when she was to repair to signora Maserini's room:
she put some trinkets of her sister's, which Felicia had given her before she
took the white veil, into a small silver casket which she could place in her
pocket, and among them the picture of her mother; she shed a flood of tears at
the thought, that if the original had lived, how happy she might now have been;
she then, according to the directions in the letter, wrote with her pencil
feigned memorandums relative to their escape, and the names of several roads
quite contrary to those they meant to take; and dropped this book in the place
where it was most likely to be found.

Eleven o'clock now struck, and the hail had in some measure abated, though the
thunder and lightning still continued, when Clementina took a last farewell of
her departed sister; she embraced the corpse, wept over it, and was for some
time unable to move, till she at last tore herself away from the body, and,
with her eyes swimming in tears, implored the Author of all events to support
her in the few critical hours she must undergo. With a trembling hand she then
unbarred the door, which opened into a long gallery, on each side of which were
different cells; she could not take the lamp, for fear of the light glancing
into any of the apartments, and was therefore only guided by each flash of
lightning that came through a large window at the further end. So weak as to be
hardly able to walk, she at length arrived at the casement, and sat down on a
seat under it to recover her strength. The way she had already come was by far
the most dangerous on account of discovery, there being one or more inhabitants
in each of the rooms she had passed. She now went through several passages that
led to a large vaulted chamber, and from thence began to ascend a stone
staircase that wound round the south tower of the convent, and took her
entirely away from the cells below, belonging to the nuns, to the sleeping
rooms of the boarders above. The thunder in this place had a most awful sound;
the lightning, though it could only enter a small painted casement which stood
at a great height, yet served to show the gloomy horrors of the place.

She was already half way up; but, terrified at the thoughts of her situation,
she rested for a few moments against the old iron railing, when a light step
seemed to move on the same stair. Almost convulsed with horror, she shrunk
back, and was fortunately unable to call out, when at the same moment a strong
flash of lightning darted from the window above, and showed her the figure of a
man; the sight of it was but momentary, and all again was silent and dark. With
breathless agitation, and considerable quickness, she ran up the other part of
the staircase, flew across two passages, and arrived at the chamber of signora
Maserini. She gave the signal they had fixed on, and the door was carefully
opened by her friend, who with astonishment received Clementina, fainting in
her arms.

She soon recovered, and informed signora of the death of her sister, and also
of the event that had so much alarmed her. The former intelligence she was
surprised and grieved at; but the latter, concerning the person on the stairs,
she told her was her brother, who was to wait in the chamber below. This
circumstance signora had neglected to mention in the letter, which might have
been the cause of discovery. She insisted on Clementina's taking a glass of
wine, and helped her to dress in the apparel of a priest, and then made herself
ready in another disguise of the same kind.

She now thought it full time to attend her brother, and begging Clementina to
support herself through this great trial, she softly opened the door; they
proceeded to the staircase, and descended it. It was quite dark, the thunder
and lightning being over. When they had got to the bottom, signora, in a
whisper, called her brother, who instantly answered. He was going to
congratulate them on having got so far without discovery; but his sister
stopped him -- "This," said she, "is not a place for compliments." They all
three then reascended the staircase, passed through a long passage, and
arrived at the door of the lady abbess's apartments; they stopped there about
two minutes, and then, holding their handkerchiefs partly over their faces,
they crossed a large hall, and arrived at the door at the further end; they
here passed two persons, who made no inquiries. This door led them to an inner
court, and from that to an outer one, in which there were several porters; but
they, supposing them to have returned from a conference with her ladyship,
asked no questions. They had now only to pass the outside gates, which they did
in the same manner, without any obstructions, and saw themselves totally free
from the convent.

Signora and her brother were overjoyed at their good fortune; but Clementina,
though she was happy in having escaped, yet sorrow still hung upon her brow.
They walked about half a mile, and then entered the chaise that waited for
them; signor Maserini's servant was on horseback; they desired the post-boy,
whom they were obliged to acquaint with the whole affair, to drive as fast as
possible, and he might depend on being rewarded. Signora acquainted her brother
(who had very tenderly inquired after Clementina's health, and the cause of her
melancholy) of Felicia's death, and begged him not to force her to talk; that
her spirits, which within a few hours had been so greatly shocked, might again
be a little composed.

This observation was just: Clementina had in a little time gone through a
great deal of trouble: the surprise and concern which followed the finding of
her father's letter, the grief she felt at those orders being so soon put in
execution, the terror and anxiety she was under when she read signora's billet,
the sudden shock of her sister's death, the horror she felt during the storm,
with the alarm she received on the staircase, and her dread of being
discovered the whole night, conspired to overwhelm her with sensations almost
equal to madness; her looks plainly confirmed that she was exceedingly ill, and
it did not escape signora or her brother. He was almost distracted to know in
what manner to act. To wait for advice, would be as bad as to discover
themselves; yet to see her in such a state, without any aid, was distressing
beyond expression. He could not persuade her to take any nourishment, though he
had provisions in the chaise to prevent their stopping on the road for any
thing else than to change horses. Signora was extremely sorry to see her friend
so much indisposed; she perceived a fever was coming on; she therefore advised
her brother, about three o'clock in the afternoon, to order the post-boy to
turn out of the high road, and drive into a wild part of the country, which,
though it might take them out of the way they intended to go, yet in such a
place they might find some retired cottage, where they could stop for some time
in safety; for she was very certain Clementina would not be able to proceed on
the journey.

Her brother consented, and ordered the boy accordingly, who turned into
another road, which led them to a wild heath, and from that to a remote,
solitary forest. They continued in one track for some miles, till it began to
grow dark, when they descended into a deep valley, at the bottom of which was a
cottage that stood by itself. The chaise then stopped, and signor Maserini and
his sister alighted; they were obliged to help Clementina carefully out, who,
supported by each of their arms, walked up to the retired dwelling, which
seemed to be the residence of virtue, contentment and happiness.

CHAPTER IV. ADVERSITY.
Daughter of Jove, relentless power,
Thou tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge, and tottering hour,
The bad affright, afflict the best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain,
The proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple tyrants vainly groan,
With pangs unfelt before, unpi^ied and alone.
GRAY.
"WHO would not relinquish the gaudy pomp and splendor of a court, the costly
robe, the sumptuous feast, the deceitful courtier, and all the pride of empty
greatness, to spend their few remaining days in such a cot as this? The happy
pair, blessed with each other's love, whose health and strength permit them to
earn their daily bread, and care for no one, might here enjoy repose, and, with
comfort to themselves and others, breathe out a life of piety and virtue." Such
were the thoughts of ^ignor Maserini, as he aided to support Clementina to the
door of the cottage; he knocked, and it was opened by a young man who seemed
not yet to have attained his twentieth year.

"Friend," said the disguised priest, "admit under your hospitable roof three
travelers, who for one night beg a lodging, and will repay you to the utmost
of their power, with gratitude and prayers."

The young shepherd (for such his dress denoted him (...) be) courteously
invited them into a small clean room, where, on one side of the fire, sat a man
and woman seemingly much advanced in years, and on the other a beautiful young
girl, who looked to be about eighteen: they rose, and seemed greatly surprised
at the entrance of the priests: the old man instantly ordered supper for his
reverend guests, after assuring them they were sincerely welcome.

Signora Maserini placed Clementina next to her, while her brother went to the
post-boy, whom he liberally rewarded, and told him to make the best of his way
home, and acquaint his master he had been with only one gentleman, quite a
different road from that they had traveled; he then re-entered the cottage
with Edward, whose horse they turned loose in a field behind it. Clementina,
since he had been out, had fainted, and was just recovering.

Amazement might be seen in each face of the cottagers; that three priests
should ride in a chaise attended by a servant, was strange, as such sort of
people usually walked; the effeminate beauty of two of them was remarkable; and
then one of them fainting, was astonishing. Signora thought it would be better
to inform them of their situation at once, and trust to their generosity in
concealing them; she therefore gave her brother the hint, and called on one
side the old woman, whom she acquainted with the whole affair, while he did the
same to the man. They both greatly wondered in what manner they could escape,
but readily promised their protection.

Clementina all this time seemed totally insensible of what was going forward,
and, in short, was in a state of stupidity; for she hardly gave any answer to
those questions that were put to her, nor could they persuade her to take any
nourishment; she was therefore undressed (...) put into a warm bed. Neither the
brother nor the sister could partake of the homely fare that was set before
them; but about eight o'clock signor Maserini left the cottage with the young
shepherd and Edward, and walked to a small cot, that belonged to the father of
the former, who was acquainted by his son with the history of the gentleman he
had brought. There was one bed to spare, which signor Maserini took possession
of, and Edward slept with Cyril, which was the young man's name.

La Faril, the old cottager, insisted on his daughter Sabina sitting up with
Clementina, and begged signora to retire to rest, as he was sure the fatigue
^he must ^ave undergone must make sleep very necessary. She took his advice,
and lay down in a small room next to Clementina's. Both La Faril and his wife
gave Sabina a charge to be very careful of the young lady, and then they
themselves bowed under the influence of the drowsy god.

Signor Maserini was at the cottage early the next morning; he eagerly inquired
after Clementina's health, and was informed by Sabina that she was very ill,
and had been delirious the greater part of the night; she was now asleep, but
was so disturbed she feared it would not refresh her; neither his sister nor
her mother was up, and her father was gone out. He had not changed his dress,
but was still in the disguise of a priest. He asked Sabina whether there was
any medical man lived near; she said there was one about three miles off, who
always attended their family; he asked her for a direction, which she gave hi^;
and not considering the hazard he ran, he resolved to go to him.

It was hardly light when he set off: he had not got above a mile, when he was
accosted by a man who was crossing the same (...).

"Father," said he, "there is sad news." "What, my son?" replied signor
Maserini. "Why," returned he, "there are two young ladies gone off with a young
man, who* they say, is brother to one of them, from the convent of N****; and
the other, who is daughter to some marquis, has poisoned her sister, for the
was found dead in the morning"

(...) then continued to give an account how it was supposed they had escaped;
and a man whose chaise was (...) the same night, had some thoughts it (...) a
different road from that the post boy informed him; for, upon inquiry, no such
cartiage had been seen in the places through which he said he had passed. He
concluded with saying, (...) supposed the (...) search would be made after
them, and that ^e heard the news from a friend who had (...) and arrived at his
cottage about six that morning.

It happened well that the man was so pleased with his own discourse, at not to
take much notice of his hearer; for (...) would not have required a very acute
observer to have seen his countenance change several times; he wished much to
return back directly; but then his companion would certainly remark it; he
therefore thought it best to continue walking (...) he could part with him
without b^ing noticed (...) opportunity offered about half a (...) man turned
short into a lane, and (...) him a good morning. He ran back as fast a^ (...),
and ^ound breakfast quite ready; he told them (...) of his (...) return: and
they all allowed it was not unlikely but the cottage might be searched; but
their perplexity and (...) were still increased, when he informed them of the
suspicions that had fallen on Clementina, concer^ing Felicia's death; but they
all agreed by no means to inform her of any part of the adventure.

There was now the greatest necessity for them to be concealed; for as there
were no witnesses to contradict an affair which by appearances seemed probable,
he was distracted to think, that if they were taken, Clementina might suffer
the punishment of a murderer: and in such cases strict inquiries and search
were made through France. In what manner to act they knew not: Clementina was
too ill to travel; and if she could, there was not a doubt but they would be
overtaken; the officers might be here in three or four hours' time; and La
Faril would run a great (...) in concealing them. Edward had no change of
dress; he arrived at the cottage a little while after his master in the
morning; Cyril, the young shepherd, who, the^ found, was to marry Sabina, had
set off early with his father on a short journey, and would not return till
night. (...) of them had promised secresy, and begged signor Maserini and his
servant would sleep there as long as he thought proper. None of them could
think of any scheme to pr^^ent discovery, till Sabina said, "Father, is there
not at the (...) of the garden a cave, which none knows of besides ourselves!"
La Faril instantly turned pale, and answered, "Yes, my dear; but it will, I am
afraid, be too damp for the sick lady." "Is it not possible," said signore
Maserini, "to have it warmed by fires?" They (...) agreed i^ would. "Then, for
heaven's sake, my friend," answered her brother, "let us begin about it
directly."

All hands were set to work; Edward made a fi^e in it immediately and conveyed
feather-beds, provisions, chairs, a table, candles, a lamp, (...), tinder-box,
matches, and every other utensil that could any way make it comfortable. The
cave extended a great way back under some hills which rose at the bottom of La
Faril's garden; the entrance was entirely hidden from the eye by thick moss and
shrubs which grew round the bottom of the eminence. It seemed to have been a
retreat at the time Henry the Fifth conquered France. The present possessor,
who by chance discovered it, had never disclosed the secret to any but his own
family; for a son of La Faril's who turned out exceedingly wild, but was since
dea^ committed a robbery about ten miles from the cottage, and, for fear of
being taken, begged his father to conceal him in the cave, which was
accordingly done; and (...) officers of justice, though they searched every
part of the house and garden, did not perceive the entrance of it. It was at
the recollection of this circumstance, that La Faril turned (...) when Sabina
mentioned the cave; for it was very necessary they should keep the knowledge of
it in their own bosoms, as he would be punished, if it was known, for screening
his own son from the rigor of the (...).

About two o'clock in the afternoon, every thing was ready: but though great
fires had been kept in it ever since the morning, it was yet damp; (...)
therefore thought it best not to enter that (...) the next day; and then signor
Maserini could instruct Cyril and his father in what manner to act. Edward was
placed at a window on the top of the cottage, with a glass, so (...) could
perceive any one coming that way within a (...); and (...) notice would be time
enough for them to ma^e their escape to the garden: he was also to sit up all
night in the cave to keep in a large (...), that it might be thoroughly aired
by the morning.

Clementina was better, and perfectly sensible and composed; signora ventured
to inform her of the affair relative to her brother's meeting the man in the
morning, carefully concealing that part concerning the death of her sister.

She was not so much alarmed as might have been expected, and seemed extremely
happy in the contrivance of the cave. Since the sleep she had in the morning,
though it was much disturbed, she had mended, and was now able to sit up for an
hour to have her bed made. She ate a little supper; and, in short, through the
good attention and management (...) her hostess, Clementina seemed perfectly
recovered from those dangerous symptoms of a fever which appeared the night
before.

At nine o'clock, signor Maserini took his leave, and walked to the cottage of
Cyril and his father; he informed them of the whole affair concerning the cave,
by permission of La Faril, who knew them to be too much his friends to discover
it. Signor Maserini begged both of them, if any inquiry should be made after
him, to declare they knew nothing of him; he conjured them to lay the same
injunctions on a young girl who was a distant relation to them, and kept their
house; all which they promised faithfully to perform. The place was so
exceedingly retired, that none of them had been seen, except by La Faril, his
wife and daughter, Cyril, his father, the young girl and the man before
mentioned; nor was any stranger observed in that part, sometimes for three
months together; and the only way they had of procuring povision was, by going
to a small town four miles distant. Signor Maserini thanked both the father and
the son for their hospitality toward him, and, after wishing them a good
night, retired to his bed.

CHAPTER V.
THE dejected lover had now time to recollect his situation. Though his father
was exceedingly fond of him, yet there was a haughty pride and obstinacy in his
disposition, that made him tremble l^st he should disapprove of his
proceedings. It was true, he had several times told him that, with respect to
his marrying, he should consider wealth as no object; but used always to lay a
particular stress on his consent being first obtained: this last circumstance
he had never mentioned to Clementina. He also knew him to be whimsical and
capricious, insomuch that it would not be unlikely, should they ever be so
fortunate as to arrive in Italy, but he might refuse his consent to their
nuptials, though not capable of alleging any reason for his dislike. He
therefore determined to persuade Clementina to be married to him before they
made themselves known to his father, whom they could (...) deceive by telling
him the ceremony had not been performed: if he approved of her as (...)
daughter, it was all very well; if, on the contrary, he rejected her, it would
be out of his power to part them, as she would be his by the most sacred ties
on earth; for, should the worst happen, and his father totally discard him, at
the death of a brother of his late mother's, no one could prevent his taking
possession of a very good fortune; and till that period, which was not likely
to be long, his uncle being a man much advanced in years, he could support
himself and wife by industry and application to his pencil, which art he was a
proficient in, though he only learnt it as an accomplishment. But still the
thoughts of their being discovered again intruded on his mind, and he shrunk
with horror from the idea that Clementina might suffer an ignominious death:
sleep refused its aid, and the rest of the night was spent in melancholy
reflections on the dangers they had passed, and disagreeable conjectures on
those that might still be to come. He rose about six, more fatigued than when
he retired to rest, and took the advantage of the darkness of (...) morning, to
walk to the cottage; he found them all up, as they had determined to enter the
cave before day-^ight. Clementina was considerably better; signora Maserini was
in good spirits, but they were damped by seeing her brother look so ill: she
however concealed her uneasiness, for fear of alarming Clementina, who had also
taken notice of it.

After a hasty breakfast, they thought it full time to proceed to the garden;
it was a disagreeable morning, though not so cold as might have been expected
for the time of the year; yet there was a chilling dampness in the air, which
made it far more uncomfortable than a severe frost; and a few small stars,
scattered about the heavens, gave the heavy black clouds which encompassed a
large space a more dreary appearance. It was just beginning to grow light, when
the melancholy party came out from the cottage. La Faril went first: his
thoughts were fixed on the similarity of the present scene with that when he
conducted his only son to the same gloomy habitation.

The recollection of this circumstance drew a tear from his aged eye; for the
good old man could not help paying that tribute to his memory, though he had
shed many on account of his vices and extravagances. Signor Maserini walked
after him; he was wholly taken up with the idea of their being discovered; and
when he looked on Clementina, who rested on one arm while his sister laid hold
on the other, he almost cursed himself for leading her into so much danger.

Clementina was distressed to see him look so ill, but feared nothing while she
was under his protection. -- Signora had no misfortunes of her own; to see them
happy, she thought would make her so; and therefore her anxiety or happiness
was heightened or decreased according to the situation of her brother and her
friend. -- Sabina and her mother followed, with their hands and eyes lifted
toward heaven, imploring blessings on their visitors, and praying that they
might remain undiscovered.

When they arrived at the care, La Faril touched the secret spring, and the
door flew open; -- they were received by Edward, who had, as he was ordered,
kept good fires all night, so that the place felt perfectly warm: their
conductor then told them that Sabina should come every night after it was dark,
to inform them if any thing particular had happened, and to be useful in any
way that might serve to make them comfortable: -- signor Maserini returned him
a thousand thanks for his kindness and friendship. -- La Faril and his family
then took their leave, and the door closed after them.

The cave, as was before mentioned, ran a great way back; -- it was divided
into three regular apartments, which, though narrow, were each of them long: --
the first they made their sitting room; in the second signor Maserini slept;
and in the third, Clementina and his sister. -- Edward had a small bed placed
for him close to the entrance, that he might be ready to give an alarm if he
heard any noise that seemed to threaten danger. -- They received no light but
from candles or lamps: -- this, added to the antique manner in which it was
fitted up, and the hollow echo that sent back every sound they uttered, gave
the place a gloomy and melancholy appearance; -- but, disagreeable as it might
seem, it was to them a comfortable retreat; -- it might preserve them from
their enemies; and with that hope, any situation would be acceptable, though,
if possible, ten times more disgusting than that they now possessed.

Sabina arrived at the cave about ten o'clock at night, attended by Cyril; --
they informed signor Maserini that no inquiries had been made after them that
day; but they had heard the king's officers were within a few miles of the
place; and there was not a doubt but they would remain there until the next
morning. The young lovers stopped about an hour, and then took their leave.

CHAPTER VI.
IT was near twelve o'clock wh^^ signor Maserini, who had been reading to
Clementina and his sister ever since the departure of Cyril and Sabina,
declared he was fatigued, and proposed going to rest; they both readily
consented, and had retired to their chamber about a quarter of an hour, when
Edward ran into his master's room, with the news that the officers were
certainly arrived, for he had heard them talking close to the cave.

Fortunately, he did not speak loud; and signor Maserini, who was just
beginning to undress, desired him not to disturb the ladies, and he himself
would come to the door and listen to their conversation. -- They both proceeded
to the mouth of the cave; the wind was high, and the noise which it occasioned
among the trees, prevented them from hearing but now and then a few words. --
The first person whose voice they could distinguish, was Cyril. -- Signor
Maserini was very glad he was there; -- he seemed to be talking to one of the
officers --

"You see," said he, "there are no signs of a place where we could conceal any
one, even if we had ever such an inclination."

"Hold -- not so fast, young man," answered a stern voice: -- "we shall (...)
particularly this place; for I remember, some years back, being here on the
same errand, after a young thief, who, though he was seen to enter this
cottage, yet could not be found. He was, I belive, that old man's son."

"Ah!" exclaimed La Faril," call him not by that name; he is now no more; and
those epithets are ill bestowed on one who has long since been in his grave,
and is by this time partly turned to earth again" -- Here the old man burst
into tears, and, as they supposed, retired to the house; for they heard him no
more.

The officers stopped about half an hour, during which time Cyril remained with
them. -- Signor Maserini wondered at his having stopped so late, but looked on
it as a fortunate circumstance, as La Faril was too weak and infirm to attend
them in a proper manner. He was exceedingly glad to think that neither his
sister nor Clementina had known any thing of the matter, and pleased himself
with the thoughts how happy they would be, when he informed them the affair
they most dreaded was now over; nor were his conjectures wrong; for his
intelligence gave them the greatest pleasure.

The following night, Sabina arrived at the cave. She told them that when Cyril
and herself entered the cottage from seeing them the night before, the father
of the former had called to tell them the officers were within two miles of
them; he had heard it at a place where he had been in the afternoon; they
therefore thought it would be best for Cyril to stay all night, in case they
should come at a late hour to surprise them. It was fortunate they took that
precaution; for about midnight they were knocked up by the unwelcome visitors.
Cyril let them in; and, after their coming from the garden, they stopped about
a quarter of an hour, and then departed.

Their only fear was now to fix in what manner they should proceed to Italy
without discovery; but at all events they determined to remain in the cave, at
least a month, that the affair might be in some measure forgotten; and they
could then consult what disguise would be the most proper for them to travel
in. They had resided in their habitation near a fortnight before La Faril dared
to make them a visit; but receiving intelligence that the officers were
certainly returned, he took the first opp^rtunity* to see them, and proposed
they should travel to Italy in the disguise of Savoyards, as he had dresses
which would fit them, and every thing proper for that character; they having
been made for a masquerade. His scheme met with the greatest approbation, and
they accordingly set about carrying it into execution.

In about three weeks every thing was prepared, and the morning fixed when they
were once more to venture forth in search of happiness. Sabina and her mother
attended them very early, in order to assist in putting on the dresses. La
Faril arrived soon after; and at six o'clock they thought it full time to set
off, as it would be necessary they should get some distance from the cottage
before daylight. La Faril made signor Maserini perfectly acquainted with the
way across the country: and in case any questions were asked them by the
villagers, they were to reply they were going to Italy, the place where such
sort of people mostly reside. Cyril also attended to take his leave. The spring
of the cave was turned, and they once more breathed in open air: yet the
thoughts of leaving the place which had preserved them from their enemies,
created a pang in their breasts, and particularly since they knew not how soon
they might once more wish to be confined within its close recess. Signor
Maserini clasped La Faril's hand, and stammered out his gratitude, accompanied
with tears, while the good old man, whose silver hairs and aged form denoted
those pearly drops which hung upon his withered cheek were not the first soft
emblems of his feeling heart, pressed him to his bosom; then, almost overcome
with weakness and the effect of years, he nearly funk insensible on the earth
-- This was too much for signor Maserini; -- he pressed his sister and
Clementina to hasten their departure, and hurried away from the spot to which
he before seemed rooted.

It was an exceeding cold morning, and the twinkling bright stars which
illumined the heavens, plainly showed it to be a severe frost. They got three
miles from the cave before daylight, and continued traveling without any
disagreeable circumstances happening on the road, except the curiosity of the
peasants, whose homely entertainment and good nature made ample amends for
their ignorance.

After some days, they had the pleasure to enter Italy. Signor Maserini hired
lodgings some miles from his father's residence, and entreated Clementina to
become his, before he made himself known to him. She was very unwilling to
consent; but at last, overcome by the persuasions of the brother and the
sister, he had the rapture to receive her as his own, about a fortnight after
their arrival. The only difficulty that now remained was, to make it known to
his father, which he determined to do in three or four days after their
marriage, but first wrote to La Faril. In the letter he enclosed a considerable
present, and sent it by a friend who was going that way, as he was certain
every method would be taken to intercept any letters directed to him, as La
Faril lay under the greatest suspicion in point of concealing his son, as well
as signor Maserini.

The day arrived on which he was to pay a visit to his father. He begged his
sister to stay with Clementina, as she would be in want of company, and was a
stranger to the place. He set off early in the morning, and, after some hours'
quick traveling, during which time his ideas were entirely taken up in
thinking of his father, and in what manner he should be received, he arrived at
the large heavy gates of the abbey. With a trembling hand he pulled the bell,
but could not hear it ring. After another attempt, he found the wire was rusty;
yet it made a noise. A thought struck him, which chilled him with horror -- his
father might be dead! -- for he made himself known to no one since his coming
to Italy, but his friend who carried the letter to La Faril; and he could give
no intelligence concerning his friends, as he arrived the same night as signor
Maserini, from Spain, was taken ill, and did not go out till he proceeded on
his journey to England, when he promised to leave the letter as he went through
France.

CHAPTER VII.
THIS idea had not crossed his mind five minutes before a man and a boy
approached him: he asked them if they could tell the reason why that abbey was
uninhabited?

"Heaven bless you, master!" said the man: "you must surely be a stranger in
this part, if you have not heard of the old gentleman's death who lived here."

Signor Maserini turned pale; the bridle dropped from his hand, and he must
have fallen upon the ground, had he not been received into the arms of the
villager.

"You are not well, sir," said the man, as he placed him on a seat under the
large heavy portico of the abbey. -- "Lubin, run and get the gentleman some
water from yonder spring."

The boy obeyed, and brought ^ome in a pitcher which he had in his hand; he was
persuaded to drink a small quantity, and soon recovered. He informed the
peasant he was a distant relation of the late count, and was come upon a visit
to the abbey; that the hearing so suddenly of his death had quite overcome him.

"Ah, your honor," replied the man, "there has been strange doings for these
last six months; heaven knows best; -- but one cannot be hanged for thinking,
as the saying is."

"Strange doings! for heaven's sake explain yourself, friend," said signor
Maserini, "for I have the greatest reason to be interested in the affairs of
the count."

"If you will step with me to my cot, signor, I will relate to you the
circumstances that have happened. My wife expects me home to dinner, as I must
return, in less than an hour, to my labor in yonder vineyard"

He readily assented; and having walked a small distance, they arrived at his
habitation. The horse was turned into a field When they entered the cottage, a
neat middle-aged woman was preparing dinner: they wished much their guest would
partake of their homely fare; but he could not eat. -- They had not resided in
that part above six months, therefore knew nothing of signor Maserini's person
He conjured the man to begin his narration; and the honest husbandman complied,
as follows: --

"You, no doubt, signor, were acquainted with young Percival Maserini and his
sister Sisera, the only children of the late count. Twelve months have not yet
passed since they both took leave of their father at that very abbey, and
traveled into France, on account of some business which required Percival's
attendance at court, as Louis XIV had just then ascended the throne. Sisera was
to be placed in the convent of N****, while her brother staid, which they
supposed would not be above four months; and then they were to return together.
The count for some time received letters from them both: but though the
business which caused their journey was finished at the expiration of the four
months, they did not by any means seem inclined to return to Italy; and, in a
little while after, their correspondence dropped; for though letters were
continually sent to them, no answers were received.

"This gave the count great alarm, and he wrote to a principal person near the
place, concerning them. In a little time he received information that his son
had run away with a young lady from the convent of N****, where he had placed
his sister; that she also had eloped with them, as well as the servant who
stopped with Percival in France: he concluded with saying, the strictest search
was making after them, as it was supposed the young lady had poisoned her
sister, who was placed in the convent with her, had taken the white veil, and
was found dead in her bed the morning after her departure.

"This news, signor, was like a thunderbolt to the old count: he had not a
doubt but they would be taken. From that day he drooped, and in about a week
after was laid up with a violent fever. Count D'Ollifont, his nephew, was sent
for." Here Percival trembled: he knew D'Ollifont to be his enemy. The man
continued -- "He attended his (...) with the greatest tenderness, insomuch that
he recovered enough to sit up for a few hours every day, and dispatched him to
find some intelligence of his children: he accordingly set off for France, but
returned at the end of the second day, with a letter which he acquainted his
uncle was given him on the road by a messenger, sent from France for that
purpose; it came from a friend of his who resided there, and acquainted him
that both signor and signora Maserini were no more; that the former had fallen
in a duel with an officer of the guards, who was going to secure them; and that
the latter was seized with a violent grief, which turned her brain, and she had
found means to poison herself, unknown to those who had the care of her; that
lady Clementina was placed in the Bastile, till it was settled what punishment
she should suffer; but that she was not married to signor Maserini. This news
caused a relapse in the old gentleman's disorder. Nor was it he alone who
suffered: every domestic of his household, signor, shed tears for the loss of
two amiable children, who were never known to give a tender parent one pang of
sorrow, except in this circumstance, and that cost them their lives."

"Would it had!" repeated signor Maserini to himself. "That ever I should have
lived to have seen this day!"

The woman was too much employed in cooking her husband's dinner, and the
husband too much taken up in eating it, and telling the story, to take any
particular notice of him; or else the inward workings of his soul might easily
have been observed. The man continued: --

"The old count now grew considerably worse; his physicians gave him over, and,
in about a week after his relapse, he died of a broken heart. when he heard of
the death of his children, he altered his will; the servants were all left
mourning, and a genteel legacy; old Absalom a comfortable allowance for life;
his tenants a twelvemonth's rent; except which, and a few other legacies, he
bequeathed the whole of his fortune to count D'Ollifont. Among the estates is
Grasville Abbey, which has been ^^ut up ever since the death of count Maserini;
nor has any of the furniture been removed."

"How happened that, my friend?"

"I know not, your honor; but folks say strange things -- that there has been
soul play, and that the place is haunted by the father and his children; but it
is known for certain, that count D'Ollifont intended to sleep there the night
o^ his uncle's funeral, but could not rest: he started up about midnight, left
the place with his servants directly, and the next week returned to Spain,
where he was sent for at the time his uncle was taken ill."

Signor Maserini inquired if he himself had ever seen any thing at the abbey to
confirm the reports of its being haunted, and how he came to be so particularly
acquainted with those affairs relative to its late inhabitants.

"Why, by old Absalom the steward, signor," answered the man. "He lived just by
here, but did not long survive his old master; and as to seeing any thing, as
your honor talks of, I cannot say I ever did; but Dorothy once said she saw a
light one night pass several of the casements in the west tower; this Dorothy
declared she could take her ^ath of."

"Is there any way to get to the inside of the abbey?"

"None, signor; each of the gates is well locked, barred and bolted; and the
windows are all fastened."

After some further conversation, the man's dinnertime was expired. Signor
Maserini rewarded him for his trouble, and then with a heavy heart mounted his
horse and departed.

CHAPTER VIII.
Expectation stood in horror
MILTON.
WHEN the iron rod of adversity falls suddenly upon us, and misfortunes of the
most distressing nature unexpectly darken our future prospects, surprise for a
little time gets the better of our feelings; amazement and horror gain such an
ascendency over our intellects, that, in the relation of our griefs, we forget
for some time the nature and cause of them, while we listen with attention to
the frivolous story of the circumstances by which they were occasioned.

Signor Maserini was in this state while the husbandman related to him the
account of his father, and the villainy of count D'Ollifont. His astonishment
was so great, that the death of the former, and the total loss of his fortune,
were entirely forgotten, and he thought only on the falsehood his cousin had
propagated. He left the cottage; his horse took his own course for some time;
nor did he perceive he was entering by degrees into a thick wood, till some
trees obstructed his way; he leaped from his horse, and threw himself on the
ground; the thoughts of his situation now flashed on his memory, and the loss
of his father he regretted with the most sincere grief. The imposition which
had been put in practice to deprive him and his sister of their fortunes,
excited both his surprise and anger; in short, the different emotions he felt,
almost drove him to a state of distraction.

In this situation he remained for near two hours, till, harrassed through
distress and fatigue, he fell into a slumber. Horrid dreams disturbed him, and
his sleep was both uneasy and disagreeable; yet he remained in this state of
forgetfulness till it was nearly dark: he started up and mounted his horse,
which had not moved from his side; he remembered he had promised Clementina and
his sister to be at home early in the evening; but that would now be
impossible, as the wood was intricate, nor was he acquainted with the way out.
He wandered about in search of the right path for near two hours, but was
unsuccessful, till chance led him to the direct track: he followed it, and in a
little time found himself clear of the labyrinth. He was very ill, and hardly
able to ride; the cold had seized him by being so long in the open air; he,
however, continued a good pace till he once more found himself before the gates
of Grasville Abbey.

The night was very dark, the thunder rolled at a distance, and faint flashes
of lightning followed one after another with considerable quickness; he stopped
once more to look at the place where he had spent so many happy juvenile hours,
and where he had that day hoped to have been received with cordiality and
tenderness. He had experienced the reverse; he had found his father was no
more, and that he had been duped out of his right by one who was allied to him
by the ties of blood, and, as he had supposed, by those of friendship.

A tear fell from his eye while he looked on the venerable structure, every
part of which seemed deserted; a gloomy stillness reigned through the heavy
pile, nor was the solemn silence broke but by the bird of night, which had
taken up its habitation under one part of the portico. The idea of the place
being haunted now entered his imagination.

"Would to heaven," said he, "the report I have heard was true, that I might be
permitted to converse, nay, only to see, the spirit of my sire! surely he would
-- "

Here he was interrupted by a stong flash of lightning, which darted right on
his face, and was followed b^ a loud (...) of thunder. Though he was struck
silent, his eye was still fixed on the abbey; the noise of the thunder had not
died away above three minutes before a violent crash was heard at the other
part of the building; it seemed like the falling of armor, and continued for
some little time.

Signor Maserini was struck with astonishment; horror and expectation seized
him at the same moment; he turned his horse round, and rode to the side whence
the noise seemed to proceed; all again was silent, yet he still continued
locking on the place. It was by the west tower -- he recollected the account he
had heard of the light being seen there. At the moment he was thinking on this
circumstance, a faint glimmering passed a small casement in the very part of
the west tower the woman had described. His situation may be more easily
imagined than described: He was a perfect statue with astonishment; still he
thought it might be fancy; but he was thoroughly convinced, when a stronger
light appeared in the same place a few minutes afterward, but disappeared in
an instant. Every nerve was stiffened with horror; he still drew nearer that
part of the abbey; five minutes had not elapsed before the light again appeared
in the same place; he now plainly perceived a figure pass, bearing a lamp; it
vanished as quick as the former light had done, and all again was silent and
dark.

His passions were now wrought up to the highest pitch; he galloped round to
the front gates, alighted, and in vain attempted to enter the abbey; every
entrance was strongly fastened; his brain was disordered, and he still
continued to force the doors; but, after a long time, finding his exertions all
in vain, he again mounted his horse, and rode as fast as possible toward his
own home.

CHAPTER IX.
SIGNORA Maserini waited with impatience the return of her brother; she wished
much to hear of her father's health, and in what manner he received the account
of Clementina: nor was Clementina less anxious; her spirits were depressed, she
trembled for fear of ill news, yet the vivacity of her sister-in-law supported
her tolerably well through the day. Night approached, and the time when signor
Maserini promised to be at home expired: his father might have detained him;
several circumstances might have happened to make him later. With these
thoughts they in some measure satisfied themselves till it grew late; they were
then exceedingly unhappy at not seeing him: the roads he had to come were often
infested by banditti.

A little while after midnight, a loud rap was heard at the door: Edward flew
to open it; neither Sisera nor Clementina could ask who it was, before signor
Maserini stood before them: his appearance for a moment struck them motionless
with surprise; nor was it to be wondered a^: the disorder of his dress, and the
wildness which darted from his eyes, made his figure altogether horrible.

"How does my father?" asked his sister.

"Well," he exclaimed; "but if you wish to know, Sisera, ask the angels in
heaven: they best can tell thee."

"Alas!" she cried, and burst into tears: "my father is no more; I know it by
thy looks -- by the strange answers you give to my questions."

"You are right," said he: "our father has paid the debt of nature."

He seemed now rather more composed; yet complained of violent pains in his
head and limbs. Signora Maserini grieved much for the loss of her father: she
could get no further intelligence from her brother's discourse, which was very
incoherent and difficult to be understood, but that her father was no more, and
they were duped out of their right; but by whom, and in what manner, she could
not possibly find out. He talked much of an appearance he had seen in the
abbey; but they looked upon it as the effect of a disordered brain.

The morning found them still more distressed. Signor Maserini was in a high
fever, and quite delirious, his sister almost distracted, and Clementina very
little better; the former immediately sent for a physician who lived near, and
had always attended their family: she hoped from him to receive some
i^telligence concerning her father's affairs, which ^he situation of her
brother prevented him from communicating. Edward was dispatched, and in a
little time returned with the gentleman they so much wished to see.

He was a character universally (...) in Italy; his abilities were equally
exerted in behalf of the poor and those in a higher sphere of life; he was a
friend to the indigent and distressed of every class, yet looked upon with
admiration and respect by all who were so happy as to be known by him. Such was
the man who, with all the marks of astonishment and surprise in his
countenance, was conducted by Edward to signora Maserini^^ he informed her that
it was supposed, by all who knew them, that both she and her brother had been
dead some time; he also confirmed the news of her father's death; she would
not, however, detain him to relate to her how such a report had been spread,
till he had first seen her brother: he had some knowledge of the physician, yet
every answer he gave to their questions, proved him in a state of insanity.
Clementina and Sisera anxiously inquired the gentleman's opinion; he told them
he had a very violent fever, and some very alarming symptoms; nor could he give
any satisfactory answer concerning what might be the issue of his disorder: he
however assured them he would do all in his power to forward his recovery.

They both returned him their sincere thanks. Sisera begged to know how the
report concerning their death could be believed* and the particulars of her
father's dissolution, as she supposed he attended him in his illness. He
answered in the affirmative, and related to her exactly the same train of
circumstances which the husbandman had before communicated to her brother.
Clementina was in the room at the same time he mentioned the account of her
having been supposed to poison her sister.

Her situation is more easily conceived than described: that she should be
suspected to murder a sister whom she so dearly loved, and whose death she so
much regre^ted -- the idea was almost too horrid for her to support. An illness
of some days followed the sudden shock she felt at the physician's recital; for
though no proof could have been brought to confirm so terrible a charge, yet
she shuddered at the thought of the distress and horror it would have
occasioned her. They now wondered not at Percival's illness, and supposed his
talking so much about the light and appearance in the abbey, was occasioned by
the report of its being haunted.

New difficulties now perplexed them: a week had elapsed, and no signs of
amendment appeared in signor Maserini's disorder; yet all their money was
nearly exhausted. In this dilemma they resolved to apply to the physician; he
immediately lent them as much as they desired; and if at any time they should
want more, begged they would speak, and he would accommodate them.

In about a month signor Maserini began to alter for the better; he talked more
rationally, and by degrees gained strength; in six weeks he was able to leave
the room, and soon after, by the assiduity and judgment of the doctor, found
himself nearly as well as ever. He returned the good man a thousand thanks for
his care and friendship, and hoped it would soon be in his power to repay him
the sum he had sent them: he also begged him to contradict, as much as
possible, the scandalous report his cousin had propagated, and make it known
that he now intended to live by the practice of his pencil. The physician
promised to comply with his wishes, and assured him he should consider himself
happy to serve him in any respect.

Signor Maserini paid a visit to the old uncle, at whose death he was to
receive the fortune before mentioned; -- he was astonished at the sight of him;
railed at count D'Ollifont for his villainy, and testified the greatest joy at
seeing his nephew.

Percival now began to apply himself to his profession; he was soon known, but
received with coldness by those who once called themselves his friends; his
abilities, however, gained him patrons, and his industry preserved them. He was
in a little time able to discharge his debt to the physician, and found he
could earn not only a comfortable but a genteel provision. He determined,
however, if possible, to retrieve some part of his father's fortune, yet
resolved not to act rashly, but proceed by a due course of law. In the first
place, he wished much to see the inside of the abbey: this took up a great deal
of time; he was near three months before he could get a sanction to enter it:
he had then to send to Spain for the keys, as count D'Ollifont had them in his
possession, nor would he give them up without great trouble; in short, it was
near six months before he could gratify his wi^hes, of once more seeing the
inside of Grasville Abbey. The light and figure he had seen in the west tower
continually haunted his imagination; and though he was not by any means
superstitious, yet many disagreeable ideas served to perplex him; he, however,
never mentioned the circumstance to any one since the recovery of his reason;
not even to his wife or sister; as he naturally supposed it would prey upon
their spirits, and make them fearful of searching the abbey, which he was
determined to do alone. Having got the (...), the day was fixed for his
departure. Clementina and Sisera wished much to accompany him; he begged them
not, as he knew it would hurt his sister extremely* to enter the family
mansion, under their present circumstances, and could give no pleasure to the
former. He accordingly set (...); they were detained a long time on the road by
a violent storm, and did not arrive at (...) Abbey till it was d^^^.

CHAPTER X.
SIGNOR Maserini did not intend to enter the building that night; yet curiosity
prompted him to take a view of the west tower. He accordingly dismounted, and
told Edward to hold his horse at the front gates, while he walked round the
abbey. Having arrived at that part where he had before seen the figure and the
light, he stood some time observing the window, when a faint glimmering passed
a small casement a little above it. He thought it might be fancy, yet in about
two minutes saw it again; His resolution was now fixed; he resolved to enter
the abbey directly; having returned to Edward, without communicating his
reason, he ordered him to open the gates immediately.

The poor fellow was astonished, and naturally supposed his master's head was
again affected. "For heaven's sake, sir," said he, "do not attempt to enter
such a dreary place at this time of night, and in the dark."

"Your light, Edward," returned his master, "will ^erve me; therefore open the
gates without delay."

The man reluctantly produced the keys: great exertion was required to turn the
lock; it however, after some little-time, yielded to force, and they beheld
themselves in the large paved court. Edward fastened the horses on the outside;
at the front doors they were again detained on account of the fastenings being
rusty; but after a little trouble they opened them, and discovered the large
hall or entrance of the abbey: it was supported by columns of the ancient
orders, and arched over in the Gothic style; at the farther end were a pair of
heavy folding doors, which led to an extensive suite of apartments; on each
side wa^ a flight of stone stairs, which wound round to the different rooms on
both sides of the building.

Grasville Abbey was an ancient structure, and had, in former times, been a
place of religious worship. Some monks, at a time when Italy was involved in
war, kept themselves concealed in this place, on account of atrocious crimes
they had committed against the state, by keeping up a correspondence with the
enemies of their country* they were all discovered except one, who secreted
himself in an obscure part of the abbey, while his companions suffered the most
severe punishment that could possibly be inflicted on them. Their only aim was
now to destroy the surviving one; they accordingly found means to mix a large
quantity of poison in some food which he had concealed, and which they observed
he partook of every day. The scheme succeeded, and he fell a sacrifice to their
invention; for they found the victuals after that time were never touched. He
died, however, in that part where he usually resided, for his body was not
discovered till many years after; and the abbey from that time was called after
his name.

The late count Maserini's father purchased the estate just before his
marriage, and had the whole of the internal part repaired; from him it
descended to his son, who resided in it the remainder of his life. Signor
Maserini plainly perceived nothing had been moved in the hall, as every article
was in the same order as if the place was in habited, and his father still the
possessor of it* but the appearance of the furniture plainly told it had been
taken no care of for some time. He began to ascend those stairs which led to
the west tower.

Edward followed: but his master, after some little time, suddenly turned
round, and desired he would wait below and take care of the horses. The man
begged of him with tears, not to go alone. Signor Maserini was pleased with
this mark of his fidelity, and hastily replied -- "However strange, Edward, my
conduct may appear to you at this time, believe me, I have the most weighty
reasons to justify my behavior; and, if I live to return, you shall be
acquainted with them."

He then ran up stairs -- and, strange as it may appear, was never seen again.

Edward stood for some time fixed with amazement -- there was a mystery in his
words and looks, which plainly told all was not right. He heard him ascend the
stairs for some time, till the sound of his footsteps died away, and all was
again silent: he then walked slowly across the court, and seated himself under
the portico; the night was not by any means cold; he therefore chose that place
in preference to the inside of the abbey, as he was near the horses. Sleep in a
short time overpowered him, and he did not wake till two in the morning: -- he
thought it strange his master was not returned, but waited another hour with
some degree of impatience; at the expiration of it he was seriously alarmed;
yet to enter the abbey without a light, would be madness; he therefore resolved
to defer it till daybreak.

Edward had heard of the abbey's being haunted, yet he always laughed at the
idea; his natural courage and intrepidity forbid his believing such fabulous
reports: the only reason he could allege for his master's stay, was, that the
wind might have blown out the lamp when he was at some intricate part of the
building; and in that case it would have been impossible for him to have found
his way back, there being several suites of apartments which were never
inhabited in the count's lifetime, and which signor Maserini might hardly ever
have seen.

As soon as it was light he again crossed the court, and ascended those stairs
which his master had done before; he followed the marks of his feet up a
considerable height, and then traced them through several rooms that led to the
west tower: one of these, which was rather larger than the others, was covered
with footsteps of different sizes; and in one part of it lay the picture of
Clementina, which signor Mazerini always wore next his heart; the ribband to
which it was tied seemed as if it had been torn by force, and the boards were
stained with several spots of blood. There was not in any other apartment the
least mark of a foot, nor any ^igns of their having been opened.

Edward was astonished; he almost supposed himself in a dream; yet every object
realized the scene. He knew not in what manner to act; to stop any longer in
the abbey was of no use; yet to whom was he to apply! -- He at length resolved
to go immediately to the physician, and relate to him the circumstance, as he
would be the properest person to advise with concerning those measures they
ought to take relative to signor Maserini's disappearance, as well as in what
manner they should proceed in communicating the news to his wife and sister.

Edward took up the picture, and placed it carefully in his pocket; he then
descended the staircase, and closed the doors after him; but determined to
lock neither them nor the outside gates. Having placed his master's horse in
one of the stables belonging to the abbey, and mounting his own, he departed
with the utmost speed toward the house of the physician.

CHAPTER XI.
EDWARD found himself at the end of his journey in a few hours. Fortunately,
the good man was at home, and heard his recital with the utmost consternation
and surprise; he by no means approved of either the wife or sister being
informed of this dreadful news, till it was more fully confirmed; and having,
from the servant's account, obtained two officers of the civil power to
thoroughly search the building, he resolved to attend them himself; and they
set off in less than three hours after Edward's arrival.

The evening was advancing, when they beheld at a distance the lofty towers of
the abbey; they were therefore obliged to defer their intention till the next
morning.

Neither Clementina nor Sisera expected signor Maserini's return till the
evening following the day he left his lodgings. Edward, therefore, informed the
physician they would not be unhappy though they should receive no intelligence
from them. As soon as it was light they entered the abbey, attended by a
workman who was able to remove any kind of intricate wood work which might tend
to a discovery. They first examined all those apartments that led to the west
tower, and which, by the marks of the footsteps, seemed as if signor Maserini
had crossed them: they plainly perceived the spots of blood, but could discover
no other mark or clue to their wishes, in either of the rooms. They then
searched each part on that side of the building; but their diligence proved
unsuccessful: in short, every recess of the abbey was looked into with the most
scrutinizing attention, yet not the least sign could be discovered that
indicated a mortal to have been in the place, except ^he footsteps and the
blood. They were all at a loss what to suppose; and about evening they finished
their search, and left the abbey more perplexed than when they entered it.
Edward took his master's horse from the stable, and shut the gates, but
determined to leave them, as before, unlocked.

After a hasty meal, the physician, two officers and Edward, set off for the
former's habitation: it was very late before they arrived there; the men were
liberally rewarded for their trouble. Edward then consulted what method would
be the most prudent, to inform the ladies of this mournful event; the old
gentleman undertook himself the disagreeable office of communicating it to them
the next morning; it was therefore agreed that he should remain at his house
till the affair was over. They then took leave for the night, the one grieved
for the loss of his young friend, whom he had loved and admired from his
infancy; the other for an excellent master, whom he had revered and served from
his cradle.

To describe the situation of Clementina and Sisera at the physician's recital,
though he related the dreadful circumstance by degrees, and with the utmost
caution, would beggar description; it will therefore be necessary to draw a
ve^l over this affecting scene; and suffice it to say, their grief was little
short of distraction. The extraordinary manner of signor Maserini's
disappearance left room for the most horrid suppositions, whilst the faint hope
which the uncertainty of his dissolution inspired, served to make each cruel
idea more terrible and lasting. Clementina's situation was, if possible, more
dreadful than her sister's, as she was in a strange country, and some time gone
with child. The physician acted like a father to them both, and declared, that
while he lived they should never want a friend.

The wonderful event of signor Maserini's disapearance was soon spread over the
country. Grasville Abbey was now become a place of much greater terror than
before, as those suspicions of its being haunted seemed in all probability to
be confirmed; none of the peasants would go near it after dark; in short, every
inhabitant was surprised and terrified.

Six weeks had not elapsed, before signor Maserini's uncle died; the fortune
now devolved to his sister: a more lucky circumstance could not have happened,
as she would have it in her power to support Clementina and herself in a
genteel and comfortable manner, without remaining under the least obligation to
any one in point of pecuniary aid; and the physician undertook to settle those
affairs relative to the old gentleman's death.

In a little time, every thing was completed, and she found herself in
possession of not only a moderate, but affluent income. Signora Maserini now
determi^ed to make the life of her sister-in-law as agreeable as possible; she
knew that Clementina wished much to return to her own country; nor had Sisera
any desire to remain in Italy, where every object reminded her of her late
misfortunes; she therefore resolved, after Clementina was brought to bed, to
consult if some method could not be taken to clear her innocence in respect to
Felicia's death, and a reconciliation brought about with the lady abbess, so
that they could, without impropriety, reside totally in France.

Clementina was delivered of twins, a boy and girl. For some time her life was
despaired of, although the judgment of the physician and the tenderness of
Sisera were equally exerted toward her recovery; but in six weeks, to the joy
of both, she so far mended as to be pronounced out of danger.

Signora Maserini now resolved to ask the doctor's opinion concerning their
appearance in France. He offered to go himself to the convent of N****, and, if
possible, to settle with her ladyship those disagreeable circumstances that had
caused her displeasure

Sisera returned him many thanks, and accepted his friendly assistance. They,
however, resolved to let Clementina know nothing of it, till the business was
finished: an excuse was therefore made for his leaving Italy, and his journey
to France said to be on account of family affairs, which he had to transact in
that country. -- He was so fortunate as to return in a very short time, with
the agreeable intelligence, that Clementina's character was entirely cleared,
respecting her sister's death, and all their affairs settled at the convent, in
an amicable manner. -- This gave Clementina as much pleasure as it was possible
for her to enjoy; every thing was ready in a few weeks; the parting with the
physician was affecting on both sides; to speak of their obligations to him
would, they knew, be the only way to make him repent of his goodness: -- they
were therefore necessitated to express their gratitude in as few words as
possible.

A house was prepared for them in a private part of Paris, and every thing made
ready for their reception. -- In this state they lived for some years, and
enjoyed as much happiness as the remembrance of those misfortunes they had
suffered, would permit. -- The children were their greatest care; they served
in some degree to dispel that melancholy which had taken so deep a root in
their bosoms since signor Maserini's disappearance.

Grasville Abbey remained in the same condition, except the gradual and slow
decay of the external part: it was taken no notice of by its owner, while fear
and superstition prevented any interruption from those who resided near i^. --
Count D'Ollifont continued but a short time in Spain after the keys were
returned; he made a tour to England, and, as it was supposed, intended to
settle there.

About twelve years elapsed, and nothing particular happened to distress
signora Maserini or her sister-in-law, except the death of the phy^ician and
Edward; when the former was taken ill with a violent sever, and lived but a
week; during that time she was delirious, but had before settled her affairs in
such a manner, as to leave Clementina the chief part of her fortune.

Alfred and Matilda were now obliged to exert their childish abilities, to
comfort their mother for the loss of her only friend; she had often made
repeated solicitations to be admitted to her father's favor; but the marquis
was obstinate, and complained of her elopement from the convent, as an excuse
for his cruelty. -- Her whole attention was, therefore, paid to her children;
and through a fond yet mistaken notion, she impaired her income, by giving them
an education far superior to any situation in life she could ever hope to
procure them; they, however, rewarded her love in the tenderness of their
conduct toward her, and the quickness of their capacity in receiving those
instructions that were given them.

Alfred already showed a wish for the army; his mother determined not to check
his inclinations, though she dreaded the dangers he might be exposed to: -- she
therefore purchased a commission for him, and he soon after departed for
Flanders, where the regiment was stationed.

Madame Maserini had never informed her children of the dreadful manner in
which their father disappeared; she considered it might impress their young
minds with a horror which might cast a gloom over the brighter scenes of life;
they were therefore always taught to believe signer Maserini was killed by a
fall from his horse, when hunting; nor was there any probability to suppose the
real cause would ever be discovered to them, as neither Clementina nor Sisera
had informed any one to the contrary.

About six months after her son's departure, madame Maserini was taken ill; for
some time it was thought only a slight disorder, but afterward confirmed to be
dangerous. -- The most eminent physicians were procured; but their exertions
proved fruitless. -- She now wished to communicate to her son that which she
had so studiously kept from him; she determined, however, not to relate it to
Matilda, as the surprise and shock would be too great for her; this caused
madame Maserini to wish so much to see Alfred, which was before mentioned; he
did not, however, arrive till her dissolution.

CHAPTER XII. EMBARRASSMENT.
-- Reason, the power
To guess at right and wrong, the twinkling lamp
Of wandering life, that winks and wakes by turns,
Fooling the follower, betwixt shade and shining.
CONGREVE.
"FORTITUDE is one of the noblest virtues appertaining to human nature, and
stamps upon those who possess it an unfading luster, which does honor to the
name of man. He who labors under the lash of adversity, and bears up against
misfortune with a pious resignation, must be pleasing to the Supreme Being,
while his conduct is universally admired by his fellow creatures."

This was Alfred's argument to his sister, as he tenderly conjured her to
moderate her grief, and look upon him not only as a brother, but as a guardian
and protector.

They both had just entered their twentieth year. Alfred was in his person
handsome and manly; Matilda beautiful and delicate. The former's disposition
was generous and noble, his temper rather impetuous; yet he was always ready to
forgive: there was, however, a kind of haughty pride in his character, which
would sometimes cast a shade over his other virtues.

Matilda was amiable in the highest degree -- to give a description of her
qualifications would be needless, when we say she was every thing a fond and
tender parent could wish her to be. It was not till just before they retired to
rest, that Matilda recollected the paper her mother had wrote on; she took it
from the escritoire, and gave it to her ^^other, who wished to read it alone,
and promised to inform his sister of the contents the next morning. As soon as
he entered his chamber, he eagerly opened it, and read the almost illegible
words of his dying mother: --

TO ALFRED MASERINI.
Before I depart from this state of mortality, and am numbered with the dead, I
would wish to inform you, my dear son, of a circumstance that lies heavy at my
heart. The pains of death encompass me; yet I will, if possible, acquaint you
that your father died not in that manner you were always taught to believe: --
he ^^tered* Grasville Abbey with an intent to search the building, and from
that fatal period was never heard of more. Heaven forgive me if I judge
wrongfully, or condemn the innocent! but, though I have never communicated my
suspicions to any one, yet I have the strongest reasons to suppose the chief
person concerned in this horrid affair was --


Madame Maserini had wrote so far, when she dropped her pen, and expired.

Alfred was almost petrified with astonishment and horror; the fatal name, so
near being known, was not yet revealed: his mother's senses might (...) the
time be deranged; but this idea entirely vanished, when he considered how much
she had wished to see him, on account of relating a circumstance she chose to
communicate to no other person. He resolved for the present to conceal this
from his sister; she had already suffered enough by her mother's death: to
inform her, therefore, of the contents of the writing, would only occasion new
sorrow and distress.

The next morning Matilda eagerly inquired the purport of her mother's letter:
she was shocked to see him look so ill, but naturally supposed he had not
rested well. Alfred told her it was a memorandum relative to her fortune, (...)
other matters; but she observed in him an uncommon agitation the whole evening,
yet forbore to inquire further, though she was certain there was some
disagreeable secret he did not choose to divulge.

Alfred gave orders for his mother's funeral, and had her handsomely interred.
He then consulted with his sister in what manner she meant to proceed with the
small sum she was now possessed of. Madame Maserini had equally divided her
fortune between them, but always particularly recommended Matilda to her
brother's care; he therefore generously determined to add half of his to his
sister's income, but first wished to settle her in some genteel situation
before he returned to his regiment.

Alfred, after some persuasions, promised Matilda he would write to the marquis
of ****, their grandfather, to inform him of his daughter's death, and her
situation. She considered, as lady Eleanor had been dead some time, and his
hopes concerning her marriage entirely at an end, that he might receive her
with some degree of tenderness, though he never would look upon their mother.

The young soldier felt himself hurt, to write a letter of supplication to a
man who had behaved so inhumanly to his own daughter, and slightingly to
himself and sister; however, the idea of Matilda's welfare quenched those
sparks of pride which had before kindled in his bosom.

About a week after madame Maserini's funeral, he sent the following letter, in
which might be observed a kind of inward disdain, not likely to move or gain
upon the feelings of a man so utterly void of sensibility as the marquis.

From ALFRED MASERINI to the MARQUIS of ****.
My Lord,
Impressed with the idea that natural propriety, as well as common respect,
commands me to acquaint you with the death of my mother, I have taken the
liberty to trouble your lordship with a letter, under the sanction of
communicating that information; although the dissolution of a daughter whom you
have never seen, nor perhaps heard of, for many years, may signify but little
to your lordship's feelings, and the knowledge of it appear frivolous and
impertine^^, when conveyed by the handwriting of her son.

But, if possible, my lord, a more forcible reason urged me to intrude on your
patience; it is to supplicate a small share of that favor and protection for
my sister Matilda Maserini, which her mother was so unfortunate as never to
receive. Your lordship must naturally suppose my station in life prevents me
from affording her that attention so necessary at her present age and
situation; the service of my country will in a very short time call me to
Flanders; otherwise, I should glory to make it known to your lordship and the
world, that I could prove myself her guardian and protector, without remaining
under an obligation to either relations or friends.

Your lordship, except myself, is the nearest relation she has; it is,
therefore from you she hopes to find that countenance which will prevent her
being looked upon with contempt, and, consequently, preserve her from
temptations and insults; for, when parted from her brother, deserted by her
other relations, and forsaken by those who in time of prosperity and affluence
^alled themselves her friends, your lordship must consider she will stand a sit
object of prey for wretches whose whole life is dedicated to the seduction of
virtue, and the ruin of female innocence. The idea, my lord, almost drives me
to madness; yet a horrid thought will sometimes intrude, that she may, more
(...) necessity than inclination, prove a disgrace to her family, and an
everlasting curse to my happiness. Were such a suspicion by any means well
grounded, or even if I had not the most perfect confidence in her virtue and
honor, I should bless that hand which would strike her to the heart, and enjoy
the moment when I beheld her at my feet a breathless corpse.

The annuity left her by her mother, added to that part of my income which I
mean to make over to her, will support her in such a manner that she will be no
disgrace to your lordship. I only wish to obtain for her, permission to reside
with you; her accomplishments, manners and behavior are such as no nobleman
need be ashamed of; and, permit me to say, my lord, her natural goodness of
heart, and gratitude for your protection, will make her a comfort to your
declining years.

I hope your lordship will take the purport of this letter into consideration;
-- and that your lordship's opinion may coincide with the supplication I have
made for my sister, is the sincere wish of,

My Lord, Your lordship's obedient nephew, ALFRED MASERINI.
Paris.

This letter was dispatched as soon as possible, and the messenger ordered to
wait for an answer. He returned the next day, and delivered Alfred a small
packet, sealed up, Matilda's heart beat high with expectation; she eagerly
watched her brother's looks while he read a few words which were written on the
outside paper; but soon observed by his countenance there was nothing he hoped
for from the marquis. She faintly asked what were the contents. -- "Short and
explicit!" he answered; while pride and contempt were visible in his features
-- "Read, (said he) and judge of it yourself, Matilda." He threw it on the
table; she, trembling, took it up, and read the following words:

TO ALFRED MASERINI.
The marquis detested your mother; he has also the same hatred against her
children. Your childish and romantic petition was read; the violent passion it
caused in him has brought on a fever. His orders were, that this note should be
written and sent to you by

FATHER LAURENCE.


"But what letter was that (asked Matilda) which was enclosed in this paper?"

Alfred showed it her; it was his own letter returned. They had heard that a
priest was the constant companion of the marquis, and that it was supposed he
would stand a chance for some part of his patron's wealth: but the messenger
informed them that father Laurence entirely lived at the castle, an^ that the
marquis had been heard to say, several times, that he should leave him the
whole of his fortune.

The only person they now had to apply to, was a gentleman in England, a
distant relation of their mother's: he had been sent over to this country by an
uncle, on affairs relative to the family. The old gentleman died while he was
in London, and left him a small fortune. After this event, he determined to
settle in the city, and commenced business in the liquor trade: he first kept
wine-vaults; from that rose a step higher, and was called a wine merchant; in
this line he accumulated a considerable deal of money by importing foreign
goods to this country. To add to his good fortune, he one year received a prize
of ten thousand pounds from the lottery; and in about two years after married
an heiress whose fortune amounted to three times that sum.

The friends of the lady were at first so displeased with the union, that for
some months no notice was taken of her; but time soon brought about a
reconciliation; they determined to make the best of her husband, that he might
not in i^ his present situation in life disgrace their name and family. His
wife was a woman of fashion, and had to her name the additional title of lady;
they therefore found means to get their new relation knighted; and he now was
distinguished by the appellation of Sir Pet^r Peviquil. His brother-in-law died
about two years after their marriage, and, having no family, left his sister an
income of six hundred a year. They now thought proper to quit business
entirely, and reside at the court end of the town. Their manner of living was,
according to lady Peviquil's wishes, in the first style and taste: they were
noted for giving the most superb and elegant entertainments of any in London*
In short, sir Peter and lady Peviquil were allowed to be the first fashionable
couple in the great metropolis.

CHAPTER XIII.
MADAME Maserini had received repeated solicitations from her relation to visit
him in London; she, accordingly, a few months after Sisera's death, determined
to see England, considering it might dispel the melancholy that event had
occasioned her: the children she committed to the care of a faithful servant,
during her stay, which was about two months. Mr. Peviquil had not then quitted
business. She received the most polite and friendly attention both from him and
his lady, and resided totally at their house while she remained in this
country. She always since that time had spoken of them to Alfred and Matilda,
as people well worthy their esteem, and had often regretted their living so far
distant as to make their society impossible.

Since his mother's death, Alfred had received a letter of condolence from sir
Peter, who had accidentally heard the news from a friend; this letter contained
a kind and pressing invitation for them to spend a few months in England: which
offer they were now resolved to accept, provided Alfred could obtain leave of
absence long enough, and permission to quit his country. This, through
interest, he accomplished, on condition he should be ready to return at a short
notice.

Matilda, little used to the gaiety of the world, though she had nearly all her
life resided in a city renowned for its luxury and dissipation, considered that
if she was pleased with sir Peter's family, by paying a small gratuity she
could reside with them without any inconvenience. This was, in some degree,
Alfred's opinion; but he was much better acquainted with mankind, and the
dangers that attended a fashionable life, to view this scheme in so pleasing a
light as his sister. He well knew the dissipated life of intrigue, and other
vices, so closely followed by most of the English circles; he had been
necessitated, in some respects, to partake of those follies in Paris, which he
knew were daily practiced in London; and his soul sickened at the thought of
leaving Matilda exposed to such dangers, friendless and unprotected. Possessed
of that nice sense of honor which is supposed to constitute the soldier and
the gentleman, it in some respect served to make his life uncomfortable.
Generous to a great degree, he was never so happy as when he could make others
so; but a haughty and stubborn pride hurt him when he received an obligation.
Ready to take an affront, and as ready to resent it, he was sometimes
disagreeable company; yet his person, behavior, and character, procured him
admittance to the first parties.

Matilda was totally unacquainted with the vices of the great; her mother had
only kept up (...) society of a few friends since her return to France; yet her
manners were elegant without affectation; her deportment graceful, yet easy;
and her accomplishments by no means inferior to the first ranks of life. Yet
her ideas of the world in general were entirely ill founded: she judged of
others by herself, and had so little ^otion of the villainy of mankind, as to
be easily deceived by any one under the mask of flattery and dissimulation.

After some persuasions of his sister, Alfred determined to answer sir Peter's
letter, with an acceptance of his kind invitation. The same day month was fixed
for their departure; and that period of time was fi^led up with necessary
preparations for their journey.

Matilda was all expectation, yet a deep melancholy still clouded her future
prospects; the loss of her mother preyed much on her spirits; and while her eye
beamed pleasure at the idea of seeing London and gay life, a watery gem would
often intrude, and dim its luster, when she considered the distance she should be
from the tomb of a parent whom she had so dearly loved, and whose memory she so
much revered. Alfred was silent and thoughtful; his spirits were fled; the
contents of the paper written by his mother served to perplex and distress him,
while his anxiety for the welfare of his sister continually preyed upon his
mind. As the time drew nearer for their leaving Paris, he became less pleased
with the plan on which they were going to proceed. He had always heard his
mother speak highly of the family; but their situation in life at that time was
entirely different from the present. -- Though in a capital (...) of business,
they neither were considered, nor looked upon themselves* as people of fashion;
their manner of living, as he now understood, was one continual scene of gaiety
and dissipation. Those reports might be false; and on their being so, he
entirely placed his hopes respecting Matilda's making one of their family.

Sir Peter's letter was extremely friendly; to have refused what he so
earnestly requested, would not only have been impolite behavior, but would,
without doubt, have offended him. -- This mode of reasoning, in some degree,
lessened his disquietude; yet he resolved within himself not to leave his
sister in England, without being certain her situation was strictly accordant
both with propriety and honor.

The day of their departure at length arrived, -- Matilda, as they passed
through the gates of the city, bid a melancholy adieu to her native country. --
The recollection of those happy juvenile hours she had enjoyed with a parent
whose tenderness and maternal fondness she never more could experience, added
to her ideas of the friendless situation and unprotected condition she would be
left in when parted from her brother, entirely overcame that fortitude she had
shown at the beginning of their journey; and, almost convulsed with grief, she
burst into an agony of tears.

Alfred raised his head from a reverie which he had been in from their first
setting off; he conjured his sister to be composed, and once more tenderly
assured her of his protection. -- A post carriage conveyed them from Paris to
Calais; an elderly man attended them, who had lived in the capacity of a
servant with their mother, since the death of Edward; he was by birth an
Englishman, though he chiefly had resided in France.

They were necessitated to wait some time for the packet-boat; Matilda,
therefore, who was much indisposed, retired to take a few hours' rest, while
Alfred looked over some papers of his mother's, which were in a small trunk.

Matilda had not yet examined it, supposing it to be full of waste papers,
which were of no consequence; she only brought it with her to hold a few
articles of dress when she arrived in London.

After having removed a few of the upper papers, he discovered a miniature of
his mother; it was the same which Edward found in the abbey, and had the
identical piece of ribband hanging to the ring, the remaining part of which had
seemingly been broken by force, or by a sudden shock. Alfred looked on the
resemblance with attention; he contemplated the features of his departed
mother, with a melancholy pleasure, and sighed at the idea that he never more
should look on the original. -- Close to it was the picture of his father. --
Alfred had always been told he was extremely like him, and for the first time
thought so himself. -- Both he and his sister had often seen the miniatures
before their mother's illness, and after her death every place was searched for
them, but to no purpose; nor had they the least idea of their being placed in
this trunk.

Alfred carefully looked over the papers, and found none of them worth notice,
till he had nearly emptied them all out upon the table, when a roll of
parchment, with the name of Sisera Maserini at the bottom, struck his eye. He
immediately perused it, and found it was written by his aunt, about six months
before her death. -- It contained an account of their misfortunes, from his
father's first seeing his mother at the convent, till their return to France,
and every minute particular relative to signor Maserini's entrance of Grasville
Abbey, and his disappearance. She also at one part seemed to suspect his
cousin, count D'Ollifont, to be privy to the affair, though he was then in
Spain.

Alfred's emotion and astonishment were past description; he burnt with eager
desire to see the inside of the abbey; but that would now be impossible, till
he should return to France. He knew not how to revenge the loss of his father,
as no proof could be brought to charge any one with the guilt; -- yet,
according to what he had read, he could not avoid supposing that the count was
concerned: nor was there a doubt but his mother also intended to have written
the same name.

He carefully placed the manuscript in a private drawer of his own, and
determined not to inform his sister of the event, as her spirits were already
agitated enough, without any new source for horror of distress.

When she rose, he agreeably surprised her by the discovery of the pictures,
and informed her he had looked over the papers in the trunk, and could find
none but frivolous fragments of no use or consequence.

They were obliged to remain at the place till the beginning of the next day;
they then crossed over to Dover, and slept there that night. Matilda was yet
much indisposed, partly occasioned by sea-sickness. The next evening, after a
fatiguing day of post traveling, they found themselves at a principal inn at
London.

CHAPTER XIV.
Would you rekindle all your ancient fires?
Extinguish first your modern vain desires:
Still it is yours, your glories to retrieve;
Lop but the branches, and the tree shall live:
With these erect a pile for sacrifice;
And in the midst throw all your cards and dice!

WHEN the soul is totally absorbed in melancholy reflections on past
misfortunes, we are too apt to encourage oppressive ideas, by taking a
retrospect of the calamiti^s that may attend futurity.

These ideas sink our spirits under new horrors and distress; imagination
presents to the fancy troubles and sorrows we are never likely to experience.

To be too confident of our success and abilities at the first out-set in life,
naturally leads to extravagance and neglect; we are disappointed at our
ambition's not being gratified so early as we expected, and consequently sicken
of that employment which occasions our mortification and chagrin. Yet
diffidence and timidity are far worse companions to struggle with through the
rugged path of life: we continually stumble on dangers and vexations in our
hazardous voyage; while they chiefly contribute to multiply adversity, and
paint the events that may succeed, worse than those we have already suffered.

Fortitude forsakes the breast which is governed by terror and self-interest;
happiness is no more, the sunshine of hope is eclipsed by the heavy clouds of
despair, and we sink into that misery which, through courage and exertion, we
might have overcome with honor and respect.

Matilda did not totally despair: and Alfred, by conversations of this nature,
strove to dispel that melancholy which was settled in her features during the
latter part of their journey. It was entirely through her persuasion that her
brother undertook the affair; she was now sorry she had biassed his opinion;
for she even regretted leaving Paris; and the nearer she arrived to London, her
pleasure in seeing it gradually decreased.

Reflection had in a great degree lessened those expectations she supposed
would be gratified when she entered this city; and the romantic ideas she had
formed of remaining with sir Peter's family in England, seemed now to have many
obstacles which she never before thought of.

It was about six o'clock, in a wet uncomfortable evening of February, when
they arrived at the inn. After some little time, the chief part of their
baggage was put into a hackney coach, and Leonard, who was tolerably well
acquainted with London, dispatched in it to Grosvenor-square, with a polite
message, saying his master and miss Maserini would pay their respects in
person, in less than two hours.

Alfred and Matilda, having ordered coffee, remained till near eight; during
which time they made some little alteration in their dress. They then stepped
into a hack, and ordered it also to drive to sir Peter Peviquil's, in
Grosvenor-square.

Neither of them was under any embarrassment concerning the English language,
as they both had been used to converse in it from their childhood, and
pronounced it nearly as well as their own language.

On their arrival at the place to which they had ordered the coachman to drive,
the square was full of carriages; nor did they observe more than one
hackney-coach in the whole train: they stopped close to it, unable to proceed
any farther for the crowd. Alfred looked out to see if there was any
probability of their getting nearer to sir Peter's house, which he was informed
was on the opposite side of the square, when, to his inexpressible supprise, by
the light of a footman's flambeau, who passed at the same time, he beheld
Leonard in the coach he had before noticed, seated with the baggage in the same
state as when he set out from the inn.

The man at the same moment recognized his master, and acquainted him that he
found, from his first entrance in the square it would be impossible for him to
get to the door of sir Peter's house, there being a grand entertainment there
in honor of his daughter's birthday; and that the gentlemen's carriages would
not permit a common hack to draw up; he was afraid to go himself in search of
it on account of the baggage he must have left behind; but he said he had sent
several messages to the servants concerning his situation, but that he had
received no answer.

Alfred was vexed, yet he could not help smiling, at the fellow's recital: they
were now in a line of carriages leading to the house: he knew it would be some
time before they could arrive there; yet to walk would be almost impossible on
account of his sister, as the rain poured down with uncommon violence. They
therefore determined to wait till the coach, in due course, should draw up to
the door: in about twenty minutes they found themselves before the entrance of
sir Peter's mansion.

The coachman, by Alfred's order, knocked a single rap: a footman in a handsome
livery appeared; he asked, in a surly manner, what was wanted? the man
answered, a gentleman in a hackney coach wanted to see sir Peter Peviquil.

The footman replied with some insolence, "His master could not then be spoke
with," and immediately shut the door.

Alfred's pride (who overheard this conversation), took fire; -- he directly
gave the coachman a card, and ordered him to knock a double rap at the door,
and desire the servant to deliver it to sir Peter.

The man at first hesitated, but at last complied with the request. In a short
time he returned with a polite message from sir Peter, requesting they would
make his house their home; and that he himself would, if possible, welcome them
to England in less than an hour.

The servant was now all civility; both the coaches were discharged, and
Leonard saw the baggage safe in the house, while Alfred and Matilda were
conducted by sir Peter's valet, through a noble hall, elegantly adorned with
lamps, and lined with servants in waiting, to a handsome parlour. The house
seemed in total confusion; and the number of fashionable company and nobility
that was there was evident from their names being announced, as they ascended
the great stairs leading to the rooms of reception. Sir Peter's genteel conduct
in some degree compensated for the impertinence of his porter, and banished
that anger from Alfred's bosom, which the insolence of the latter had
occasioned. In about two hours the gentleman himself appeared: he tenderly
embraced them both, and expressed, with the most pleasing affability, his
happiness in seeing them in London: he regretted (he said) the etiquette which
prevented lady Peviquil and his daughter from leaving the rooms above, to
perform the duties o^ hospitality and politeness; but that he was sure they
would impatiently wait fot the breakfast hour in the morning, to be introduced
to their amiab^^ relations.

He, however, begged they would make themselves happy; order supper, and retire
to rest (...) what time they thought proper, as chambers were prepared for
them, and also proper accommodation for their servant. He then took his leave
for the rest of the evening, and (...) the young travelers highly delighted
with his courteous behavior.

They made but a short repast, though the table was spread with dainties
elegantly served up; about (...) they desired to be conducted to their
different apartments; but the noise of the house, and their own reflections,
prevented either of them from enjoying repose.

CHAPTER XV.
THE noise and confusion in the house did not seem over before four in the
morning; -- Matilda heard the doors fastened half an hour after; -- and about
five, silence reigned through every part.

She once more strove to drive away uncomfortable reflections, and fell into a
disturbed slumber: distressing dreams harassed her imagination with horrid
visions; the figure of her* the^ was constantly before her eyes, reproaching
her for entering a house remarkable for gaiety and dissipation.

She awoke about t^n, but little re^reshed, and (...) up for fear of detaining
the breakfast-table; but to her great surprise, as she descended the
staircase, a servant was but just opening the windows. She inquired at what
hour the family assembled in the breakfast parlour; the man answered, generally
at half past eleven, sometimes twelve.

Alfred had been up near an hour, and was equally astonished with his sister,
at the servant's intelligence: -- he proposed a walk round the square, (...)
^he sitting-rooms were in order; which she gladly accepted.

Matilda seized the opportunity to ask her brother, considering the little they
had seen, how he liked their situation; and also his opinion of sir Peter.

Alfred replied, from the short time he had been in company of sir Peter
Peviquil, he seemed to be a man who would interest any one in his favor, even
at a first interview.

"But, Matilda," said he, "we must not depend too much on the smooth,
well-timed speeches of a man of fashion; for though both he and the family in
general were friendly and agreeable in every respect, yet their manner of
living would kill you. Leonard informed me last night, that he had learnt from
the servants, the family hardly ever retired to rest before three or four in
the morning; that they were never without company when at home, and that their
rooms are filled with the first people of distinction and fashion. Even if
their diss^^ation did not effect your health, you certainly must consider how
improper a situation this is, for a young woman whose fortune is barely
competent to support her.

Matilda acquiesced with his observation, yet was hurt at the idea of her own
insignificance.

In about an hour they returned to the house; prepararations were made for
breakfast, but the family had not assembled.

Sir Peter, in a short time, entered the room, and introduced his lady,
daughter, and son.

Lady Peviquil was, in person, tall and elegant, her deportment was graceful,
and in her manner she was the woman of fashion; yet a haughty pride in her
disposition was visible, even to a common beholder, at first sight; and cast a
deep shade over those accomplishments which showed her a lady of rank. Miss
Peviquil had the day before entered her nineteenth year; she was tall, genteel,
lively, and good tempered; in the ornamental part of education she was
accomplished, but, like her mother, a total stranger to domestic duties. In
conversation, she was gay and witty, and accounted, by the connoisseurs of
fashionable manners, a tolerably smart, pretty girl.

Henry Peviquil was one-and-twenty; entirely free from pride, handsome in his
person, and pleasing in his behavior and address; extremely dissipated, and
fond of being thought so.

He had received the education of a gentleman, and was left a fortune of six
hundred a year by an uncle of his mother's. He was shortly expected to set out
on the grand tour, and only waited till a proper companion could be obtained.

The young travelers were treated in the most friendly manner by sir Peter.
Lady Peviquil, her daughter, and Matilda, took an airing in the coach; while
Henry drove his new friend round Hyde Park in his curricle.

Cards were delivered out to form a select party of friends in the evening, who
were to be introduced to the young foreigners.

At their return, they dressed for dinner, which was served up by candlelight.
The select party at night consisted of about thirty persons of fashion and
distinction. The formal introduction to them all by her ladyship, was tiresome
and disagreeable to Matilda: yet she returned the compliments of each
individual with a grace which did honor even to the drawing room of sir Peter
Peviquil.

Alfred had been used to the gaieties of Paris, and being as well versed as his
sister in the English language, found himself under no embarrassment in a
London company.

The next day he declared his intention of taking lodgings for himself and
servant; this was strongly opposed by sir Peter; but he persisted in his
resolution, and begged the assistance of Mr. Peviquil in the undertaking.
Henry, with his usual goodnature, eagerly complied with the request, and
declared, he knew of handsome apartments that were to be let in Bond-street;
which was no great distance from Grosvenor-square, and made it the more
agreeable, as sir Peter requested he would spend as much of his time as
possible with him and his family.

The gentlemen viewed the rooms that morning, while the ladies attended a
music-meeting. Alfred approved (...) o^ their situation and convenience; he
immediately engaged them, and was to take possession the next day.

Henry Peviquil was engaged for the beginning of the evening, and sir Peter
rather indisposed with a cold; it was therefore agreed that Alfred should
escort her ladyship, his sister, and miss Peviquil to the theater; and a
stage-box was accordingly retained for them.

Matilda was delighted with the tragedy, which was Hamlet: although her
knowledge of the language would not permit her to understand every sentence,
yet she could perfectly make out the plot and management of the piece; and was
charmed with the ingenuity of the author. Her ladyship paid more attention to
the company than to the stage; while her daughter was entirely taken up in
observing Alfred, whose attention was fixed on a lady in the opposite box. Her
figure and manner charmed him; in short, the latter part of the evening he
quite neglected the performance, in the notice he took of the fair incognita.

At the close of the entertainment, Alfred inquired of lady Peviquil the name
of the young lady opposite them: her ladyship answered, "It was lady Caroline
Albourn, daughter of lord Albourn, a nobleman renowned for his large fortune
and good character; and, lady Caroline," continued her ladyship, "is allowed to
be a beautiful and accomplished young lady." "My ideas, my lady." returned
Alfred, "perfectly agree, in the former observation, with the opinion of the
world."

"Lord, Mr. Maserini," said miss Peviquil, hurt at the compliment paid to
another, "surely there are as handsome women in the house as lady Caroline
Albourn!"

"Pardon me, madam," replied Alfred, "all are handsome; yet some more beautiful
than others; nor can the remark be more fully exemplified, than when lady
Caroline or miss Peviquil make their appearance."

This well turned compliment entirely stifled the resentment of the lady, and
she immediately resumed her usual gaiety and good temper.

As they crossed the lobby, they were met by Henry Peviquil, who, after helping
Alfred to assist the ladies to their coach, stopped him from following.

"Ladies," said he, "I must request you will dispense with the company of your
knight errant from conducting you home, as I arrest him for the remainder of
the night. Therefore, my dear Maserini, take leave of the fair damsels, and
follow me."

Alfred begged to be excused, and desired he would consider there were none but
ladies in the coach.

"Oh!" returned Hen^y, "there is a footman behind, who is able to defend twice
as many."

"I do not take it kind of you," said her ladyship, "to force Mr. Maserini from
us, if you do not like to attend yourself."

Matilda was anxious her brother should return with them, and miss Peviquil
afraid of losing the gallant conversation of the young Frenchman: but it
availed nothing: Henry, after begging all their pardons, and declaring he would
make it up with them in the morning, closed the coach door, and ordered the
coachman to drive home.

He then said hold of Alfred's arm and told him he must now introduce him to a
set of friends, whose names he did not choose to mention before the ladies: "for
though," said he, "I am not a gamester myself, yet I spend some of my time in
the fashionable company of those who love play."

Alfred was rather displeased at his impetuous behavior; but considered it as
the warmth of his friendship, and the consequence of his having partaken that
evening rather too freely of the bottle.

They arrived, after some time, at a well known house in St. James's-street,
and were conducted to the room of fashionable company.

Alfred was struck with their appearance: the horrid countenances of some, whom
fortune had not so favored that evening -- the intoxicated joy of others who
had emptied the pockets of their friends -- and the extreme agitation of the
whole assembly, whose expectations were all on the table, made it a scene of
disagreeable reflection to those who had never been addicted to that
destructive vice. Alfred plainly perceived his companion was well known to
them; he was asked to play, but refused; and Alfred likewise begged to remain
out, but was obliged to bet, that he might not seem particular, as all those
who did not sit down, laid on the success of each player: but the stakes were
not large at their part of the room.

In about an hour a table was vacant, and a party accordingly mustered to fill
it. Alfred was over persuaded, and sat down with Henry Peviquil, who proposed
no high play: this was unanimously agreed upon, and a small sum settled, to the
satisfaction of every person. They broke up in about three hours, and Alfred
found himself a winner of about a guinea. He was complim^^ted on his judgment
of the game, and invited for the next evening. Henry and Alfred both returned
to Grosvenor-square, and arrived there about four in the morning.

When the family met the next day, Henry Peviquil made his peace with the
ladies; but he found more difficulty in the undertaking than he expected: his
mother and sister were seriously offended; nor could Matilda forgive him,
though she was necessitated to say to the contrary.

Alfred was far from being displeased with the company he had seen; struck as
he was at first with their appearance, the latter part of the time they seemed
more agreeaable to him; and their ready acquiescence to play for a small sum,
confirmed him in the mistaken opinion that they were not a common class of
gamblers. He was not averse to meet them the following evening, nor did morning
reflection by any means alter his ideas concerning the transactions of the
night.

Lady Peviquil informed them, she had summoned a numerous company for that
evening, "and amongst the rest," added her ladyship, with a smile, which was
well understood, "I expect lord Albourn and his daughter."

Alfred was struck with astonishment -- he had engaged himself to the party in
St. James's-street; but this obstacle to his wishes he determined to surmount,
by begging Henry Peviquil to make his excuse, as he could not possibly be
guilty of such impolite behavior, as to absent himself from lady Peviquil's
drawing room, when she herself requested his company. -- But he might have
saved himself the trouble, as Henry intended to spend the forepart of the
evening in Grosvenor-square; yet he insisted on Alfred's accompanying him
there, after the rooms closed, which he supposed would not be very late.

CHAPTER XVI.
MATILDA took more pains than usual at the toilet: she understood from lady
Peviquil that numbers of fashionable people were to be there; she therefore
considered it would be a compliment to her ladyship to make some few additions
to her dress, which consisted of white satin. She wore the picture of her
father suspended on her bosom, by a gold cross and chain; her appearance was
beautiful, and she received no small compliments from sir Peter and his son.
Lady Peviquil and her daughter were rather cool in their behavior, and seemed
envious of her superior beauty and elegance. The rooms began to fill at nine
o'clock, and many persons of distinction were announced: among the rest the
Spanish ambassador was ushered in, and begged to introduce to sir Peter and his
lady, an intimate friend, who had accompanied him from Spain to England. The
gentleman was a foreigner of note, rather in the decline of life; yet his
person was handsome, and his manners elegant and accomplished: his excellency
had not yet been made known to Alfred or Matilda; sir Peter therefore
introduced them both at one time, the first as the Spanish ambassador, the
second as count D'Ollifont.

Alfred was struck motionless with horror and surprise; the supposed murderer
of his father stood before him: nor was the count's embarrassment less; for
before sir Peter could mention the name of Maserini, he cast his eye on the
picture of their father; his countenance immediately turned pale, and he showed
the greatest emotion.

Matilda, though she had never heard her mother speak highly of the count,
received him with politeness; but Alfred, after a few cold compliments, joined
lord Albourn and his daughter at another part of the room.

The behavior of both gentlemen was generally noticed: but each excused
himself, by saying it was surprise at the sudden introduction to a relation
almost unknown.

The count seemed struck with Matilda's figure and address; he chiefly attended
her the whole evening; which caused great envy and uneasiness in the breasts of
her fair friends; among these was miss Peviquil, who was extremely hurt at
being forsaken by Alfred Maserini, and more so at receiving such few
compliments from the ambassador and his friend.

Alfred dedicated the whole evening to lady Caroline, nor did she seem by any
means displeased at the attention paid her by the young Frenchman; her father
gave him a general invitation to Soho-square, as the friend and relation of sir
Peter Peviquil.

The agreeable conversation he had with the young lady, in some measure made up
for the surprise, horror, and dissatisfaction be felt at an introduction to the
count.

The attention paid Matilda by her relation did not pass unnoticed by her
brother; he determined next day to hint to his sister his dislike of him,
without entering into a particular de^ail of circumstances, which would only
distress and perplex her.

The rooms began to be thin about twelve; and in a little time after, lord
Albourn and his daughter took their leave; Alfred conducted the latter to her
carriage, then joined Henry Peviquil, and proceeded to St. James's street.

The same company was assembled, with some additions: and one of the strangers
was at the table where Henry and his friend were placed; they played higher
than the night before, and Alfred, at the breaking up of the party about half
past four in the morning, found himself a loser of thirty pounds; he paid the
money without the least chagrin, and was promised his revenge the next evening.
Henry Peviquil was also declared a debtor to the table, of twenty guineas. They
parted a little way from the house; the latter for Grosvenor-square, the former
for his new lodgings in Bond-street.

Matilda had taken notice of her brother at his introduction to the count, nor
could she conceive a reason for his abrupt behavior; her surprise, however,
was greatly heightened at the slighting manner in which he spoke of him, when
they were alone the following day. In vain she asked his meaning for the
dislike he showed; the more they conversed on the subject, his conversation
appeared the more strange and intricate. His ideas also seemed entirely changed
concerning their residence in London; her fears of dissipation and bad hours he
laughed at; declared himself pleased with sir Peter's family; and would not
permit her to mention a wish of leaving it.

Alfred was a constant attendant at lord Albourn's, the fore part of the day;
the latter he generally spent in the gay family of sir Peter; and the night and
beginning of the morning at the gaming table: he was now universally known as a
man of fashion, and his name familiar in the first circles, as the dissipated,
lively, and handsome Frenchman.

His sister saw, with concern, the effects of their London journey; she could
plainly observe her brother's fortune would be soon exhausted, in the manner he
lived: his character, as a gambler, was constantly made free with, and his
midnight exploits and quarrels commonly mentioned in general conversations. Her
own situation was also particularly disagreeable. Harrassed by the assiduities
of the count and many other admirers, she was continually plagued with their
importunities and flattery. Lady Peviquil had entirely thrown off the few
amiable qualities she seemed to possess; and being further acquainted with her
circumstances and friendless situation, she treated her little better than a
dependant on her bounty.

Miss Peviquil hated her for her beauty, and was hardly civil; in vain Matilda
begged her brother to leave England, and return to France; he laughed at her
complaints: she requested him only to conduct her there, and she would
immediately place herself in a convent, and cause him no further trouble: --
but her solicitations were vain; the destructive vice of gaming had already
taken possession of him: every obstacle, difficulty, and interest, vanished
before it; even the welfare of his sister, the honor of his family, the
treatment of his father, and the desire he had to see Grasville Abbey, were
thought of no more, when the gaming table appeared; lady Caroline was almost
forgot; in short, every sentiment of fortitude, courage, and humanity, with
other virtues which stamped on him the name of a gentleman and a soldier, were
almost swallowed up in a cursed infatuation for a fashionable vice.

Sir Peter, who was entirely governed by his lady, paid hardly any attention to
his fair relation: -- the whole family treated her with the utmost
indifference, except Henry Peviquil: -- his gallantry, like that of the count,
was entirely disgusting; and the most villanious views appeared under the mask
of friendly concern and pity for her situation; he would often hint his
knowledge of her circumstances* and the extravagance of her brother; which
extravagance he first introduced him to: -- his discourse would then turn into
violent protestations of his regard for her, and admiration of her beauty and
accomplishments.

Before Alfred, he showed no further signs of particularity in his behavior
than what common politeness required. Affairs were in this state, when one
evening, at a grand ball given by lady Peviquil, a stranger was introduced
under the name of Milverne, an only son of a lord of that name: he was just
arrived from Italy, where he had attended his father, who was in a declining
state of health: his elegant figure and agreeable manners were universally
noticed; -- he was requested to open the entertainment with a minuet, and a
lady was also fixed on for (...) purpose; but the latter being rather
indisposed, declined the ceremony and (...) attending on single dancing: the
young gentleman was therefore obliged to take another partner, and he
immediately requested the hand of Matilda: praises were whispered through every
part of the room, at the elegance and grace of the young performers: nor did
Mr. Milverne's attention end here; he continued among the crowd of her admirers
the whole evening, and greatly interrupted the soft speeches of the count.

Alfred danced with lady Caroline: but he was by no means so great a favorite
with his lordship as at their first interviews; nor did he seem pleased with
his daughter's resigning her hand to him as a partner: lady Caroline herself
appeared much attached to him; and Matilda thought she could perceive, in her
eyes and manner, something more than common regard; yet she never, in the
several visits and times she had seen her ladyship, which had brought on an
intimacy between the young ladies, received the least information to confirm
the opinion her ideas had suggested.

The company broke up about five in the morning* -- Matilda, vexed with the
impertinence of the count and Henry Peviquil, yet pleased with the conversation
o^ Mr. Milverne -- her brother equally hurt at the cool manner and treatment of
lord (...), but happy in finding his lordship's sentiments against him were not
imbibed by his fair daughter.

CHAPTER XVII. REFLECTION.
The thoughts of glory past, the present shame,
A thousand griefs shall waken at the name.
POPE'S HOMER.
THERE are a number of vicious and licentious vices, which will so far triumph
over human nature, as to seduce those from a track of virtue, that for years
have been respected as valuable members of society. Yet we see few but what, at
some time or other, feel the most severe pangs from remorse of conscience, and
a retrospect of the fair character they once held in the world; contrasted with
the scorn and slighting treatment they are necessitated to suffer from many
who, at an early part of life, would have been proud of their esteem, yet had
lived to behold their superiors reduced to the lowest state of penury and
distress.

Reflection is never more poignant than when happy scenes once enjoyed are
compared with the misery of a present state -- which misery has been occasioned
by neglect, indolence, or extravagance. The most abandoned experience moments,
when acute feelings assail them with redoubled force: yet these feelings in
some measure serve only to harden them in their crimes, and drive them to acts
of desperation. On others they take different effect; repentance, and shame for
what is past, urge them to amend for the future; give them strength and
inclination to disentangle themselves from those embarrassments they are
plunged into, and make them more cautious and wary through the remainder of
life.

Alfred, at serious intervals, was nearly distracted with the idea of his own
conduct; yet he had no power to reform: those resolutions of amendment made in
a morning, were thought of no more when the gambling hour approached; his care
for the welfare of his sister would sometimes make him thoughtful in the midst
of dissipation, but he was laughed at by his gay companions, and suffered to be
melancholy no more.

His pride was hurt at the behavior of lord Albourn; yet he knew he merited
it: and his love for lady Caroline still drew him to a house where he was
received by its owner with little cordiality and politeness.

Nor did count D'Ollifont's attention to his sister altogether pass his notice:
his natural jealousy made him believe she really liked his addresses, and he
instantly mistook common civility for returned affection.

His hatred against the count was the ^^me, yet he had seldom time to think of
it: but he now resolved to give Matilda her aunt's manuscript, let the (...) it
might oc^asion her be ever so distressing: she was accordingly told, a few days
after, that her brother's servant requested to speak with her. She was glad of
this opportunity to see Leonard alone; having wished much to question him
concerning Alfred's manner of living: and though she felt herself hurt at
causing the man to betray his master's affairs, yet she knew it to be an
expedient absolutely necessary (...) present circumstances.

(...) poor fellow's countenance clearly told all was not right; Matilda was
shocked at his appearance; she had seen him but once since he moved with his
(...) to Bond-street; and the visible change in his person plainly discovered
the effects of irregular hours.

He delivered to her the paper sealed up: and, after inquiring her health, and
telling her he was sorry he had troubled her, but that he was ordered to
deliver it into her own hands, he would have departed: -- Matilda stopped him,
and begged to know if he had been ill.

The tear almost started from his eyes. "No, madam, I thank you" -- was all he
could answer.

"For heaven's sa^^* Leonard," continued Matilda, deeply affected with the mark
of his attachment, "tell me from whence this un^^^^ness proceeds; I am sure you
are not well: perhaps my brother's house does not suit your constitution."

Leonard seemed hurt that he had gone so far, and, after stammering an excuse,
would again have withdrawn; but she insisted on his sitting down and ordered
some refreshment; that was however useless; his appetite was gone, and he
seemed in the last stage of consumption. She then implored him, by the love he
bore her family, and by the regard he had for his master and herself, to inform
her of every circumstance relative to his affairs: "for I am certain,"
continued Matilda, "they are in a disagreeable situation; the expensive manner
in which he lives, added to his fondness for play, confirms those reports which
have been hinted to me by many, whom I know to be well acquainted with his
proceedings.

The man seemed struck with astonishment at her knowledge of those
circumstances he had dreaded to communicate to her; and confessed, by the
appearance and behavior of his master, the worst might be expected; that the
hours he kept were unreasonable, and that his manner often showed him to be
distracted. He also told her he kn^w he had drawn on monsieur La M^^^ie several
times; "in short, my dear lady," continued Leonard, "he is quite an altered
man, and he sometimes returns home in a morning, after I have been sitting up
for him all night, in such ill temper, that it cuts me to the heart."

Matilda found herself incapable of bearing this interview any longer with
fortitude; she therefore dismissed the faithful servant, with repeated
assurances of her esteem for him, and a request that if any other circumstances
should arise concerning her brother, he would immediately repair to
Grosvenor-square, and relate them to her. She directly retired to her chamber,
and broke open the letter: signora Maserini's manuscript dropped from the
cover, on which Alfred had wrote a few lines. He concluded with saying, he
could plainly perceive by her manner, she had an attachment for count
D'Ollifont, which gave him the greatest uneasiness; and though he had hitherto
kept the enclosed from her sight, through motives of tenderness, yet the common
force of nature urged him to take every method in his power to prevent her
forming a wretched alliance with a villain, the supposed murderer of their
father.

The paper fell from her hand, and she fainted in the chair. Miss Peviquil at
that moment opened the door: she was astonished to see Matilda in a fit, but
immediately rang the bell. A servant attended: water and hartshorn were
procured, and she recovered in a short time. Both papers lay on the floor, but
fortunately were not observed by either of the servants or Miss Peviquil,
during their attendance on their fair patient; but, at the beginning of her
recovery, they were taken up by her own woman, who was going to deliver them to
her lady, not thinking Matilda able to take them: yet her ideas were not so
deranged but a recollection of their contents struck her with the impropriety
of their being seen by the family; she therefore exerted her utmost strength,
and, though (...) able to speak, snatched them from the girl's hand, and
hurried them into her pocket wi^h the utmost precipitation.

Miss Peviquil felt herself hurt at the disappointment her curiosity suffered
by not seeing the letters which had caused such violent emotion in her friend:
she directly suspected it to be a love affair, and maliciously determined to be
revenged on her, by relating the whole story in company. With these charitable
resolutions she took leave, requesting to see her in the drawing room, as Mr.
Milverne and some other gentlemen had paid them a morning visit, and were
inquiring after her health. Matilda returned her many thanks for her care and
attention, and promised to join them in a few minutes.

Mr. Milverne had been a constant attendant at sir Peter's, since his first
introduction at the ball: his particular politeness to Matilda plainly told she
was the chief magnet which drew him to the house; and though lady Peviquil was
not by any means pleased with this information, which was first hinted to her
by her daughter, yet she knew not how to dismiss from her parties a young
gentleman of high birth, noble character, and elegant accomplishments. Their
only hope was, that he could not possibly entertain any serious ideas of an
honorable connection, without his father's consent; which consent they were
partly certain would never be granted, on account of the old gentleman's
avaricious disposition.

Every one expressed their concern at the languid appearance of Matilda, when
she entered the room: she excused herself by her having been rather indisposed
that morning.

"Pardon me, miss Maserini," returned Mr. M^lverne. "your health seems on the
decline^: and though I do not mean to alarm you, yet I think the country
absolutely necessary to restore that bloom to your countenance, which, through
fine feelings, has too often vanished at the entrance of a sympathetic tear
occasioned by a tale of woe, or a recital of the misfortunes of others."

Both lady Peviquil and her daughter smiled with contempt. Matilda thanked him,
and said, she shortly intended to leave England, as she did not find the
climate agree with her constitution.

He changed color instantly; -- his surprise and emotion were visible to all.
-- "To leave England, madam!" he replied. -- Having recollected himself, he in
a more compo^ed manner asked her, if her resolution to that purpose was not
very suddenly taken?

Miss Peviquil considered this would be a fit opportunity to exercise her
ill nature, which was greatly heightened by Mr. Milverne's behavior to
Matilda, on the circumstance of the letter; and immediately answered to that
gentleman's question, by significant hints, that it was a disorder in the
heart, which was extremely difficult to be cured: -- she then, with the utmost
irony and malice, related the affair in the most ridiculous terms, and
concluded with a request to know the name of her admirer.

Mr. Milverne seemed petrified: -- Matilda was struck with astonishment at her
conversation; the insulting and malicious wit of miss Peviquil was more than
she could support; nor had she power to utter a word, but burst into a flood of
tears. Her brother at that moment was announced, and entered the drawing room.

The embarrassment of the whole party was general: the gentlemen, who, except
Mr. Milverne, were chiefly strangers, testified their approbation of Miss
Peviquil's recital by laughing; but the idea that their mirth had drawn tears
from a beautiful young woman, cast a gloom on their countenance, and gave them
no very favorable opinion of her whose satirical talents had so much
entertained them.

CHAPTER XVIII.
ALFRED Maserini was going to pay the compliments of the morning with more than
usual gaiety, when the sight of Matilda, striving to conceal her tears, struck
his eyes; her manner and peculiar situation prevented his utterance: reflection
darted on his memory, and his late ill-treatment of her appeared in the most
black and villainous colors: she had been insulted, he could perceive;
friendless and unprotected, she had no one to take her part; their mother had
always recommended Matilda to his care: -- how had be fulfilled her request? --
by cruel indifference, when she was surrounded with seducers, danger and
dissipation: in short, every part of his behavior since their residence in
London presented itself in the most shameful light; and the ideas of his own
baseness kept him motionless some time.

The silence was not broken till he himself, with the utmost tenderness, asked
his sister the cause of her tears. -- She found he was hurt; and the
recollection of his former kindness, contrasted with his present conduct, threw
her into another agony of weeping.

He immediately turned, and, with the greatest indignation in his looks, asked
an explanation of his sister's uneasiness, which he said he supposed was
occasioned by some affront she was unable to resent. -- "If so," continued
Alfred -- "I am arrived here in proper time, to afford that protection which by
duty I am bound, and by inclination I am most willing, to give."

Mr. Milverne was the only gentlemen ^e had any knowledge of in the room; he
had noticed that he in general paid particular attention to Matilda; his wild
imagination instantly took fire, and whispered him he was the person who should
answer for the injury (...) No sooner had this thought suggested itself, than,
in a resolute tone, he insisted on his resolving the question.

Mr. Milverne started from a reverie, which the late conversation had thrown
him into, and, with a manly composure, addressed the distracted Alfred: "Most
willingly, sir! My carriage is at the door: -- if you will favor me with your
company round the Park, I will inform you of the whole affair; and permit me to
say, sir, had miss Maserini's brother been always as anxious after her welfare
and happiness, there would have been no ^ause for him to have requested
information, or my assistance to have given it."

This just reproach struck the young Frenchman to the heart; he frowned, and
they left the room together.

The gentlemen who remained soon after took their leave. Matilda found herself
alone with lady Peviquil and her daughter. The situation was distressing; but
she was soon relieved from it, as both retired to their dressing rooms, the
latter making an awkward apology for the unhappiness she had occasioned.

Mr. Milverne in the most friendly terms informed Alfred of the cruel treatment
his sister had received, not only that morning, but at many other times, when
he himself had in the same manner been witness to it. He conjured him to remove
her from sir Peter Peviquil's -- reminded him it was a house of dissipation,
pride, and luxury -- begged him to consider how dangerous many parts of the
company were to a young lady but newly entered into the gaieties of life; -- he
even hinted his suspicions of Harry Peviquil, and count D'Ollifont. -- This
name touched Alfred to the soul; he made no answer, but heaved a convulsive
sigh.

Mr. Milverne still continued: "My attention to your sister has, I own, Mr.
Maserini, been particular; and I now in your presence avow that I love her;
love her to distraction."

"Why not then, sir," returned Alfred, -- "avow it to the world, and openly
address her as a man of honor? Not, sir, that I wish for your alliance with
her, more than that of any other gentleman; yet I conceive, when sentiments of
love and attachment are declared for a young woman, they ^ound not with
propriety till sanctioned by the open behavior of an intended husband."

"And that, sir," replied Mr. Milverne, "should before now have been
exemplified in me, had it not been for a whimsical father whose consent I must,
if possible, obtain, for the sake of us both: -- If this can be done, I shall
be happy to make her my wife, and think myself blessed in the possession of
such a treasure"

Alfred still remained thoughtful; reflections crowded on his mind, and they
were almost too much for his senses. -- Henry Peviquil, he was now informed,
wore a mask of friendship to cover his villainy: he had more than once thought
ill of him, in his transactions at St. James's-street; yet he was a young man
of the first fashion, the son of a person of distinction. But were these idle
pompous ornaments to make amends for the ruin of his sister, the disgrace of
his family, the curse of himself; -- that sister delivered to his care by a
fond mother -- that sister whom he was bound to protect by every tie of blood,
love, and honor -- that sister who herself foresaw danger, and wished to
escape it, but was prevented by him -- that sister whose regard for him he knew
so be sincere -- that sister who had been insulted yet had no one to defend
her, but those who, under motives of charity, would expect a reward that must
at once crush her to the lowest state of human nature* --

"Accursed idea!" exclaimed he, in a voice hardly articulate, pulled the
check-string, and desired the coachman to stop.

There was a wildness in his look, which alarmed Mr. Milverne. "You are not
going to leave me, Mr. Maserini?" said he: "I intended to ask you to take a
friendly dinner with me."

"I thank you, sir!" returned Alfred, "but must bag to be excused." He leaped
from the carriage, and darted across the Park toward Piccadilly.

He had arrived at the turnpike-gate when lord Albourn's post chariot drove
through. Alfred just perceived his lordship and his daughter were in it. The
young lady's eyes met his at the same moment; -- they both bowed; -- but her
father did not observe him. He stopped the servant, who was on horseback paying
the toll, and asked if his lordship was going a little excursion from London.

"He is going beyond a little excursion, sir," replied the man -- "many miles
from hence."

Alfred was struck with astonishment. -- "Many miles!" returned he: "why, lady
Caroline never informed me of at, although I saw her yesterday."

"Her ladyship," said the man, "did not know of it herself two hours before we
set off, as it was a sudden whim of lord Albourn's."

The servant seemed in a hurry to overtake the chariot, which had got some
little distance; -- but Alfred still detained him, to inquire what place they
were going to, and when they were to return.

The man answered, "He really could not tell to what part they were going; but
the distance was near two hundred miles from town; -- that his lord returned in
a week, but that lady Caroline was to be left behind." He then spurred his
horse, and left his hearer in a state little better than stupefaction.

That lord Albourn had taken his daughter from London merely to avoid any
further intimacy with him, was certain; in short, the occurrences of the
morning had overwhelmed him, with despair, and he found himself at his own
lodgings, before his recollection had reminded him he was going that way.
Leonard opened the door; this faithful servant plainly saw the agitation of his
spirits. -- Alfred strove to disguise his uneasiness, and asked, with some
degree of composure, if any person had called since he left home? Leonard
answered, "No one, except a mean-looking man, who had left a note for him,
which lay in the dressing room." -- He immediately repaired to it and read the
contents; it was from his tailor, requesting the payment of seventy pounds on
the next day -- and, if disappointed, threatened an arrest. He had, a week
before, drawn upon his banker in France, for the last three hundred pounds of
his fortune; this would not even pay his debts. Ruin and confusion learned to
encircle him: where was now his pride -- his honor -- his character as a
gentleman and a soldier? Where was his love for his sister? In what manner was
he to make good his word, of adding a part of his fortune to hers? -- If he
remained in England, disgrace and infamy must surround him; -- nor could he
fly, but like a mean and beggarly outcast of society, leaving behind him the
name of a swindler and a villain. Even in his own country, he must meet the
reproaches of those to whom he used to preach lessons of morality, and by
example enforced his doctrine. Matilda too, what was to become of her? Her
fortune would not support her. "Must she," said he, "through my faults and
follies, sink with me into destruction? Who is to protect her when I am in
jail? That villain, count D'Ollifont, whom I suspect to be the murderer of my
father, may seize on the moment to complete his accursed intentions, and, like
the fiend of hell, laugh at those his mischief has hurled headlong into
irremediable ruin. It is too much," exclaimed he, running to a part of the room
where his sword hu^g: his despair overcame him; -- he drew the blade from the
scabbard in a kind of triumph, and uttered, in a voice of phren^y, "Now I defy
them all; even hell itself is better than what may come tomorrow."

The glittering steel trembled in his hand; -- his arm wa^ in the very motion
to strike his heart, when he ^ound it withheld by a person behind him. He
turned, gasping with convulsive madness; the good old Leonard dropped before
him on his knees: -- "Merciful father," exclaimed he, "look on him with an eye
of pity!" -- then turning to Alfred with a stern aspect; "is this, sir," said
he, "a time to appear before that God, to whom you have so much to answer for,
and from whom so little to expect? Look, sir, in the mirror before you; and
consider if your figure is in a proper state for a dying man; your countenance
convulsed and agitated; your senses in a state of distraction; the sword of
your departed father lifted in your hand ready to supersede the power of your
God, by putting an end to that existence he gave you, and consequently has
alone a right to extinguish."

The sword dropped from his hand; he sunk into a chair, and felt severely the
just reproaches of his servant; "I thank you, Leonard," was all he could say;
but he made a motion to be alone. Leonard first secured the weapon, and then
left him to meditate on his rashness.

He continued for some time in a state of stupid insensibility, but by degrees
recovered, and shuddered at the danger he had escaped. His resolution was
fixed, never more to game; he swore by the most solemn oath, never to play but
for a trifling sum, nor any m^re to hazard himself at a place where, to his
cost, he had experienced the villainy of mankind under the mask of friendship
and kindness. With these resolutions Alfred staid at home the remainder of the
day, thanked Leonard again for his care, and retired to rest with more
composure and satisfaction than he had for months before.

Matilda was overpowered with misfortunes. The account of her father's
disappearance, and the suspicion which rested on the count, whom she had before
disliked, but now even shuddered at his name, sunk her into new troubles and
distress. The insults she had received from miss Peviquil, although they had
confirmed her in the idea of possessing the esteem if not the love of Mr.
Milverne, entirely settled her determination of leaving England. To accomplish
this, she resolved to demand of her brother a small part of her fortune, to
carry her over to France; and, immediately on her arrival in that country, to
enter a convent, and totally seclude herself from a world where, young as she
was, she could plainly perceive the interested and sordid views of mankind; and
sickened at those gaieties of high life she once languished to enjoy.

CHAPTER XIX. THE MASQUERADE.
To wake the soul by tender strokes of art,
To raise the genius and to m^nd the heart;
To make mankind in conscious virtue bold,
Live over each scene, and be what they behold:
POPE.
WHY was superior strength, fortitude, and courage, given to man? Why does he
naturally inherit these blessings in a greater degree than woman? To protect
the weak and defenseless from the gripe and cruelty of the wicked; to give
succor to those who in their nature are less capable of bearing up against
imposition; and who consequently require that aid, which, according to the laws
of christianity, he is bound to afford them.

Who is the cause of this horrid downfall to infamy and shame? Man! he who in
the book of nature was ordained to bear the image of the Supreme Being, and
created to take on him the godlike office of protector to the female part of
the world; yet does he blunt his feelings against every trait of humanity, and
dares destroy that which the Almighty intended he should preserve. Of this
description there are many: but it is to be hoped they are greatly overbalanced
by the more noble and generous part of mankind, who equally feel the effects of
beauty, yet scorn to gratify their passions by villainous and deliberate schemes
of seduction.

Count D'Ollifont was struck with Matilda's charms, the first evening he was at
sir Peter's; and, in the few minutes' interval between seeing her and being
introduced, he settled within his own mind, if possible, to seduce her.

The count was a man who experienced no disturbance from the intrusion of
honor, conscience, or feeling; the milk of human kindness was not in a^y
respect concerned, in softening his composition: the tear of compassion was
never seen in his eye, nor could the most dismal tale or even sight of woe
procure from him an accent of pity, or even a sympathetic sigh. The
gratification of his passions was his whole concern; nor did he stop at any
thing to accomplish what his wishes prompted him to possess. He now enjoyed the
whole estates and large fortune of count Maserini, grandfather to Alfred and
Matilda; he could therefore well afford to live in the most splendid and
elegant manner. On riches he chiefly depended to succeed with the ladies; as he
knew his age would almost give him the title of an elderly man.

He had just planned in what manner to make his attack on the beautiful young
foreigner, when sir Peter Peviquil, as was before related, led him up, and
introduced her under the name of Maserini. The picture of her father plainly
confirmed who she was. A sudden horror overcame him; he felt a something strike
his heart, which he had heard described as the touch of remorse; he, however,
^oon recovered, and resumed his natural gaiety and politeness. Yet the
behavior of Alfred did not go unnoticed by him; and it seemed as if he had
actually known those intentions the former had been weighing in his mind five
minutes before.

Rest forsook the pillow of the count that night; his ideas of seduction
received a check at the mention of the name; yet every circumstance coincided
with his wishes, except her brother: him he feared. Mean and dastardly in his
disposition, he was fearful even as a child, and would shrink like a wretched
reptile from the just revenge of a man whom he had cringed to with meanness,
for the purpose of destroying his happiness, and ruining his family.

He resolved not to be too hasty in the affair, but in every respect to make
himself agreeable to Matilda, and wait for an opportunity, when, by some means
or other, Alfred should be unable to afford that protection his sister would
require.

That opportunity was now arrived; the tailor, who had threatened in a letter
to arrest him, was the same that made the count's clothes; it was he who first
persuaded the man to take that method; supposing that, not being able in so
little a time to procure bail, he must be confined at least for one night, and
during that time he could by force (finding that none of his persuasive
eloquence had any effect on Matilda) convey her to some secret spot, where he
might, unmolested, take advantage of her sitution.

This diabolical scheme was, accordingly, with the greatest deliberation, put
into execution; and the tailor informed the count in the evening, that he had
not received his money; the latter then ordered the man, on pain of his
displeasure, and entire loss of his custom, not to fail to put his threats in
practice. To add greater force to this request, he presented him with a ten
pound bank-note, over and above the bill he then paid him; and received a
solemn promise, in return, that his wishes should be accomplished with the
greatest exactness.

Count D'Ollifont then proceeded to sir Peter Peviquil's; he plainly perceived
there had been a misunderstanding between the ladies: but it did not in any
respect alter his plan.

He presented the family with tickets for a grand masquerade which was to be at
the Pantheon the next evening, and also begged Mr. Milverne's acceptance of
one, who entered the room soon after him.

Matilda at first declined going; but the count would take no refusal. She
seemed particularly cool in her behavior toward him; but this did not in any
respect damp his spirits in the plot he had undertaken.

In the course of conversation, he hinted that he should like Mr. Maserini to
be of the party, and pretended he should likewise send him a ticket the
following morning. He gave them to understand the manager of it was patronised
by himself, and consequently he should exert his interest as much as possible
in his behalf.

The count, Mr Milverne, and Henry Peviquil, escorted the ladies to a concert:
they returned to supper. Mr. Milverne seemed unhappy; Matilda extremely
dejected. She inquired how he left her brother; he did not wish to relate to
her the manner in which Alfred flew from the carriage; but turned the
conversation by saying, "He could not persuade him to take a dinner." -- She
would have continued, but was interrupted by the count's asking in what
characters they intended to appear. Matilda and Mr. Milverne resolved to go in
dominos; Henry Peviquil declared he should assume the character of Don Quixote;
sir Peter, a hermit; her ladyship, a nun; and miss Peviquil, a gipsy. The count
said he did not think himself able to support a character, and therefore should
follow the example of his fair cousin, as he was pleased to style her, and
appear in no particular dress. About one o'clock he took his leave, and
promised to be with them the next evening. Mr. Milverne likewise appointed to
call in Grosvenor-square at the same hour.

Matilda retired to her chamber, but not to sleep; she disliked even the sight
of count D'Ollifont; yet she had con^^nted to be conducted by him to a
masquerade. It was an entertainment she had much wished to see; but had heard
of its being a dangerous scene of amusement. She however resolved, if possible,
to persuade her brother to accompany them, and for once be the cause of
spending a dissipated evening: she should then consider herself safe in his
presence, and have greater enjoyment of the entertainment.

Alfred Maserini arose in the morning, more composed than he had been for many
weeks; having already resolved, immediately on receiving the sum he expected
from M. Le Mercier, to discharge his debts, and retire with his sister to
France. He sat down to breakfast, again thanked Leonard for his care, and told
him of the alteration in his sentiments; he observed on the table a letter
directed to him; having asked from whom it came, he was informed a man brought
it early in the morning, and said it required no answer; -- the contents of it
were as follow:

To Mr. MASERINI.
STRANCE as an anonymous letter may seem under the present circumstances, yet I
conjure you, for the sake of your own happiness and the honor of your sister,
to obey the dictates it contains. Count D'Ollifont has engaged sir Peter
Peviquil's family to a masquerade this (...) at tho Pantheon: and it is his
intention in the (...) of the night to convey miss Maserini, by treachery, to a
house he has provided in the country for this purpose; where he will take every
advantage of her situation. He is also determined to deprive her of your
protection, by keeping you away; which scheme he has planned with the tailor
who sent to you for money yesterday. The man will call this morning, and arrest
you if the bill is not discharged. Be not offended at seeing the enclosed ^ool,
bank note, as you may not immediately be able to procure the sum: -- pay him,
and, if possible, persuade him to keep the knowledge of it from the count. I
have also sent you a ticket for the masquerade; fail not to be there; but by no
means discover yourself to the party, whom you will recognize in the characters
of a hermit, a nun, a gipsy, and a Don Quixote. Among them will be three
dominos, which are the disguises of your sister, Mr. Milverne, and the count:
watch diligently the latter, whom you will observe draw the young lady to a
private room, and then by force take her to a carriage that is to wait at the
backdoor of the building. I leave the rest to you. Fail not to follow minutely
this letter, as you value your peace of mind for ever.

A FRIEND.


Alfred's astonishment at reading this extraordinary epistle, may well be
conceived. He showed it to Leonard, and asked his advice; the old man begged
him to attend to its contents: "No one, sir," said he, "could have an interest
in writing such a letter; and the bank-note fully confirms it to be no idle
frolic." His ideas were the same as his master's, and they determined to
execute implicitly the directions given. The receiving of the money hurt him;
but it was absolutely necessary ^o discharge the debt, as he had none of his
own, till that he had sent for arrived: he however resolved to find out, if
possible, the person, and repay him with every acknowledgment, if the
suspicions were well grounded.

Alfred determined, in the first place, not to see his sister, and gave Leonard
orders, if any of the servants should come from, Grosvenor-square, to send word
back he was not at home.

About eleven o'clock, the tailor arrived, was introduced, and received his
money. The man was astonished. Alfred insisted on his taking a glass of wine,
and made him a present for the trouble he had caused. He then related to him
the scheme which he had heard was to be put in practice by the count and
himself.

Surprise, guilt, and consternation, stopped the tailor's utterance: he
believed it must be some supernatural power that had informed him of it. Alfred
argued with him for some time, explained the villainy of such proceedings, and
the ruin that might have ensued. In short, he worked so much on the poor
fellow's feelings, that he fell at his feet, asked ten thousand pardons, and
begged to know if he could in any respect serve him, to recompense the injury
he had intended to commit.

Alfred took him at his word, and informed him that the only way to make
reparation, would be, to go immediately to the count, and say that every
circumstance had succeeded to his wishes, for that Mr. Maserini was in close
confinement. The man promised to be punctual in the message, and, after again
thanking him for his generosity, departed.

As it was expected, a servant called from sir Peter's, to my that miss
Maserini wished much to see her brother Leonard told him he was just gone out.

Alfred then sent to procure his dress with as much secre^y as possible: it was
a plain domino, that he might not be observed.

In the course of the afternoon, the servant from Grosvenor-square arrived a
second time; but was answered as before, that Mr. Maserini was not yet
returned; he left a note from his sister, and desired it might be given him as
soon as he came home. Alfred opened it: Matilda informed him how much against
her inclination it was to accompany the count to a masquerade; yet she could
not decline the invitation without absolute rudeness. She requested her brother
would be there, and concluded with saying, she supposed he had also received a
ticket.

He resolved to take no notice of the letter, but as the anonymous epistle
desired (the contents of which he had now every reason to believe authentic),
to go himself, unknown to every one. He panted for the moment when he should
detect the villain in the very act of injustice and cruelty he had long
suspected him to be guilty of; and crush that monster to the earth, who dared
attempt the honor of his family.

The wished-for hour of twelve was announced; when, having placed in his pocket
a brace of pistols, he threw himself into a hackney coach, and ordered the
coachman to drive to the Pantheon.

CHAPTER XX.
ALFRED ordered the coachman, when he stopped at the front doors in
Oxford-road, to drive round and wait for him at the back entrance.

The Pantheon was crowded; the company were numerous and elegant; every one
looked happy and pleased with each other. "I," said Alfred, "am the only person
who seem unsociable and alone." Several characters passed, which he knew by
their voices; but he could nowhere trace those he wished to recognize; when on
a sudden a group of bacchanals rushed by him, and* among them he observed Don
Quixote. Having addressed the figure in a feigned voice, by inquiring after his
Dulcinea del Toboso, he immediately received a witty answer from a tongue which
plainly confirmed it to be Henry Peviquil.

He now judged the rest of the party must be in the rooms, and accordingly
continued his search.

In about a quarter of an hour he perceived the knight join his company; they
were dressed exactly as the letter had described, except that he could observe
only two dominios, which he found were his sister and the count; but soon after
heard them speak, as if they were surprised at not seeing Mr. Milverne

At supper the greater part of the company unmasked, and Alfred was confirmed
that his conjectures on each of the characters were right. He still continued
disguised, with his eye fixed on them: and it gave pleasure to see Matilda
treat the count with the utmost coolness: but yet he thought he could perceive,
in the countenance of the latter, a malicious smile occasioned by the hope of
having her shortly in his power. These ideas made him redouble his vigilance;
and he directly after the repast joined them almost close, but strove as much
as possible to escape notice.

Henry Peviquil and his father seemed heated by the wine they had drank; miss
Peviquil was chiefly taken up in gallanting with a gambling friend to her
brother's; and her ladyship in paying compliments of her fashionable
acquaintance. Count D'Ollifont attended to none but his fair relation; and the
inattention she received from the others, gave him an opportunity of continuing
his politeness. Alfred remarked a magician who followed also the steps of the
count; his dress was, truly conformablo to the part he performed, and he held
in one hand a wand, the emblem of his power. This figure gave him some chagrin,
and he resolved to address it, by asking him in what manner he made use of his
art: the magician answered, in a voice which he thought he had somewhere heard,
"That he punished the guilty, and gave succor to the innocent. I know you,
young man," said he: "and you are in a noble cause; be cautious how you execute
it."

Alfred was staggered at this reply, but yet thought they might be words of
chance, and begged an explanation of the incoherent sentence. The magician
said, he would convince him of his knowledge; and immediately wrote on a card
the following words. "Your name is Maserini; your business at this place is to
protect the honor of your family in the person of your sister: the time draws
near: be diligent, and fail not."

By the time he had read these few words, the magician was gone; and the
astonished Alfred stood for some time motionless: he seemed in a dream, and
could hardly believe his senses; yet he supposed this stranger must be the
person who had sent him the letter. The count and his sister were nearly out of
sight at a different part of the Rotunda, but he quickly made up to them; their
party had entirely dispersed, and Matilda seemed extremely uneasy. The former
in vain strove to give her comfort; she could hardly conceal her tears. It was
about three o'clock, the time fixed for the horrid scheme, when Alfred observed
the count draw his sister to another room, under the idea of seeking their
friends. He followed, and heard him inform her that he had been just told they
waited for them in their carriages at the back entrance. He led her to the
door; that being a place for chairs only, there were no coaches near. The count
conducted Matilda down the street, and turned into a part where there was a
chariot and one hackney coach waiting at a little distance.

Matilda, seeing no one in the carriage, refused to enter it: the count
entreated, but she still continued obstinate, and seemed extremely alarmed.
They were not within hearing of any person but ^he hackney coachman and another
man who stood with him. Alfred gasped for breath; his very soul was convulsed
with rage. Count D'Ollifont with some vehemence again insisted on her complying
with his request: she answered, she would die first, and burst into a flood of
tears: he then began to force her into the carriage.

"Your brother, now, madam," said the count, "is not here to encourage your
pride, or frustrate my wishes." She screamed, and fainted.

"Damnable villain!" exclaimed Alfred: "know thou art mistaken: for you now
behold him ready to protect the honor of his house, by crushing to the earth
that wretch who dare seduce his sister."

While he uttered these words, Matilda remained in the arms of one of the
count's servants, insensible. Leonard, who had dreaded his master's violence of
temper by the pistols he had taken in his pockets, determined to be near at the
time, to assist his young lady* he accordingly waited with a hackney coach, the
same that stood near the count's chariot. He immediately ran to the assistance
of Matilda, forced her from the footman, and placed her in the vehicle he had
hired.

During this time count D'Ollifont was struck motionless: he could hardly
believe himself awake; but the figure of the enraged Frenchman, who had now
unmasked, plainly confirmed the truth.

"I was only," said he with a smile, "going to conduct your sister to sir
Peter's."

"Liar I villain!" exclaimed Alfred, "thou wast going to take her to a place
where, unprotected, she must have sunk beneath thy diabolical intentions; nay
more," continued he, in a low voice, "I strongly suspect thee to be the
murderer of her father."

He started, stood about a minute in a thoughtful posture, and then uttered
with a curse -- "Desperate causes require desperate rem^dies!" -- pulled a
pistol from his side pocket, and fired at his adversary: -- owing to his
agitation, the ball passed, and Alfred remained unhurt: but he instantly
discharged one at the count, who fell, and every spark of life seemed
extinguished. The coachman and the footman cried their master was murdered, and
instantly secured the young foreigner, who made no resistance, but seemed
buried in a reverie; till the magician, whom he had noticed in the rooms, came
up.

"I see," said he, "there has been bloody work here; but punishment has fallen
on the right person." He unmasked, and discovered the features of Mr. Milverne.

The men still kept their hold of Alfred: but no crowd had assembled, as they
were some distance from the doors, and in a private street. Mr. Milverne took
the part of his friend, soon disengaged him from confinement, and with the
assistance of Leonard, who had by this time made himself known, forced him to
the coach. They promise the man a large reward, if he would drive as fast as
possible toward the first stage to Dover.

The horses, which had not been out in the day, traveled with the utmost
speed; and the driver, in hopes of the money, failed not to exert his abilities
in keeping up their pace, insomuch that he brought them to an inn at Dartford
by eight in the morning.

During the time of their journey, Matilda learnt from her brother the whole
affair, and plainly perceived they must be plunged into new difficulties in
consequence of the count's death.

Mr. Milverne might be suspected as the cause of it; and the idea that she
should never see him more, added new pangs to those she already experienced.

Leonard informed them, when they had got some distance from town, that a
packet from France had been received by the people of the house where they
lodged; who had neglected to give it till after his master had set off to the
masquerade: he therefore, having no place to put it under lock and key,
determined to bring it in his pocket.

This was a fortunate circumstance, as the direction confirmed it to come from
M. Le Mercier: on opening it, Alfred received the money he had wrote for; it
gave them some comfort, as it would support them with economy for some time.
But this was of little consequence when he (...) his life must be sacrificed as
soon as the count's death was made known in France; his interest being so great
at court, as to prevent any de^ence from saving the person who had deprived him
of his existence.

He determined, however, rather to die than cowardly shrink from justice, and
disgrace the name of a soldier. He related to his sister his resolution; but
she conjured him not to risk his life, from a punctilio of honor.

"You are engaged in a just cause," continued Matilda, and need not be ashamed
of your conduct being known to the world." She used many other arguments, and
asked him, "To whom she was to look for protection, when he was no more."

"To God," he exclaimed; "for among mankind all honor is lost. I am sick of
the world, Matilda, and care not how soon I leave it." "Surely," said she,
"that fortitude, courage, and patience, which were the leading traits in your
character, and which used to charm our departed mother, are vanished: have you
no desire to see Grasville Abbey?" The name struck him to the heart. "Who can
tell but it is ordained for you to unravel that mystery which has so long hung
over our family, and been the ruin of our house? But heaven forbid, Alfred,
that I should persuade you to act contrary to that honor which for years has
been the boast of our forefathers* -- if, therefore, you resolve to make
yourself known in France, I will cheerfully enter a convent, and take leave of
a world in which I have little happiness to expect." Here she sighed deeply;
her heart reminded her that the image of Mr. Milverne would often intrude amid
those religious duties she would then be bound to perform.

Alfred continued silent; his curiosity to see the (...) of his ancestors, the
hopes of finding some clue to the mystic disappearance of his father, urged him
to adopt the plans his sister had proposed; but his honor, his character as an
officer and a man, forbade it.

Every mile he found himself farther from London, his perplexity increased; nor
was his determination by any means fixed, when the coach drove up to the
principal inn at Dartford. Alfred handsomely rewarded the man, desired him to
say nothing concerning the business he had been witness to, but give feigned
answers to those who should wonder at seeing a hack so far from London. The
coachman promised faithfully to obey his orders. They each took some
refreshment, hired post horses, and set off again in less than an hour toward
Dover.

Alfred during the journey informed his sister that his resolutions were fixed
to join his regiment, and throw himself on the mercy of his countrymen. "I
scorn," said he, "to fly ignobly from a punishment I flatter myself I do not
justly deserve."

Matilda shed a flood of tears, but perfectly acquiesced in his wishes, and ^he
strove to think no more of Mr. Milverne; that was impossible, but yet she
considered, the strict and awful ceremonies of a monastic life would, in a
course of time, erase those thoughts from her bosom. Alfred in some respects
was in a similar situation; his acquaintance with lady Caroline Albourn was
first commenced in the midst of dissipation, yet he felt many pangs at the idea
of losing her for ever. In this career of folly he had persuaded himself that
he was no farther interested in the affair, than merely the idea of being
intimate with a young lady of fashion, and having an opportunity of toasting a
beautiful girl; but he now plainly perceived that he loved lady Caroline so far
as to make his life uncomfortable without her. There was also another cause for
uneasiness; his debts in London were unpaid to the name of murderer, the
appellation of swindler must be added: a title he in some measure merited.

His silence plainly told the state of his mind; while his sister shed many
tears at thoughts of their present misfortunes, and at the recollection of
those happy hours she had experienced under the care of maternal tenderness,
never, never, to return.

Leonard shared the sorrows of them both; yet he received some little comfort
at the thoughts of returning to that country where he had spent the chief part
of his life. They arrived rather late at Dover; Leonard was directly dispatched
to inquire what time the packet would sail, and brought word back, not till the
following evening. This intelligence was extremely disagreeable to them; as
they might before that time be recognized, taken into custody, and conducted
back to London. They were necessitated, however, to wait patienely the event;
but Alfred reflected, with some terror, on the horrors of a jail, in a strange
country, and under laws he was equally a stranger to. Under these
circumstances, they remained at the inn as private as possible.

About two hours before they intended to sail, a man arrived post from London;
he asked if any travelers were in that house, who intended going to France,
and was answered in the affirmative. Leonard, who by chance overheard the
conver^ation, ran to his master, and informed him of the affair; each
conjectured it to be an officer of justice, and Alfred waited with fortitude
and composure the event; when they were agreeably surprised, by seeing the
innkeeper introduce Mr. Milverne's valet.

He delivered a letter, the first sentence of which contained the following
words:

"Count D'Ollifont is not yet dead." -- "Thanks be to heaven!" exclaimed
Alfred, and communicated the agreeable intelligence to his sister.

Mr. Milverne informed him, that he was kept in custody till late in the
morning, when he procured bail; being then taken before a magistrate, he
explained the whole affair, and was honorably cleared. He further informed him
that the count's indisposition was very uncertain, and advised him by no means
to remain in England, or make himself known in France, as count D'Ollifont had
many friends in that country, who, immediately as they knew of the event,
would, through particular interest at court, place him in the Bastile for life,
even if the former should recover of his wound.

In the latter part of the letter he mentioned Matilda with the utmost
tenderness, pitied her situation, and entreated Alfred by no means to run
hazards, through false notions of honor, and leave his sister destitute of
protection. He concluded with saying, he thought they had better pass over as
quick as possible to Italy, but requested he would send word what part they
resolved to visit, as he himself hoped to join them in a few weeks.

Alfred wrote an answer, expressing his gratitude for the gentlemanlike and
friendly treatment he had received; informed him that he at first resolved to
throw himself on the laws of his country, although he knew them to be severe
where a courtier or man of interest was concerned; -- but that his letter had
entirely altered his resolutions, and that he now intended to travel as fast
and as privately as possible toward Italy: that the hope of seeing him there,
and making proper apologies for the strange behavior he had been guilty of
toward him, would in a great measure alleviate the disagreeable manner of his
journey. He concluded with his sister's thanks for his kind inquiries, and the
equal pleasure she would enjoy with himself, on seeing Mr. Milverne in a short
interval of time.

This letter was given to the valet, and he set off immediately. The vessel set
sail a short time after, and Leonard informed his master, while they were
crossing the Channel, that he had learned from Mr Milverne's servant, that the
anonymous letter he had received was sent by that gentleman; for that he, the
valet, was employed by his master to draw the plan of proceedings from the
count's confidential servant, whom he contrived to intoxicate with liquor, and
then communicated to Mr. Milverne the intelligence he had received.

Alfred was vexed that Leonard did not inform him of this circumstance sooner,
that he might have returned the money he received, and acknowledged the
obligation.

Matilda was still more attached to him: she was happy in the change of
sentiments which his letter had caused in her brother, and looked forward with
a considerable degree of pleasure for the time when he should join them abroad.

After a pleasant voyage of a few hours, they found themselves landed in their
native country; but in a far different situation from that they were in when
they left it: then they were honored and respected by all, and afraid of
meeting no one: now they were under misfortunes and concealment, shrinking from
the eyes of every beholder, like wretched outcasts of society, and terrified at
being observed by every individual.

CHAPTER XXII. ADVENTURES.
Oh, Peace! thou source and soul of social life,
Beneath whose calm-inspiring influence
Science her views enlarges, Art refines,
And swelling Commerce opens all her ports;
Blessed be the man divine who gives us thee!
THOMSON.
WHEN men of honor, whose principles and dispositions are naturally just, fall
under misfortunes, and experience adversity and disappointment, their feelings
suffer a far greater shock than can be felt by those who, from childhood, have
been plunged in irregularites, and are well practiced in the arts of meanness
and deceit.

The sting of remorse seldom lasts longer than that punishment which they bring
upon themselves through perpetual indiscretion and deliberate schemes of
villainy; -- while the man who has been merely led away by example or youthful
follies, receives with redoubled force that blow which stabs at once his
character and reputation. Nor can he, though the clouds of despair, which
encompassed him, may be succeeded by the sunshine of prosperity, think of
disagreeable events at a former part of life, but with anguish and distress.

Of the numberless griefs and afflictions to which human nature is subject,
poverty is held up as one of a considerable magnitude; it generally procures
contempt and illtreatment from the haughty sons of wealth; and the opinion of
the world in general is by no means favorable to those who are not possessors
of riches and affluence. These mistaken and shameful ideas are almost too
predominant in every country; and the child of misery receives great addition
to his woes by the sneers and scandal of his neighbors. Equality, though a
word of terror to the great, if taken in its true meaning, implies sentiments
of the most noble and generous kind; instead of pulling down laws, and
levelling the whole class of mankind, it would confirm unity, peace, and good
order.

The rod of oppression too often falls upon that man who is unable, through
misfortunes or peculiar circumstances, to raise himself against the weight; but
crushed by its power, he sinks beneath the force of injustice, and is lost to
his God, his family, and himself; whereas, in the time of his sorrows, had he
received comfort, succor, or assistance, he might have continued to have
proved a valuable member of society.

Alfred Maserini meditated with painful ideas on those distresses which had
happened, through his own misconduct, during the time they had been in England.
He not only beheld himself surrounded with difficulties, but his sister, who
was innocent of the cause, equally involved, through his errors and vices.
Young, beautiful, and accomplished, she was but ill calculated to undergo the
hardships of life; yet she submitted to them with resignation, and could even
teach patience to him who had brought her to the present disquietude. This
would cut him to the soul; and the scalding tear of repentance would often
start from his eye, in defiance of the many efforts he made to conceal it.

He was impetuous, proud, and courageous in his disposition; yet, in feelings
he was a woman: nor was his pride of that nature to make him overlook
affliction, although concealed in a hut of poverty and misery. But he laid too
great a stress on the punctilios of honor and high birth; he valued the name
he bore, with such ardour as to make him resent the least affront offered in
the family to which it belonged.

Their arrival at Calais was attended with disagreeable and degrading
circumstances, on account of their giving in their names, which were feigned
ones, and the review of their baggage, which consisted of clothes and a few
articles which Matilda had received from Mr. Milverne's valet; that gentleman
having procured from sir Peter's what little goods she set a value on, and
desired his servant to deliver them at Dover. Their traveling through France
was in every respect extremely uncomfortable, and the difficulties they met
with in consequence of their endeavoring to conceal themselves from vulgar
curiosity, extremely distressing.

They had nearly arrived at the Alps, when they halted for the night at a small
inn. The accommodation was very indifferent, and they were given to understand
by the hostess that some English persons of distinction were then in the house,
who took up the best rooms. They were therefore necessitated to put up with the
inconvenience, and, after a scanty meal, retired to poor and desolate
apartments. Both Alfred and Matilda, with Leonard, had, the last day's journey,
rode on horses which the former purchased of a smuggler at a low price,
considering that it would be the cheapest and most secret way of traveling.
Leonard saw the cattle safely placed in a barn some distance from the house;
the stables being occupied by the horses and servants of the persons whom the
landlady had mentioned: he then laid himself down on a small bed in one corner
of the building.

Leonard had not been asleep above two hours, before he was awakened by a glare
of light which darted right on his eyes through an opening on one side of the
barn. He immediately started up, and looked out at the door, and perceived that
the inn was in flames. He hurried on his clothes, and ran as fast as possible
to the spot, in order to assist his master and young lady. By the time he got
there, one part of the house was entirely burnt down, and the remainder
surrounded with flames: he was happy however to see his master and Matilda
safe; and the former delivered to him the trunks, which he took care to place
in security.

A number of peasants were assembled round, and each seemed to bewail the
situation of a young lady and her father, who slept in those rooms which were
on fire; but no one dared to go to their assistance, as the whole fabric was
expected to fall in a few minutes. Nor was the general conjecture wrong, for in
a very little time the front gave way, and fell; which discovered the internal
part of the two rooms. They could see nothing of the gentleman; it was
therefore supposed that he was suffocated, and had fallen among the ruins at
the back part; but the eyes of the spectators experienced a most horrid sight
in the other apartment: a young lady was standing in the middle of the flames.
The agony such a situation must inspire, had made her insensible; her hands
were clasped together, and her eyes lifted toward heaven. The people cried out
to give her assistance; but none dared try the experiment, till Alfred, touched
with compassion for the unfortunate female, sprang forward with a ladder, and
placed it against the part of the building which was yet standing: he had
ascended above half way, when the part where the ladder rested against broke
from his weight; but he had rose far enough to perceive, to his astonishment,
that it was lady Caroline Albourne.

At this sight, Alfred forgot all danger, and resolved to die or save her: he
accordingly, when he found the steps fall from under him, clasped a post which
supported the story, and with an amazing agility sprang on the tottering floor
of the room. He took her in his arms, but found no ladder set for his descent;
the people were afraid to come near, on account of the falling in of the
building, which, would bury them in the ruins. He called to them; but his cries
were vain; till Leonard, who was returned from conducting Matilda to a house a
little distance from the spot, seeing his master in such a situation, ran for
the ladder; but it was too late, for Alfred felt the place on which he stood,
must sink with them, before he could get to the ground by that method: he
therefore, with remarkable intrepidity, jumped from the part with lady Caroline
in his arms, and fell on a feather bed which by chance had been thrown out at
the beginning of the fire.

They were immediately dragged some distance off, and in one minute after, the
whole fabric fell to the ground.

The situation of the unfortunate lady Caroline may be better imagined than
described; for even when she had recovered from the insensibility which the
thoughts of her danger had caused, it was but to experience new misery. Her
father, without doubt, was buried in the ruins; she had not yet seen her
deliverer, nor knew of the heroic courage that had been exerted in her behalf;
for, from the moment the front of her chamber fell, she saw nor heard no more
till her recovery in the house to which she had been conveyed. She was now
attended by several persons, and her own woman servant, who had slept in the
back room, and leapt from the window at the first alarm. At this period, while
all were bewailing the loss of lord Albourne, he entered the room, supported by
two servants. Lady Caroline fainted, and afterward fell into hysterics,
occasioned by the joy of seeing her father, whom she considered as no more. He
embraced her, and shed tears of paternal tenderness for the safety of his child.

His lordship, when awaked by the alarm of fire, knew it would be some time
before he could enter his daughter's chamber, as she always bolted her door on
the inside; and that the fright which so sudden an information might give her,
would most likely prevent her from opening it at all; he therefore considered
it would be best to get out at the back part as soon as possible, and fly to
her assistance in the front. With this idea, he attempted to descend the
staircase, but found it in flames: this sight drove him distracted. Without
waiting for help, he jumped from the window, and was so hurt by the fall, that
he lay insensible for some time, when one of his servants found him in that
situation, and conducted him to the house which was occupied by the other
sufferers.

Alfred Maserini, his sister, and Leonard, were in another apartment; they
neither of them judged it expedient to appear before lord Albourne, his
daughter, or any of the servants, for fear a sudden exclamation of their name
should discover them to those who were about. They resolved, therefore, to
remain private till morning, and then have an interview with his lordship. The
fire being partly extinguished, the people dispersed, and quiet was in some
measure restored.

At breakfast his lordship inquired in what manner his daughter escaped death.
They were both informed of the circumstances relative to the behavior of the
young gentleman who had so valiantly undertaken to rescue her; and heard not
the repeated praises of the rusties unconcerned. Lord Albourne's heart, as well
as his daughter's, overflowed with gratitude, and they both requested to see
him as soon as possible. The woman of the house said she would call him
directly, for that he had desired to be alone the remainder of the night. She
left her noble guests, and repaired to the room where Alfred slept. Having
knocked several times without receiving any answer, she opened the door, and,
to her astonishment, found it empty. She immediately entered the chamber of his
sister, and saw that was also deserted. The stables and loft where Leonard
slept, were also searched; but neither cattle nor man could be seen.

In Alfred's deserted apartment, they observed a note which lay on the table;
it was directed to lord Albourne: he received it, and the intelligence that the
writer could nowhere be found. His lordship read the following words:

TO LORD ALBOURNE.
MY LORD,
IF your lordship's curiosity should lead you to know the name of that man who
saved your daughter from the flames, it may be satisfied by perusing these
lines: the only return you can make him, is to keep it a secret; an unfortunate
circumstance having occurred, that renders a decampment (both mean and
dastardly) necessary; the manner of which is totally inconsistent with the
character and equally against the inclinations of

ALFRED MASERINI.


If lord Albourne was astonished at the elopement of lady Caroline's preserver,
he was, if possible, far more surprised at the contents of this note; and
although he (...) the same obligation to him as to any other individual, yet he
would rather have had lady Caroline's life saved by any other person. He
concluded Alfred was in debt, and was therefore obliged to keep concealed. Lord
Albourne was a nobleman of the nicest honor, and most generous sentiments; he
could not therefore consider himself happy in being obliged to a man whose ill
qualities he had only known, and, as a stranger to his real character, detested
his principles. He strictly observed what was mentioned in the note, and made
an excuse for the gentleman's sudden departure.

In private he acquainted his daughter with the (...) She shed tears; his
lordship started: "I hope, Caroline," said he with some warmth, "you encourage
not a partiality for a man to whom I have many times declared a total dislike."

"Your lordship, surely, cannot blame these few marks of sensibility for one
who has saved my life, and by that, I flatter myself, deserves, your gratitude
as well as your daughter's."

"My most sincere gratitude he certainly deserves* replied his lordship: "but
yet I would rather he (...) have any recompense in the world than the
affections (...) my child. You well know, Caroline, pride was never a (...)
trait in my character: I have never attempted to (...) your inclinations
respecting the choice of a husband, although you have had many noble offers. I
therefore think I may reasonably require your compliance in one point, which
is, never to marry a gamster: of this description Mr. Maserini is known to be;
and by that title I never could own him as a son-in-law."

Lady Caroline sighed; her understanding told her his lordship's arguments were
just; but her heart informed her she must suffer in the acquiescence to them.

Lord Albourne remained near six weeks at that place, till he was quite
recovered, and then pursued his journey slowly toward Italy.

CHAPTER XXI.
LORD Albourne had observed, from the first evening of his daughter's
introduction at Sir Peter Peviquil's, a growing partiality on her side toward
the young Frenchman: and particular assiduities in his manner which seemed
calculated to gain the affection* of any young lady (...) whom they were
addressed.

His lordship when ^^orougly convinced that these conjectures were well
founded, determined to inquire more closely into the character and principles
of his new acquaintance; he had received hints from several persons, that he
was a man of no fortune; but wealth was the least object of lord Albourne's
consideration; his own income was (...) and noble, having, as an only son,
(...) the whole estate and title of his father: he therefore wisely conceived
that his child might find more substantial happiness in a good man, though with
only a small patrimony, than by receiving a higher name and additional
luxuries, as the wife of a dissipated man of quality.

Under these ideas his lordship scrutinized the conduct of Alfred Maserini. He
heeded not the envious tongue of calumny, but determined to be himself a
spectator of those vices that should render him unfit for an alliance with lady
Caroline. But he found the general voice to be too true, and more than once saw
him seated among notorious sharpers at a gaming-table Disgusted at the sight,
he resolved never to admit him into his family. Having informed his daughter of
the resolution he had taken, he could perceive, by the manner of her receiving
the declaration, that Love had on Her bosom seized: shame, void of guilt,
The charming blush of innocence, esteem,
And admiration of her lover's flame,
By modesty exalted; even a sense
Of self-approving beauty stole across
Her busy thought.
THOMSON.

Lord Albourne was now seriously alarmed, and resolved on a sudden scheme, to
break off at once the connection.

He had received advice to travel, on account of his health, which had been in
a declining state for some months. He considered this as a good opportunity to
comply with the wishes of his friends; and by taking lady Caroline with him,
the novelties of other countries, distance, and separation, might break an
acquaintance which threatened her happiness for ever.

He accordingly ordered the servants to deny their young lady, whenever Mr.
Maserini should call that day; and then gave immediate directions for a long
journey, which he intended to take the next morning, having business of
importance to transact in the country.

Lady Caroline was astonished, when she was requested by her father to
accompany him, and prepare her wardrobe in as little time as possible.

"Your lordship I suppose means to make no great stay: consequently, I shall
have little occasion for many dresses."

"If I find, Caroline," returned lord Albourne, "that the air agrees with me, I
may perhaps remain there some weeks, if not months; and, in that case, shall
without doubt wish for your company. You had, therefore, better order the chief
part of your clothes to be packed up: even your writing and drawing implements
I would advise you to take with you."

The young lady was still more surprised and vexed at the stay her father
intended to make; but even to wish not to go with him, was, in her ideas,
cruelty to a parent who had always been so tenderly attached to her.

The next day they took leave of London. Lady Caroline did not mention the
circumstance of seeing Alfred at the turnpike gate. At a late hour in the
evening they entered D^ver, and slept there that night. During supper, his
lordship opened his mind to his daughter; acquainted her with his motives for
so suddenly leaving town, and his intentions of traveling through France and
Italy, as he hoped change of climate would both benefit his health and drive
from (...) a man unworthy of her esteem.

"You might, my dear Caroline," concluded his lordship, "have (...) to reproach
me, had I listened to the tales of (...) but I had the evidence of my own
senses, and therefore could not be mistaken, in observing Mr. Maserini to be a
person (...) would in a course of time being his wife to (...)"

Lady Caroline made no answer; but her looks showed she thought her father's
proceedings right, although they were entirely against her own inclinations.
The next morning they crossed over to Calais, and traveled slowly toward the
Alps, when they stopped at that inn where our young adventurers arrived a few
hours after.

It was not a wonder that lord Albourne should be chagrined at the note he
received; when it informed him that the very man who had given him so much
uneasiness, and on whose account he left England, had in a few days' time
overtaken them, and, by a noble act of courage and generosity, bound himself by
the strongest ties, to the gratitude of both his daughter and himself.

His lordship, however, was soon convinced that his supposition on the cause of
Alfred's departure was ill founded; but his knowledge of the actual reason of
it served, if possible, to hurt him more than ever in that nobleman's opinion.

It will be now necessary to acquaint the reader with those circumstances that
occasioned the young travelers precipitate elopement from the inn.

Leonard was a second time going to retire to his bed, which was no better than
a heap of straw placed by the side of his horses, when a large paper, stuck on
the door of the stable, met his eye. Fatigued as he was, curiosity prompted him
to hold up the lanthorn which he had in his hand, in order to read the
contents; when, to his astonishment and horror, he preceived it to be an order
for apprehending Alfred Maserini, as a deserter from his regiment, and a large
reward to be given to any one who would produce him.

Astonished and alarmed at this intelligence, he stood some moments motionless.
Having in some degree recovered, he ran back to the houso; fortunately the
entrance was not fastened, and he arrived, without difficulty, at his master's
chamber. He knocked, and Alfred answered: Leonard begged to be admitted. No
sooner had he entered the room, than he informed him of the advertisment which
he had seen, and entreated his master to set off again immediately. "I am
perfectly well acquainted, sir, with a way across the Alps, and will be bound
to conduct you safe into Italy."

This information was the most severe trial Alfred had ever yet experienced; he
now saw his character and honor ruined, his name branded as that of a coward,
and even publicly exposed as a villain, by a reward to be given for his person.
"Leonard," said he, half frantic "take care of my sister, and I will this
moment fly and deliver myself up to my country; then I will explain my motives
for my present behavior, and die in a manner that shall not disgrace my
family."

"Alas, sir," answered Leonard, "consider my young lady. I am a poor man, and
little able to afford her that protection you request: not but that I would die
in her defense; yet I am afraid my exertions in her behalf would be only looked
on with contempt."

Alfred was tortured with contending passions: -- one moment, his honor made
him resolve to give himself up a victim to the sentence of a deserter; but then
his sister* in the power of count D'Ollifont, (who might recover) presented
herself to his fancy, nor was the idea of lady Caroline absent from his mind. A
hope, a distant hope, seemed to inspire him with a wish to fly once more
ignobly from pursuit, and try his fortune in that part where his parents had
experienced the most poignant distresses.

Leonard was overjoyed at this resolution, and directly crept down s^airs to
the stable in order to prepare the horses; and Alfred promised to follow in a
little time. Having knocked at the door of his sister's apartment, he requested
in a low voice that she would rise immediately, dress herself, take every thing
out of the room that belonged to her, and come to his chamber.

Matilda was astonished; but it was not a time for inquiries; she accordingly
did as he desired, as soon as possible. In the mean time he wrote with a pencil
those few lines that were delivered to lord Albourne Being joined by his
sister, he took their trunk, and led her to the stable; when, being placed on
her horse, they departed with as much expedition as the darkness of the morning
would permit.

There was not a doubt but that an order from France for Alfred's return to his
regiment, at a very short notice, had been sent a few hours after he left his
lodgings; but (...) to advertise him as a deserter, was a method equally
strange and uncommon. -- In short, count D'Ollifont's interference seemed to
appear in the affair; and they greatly suspected it was through his friends,
some of whom were superior officers, and others in great favor at court, that
such cruel proceedings were occasioned.

Alfred remained in a deep reverie; and it was from Leonard that his sister
learnt the reason for so sudden and unaccountable a flight. They wore some
miles from the house by daylight, and halted at a small cottage for some
refreshment, before they began their journey on the Alps. They had here,
fortunately, an opportunity of changing the three horses for two mules and a
kind of carriage which would be more convenient and safe for Matilda to travel
in; and also prevent remarks, which the sight of other animals might have
occasioned among the peasants. In about an hour they again set off, and Leonard
acted as driver the chief part of the way.

Nothing particular occurred during their journey across the Alps, which was
extremely difficult and tedious, except a visible alteration in Alfred's health
for the worse, and a settled deep melancholy in his sister, which threatened a
total decline in her constitution. Leonard in vain strove to point out to them
the beauties of the country and the romantic scenery which surrounded them;
their own misfortunes engrossed every idea; and the cloud of misery, which had
so long been gathering over their heads, seemed now ready to burst with full
force and horror. -- Their arrival in Italy was productive of little joy or
comfort, as they had every reason to suppose the same papers had been published
through that country. They secreted themselves as well as possible at every
place where they stopped, using the nicest economy for fear of exhausting their
little store; which, although it might last them a considerable time with
frugality, yet, with extravagance, could be but of short duration.

Alfred had resolved in his own mind, from their first setting off from Dover,
to visit Grasville Abbey; he now considered it would be a place of great
service in point of secreting them from their enemies, as there was little
doubt but superstition had kept it entirely free from inhabitants or curious
visitors. But these intentions he determined to keep from the knowledge of
Matilda; for he well knew the idea of residing there would add greatly to those
sufferings she already experienced: and the circumstances of the light in the
west tower, the noise which was heard by their father, and his remarkable
disappearance, were subjects which his sister dwelt on with horror, whenever
she read the manuscript of her aunt. But he hoped to pursuade her to remain
there for some little time, and then considered that she would soon become
comfortable in it, even as a place of abode.

Leonard well knew the roads that led to the Abbey, as he had often seen it
when young, and could well remember the hospitality and goodness of the old
count Maserini. To him Alfred privately conveyed his intentions, and requested
him to bring them to the mansion on a sudden, and unknown to Matilda. The man
seemed hurt on account of his young lady, and begged leave to remind him that
it would be cruel to distress her, when she needed no more occasions for terror
or alarm.

"I thank you for the caution," returned Alfred coolly; "but am not yet so
great a villain as to behave in the manner you suppose."

Leonard looked confused; his master ^ontinued --

"I will not even propose a favorable argument to keep her there against her
own inclination. But you must agree, that if Matilda could divest herself of
idle terrors, and acquiesce in the plan, it would in every respect be
particularly fortunate, both in preserving our little property, and concealing
us from the eye of malice or contempt."

With these intentions they rode some leagues each day, and, on the fifth
morning from their first entering Italy, found themselves within six hours'
traveling of Grasville Abbey. The clouds seemed to indicate an approaching
storm; rain fell in large drops, and several claps of thunder were heard at a
distance. Matilda was alarmed, and begged they might alight at some place where
they might find shelter till the tempest should in some degree abate. In vain
they looked round for a cottage or hovel to answer their purpose; no such place
could be seen; when their attention was called off by the sight of a young
girl, seemingly about sixteen. Her hands were clasped, and her eyes lifted
toward heaven. Her appearance showed both terror and distress. Leonard drove
to the spot where she stood, and Alfred offered the shelter of their vehicle,
which she accepted with joy; and by her thanks for their kindness they
perceived she was a native of France. Matilda inquired to what part she was
going. She answered, with an unaffected simplicity, "Any where." They were both
astonished at the reply, but restrained their curiosity and desired Leonard to
drive on.

The storm had now blown over, though the clouds were still gloomy and
unsettled; but the latter part of the day they again joined, and seemed to
foretell another war of elements. Vivid flashes of white lightning darted on the
ground, and loud claps of thunder (which was now much nearer) burst over their
heads. Matilda declared she would rather put up with any situation, than travel
while it lasted; and Agnes (which was the name of the young girl) was extremely
terrified. At that moment they perceived the turrets of Grasville Abbey rise
above the trees which surrounded it. Alfred ordered Leonard to drive
immediately to it.

Matilda ^shuddered, yet was ashamed to confess her fears. It was now nearly
dark, and they entered a grove of ancient cedars that led to the front gate.
The lightning was horrid, and the thunder seemed to shake even the center of
the earth: both Agnes and Matilda were nearly insensible when the carriage
stopped before the Abbey. One wing seemed entirely in ruins, but they had no
time for observations. Leonard had not quitted the mule he rode on two minutes
before the animal was struck dead at his feet, and each expected the same fate.
Alfred flew to the gates, and being assisted by his servant, after some
efforts, they yielded to their strength, and burst open, being unlocked.

Leonard drove the carriage into the court; having pushed against the heavy
folding doors that led to the internal part, they easily opened, but with a
considerable noise, that confirmed no one had entered this dreary mansion for
many years. Agnes and Matilda were carried into the hall, and the mules and
vehicle put under a piazza.

Leonard having kindled a fire on the pavement with some faggots, by the help
of a tinder-box which he had in his pocket, the (...) were in some measure
recovered, and looked with horror (...) the gloomy and desolate appearance of
the place that gave them shelter.

CHAPTER XXIII. TERROR.
Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to the rooky wood;
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
While night's black agents to their prey do rouse.
Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still:
Things bad began, make strong themselves by ill.
So pray thee go with me.
MACBETH.
SUPERSTITION (though greatly encouraged by idle conversation and fabulous
tales) is natural to mankind, and often inhabits the breasts of those whose
valor and intrepidity in other respects have been equally known and
experienced.

It produces terrors of all others the most to be dreaded and strove against;
for although they cannot be entirely overcome, yet, by giving the least way to
them, life is at once made uncomfortable and disagreeable.

From childhood we are taught to believe in the reality of preternatural
apparitions, by the prattle and simple stories of those who, in general, abuse
their care of children, by instilling into their young minds terrific and
horrid ideas. As age advances they are more likely to increase than decline;
and the number of relations, seemingly authentic, which are continually in
circulation, serve greatly to confirm the horrors of imagination. Whether such
histories proceed from the visionary remorse of guilty consciencees; from
affectation, or the tongue of falsehood; from insanity, weakness, or oppression
of spirits; from nervous disorders, or romantic thoughts and contrivances; is
equally difficult to be ascertained, as whether some of them are not actually
true, and the works of a Supreme Deity, for wise and unknown ends. Many men of
great learning and genius have differed widely on this point: and though even
the immortal Addison could not positively give a decisive opinion on those
topics, yet his words on the subject will ever be remembered and admired:

"I know of but one way of fortifying my soul against these gloomy presages and
terrors of mind; and that is, by securing to myself the friendship and
protection of that Being, who disposes of events, and governs futurity. He
(...) at one view the whole thread of my existence, not only that part of it
which I have already passed through, but that which runs forward into all the
depths of eternity. When I lay me down to sleep, I recommend myself to his
care; when I awake I give myself up to his direction. Amidst all the evils that
threaten me, I will look up to him for help, and question not but he will
either avert them, or turn them to my advantage. Though I know neither the time
nor the manner of the death I am to die, I am not at all solicitous about it;
because I am sure that he knows them both, and that he will not fail to comfort
and support me under them."

Grasville Abbey was situated near Montserrat in Italy, and but a little
distance from the Gulf of Genoa; its lofty turrets on one sido, commanded a
view of Piedmont, and the prospect was bounded by the towering and majestic
summits of the Alps: the other wing looked over the perspective scenery of
Parm^, Placenza, Mirandola, and the river Po; while at the extremity of the
prospect, in an oblique view, Venice might just be observed. The back front
looked over Valentia, Casal, and Vercelli, and terminated in a distant sight of
Savoy.

But none of these countries could be seen but from the top casements of the
two towers; the lower part of the Abbey being entirely surrounded by thick
foliage, pines and cypress trees, with many ancient cedars.

The building was in every respect calculated to inspire awe and solemnity,
both in the external and internal appearance. After the death of the count
Maserini, many strange accounts were talked of by the peasants; and
D'Ollifont's sudden departure from it, at the funeral of his uncle, seemed to
confirm those reports that had before been circulated through the surrounding
country. From that time it was shut up, without any of the furniture being
removed; and no one had been known to enter it till signor Maserini, son to the
late count, and father to Alfred and Matilda. His sudden and remarkable
disappearance raised the horror of the place, if possible, more than ever; even
those who had before laughed at the superstition of their neighbors, were
extremely alarmed at so dreadful and uncommon an occurrence. No person ever
walked beyond the entrance of the grove that led to the gates; and the only
human habitation that stood near it was a cell which contained an old hermit,
who had lived there ever since the Abbey had been forsaken, and subsisted on
the charity of the neighboring cottagers.

The travelers remained in the hall till day light, when the storm abated, and
they began to wish for some repose. Leonard pulled two arm chairs, which stood
in the recess, toward the fire, and Agnes and Matilda strove to sleep in them;
while Alfred and his servant laid themselves down on an old bench that stood
near the spot. After some hours they awoke and found themselves much refreshed.
Leonard was immediately dispatched to see that the gates were close in the same
manner as they were before, to prevent suspicion of any one having passed them.

They then opened their portmanteau, and found they had provisions for that
day: this circumstance was extremely fortunate, as they could have time to
contrive some method of replenishing their store. Leonard had also got victuals
for his surviving mule. They had now an opportunity to take a more particular
account of their situation; and Alfred smilingly asked his sister if she had
any objection to explore with him the apartments by daylight: she cheerfully
consented; but Agnes was terrified at the idea of attending them, and equally
afraid of remaining in the hall by herself, but at last resolved on the former.

The hall was of ancient architecture, but extremely noble, though heavy in the
design. It was supported by large Gothic columns; the capitals were chiefly
decayed; the shafts were composed of stained marble; and though of a
considerable height, the diameters were greater than the strict rules of that
kind of architecture would admit. The top opened in a large dome and gallery,
the walls of which had exhibited beautiful paintings, that were now nearly
destroyed; a large painted sky-light terminated the height; and additional
light was received from four elevated casements on different fides of the hall.
Pilasters of the same dimensions upwards stood opposite the pillars, between
each of which were niches that held statues larger than life; these were in
some preservation, as the count had them placed when he first came to the
estate.

Two large fire-places stood at each and, which seemed to show that hospitality
and the comforts of life had once been enjoyed in this dreary and melancholy
abode. The pavement was of black and white marble, the stones of which were of
a considerable size. In the (...) stood a large pair of heavy folding doors,
that led to the apartments on the east and west wings of the abbey. Two stone
stair-cases appeared on each side, which wound to the chambers above. Alfred
resolved first to examine the lower apartments, and accordingly opened the
folding doors, which discovered a small passage, supported by Tuscan pillars;
at the further part of it was a descent of several steps, which were in many
parts broken and decayed; at the bottom of them was a pair of large iron gates,
through which they perceived the remains of an extensive and noble chapel; this
part they supposed had stood nearly in the same state from the first foundation
of the building, as then intended for a place of religious worship. They
re-ascended the steps, and discovered in the passage two large openings, which
seemed to lead to different suites of apartments. They first entered those of
the west wing. The furniture in the first room had been extremely elegant,
though antique; it was in tolerable preservation, considering the number of
years it had (...) there without care; many noble paintings were yet hanging,
but so decayed by damps that it was impossible to make out the subjects. The
second room was rather larger than the first, but in far worse condition; the
tapestry was entirely destroyed, and both the casements and shutters broke
nearly to pieces; the columns which supported it seemed also rotten and decayed.

From this apartment they walked through many others that were in the same
condition, and showed no signs of having contained any mortal in them for many
years. In the last room there was a strong door, which they perceived, by a
window, opened into a court or terrace.

Having returned to the hall, they entered the apartments of the cast wing.
They were smaller though more in number than those they had left; and by the
plainness of the internal part, they supposed them to have been offices for
servants. At the extent of them there was a door of the same size with that
they had observed on she other side, and which opened also to the other end of
the terrace.

"The situation of this place," said Alfred, "shows that the inhabitants left
it on a sudden; but yet it is amazing that so noble a building, and such
elegant furniture, should have been left to perish by the ravages of time and
neglect."

"I cannot say I am altogether so astonished at that," answered Matilda: "for
after such circumstances happening in it, for heaven's sake who would willingly
choose it for a habitation?" -- Her brother smiled; and having again returned
to the hall, they ascended one of the stair-cases, but soon perceived that they
both terminated in one landing. The Abbey here was not divided; the chambers
were consequently far more intricate: the apartments were spacious, and had
been nobly furnished; the beds were heavy and antique; but all nearly
destroyed. They however, after some trouble, contrived to change one thing with
another, till they made up three tolerable beds. Two of them were in a large
chamber, and the other closely adjoining* They deferred, however, finishing
their search till the next day* on account of airing what they were to lie on
at night. Leonard accordingly made a good fire in the hall, and the clothes
were placed before it immediately. After another repast, Matilda begged Agnes
to relate to them those occurrences that caused her to be exposed to the fury
of so terrible a storm. "Alas! Mademoiselle," returned Agnes, "I should even
before this have related to you my little story, had I not been afraid you
would have condemned my conduct; but at least," continued the poor girl, with
tears in her eyes, "you shall never have reason to reproach me with ingratitude
for the favors I have received from you."

Both Alfred and Matilda desired her, if the relation would bring fresh grief
to her memory, to decline it, as in that case they would willingly suspend
their curiosity.

Agnes declared that, though it might raise in her mind many sorrows, yet it
would in the end give her pleasure to make them acquainted wi^h her little
narritive. The party having seated themselves by the sire, listened with
attention to their artless orator.

CHAPTER XXIV.
-- Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity.
HOME.
AGNES'S TALE.
"MY grandfather and his wife were natives of France, and resided near Moulins.
His cottage was situated in the deep descent of a beautiful valley, and his
name was La Faril."

Alfred here looked at his sister; they both recollected the name in their
aunt's manuscript, where he was spoken of in the highest terms, as one who
preserved them, at the hazard of his own life, in a cave near his house, from
the officers of justice. They did not, however, interrupt (...) fair speaker.

"They supported themselves comfortably by their industry and economy, and were
respected not only by the inhabitants of their little vale, but by all that
knew them even at a distance from it.

"They had a son and a daughter; the former was the eldest, but it was to the
latter they looked up for comfort and consolation in their old age. Leolin had
manifested from his birth a proud and haughty disposition, which made him rebel
against all control, and be ashamed to own his parents, on account of their
inferior condition in life. Both tried in vain, by inculcating honest and
industrious ideas, to ^rase from his bosom those dangerous and infamous
principles which seemed natural to him. All was however useless: he refused to
be a peasant, and determined to go to ^aris, and seek his fortune in that city.

"He there entered into the service of a dissipated nobleman, as valet de
chamber. In this situation he was introduced to scenes of luxury, villainy, and
dishonor; while every trait in his character, which had when a child only
appeared at intervals (though enough to alarm his parents) now blazed forth
with redoubled vigor, and destroyed those few good qualities he had shown in
his youth: in short, he was both a gamester and a swindler. His father received
but one letter from him during three years; but reports of his misconduct were
continually in circulation in that part of the country, although so extremely
retired. The health of both his parents was much injured by these accounts; and
their only comfort was the litt^e Sabina. About four years after Leolin had
left his home, he returned to it, for the first time, one night, at an unusual
hour, but greatly altered, not with the healthful bloom of youth upon his
cheek, but feeble, emaciated, and an old man in constitution, though only
twenty-one years of age.

"His father and mother were greatly shocked at the sight of him, but far more
so when he demanded to be concealed in a cave that was at the bottom of the
garden; they however lost no time in complying with his desire, as he said he
expected to be followed by the officers of justice in less than two hours, on
account of a robbery he had committed: nor was his conjecture wrong; for early
in the morning the cottage was surrounded by several men; but their search
proved ineffectual; for the cave was so closely concealed as to prevent any
discovery. He remained at home some little time, but shortly returned to those
vices which had already taken too fast hold on his inclinations, to suffer him
to relinquish them, while he had health or strength to follow their pursuits.

"The next news they heard of him was about six months after, when his father
was conducted to Provence, where Leolin lay at the point of death, encompassed
with misery, wretchedness and want; eaten up with disease, his soul torn with
remorse for past crimes, and sinking into eternity with a conscience racked by
the contending passions of horror and dismay. He, however, survived long enough
to receive a parent's blessing, who would, even then, have sacrificed his own
life to have saved that of a profligate and undutiful son.

"After seeing Leolin decently interred, the good old man returned to his
cottage overwhelmed with grief, yet with some hope of enjoying a few years of
tranquillity, which might make him a recompense for past misfortun^^. But how
vain is the foresight of mortals! in a very little time he lost the beloved
partner of his heart, who had struggled with him through the early part of
life, and been equally a partaker in his adversity and pleasures.

"His health and spirits suffered now a greater shock than ever, and every week
visibly altered him for the worse. His daughter Sabina had for some months
received offers of marriage from Cyril, the son of a neighboring cottager; and
the ceremony was shortly to have taken place, had not the sudden death of her
mother put it aside. But after some time they were joined together in the holy
bands of wedlock; and La Faril still remained with his child, whose attendance
and affection he now needed more than ever.

"I was born about twelve months after their marriage, and was greatly beloved
by my parents and grandfather. I had just attained my thirteenth year when my
father's father died, and though every person had supposed him to be a man
possessed of some little property, yet even his son was astonished to find
himself heir to a considerable fortune. After the funeral, we were surprised to
find my father intended to leave his native valley and cottage, to enjoy the
luxuries of Paris. This news was like a thunderbolt to my mother, who knew it
would break her parent's heart to leave that place, where he had been born,
brought up, and continued so many years; and she was certain it would equally
distress him to be robbed of her company and attendance. In vain she advised
her husband to give up all ideas of abandoning their cottage for dissipation
and vice; but to purchase some land in that part, which would then be doubly
dear to them.

"My father was deaf to all entreaties, and declared his intentions of setting
off in a short time. Our only hope was now that the solicitations of the good
La Faril would have more effect on him: -- but alas! he was too weak, and too
much shocked, to make any exertion in the affair; and his prayers failed like
those of his daughter. The poor old man was consequently obliged to be removed
to the house of a neighbor, while his beloved child was forced from him by a
cruel husband, whose ambition was kindled by the possession of a little wealth.
The cottage and goods being disposed of, with many tears on the part of my
mother and me, we took leave of my grandfather and our native vale. At the
expiration of a day we found ourselves in the gay city of Paris: and being
settled in handsome lodgings, the first news we received was, the death of La
Faril, who survived but a very short time after his daughter's departure. It
will be needless to enlarge on the grief that both my mother and I felt on the
occasion; we even thought we could trace some signs of remorse and sorrow in
the breast of my father.

We were shortly introduced to those gaities and vices which are supposed to
constitute genteel life. Having been settled about six months in our
apartments, my mothe^ heartily asked my father what trade or profession he
intended to follow, or in what manner he designed to turn his fortune to the
best advantage: but he told us to enjoy our present blessings, without
troubling ourselves with painful ideas of what might happen on the morrow.
These pernicious principles were certainly, in one respect, the ruin of us; for
he heeded not the advice of his wife or real friends, but plunged into every
extravagance that seemed to gratify his wishes.

"He, however, took some little care of my education, and I was instructed in
every branch of useful learning.

"Matters continued in this situation for three years; during which time my
father purchased a handsome villa, and our house was constantly crowded with
company. His wife most earnestly entreated him to contract his expenses; but
her prayers were useless, and he still answered in the same careless manner,
'Let tomorrow take care for itself.' We, nevertheless, saw him at times
dist^essed and unhappy, and he would return home in an evening, from spending
the day abroad, nearly in a state of destraction. My mother had sometimes
hinted to me, the cause of this strange behavior was gambling; and we were
thoroughly convinced of it, when a man, one night, brought a note directed to
him, and desired an answer to it immediately. Having opened it, we found it
contained an appointment to a gaming-house that evening.

"I need not describe to you the fresh anxiety this information gave us, nor
the rage of my father at the discovery of it: but we could now plainly tell
when he was a favorite of fortune, and when not, by the different turns of his
temper. Among the most intimate of his friends was a Monsieur Le Selet. This
man was a well known gambler, and withal a dangerous character in point of
gallantry (as he styled it) among the ladies. He was a constant visitor; and we
seldom sat down to table but he was one of the party. Monsieur Le Selet, more
than once, offended both my mother and myself by his behavior to us in
private, and we complained of it to my father; but he only ^allied us on our
prudery as he called it; and declared him to be a man who had his interest at
heart.

"These gloomy sits, which had only appeared at intervale, now returned more
and frequently, insomuch that we really thought his brain was affected, and
entreated him to have some advice. But he would then fly into a violent
passion: nor was it till three months after, that he confessed the cause of it
was the entire loss of his fortune; and not only that, but he was a debtor to
Monsieur to a very considerable amount.

"At the time of this confession, Le S^l^t entered the room and requested to
speak with my father in private* we accordingly retired to an apartment some
distance from that we left. In about two hours, while we were wondering at
their long conferrence, we were very much alarmed by hearing the bell in that
room ring violently. Soon after, we heard the servants in a kind of confusion,
and were just going to leave the chamber in order to inquire the reason for
such proceedings, when we were met by the housekeeper. 'My master! my master!'
was all she could say. In vain we asked her to explain her meaning; she could
utter no other words.

"We were therefore obliged to run to the parlour we had before left -- when,
judge our feelings at seeing my father and Monsieur Le Selet both weltering in
their blood. We ran to the former: he had just recovered from a fainting fit,
and languidly looked up. We knelt by him and wept; he seemed affected; and
those eyes which were half closed by death, shed tears of sorrow and repentance
when it was too late.

"My wife! my child!' he cried in a voice scarcely articulate, 'I have injured
you much: I have taken you from the peaceful habitation of innocence, to be
surrounded by vice and villainy, to experience poverty, distress and
oppression. Oh! my God!' he exclaimed with fervency, 'look down upon them;
shield them with thy mercy from the iron rod of tyranny and injustice; nor
condemn them for the wickedness of him who now implores thy aid.'

"His voice sailed him; he fell into convulsions, and expired. Greatly as we
had to complain of his conduct, yet our grief was excessive* A surgeon had been
sent for, but all medical aid was useless. The wound he received, as we
afterward understood, was by his own hand (...) a servant had, from the hall,
overheard the conversation. Monsieur Le Selet had called upon him that day for
the payment of the sum he owed. My father begged the interval of a week to
discharge it; this the former absolutely refused, but told him the whole might
on one condition be forgiven. He asked with eagerness by what method he should
cancel the obligation; when Le Selet gave him a paper: this paper a servant had
snatched from the floor, and presented to us: it was a bond by which my father
was to resign his child to the arms of a villain, without any ceremony or
articles of marriage. The horror he conceived at this proposal was too much for
him to support, and he gave way at once to the passions of revenge and despair:
he seized a dagger, and plunged it into the breast of the infamous Le Selet;
then rang the bell violently, and afterward, with the same hand, struck the
bloody steel to his own heart. Monsieur Le Selet was removed to another
chamber, but no hopes entertained of his recovery.

"The wound, however, we were informed, seemed more favorable after a few
days; and we requested that (...) might be taken from the house as soon as a
removal would not endanger his life. My father's affairs were greatly involved:
but we had the happiness to find that, after the villa and goods with other
effects were sold, there would not only be enough to pay his debts, but a small
su^^ remaining. We now determined to return to our native valley, and
accordingly took leave of Paris, and soon found ourselves before that cottage
which we had once called our own, and where the remembrance of past felicity
made our present misfortunes more poignant.

"We were obliged to the charity of a neighbor for a lodging, till we
purchased a little hovel for a residence. I then opened a small school, and had
the greater part of the children in the place. By this employment we gained a
comfortable living.

"Among the neighboring villagers was one of the name of Oliver. His character
was without reproach, and he asked my hand in marriage.

"Neither his friends nor my mother had any objection to this match, though the
latter would frequently say, she thought my person might command a richer
husband. On the evening before that day which was to have united us, as we were
sitting before our cottage, sometimes joining in the rustic dance, we were
suddenly stopped in our amusement by the arrival of a gentleman and his
servant. The former advanced with a corteous air: but judge of my astonishment
and horror, when I perceived it to be Monsieur Le Selet. He seemed perfectly
recovered, and requested to speak with my mother alone.

"I trembled at the result of their discourse, which continued some time: but
all my miseri^s were complete, when my mother informed me, that monsieur,
having thoroughly repented of his former ill conduct and behavior, now
offered, as an atonement, to make me his wife. He sprang to embrace me, but I
shrunk from his arms, and fainted away. On my recovery they were each standing
by me and entreated me to discard my present lover; while the artful Le Selet
talked in so insinuating a manner, as to bring over my mother entirely to his
favor; for she supposed it would secure a handsome independence for her child.
But this conversation had no effect on me, and they each retired with anger,
and I with grief and distress. But I determined that night to leave them all.
Whether you will blame my conduct, I know not, mademoiselle; but I was certain
that monsieur was by no means the repentant person he seemed to be; and ^ven if
he had been, I never could have liked him for a husband. I was also sure that
my mother could get a living in the same employment as myself; for it had been
agreed that she should take my school after I was married. With these ideas I
packed up a few clothes, wi^h a little money, in a bundle, and left the cottage
as soon as I thought my mother was asleep. I had not yet, however, resolved to
what part I should go, but determined to apply to a carrier whom I had known
for some time. He was to set out on a long journey early in the morning, and he
lived about a mile distant. By the time I arrived there, he was just going to
set off. The man's surprise was excessive to see me, who he supposed was to
have been made a wife that day. I explained to him the reasons for my visit,
and threw myself on his protection: he readily granted it, and told me he was
going to Italy. This information gave me great pleasure, as I thought I might
there get employment, and conceal my real name and family.

"We had not entered this country above two days, before Basil (the carrier's
name) was taken ill; his disorder proved violent, and in less than a week he
was no more. I was necessitated to sell his cart and the whole of his goods to
pay the expenses of his funeral and illness. I now found myself in a strange
place, without money or friends. The people, however, at the house where (...)
had died, informed me there was a family a few miles distant who wanted a
domestic. I accordingly applied: but how great was my disappointment to find
they were just provided with one! I found the whole of my little property would
support me but three days longer, and began seriously to repent leaving my
cottage, when I was overtaken by that violent storm, which proved one of the
happiest incidents of my life, by introducing me to your friendship, care, and
generosity; to which I most certainly owe my existence." Here the poor girl
burst into a flood of tears, and concluded her story.

CHAPTER XXV. SECRESY.
Can thou not minister to a mind diseased;
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow;
Raze out the written troubles of the brain;
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Clanse the foul bosom of that perilous stuff,
Which weighs upon the heart?
SHAKESPEARE.
BOTH Alfred and Matilda thanked Agnes for the recital of her narrative: they
pitied her misfortunes, and promised to protect her as long as it was in their
power. Not only their own feelings at the time prompted them to this, but
gratitude for the assistance their parents had received from her family. After
some further conversation, the bed furniture was carried to the rooms above;
and, having partook of a slight supper, they retired to their apartments. The
chambers, however, seemed extremely cold, and (...) begged Leonard would make
up a little fire of faggots in each of them.

This was accordingly done; and Agnes having lighted a wax taper, which she
placed on a large marble flab, they took leave of Alfred for the night, who,
with his faithful servant, entered the room adjoining.

"Before we go to rest," said Matilda, "I will take a more particular survey of
this chamber."

Agnes trembled; Matilda took the taper and walked round it. The apartment was
not so large as many, but had equally the same gloomy appearance. The bed had
formerly been noble and elegant, but was now partly decayed; the high and heavy
cornice of it seemed rotted by time; the furniture, they could just perceive,
had been of crimson velvet; but the curtains were now, in many parts, entirely
threadbare. An old-fashioned cabinet and dressing-table, both of which had been
ornamented with gilded figures, and stood in a gothic recess, by the dim light
seemed in form to represent a tomb. Matilda in vain strove ^o open the former;
it was locked, nor could she find any key. The wainscotting was hung round with
large pictures; but, except one, they were all nearly destroyed, so as to make
it impossible to discover the subjects. That which was in some preservation was
the portrait of a man, in an Italian (...), at full length. He seemed of middle
size, and elegant figure; but the countenance was melancholy and dejected,
while he rested with one arm on the fragment of a gravestone. Matilda gazed on
it for a considerable time; it was extremely like the miniature of her father,
which she wore in her bosom. She stood in such a situation that the eyes seemed
to look full at her. Painful and horrid ideas now arose in her mind; she almost
fancied she saw the features move: the thought overcame her: she shuddered,
sunk in a chair, and burst into a flood of tears. Agnes had attentively
observed her, and now joined her tears with those of Matilda; yet, with
unaffected simplicity, strove to give her comfort and consolation. Her efforts
at last succeeded; and, drying her tears, the former retired to a restless
pillow.

It was a considerable time before Matilda could close her eyes; the
misfortunes that encompassed her appeared now more terrible than ever. Agnes
was in a serene sleep; all was silent and gloomy: her eyes wandered over the
desolate chamber; and she could still see by the sudden light of the wood fire,
which was dying away, but now and then blazed at intervals, the face of the
picture, which still seemed to look at her. The ember was at last entirely
extinguished, and the room was left in total darkness, except from the flame of
the wax taper. At length, tired out with melancholy and terrific recollections,
she fell into a (...) slumber.

Horrid visions and ghastly figures now floated on her brain. Her father
approached, covered with blood, and with an angry tone, called on her to
revenge his murder She started, turned, and again composed herself to rest but
it was impossible. She now saw herself in an apartment of the abbey that was
hung with black; in the middle of which lay a corpse in state: she walked up to
(...) coffin: a voice whispered her it was her grandfather. (...) countenance
was black; and it struck her he was poisone^^ At that moment count D'Ollifont
appeared; he attempte^ to force her from the spot; but, at the apparition of
her father, which then ascended, with an (...) paleness, and disfigured with
wounds, he fled, and Matilda, in the struggle of horror and affliction, again
awoke. In short, during the whole night her mind was so entirely disordered by
uneasy slumbers, that she arose in the morning with a considerable degree of
fever, and by no means refreshed. It was remarkably fine, and she ventured to
open the heavy casement of her chamber. There was no danger of being observed;
the high trees that surrounded the building made it impossible she could be
perceived but by those in the inner part. The air refreshed her, but the
languor of her spirits still continued.

The breakfast, which Agnes had prepared with the utmost neatness, was served
in the first apartment next the hall. Leonard had got up very early, and
cleaned it out; and the room now wore a far more comfortable appearance than it
had done (...) day before. Alfred noticed the pale looks of his sister* and
asked, with a smile, if she had been disturbed by any of the ghosts. She
declared she had not been in the least alarmed; and each answering in the same
manner, their fears of supernatural intrusion partly vanished.

They now consulted the best method to procure provisions, which must be done
that day, with several other articles: at last it was agreed that Leonard
should take a basket, and go out of the abbey so as to be seen by no one in the
way to it: and that he should mix with other persons in the public market,
where he could purchase what he wanted, and perhaps gain some intelligence
concerning their residence, and other circumstances relative to the count* but
Alfred desired him by no means to force the conversation, as it might raise
curiosity in the peasantry to know who and what he was. This matter being
settled, Leonard was shortly equipped, and sallied forth with the utmost
caution.

Alfred now proposed to his sister to examine those apartments they had not had
time to look at the night before. Agnes said she now had courage enough to stay
in the great hall, which she had much rather do, and employ herself in
preparing the dinner.

Alfred and Matilda accordingly ascended the staircase, and walked through the
suite of rooms they had before seen. They then crossed several others, larger
and far more heavy. These terminated in a passage supported by small columns,
and arched over in the Gothic style. This place was extremely dark; they,
however, with some difficulty, passed it, and entered, by a pair of folding
doors, a more spacious apartment then they had yet seen, and, if possible, more
gloomy. It had been entirely hung with black, and, from every appearance, had
contained a corpse that had lain there in state at some former period. Several
pieces of tapers were still standing in black glasses; and in the middle stood
bearers for the purpose of supporting a coffin; but there was now only the
remains of a large plume of black feathers.

Matilda thought of her dream, and trembled. Alfred himself seemed at first
struck with awe, but presently recovering himself, laughed at his sister, and
strove to keep up his own spirits by ^allying Matilda on her fears. She
entreated him to return; the gloomy horror of this chamber overcame her, and
she found herself extremely faint. He placed her on a kind of couch, that had
also been covered with black velvet, and made several efforts to open the
windows: this was, however, to no purpose; but after some trouble h^ pulled
down a part of the broken shutters, and consequently received more light, which
had before only entered from an opening at the top.

Matilda in a few minutes recovered, but declared she would proceed no further.
Alfred persuaded her to ascend the stairs that wound round the west tower; but
she positively refused.

He wished much to see the apartment which, by his aunt's manuscript he was
informed, terminated, as was supposed, the search of his father. But his sister
absolutely refusing to go any further, they returned to the hall. Agnes noticed
the dejected looks of Matilda, but did not inquire the cause. Alfred resolved
within himself to examine the west tower the following day, and satisfy his
curiosity concerning the mystery of that extraordinary chamber.

Agnes was in far better spirits than she had been in since their meeting, and
tried every way to comfort and entertain her dejected friends. Both felt the
kindness of her intention, and acquainted her with most of the circumstances
relative to their misfortunes: there were, however, some events they thought
proper to conceal.

Lady Caroline Albourne was, however, still one of the chief objects of
Alfred's thoughts. He loved her, yet was conscious he had not even merited her
esteem. By her manner, just before he left England, he flattered himself he
could perceive innocent traits of a confession of more than a common regard for
him. But even though his conjectures should prove right, her prudence, her
understanding, must have told her to tear from her heart a man who, by the
conduct he then pursued, must bring her to wretchedness, want and misery. But
there was yet even a greater misfortune to strike him with remorse. His name,
his character, were tarnished with dishonor. That name which, he had been
proud to say, had not shamed the family it belonged to, and that nicety of
honor which is had been his utmost pride to preserve, were now, through folly
and extravagance, ruined by the slanderous tongue o^ calumny, both in England
and his own country. In the former it was most likely he would receive the
appellation of an assassin and a swind^er; in the latter he would be branded as
a base, mean, cowardly deserter from the service of his country; a disgrace to
France and the noble profession he had been brought up to -- the defense of his
country's rights.

"Damned ideas!" he would exclaim, in a voice of frantic rage. His sister and
Agnes were alarmed. He begged their pardon: -- it was the recollection of
former distress that crossed his brain at that moment. Matilda plainly
peeceived his impetuosity of temper broke out at every interval when the
re^ollection of his folly, and the misery it had brought them to, intruded on
his memory. She therefore studiously avoided to mention any topic in discourse
that might lead to a remembrance of disagreeable circumstances.

Her griefs were consequently buried in her own bosom; yet they were not less
poignant than those of her brother. She loved Mr. Milverne; but every hope of
seeing him again appeared almost impossible. His letter, which they received at
Dover, mentioned that he would join them as soon as possible in Italy; but they
had little thought of an occurrence happening that obliged them to keep more
concealed in this place, than their situation might have required them to have
done, had they remained in England. Nor was it likely Mr. Milverne should even
have an idea that they were inhabitants of Grasville Abbey. The more she
thought on those sufferings she had experienced since her mother's death, the
more she was surprised how she had survived ^uch a series of misfortunes; but
it fully convinced her that the Supreme Being constantly support those who
trust in him, though they may for a time be ordained to bear a load of
adversity and sorrow.

Leonard returned in about two hours, laden with the purchases he had made. He
acquainted them that he ha^ been taken no particular notice of; but, mingling
with other persons, had bought commodities without receiving any disagreeable
questions. This was pleasing intelligence, and they sat down to dinner with
some degree of cheerfulness. But yet there was something in Leonard's
countenance which showed he had been greatly chagrined, and that he had heard
more than he chose to communicate. At the latter part of the day he requested
to speak with his master alone.

Alfred immediately granted his request, and they ascended to their chamber.

Matilda was a silent spectator of this mysterious behavior. Agnes was
extremely alarmed; she was certain, she said, from Leonard's behavior, that he
must have received some very dreadful intelligence; and in all probability he
thought it of too terrible a nature for them to be informed of.

Matilda smiled, and strove to dispel her fears, but was herself very much
hurt. Agnes's conjecture was by (...) means unlikely; yet she felt herself
slighted at not being made a confidant in the affair. Their conference laste^
near two hours. When they returned to the parlour Leonard's countenance was
still more gloomy, while Alfred strove to assume a gaiety foreign to his heart.
Their supper was a silent meal; each seemed absorbed in melancholy reflections;
and, after some little time, they retired (...) their apartments.

CHAPTER XXVI.
ANOTHER sleepless night was passed by Matilda; and Agnes requested she would
take her breakfast before she arose for the day. She therefore acquainted
Alfred with his sister's indisposition. He was extremely concerned, and far
more so to observe her dejected manner and pale countenance, when she joined
them at dinner. Leonard seemed rather more cheerful than he had been the night
before; but his master still retained a gloomy sadness, that showed some cause
of distress lay heavy at his heart. Both surveyed Matilda with a scrutinizing
eye, and Alfred after some little time asked, with a pretended air of
indifference, if she had rested as free from disturbance as the night before.

It would not have been difficult for a common person to have perceived he
paused with unusual anxiety for an answer, though he strove as much as possible
to conceal that emotion which was visible to all. She told him she had. This
reply seemed to give him considerable pleasure; and on her returning the
question, he also answered in the affirmative. The alteration in his manner
continued but a few moments, and he again relapsed into his former melacholy.
He new mentioned his intention of examining the rooms in the west tower, and
asked Leonard to accompany him in his researches. Matilda said, languidly, that
she also meant to be of the party; at which declaration her brother looked very
much chagrined.

"I rather think, Matilda," said he, "you had (...) decline it; the coldness
and damps of those deserted chambers will not agree with your health and
spirits; particularly now you are so much indisposed."

She thought it might amuse her, and was certain the walk would be of service.
Agnes attended; and they opened the large heavy door that showed the winding
stone staircase of the west tower. They found it very disagreeable to ascend;
the place having been so long forsaken, that large webs of dust and dirt almost
impeded their passage. They at length, however, arrived at the first
landing-place, where two apartments appeared -- the one to the right, the other
to the left. They entered the former. I was a small square room, lighter than
many they had see^ in the abbey, but entirely clear from furniture; that (...)
^he left was of the same size, but contained several implements of war, among
which were swords, shields, spears and a few firearms, a trumpet and drum,
with other instruments of martial music: but all of them were in (...) repair.

They again ascended the continuation of the stone stai^ case, and found
themselves on the second landing. (...) apartments on this floor were of the
same dimensions; those below, but had been far better furnished. That (...) the
right side was where their father had so mysteriousl^ vanished. It was hung
round with tapestry, which (...) now nearly decayed. The furniture was all
Gothic, and greatly damaged; while the elevated narrow casement^ placed at a
considerable height from the floor, gave (...) room a most dreary and solitary
appearance: in short, greatly resembled, and had* they supposed, in (...)
times, been used as a place of confinement for some unfortunate prisoner.
Leonard examined the boards; and the^ could plainly perceive those spots of
blood which had been observed before by Edward and the physician. In all
probability this blood was their father's! the idea struck each of them. Agnes
was greatly sh^cked and terrified; Leonard conversed with considerable emotion
in private with his master for some minutes, while Matilda, unable to bear her
own feelings, burst into a flood of tears. After an hysteric fit of weeping,
she found herself much better; and, having closed the apartments, they
descended to the ^arlour.

Some hours were again spent by Alfred and Leonard in a private conference
above. Both still retained a settled melancholy on their features; while Agnes
was more astonished, and Matilda more alarmed, than ever. The reason of her
brother's secresy she could by no means discover; hitherto she had been made
acquainted with every circumstance concerning their situation; but Alfred was
now silent even on general topics, and only put confidence in his servant. Her
pride forbade her to ask questions, yet her curiosity prompted her to the
humiliation, as being the only means of gratifying it. Evening approached:
their supper was again a silent meal, and they retired without any conversation
having passed.

Agnes was soon in a profound sleep; but Matilda's thoughts on her brother's
behavior robbed her of repose. It was now the last hour of night, and she
strove again to compose herself to rest, when she thought she heard her
brother's voice; yet she considered she must be deceived, as both Leonard and
he had been in their apartments near two hours. The wind was extremely high;
Matilda however still listened, and found she was not mistaken. A listener she
detested; but she thought her present situation took every stigma from the
character. She was, however, still irresolute in what manner to act, when a
loud word from her brother made her determined to hear more. Having accordingly
thrown over her a nightgown, she crept to the door. All was silent again for
some time: but after an interval of many minutes, she heard her brother check
Leonard for talking so loud; "Matilda," said he, "may not yet be asleep." They
then continued so low that she could not even understand one word. After
another interval, Leonard answered to a question which Alfred asked him, that
"It was not the time."

"If I die in the attempt," said Alfred "I will unravel this mystery: and if
once -- "

Here a violent gust of wind rattled through the chambers, and she was unable
to distinguish their discourse, though they still continued talking. At length,
however, she heard Leonard say, "I will be very careful, sir: you may depend
upon my fidelity."

"For heaven's sake," continued Alfred, "follow it to ^he utmost: but at all
events do not discover -- "

Here again the wind drowned their voices; and shortly after, she heard them
retire for the night.

Matilda, chilled with horror and uncertainty, returned to her bed, and fell
into a disturbed slumber. In the morning she appeared at breakfast, though her
looks plainly told the state of her mind.

"Leonard," said her brother, "is this morning going again to the public
market." Matilda was astonished; she knew they were in want of no provision.
Alfred wished to procure some wine, an article he was certain they were all in
need of.

"But surely," answered his sister, "Leonard purchased enough when he was last
there."

"True," said he "but we have had an accident, and broke nearly all the bottles
which were full."

Although such an accident was not impossible, yet Matilda greatly doubted the
truth of this assertion; and in her brother's manner she thought she could
perceive an embarrassment, which showed it was merely an excuse to keep from
her the real cause of Leonard's errand. He, however, set off in a little time,
equipped the same as when he before left the Abbey, and using the like caution
at leaving it.

After his departure they walked on the terrace which extended from the east to
the west end of the building. Agnes was some distance from them* when Matilda
considered that this would be a good opportunity to mention to her brother the
great alteration she had noticed in him, since his long and secret conference
with Leonard. Alfred at first seemed only to laugh at her fears, and wished to
persuade her she was mistaken; but she urged the matter so close that he at
last confessed Leonard's information that night had given him considerable
uneasiness and distress.

"Then," said Matilda with quickness, "let me share in that distress; which
will be far better than to remain in this horrid suspense."

"That is impossible," returned Alfred; "you cannot, must not, be acquainted
with the affair."

His vehemence alarmed her.

"Is then the circumstance of so secret a nature, that I, who have hitherto
been made a partner in the knowledge of all those misfortunes that have
befallen us, must not now know that which your servant is privy to, and which
may concern me equally with yourself?"

"Be not offended, Matilda, if I tell you again it is impossible that in this
case I should gratify your wish: but be assured every method I take will be for
your good and safety; nor must you be surprised at any remarkable behavior in
me at different intervals, or terrify yourself at any uncommon occurences in
this Abbey, as our residence here is now more necessary than ever."

"Have you then seen any thing more than common?" said his sister, with great
emotion.

"With respect to this, too, you must excuse me," answered Alfred. "At all
events, however, we have one consolation; that those who trust in the Supreme
Being need never fear the interruption of deceased persons."

Agnes at this moment overtook them, and he hurried from his sister with
considerable precipitation into the hall.

Matilda stood motionless for some minutes.

"I am sure madam," said Agnes, "signor Maserini has been saying something very
dreadful; for I watched you all the time, and, though at a distance, could
perceive your countenance change several times." Matilda wished to keep the
last equivocal words of her brother from Agnes, as she knew she was, if
possible, more timid than herself; but her looks contradicted her speech, and
little used to say untruths, even the questions of the innocent Agnes puzzled
and perplexed her. They returned to Alfred in the hall. He was more melancholy
than ever, and Matilda was sorry she had spoken to him on the subject.

After some time Leonard returned, and produced plenty of wine, with part of a
French newspaper, which he told them he had by chance laid hold of. One of the
paragraphs mentioned the death of count D'Ollifont, and that, by the account of
the physicians, he was murdered by a wound given him at a masquerade by his
relation, the chevalier Maserini, who had fled to France; but that strict
^earch was now making after him, both in that country and Italy.

"At all events, then," said Alfred, "we must remain here till either justice
brings my cause to a proper crisis, or till I am crushed by arbitrary power and
matchless villainy."

He seemed much affected, yet bore the news with unusual fortitude. Leonard
requested to speak to him alone, and they retired to their apartment. Agnes
again wondered at these private conferences, and Matilda was yet silent,

In about an hour and a half they returned to the parlour. Leonard still
continued gloomy: but there was a considerable alteration in his master -- he
was now as full of spirits as he had been before melancholy; but yet they
seemed forced, and it appeared more like a madman's mirth, than the regular
sensations of joy. He laughed, talked immoderately, but yet often sighed.

Matilda observed him with anxiety and terror; while Agnes and Leonard were
silent spectators of his strange behavior. Supper-time at length arrived; when
the little group formed an expressive scene. Alfred at one end of the table,
first in an excessive fit of merriment, then looking round him with horror,
hardly able to suppress the rising tear. His sister was seated next him; her
color entirely faded through distress, while her fine eyes were fixed on him
with a look of misery that well showed the inward workings of her soul. Agnes
wept, and looked up to Matilda for consolation, who was now unable to give it.

The good old Leonard was seated at a little distance from them, surveying each
with attention, and often wiping from his aged eye the watery drop of
sympathetic tenderness. "Give us more light," said Alfred; "we will make a
jovial night of it; and set on another bottle of the last wine."

Leonard obeyed; two more candles were lighted, and the bottle placed before
him.

"You do not consider," said Matilda, "that it grows late, and we have already
had the usual quantity."

"I care not," he answered: "the Tuscan grape revives me."

His sister perceived it had already taken great effect on his spirits. The
night now began to grow extremely stormy, and the thunder rolled over the
building with considerable noise. The room being very large, the further part
from where they sat was entirely dark; but even this space was at intervals
illumined by the flashes of lightning which darted through the windows in that
part, the shutters being entirely decayed. Matilda and Agnes once more begged
him to retire to rest; but he was obstinate, declared he would not, and ordered
another bottle, having drank the chief part of the former one. In short, he
took bumper after bumper for some time, while every moment he became more
frantic, and the avidity with which he drank confirmed him to be distracted.
His behavior also showed him to be intoxicated; and the walls of Grasville
Abbey, which had so long remained in silence, now rung again with his
exclamations and noise. Yet his voice was often drowned by the repeated claps
of thunder, while the lightning became more and more dreadful. Matilda, Agnes,
and Leonard, were all silent spectators of this scene. It was now midnight, and
they gave up all idea of persuading him to retire to rest

"Fill your glasses!" he cried "I am going to give you a noble health." He rose
from his seat, and sighed heavily, then holding up the sparkling goblet, he
exclaimed, "Lady Caroline Albourne!"

A most tremendous clap of thunder!

Each looked with horror: Alfred stood in the same posture as when he uttered
the health; nor had he been able even to put his lips to the glass; but, after
the noise entirely died away, seemed to be listening with a degree of terror,
as if he then heard it. In a few minutes he recovered himself.

"This is a dreadful night," said he to his sister.

"It is indeed," answered Matilda. For "heaven's sake, Alfred, let us retire to
rest: I assure you I can hardly support myself."

"Another health!" he cried, relapsing into his former manner; "another I must
drink. Leonard, replenish the goblet."

"You forget, sir, that it is now full."

"True, true," he cried, "I had forgot. Here then," said he, laughing, "is to
the old ghost that inhabits this Abbey."

A violent crash!

All started from their seats. Agnes shrieked; Matilda looked wild; Leonard ran
to their assistance; while Alfred was still unable to put the goblet to him
mouth, but stood half stupefied with wine, horror and astonishment. The noise
seemed to come from an apartment which opened by a pair of folding doors into
the dark part of the room where they were now standing.

Before any one could speak, a violent clap of thunder ^ollowed, and several
flashes of lightning. The first person who broke silence was Leonard. "Be not
frightened," said he to Matilda and Agnes: but his tong^e ^aultered, and showed
he was equally terrified with themselves.

"This is a terrible night," continued Leonard; "but I will protect you to the
last drop of my blood."

"And so will I," cried Alfred, staggering from his seat; "I will protect you
too."

"Talk not of protecting us, Alfred," answered Matilda: for if the spirit of
our father at this time walks in these apartments, it is but to reproach you
for your present disgraceful situation. -- Come, Agnes, we will go to bed."

"Oh! no indeed, mademoiselle! I dare not," said Agnes: "I cannot move."

Matilda's reproach seemed to have some effect on her brother. "My father!" he
exclaimed.

A deep groan.

"Hark! hark! he answers me: it is from that room: I Will see him, if I die."

"Not for worlds," said Leonard, holding him. "There may be treachery in this
business, sir; pray stay where you are."

Another groan!

"Hark again!" he exclaimed, "I will go; by heavens, I will be satisfied." At
that moment he disengaged himself from Leonard, who, catching up a sword,
followed him. They both rushed to the dark part of the room. Alfred was first*
he pushed open the folding doors. An amazing flash of lightning illumined the
apartment they entered Alfred, in a tone of horror, exclaimed, "There!"

The object caught Leonard's eye. "In the name of the Holy Virgin," said the
old man, "who art thou?"

"'It Is gone, it is vanished," answered Alfred. He was right; there was nothing
now to be seen. They returned to the parlour; Matilda and Agnes, who had been
entirely forgotten by them, were lying on the couch, nearly senseless; but the
former had heard the words that passed, distinctly. Alfred had in a great
degree regained his reason. Matilda and Agnes after some little time recovered,
and, with assistance, arrived at their chamber: here they parted for the night;
and thus ended an adventure which seemed in a great measure to confirm all the
terrific reports concerning Grasville Abbey.

CHAPTER XXVII. THE HERMIT.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccessible by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave* dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit lived -- a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wandering swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed;
Water his drink; his food the shepherds' alms.
I went to see him, and my heart was touched
With reverence and with pity. Mild be spoke,
And, entering on discourse, such stories told,
And, entering on discourse, such stories told,
As made me often revisit his sad cell.
HOME.
WHILE in the midst of business or employment, we often suppose, on account of
many disagreeable circumstances that are apt to impede our passage through
life, that we could with pleasure relinquish all commerce with mankind, and
live after the manner of a misanthrope, totally secluded from our fellow
creatures. However these ideas may intrude at certain intervals, yet it is
improbable they should continue: when once brought to the trial, we should,
like the inhabitants of Grasville Abbey, languish after society, though our
situation might totally preclude such a wish from being gratified.

The agitation of Matilda's spirits, and her loss of rest the few preceding
nights, combined to throw her into a profound slumber; and though she was still
harassed with uncomfortable and terrific dreams, yet she enjoyed some repose;
but the little benefit she received from it was entirely destroyed when she
awoke in the morning, by a recollection of the late strange and uncommon
circumstances. Her brother's behavior was as incomprehensible as the violent
crash and dismal groans which had been heard in the apartment adjoining the
parlour. There was also another mystery to be explained, that is, what the
appearance was which had drawn from Alfred and his servant those exclamations
of horror that she had heard. This was a point of curiosity, with respect to
which she in particular wished to be satisfied; but at all events she resolved
to request no further communication from her brother. Leonard, therefore, was
the only person she could question on the subject; and to him she determined to
apply at a proper opportunity.

At a very late hour they assembled to breakfast. Alfred, seemed buried in
melancholy reflections, but made an apology for his late frantic behavior.

Matilda looked extremely ill: Agnes seemed by no means recovered from her
terror; while Leonard's countenance was still sorrowful and gloomy. Matilda
understood, at the latter part of the morning, that Leonard was again going to
the public market; but it caused no surprise, as they were in want of
provision. He accordingly, in a little time, set off for the purpose of
procuring some.

Alfred, after his departure, retired to his chamber, and took pen, ink, and
paper with him. Agnes cooked the dinner, and Matilda took up a book. The former
now began to converse on the events of the night before. "It does not signify,
mademoiselle," continued Agnes, in a harangue of some length; "but there is
something very unaccountable in this abbey. I am sure I shall now be afraid
even to remain in this parlour by myself. The holy Virgin protect us! but I
should not wonder if we were all to be carried away one of these days by the
hobgoblins that haunt the place."

"Rather one of these nights," answered Matilda, willing to put off the
discourse with a jest.

"Indeed, mademoiselle, but father Dunstan used to say such things have been
seen, even when the sun shined."

Matilda could not help laughing; but Agnes looked more serious, and declared
father Dunstan was a man who had often conversed with them, and knew their
tricks as well as they did themselves.

"For heaven's sake, Agnes," replied Matilda, "do not encourage these silly
ideas, or you will make your life a scene of uncomfortable apprehension and
terror."

"It is a misfortune, mademoiselle; and you must pity instead of blaming me.
Yet," continued Agnes, with an arch look, "I rather think you only talk in this
indifferent manner to me, with the kind intent of dispelling my fears: I thank
you; but you must give me leave to say, I think your thoughts are far different
from your words."

This remark was just; and Matilda's hesitating manner and blush confirmed
Agnes that she was right. After some time, Alfred returned from his chamber. He
spoke but little, and seemed to wait with a degree of impatience for Leonard's
return. He, however, stopped longer than usual; and they had nearly finished
their dinner when he entered. He brought with him a good stock of provisions;
but the information he had received was by no means agreeable. The people, he
said, talked much of the death of count ^'Ollifont, and the large reward that
was offered for the chevalier Maserini, his relation; "and though the general
voice is much in favor of you, sir," continued Leonard, "yet we must not trust
to that, and forget the temptation the money will excite;" an observation which
they all agreed was very just. In a short time he requested a private
conference with his master: and they returned to the parlour in about an hour.

Alfred was then more composed than he had been for some time, and Leonard
rather more cheerful. After supper the latter informed them that he had heard,
among other things concerning the abbey, that an old hermit resided in a cave
near it, which had been his habitation for a number of years.

"I wonder," said Alfred, "if it would be possible to pay him a visit without
being observed by any other person."

"Nothing more easy, sir," answered Leonard. "His cave is at the bottom of the
long walk of cypresses, on the west side to this building. The situation is so
retired, and withal so near the abbey, that it is never intruded on by any of
the vilagers."

"I should wish much to see him," said Alfred: "he may give me information of
considerable importance."

"It is not at all unlikely, sir; for people say he knows more about the story
of Grasville Abbey than any one in this part; though he is always silent on the
subject."

"Tomorrow, then, I will visit him," answered Alfred; "first as an indifferent
person: but, if I find him a man of piety, and inclined to prove my friend, I
will make him acquainted with the whole state of my affairs."

"But I hope you will first," said Matilda, "be perfectly satisfied he deserves
your confidence."

"That you may depend on; but I can see no objection to you and Agnes being of
the party; and you will then, Matilda, be able to judge of my conduct."

Matilda was pleased with the proposal, and said she was certain the air would
he of service to her. In short, this scheme seemed to meet with the approbation
of all; and the evening was spent with more sociality than they had enjoyed
since the second night of their residence in the abbey.

At an early hour they retired to rest; and as Agnes and and Matilda left the
parlour, each gave a side look at the ^olding doors on the further end, and
trembled as they advanced to their chamber.

Matilda rested better than she had for some weeks, and rose with more than
common spirits. She contrived to get down stairs before her brother, purposely
to obtain an opportunity of speaking to Leonard alone. According to her wishes,
he was in the parlour setting the breakfast-table, while Agnes was preparing it
in the hall. She immediately opened the subject, and begged him to disclose to
her those circumstances which had occasioned such mysterious behavior.

Leonard looked chagrined. "Alas! mademoiselle," he answered, "it is impossible
excuse me; but I cannot satisfy you."

Matilda was displeased.

"It cuts me to the heart," continued he, "it does indeed, mademoiselle, to
refuse your request: but I am bound by a sacred tie."

"I would not have you break it, then*" replied Main da: "yet, though you are
much older than I, Leonard, I must caution you not to be too precipitate in
entering into every scheme my brother proposes to you. He is ^ash; no, do I,
from his behavior the night before last, think his sense^ are in a right state
at certain times*"

"Heaven forbid they should be deranged," answered this faithful servant: "for
then I am sure -- " here he stopped short, and was silent.

Matilda considered it as cruel to attempt to draw from ^im that which he had
solemnly promised to keep secrets and turned the discourse to the circumstance
of his master's entering the apartment with him, from whence they heard the
groan^^^* She asked him to explain what he had seen to occasion chose
exclamations which she had heard uttered (...) great emotion. Leonard seemed
greatly agitated and surprised: he had no idea how me could have heard those
words, when both she and Agnes were to all appearance senseless at the time.

Matilda repeated the question. He was going to answer, (...) hesitated. She
begged him not to keep her in suspens^. He again began to speak, when Alfred
entered the room.

Matilda was vexed and disappointed; Leonard seemed happy at the intrusion* and
Alfred looked surprised to see (...) up so early. He, however, cast a
significant look at Leonard, which showed he could partly discover the purport
of the conversation. Agnes brought in the breakfast, and the discourse became
general. It was resolved they should walk to the hermit in the fore part of the
morning, that they should tell him they resided near, and that curiosity
brought them to his retreat.

Being all equipped for the journey, they set off, walked round the west side
of the abbey, and from thence proceeded through a quantity of thick foliage, to
the grove of cypress, which, as they supposed, led to the cave. After some time
they came to a spot entire^y surrounded with trees; and here they observed an
opening to a cavity which seemed to be formed out of a mountain that rose a
considerable height above it. They stood some moments considering whether they
should enter: but curiosity overcame their scruples, and they stepped softly
forward. After having gone a few yards, they found the passage wound to the
left, and could see at some distance a lamp which gave but a dim light, and
seemed to hang down from the roof. Agnes and Matilda again stopped; but Alfred
laughed at their fears, and they continued to walk in silence. As they came
nearer, the passage widened, and they could just perceive a table covered with
cloth, on which lay a human scull and bones, with a large book and hourglass.
Matilda trembled, and Agnes involuntarily turned round Alfred, however, by a
motion, begged them to be silent. They listened, and heard the voice of a
person praying.

Their fears were now in some measure dispelled; and they walked a little
further, when a reverend form caught their eye, in a long gown, which was
fastened round him by a belt: he knelt, with his back to them, before a
crucifix. Struck with a sacred awe, they stood in silent admiration, and
listened to the hermit's prayer.

"Father of mercy," he exclaimed, "hear the petition of thy servant! cleanse
him of those sins and wickednesses he has been guilty of in the sight of thee,
and pour into his breast that balm of comfort and consolation thou only c^nst
give. Strengthen him with thy grace; and, though immured in this recess, grant
him power, O Lord! while on earth, to be of service to his fellow creatures;
that by good example and advice he may turn the hearts of the unrighteous to a
sense of thy goodness and mercy."

Here a (...) of tears, which started from his aged eyes, prevented him from
proceeding: he turned from the (...) before him, and at that moment, lifting up
his head, beheld the intruders on his privacy. He gazed at Alfred, uttered a
faint groan, and fell senseless on the ground. Alarmed at the emotion they had
caused, each ran to his assistance, and strove to recover him from so alarming
an insensibility. Their efforts, however, for some time proved ineffectual; but
he at last showed some signs of returning life.

"Forgive us, father," said Alfred: "we come not with an intent to alarm you:
the fame of your pious character raised in us a desire to see so venerable a
person. But be assured, if we had known the effects our entering in so sudden a
manner would have occasioned, our wishes should have remained ungratified."

The hermit still ^ept his eyes fixed with a wild look, and was silent.

"Indeed, father," said Matilda, "we regret that you have suffered so much on
our account."

"Ah! and are you there?" ex^laimed he: "I think I know you both."

Each turned aside: a thought struck them that the hermit might have some
knowledge of them; and they were in their turn greatly alarmed. Their fears,
however, soon vanished, when in a more composed manner he asked who they were.

"We live not for distant," returned Alfred, "and, as I before told you, were
tempted, by the reports of your piety and goodness, to pay you a visit."

"You are very young," answered the hermit, "to covet she company of so old a
man. I have been extremely ill, and, at present, am but saint: pray all be
seated. Forgive me, if I do not observe the laws of hospitality, as I am so
little used to company, and am not quite recovered from my indisposition."

They refused his offer, with thanks for his kindness, and promised to return
at the same hour the next day. "You will not, I suppose, father," said Alfred,
"have any other visitors."

"None, my son," replied the hermit: "alas! I seldom see a soul in this retired
spot. The dread of passing yonder abbey totally precludes me from strangers. I
am, however glad that there are some, whom report has not so far intimidated
with idle fears."

"Adieu, father!" said they, as they came forth to the entrance.

"Adieu, my children!" answered he: "the Holy Lady guide you!"

Here they parted. Father Peter (for such was the hermit's name) returned to
his cell, and his visitors hurried to the abbey as soon as possible.

Their conversation at dinner was chiefly on their new acquaintance. None could
account for the effect which their presence had on him, or the particular
emotion he showed when by chance he turned his eyes toward Alfred, There was
something mysterious in these circumstances, which made them rather dubious of
performing their promise the next morning. They, however, at last resolved to
risque, it, and trust the external appearance of this man, in which were
combined benevolence, humanity, and religion. Matilda, also, particularly
noticed in his prayer the mention of the sins and wickednesses he had been
guilty of. This again raised their suspicions; but Alfred observed, that to
humble ourselves before the Supreme Deity, is a duty incumbent on every
christian; "and," continued he, "such was, no doubt, the idea of Father Peter."

Here the discourse dropped, and Alfred and Leonard, after dinner, had another
private conference.

Matilda declared she found herself much better for the walk. This evening was
again spent with some degree of comfort, and they retired to their chambers
rather at a late hour. Agnes was soon undressed; but Matilda seated herself in
the seat of one of the Gothic windows, and viewed, with a mixture of pleasure
and awe, ^he gloomy prospect before her. The clouds were low and heavy: yet it
was moonlight; and the dark shadows of the surrounding trees, which terminated
the prospect, spread over that space which remained uncovered in the court.

In an angle she could just observe the mouldering, decayed side of the west
tower, and the two where casements were to be perceived. The wind was high and
tempestuous, and seemed to threaten an approaching storm.

Matilda's spirits were uncommonly low; she wept abundantly. "Alas!" thought
she, "could I have known the sorrows, the sufferings, I was to have
experienced, gladly would I have welcomed death, and sunk into an early grave,
without even a wish to survive. But I was then happy, cherished by a tender
mother, surrounded with friends, beloved by all, and knew not the duplicity of
mankind, or the misfortunes human nature is subject to. Merciful Father,"
exclaimed she with fervency, "forgive my murmuring at thy will: strengthen me
to support those scenes of adversity I am destined to go through; and give me
fortitude enough to bear that fate it is ordained I should experience."

She found herself more composed, yet did not seem inclined to sleep, but
continued watching the different changes of the sky. Her eyes wandered over the
wild scene of foliage, which was in a continual motion by the impulse of the
wind. She thought it lightened twice, and was turning from the window, when her
eye caught the casement in the west tower, and a strong glare of light at that
moment darted from within it. Matilda could not move: she was motionless with
surprise and horror, but still kept looking at the object, which continued
illumined. In about three minutes a hand seemed to wave from one side. At that
moment the light vanished, and all was again in perfect darkness. Matilda,
scarcely able to support herself, staggered to the bed, sunk on it, closed her
eyes through fear, and, after a considerable time, fell into a slumber.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
GRASVILLE ABBEY: A ROMANCE. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

See yonder hallowed fane! the pious work
Of names once famed, now dubious or forgot,
And buried 'midst the wreck of things which were.
THE GRAVE, SALEM: PRINTED BY JOSHUA CUSHING, FOR T. C. CUSHING, AND B. B.
MACANULTY.

1799.

GRASVILLE ABBEY.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
AGNES was astonished, when she awoke in the morning, to perceive Matilda was
not undressed, and immediately inquired the cause: the latter, who had already
determined on an answer, told her, that, having sat up longer than usual to
finish a book, she sell asleep for the night. Agnes doubted not her veracity,
and cheerfully went to prepare breakfast.

Matilda was perplexed to know in what manner to act concerning the light in
the west tower. The strange circumstances which seemed to encompass this abbey
with a mist of doubtful horror, every day became more uncomfortable and
disagreable. It was true, the good sense and instructions of her mother had
brought her up to despise superstition, and laugh at the folly of those who
listened to uncommon reports. But the occurrences she had lately been witness
to, gave her strong reasons to believe in supernatural existence. The crash and
groans in the apartment, she had herself heard distinctly, and was certain both
her brother and Leonard must have seen something more than common, to have
uttered such exclamations of surprise and horror. Her aunt's manuscript gave a
particular account of a light being seen in the west tower, not only by her
father and his servant, but by more than one of the villagers. An interval from
that time had now passed, of near one and twenty years; yet she had again seen
a light in the same building, which had most probably never been inhabited even
when the late count Maserini resided in the abbey. Such strange and mysterious
events staggered all the fortitude she had derived from the lessons of her
parent, and both alarmed and terrified her. She resolved, however, to keep the
knowledge of the light to herself for the present, and watch again at the same
hour, when she might possibly make some further discovery.

With these resolutions she descended to the parlour. Her brother was already
up, and the breakfast waited for her. In about two hours they were ready to
walk to the hermit, and left the abbey accordingly. Father Peter received them
(...) the entrance of his cell, and conducted them to the inner part, where he
begged they would be seated. They discoursed on several subjects; Father Peter
showed himself to be a man of great understanding, and quick imagination; these
gifts of nature seemed also to have been cherished by an excellent education.
His manners were elegant and polished, while his whole deportment commanded
respect and admiration. There was, however, a settled gloom which overspread
his countenance, that showed he had a heavy sorrow at heart, which he was
unable to overcome. Alfred, at the latter part of their visit, mentioned the
terror which people in general suffered concerning Grasville Abbey.

"'It Is a misfortune from birth, my son," replied the hermit, "which is greatly
increased by the errors of education."

"Yet surely such terrors are natural," said Matilda; "and in every situation
we should be subject to their influence."

"True;" answered Father Peter; "yet they are greatly encouraged by tales of
horror, and terrific recitals, which curiosity prompts us to listen to, and
which so far win on our fancy, as to make us anxious after such entertainment."

"Your observations, father, are just," said Alfred; "yet there may, sometimes,
circumstances happen to us of a strange nature, that to all human probability
would confirm the appearance of supernatural beings."

Here he looked at Leonard, whose countenance changed, while he seemed to
shudder at the ideas his master's words had occasioned. None, except Matilda,
observed it; but she had lately watched every look of both her brother and
Leonard. Father Peter appeared also disturbed: he hesitated some time before he
answered; at length, however, he gave a short reply, and the conversation took
another turn.

After a little time they took their leave, and again walked to the abbey.
Alfred, when dinner was finished, had a conference of some time with Leonard;
and the latter immediately after walked out. Matilda, with surprise, asked
where he was gone; Alfred answered her with some confusion, that he had sent
him to try if he could, by any stratagem, find if there were letters directed
to him at the post house. This she knew to be entirely evasive: but she said no
more; and her brother soon after retired to his chamber.

Agnes, the moment he was gone, began talking, as usual, of the room that was
next to that they were now in, and declared ^he expected every instant some
hobgoblin would start through the large heavy folding doors before them.
Matilda asked if she knew whether her brother or Leonard had examined the
apartment.

"Oh yes, made^^iselle, the other morning before you was up."

"And, pray, did they see any thing particular?"

"Nothing then," answered Agnes: "but they did that dreadful night: for you
must know, had the curiosity to listen to their discourse while they were
searching the place; and though they spoke very low, I could just make out,
mademoiselle, they had seen a ghost."

"I am determined to have a view of this room," said Matilda, walking to that
end of the parlour.

"Oh! for heaven's sake, mademoiselle, do not enter for the world."

"Ridiculous!" replied Matilda, and immediately pushed against the doors with
all her strength, when they immediately flew open.

The apartment was spacious, and one of those they had examined at their first
coming to the abbey. The furniture was in better order than most of the others;
but, the shutters being closed, the only light came from an opening at the top.
She walked entirely round, and could perceive no alteration whatever. Agnes
stood at the door, and at intervals attempted to peep in, but directly shrunk
back, and retired. Matilda, having satisfied herself, closed the doors, while
Agnes impatiently inquired if she had seen any thing extraordinary. Matilda
smiled at the earnestness with which she asked the question, and told her she
had nothing to fear. Agnes, however, was by no means divested of her terrors;
and after the strange occurrences that had already happened, and those which
followed, it is not to be wondered at that they greatly increased.

In about two hours, Alfred descended to the parlour, and shortly after Leonard
returned: he brought some articles with him; but they were carried to the
chambers above, and Matilda had no opportunity of knowing what they were.
Supper-time arrived; when both Leonard and his master seemed, in some measure,
to have regained their usual spirits: yet Alfred was impatient to retire to
rest; at an early hour they therefore parted for the night. Matilda took up a
book: Agnes, after being undressed, wished her good repose, and was presently
in a profound sleep.

Matilda now seated herself in the window, impatiently waiting the hour of
midnight, yet dreading a repetition of the circumstance she had already seen.
He brother and Leonard, she could hear, continued in close discourse for some
time; the purport of it, however, it was impossible for her to make out, as
they spoke in a low tone of voice. At length the expected time arrived, and she
kept watching with a palpitating heart the casement in the west tower.

The night was extremely gloomy; the moon at intervals gave a light; but heavy
clouds continued frequently to eclipse it, and thunder rolled at a distance,
while flashes of strong lightning darted from an illumined part of the heavens,
which seemed to form a mountain of fire. Matilda kill kept her eye fixed on the
tower; but no light appeared, except that from above, which fell on its gray
decayed walls, overgrown with ivy, and slowly tumbling to the ground through
the ravages of time.

She was just going to quit her situation when she thought she perceived
something move in the court below. A few minutes before, she had heard, as she
supposed, her brother's chamber door open softly, and a step cautiously descend
the staircase to the hall. At the time she conceived it to be only (...); but
her ideas were now different. A strong flash of lightning gave her an
opportunity to discover a figure walk slowly with a dark lantern across the
court toward the outer gates. It was closely wrapped up; but by the height it
seemed like Leonard.

He now disappeared among some trees, but she still saw the light through the
foliage. Matilda, more and more agitated, remained at the window. In about five
minutes, the light again moved toward the abbey; and the moon at that moment
suddenly appearing from a heavy cloud, she could plainly perceive two men
follow the person who held the lantern. Both, by their dress, seemed Italians:
but their cloaks were entirely fastened round them, and their hats flapped over
their faces so as to conceal the countenance.

Astonished at such an unexpected sight, and ready to sink with terror, she
knew not in what manner to act. Leonard might be a villain! She checked herself
at so uncharitable a supposition; yet, why should he leave his bed at such an
hour, and admit two strangers into the abbey, where her brother had, in all
probability, preserved his life through the secrecy of his habitation.

This unaccountable adventure had so strange and dreadful an appearance, that
she resolved to apprise him of the visitors, as she had every reason to believe
he was asleep when Leonard left the chamber: at the moment, however, she was
going to execute this resolution, she heard the latter enter, and softly accost
Alfred in a low voice, saying, "They are come, sir;" and immediately they both
descended, as she supposed, to the parlour.

The idea of the light in the west tower now vanished from her mind, and she
was entirely taken up with the occurrence that had just past.

It was plain to her that Alfred had expecte^ (...) men, as he could not be
even undressed by his directly leaving the room when Leonard came up with the
information of their arrival: yet what business he could have with them, was an
entire mystery; and the most tormenting suspicions, which she blushed to
encourage, at different intervals agitated her mind. She resolved, at all
events, to watch their departure, which did not happen for nearly an hour and a
half; when Leonard, with his lantern, again conducted them across the court.
Soon after Alfred and himself entered their chamber, and, as she supposed,
retired to rest. Matilda, harassed out and perplexed with the scene she had
been witness to, undressed herself, and lay down on a sleepless pillow.

The conduct of her brother was so equivocal and secret, that she was greatly
at a loss to assign even one single reason for his late behavior, since that
period when Leonard returned from his first journey to the market, and desired
to speak with him alone. The intelligence he received that day was certainly
the cause of his strange manner of conduct since, let it be of what nature it
would. Though she had laughed at Agnes's fears concerning the apartment next
the parlour, yet something had been seen to cause alarm and terror: for the
countenances both of Leonard and his master, which she even then took notice
of, confirmed her they had been greatly shocked.

The (...) in the west tower had not appeared again as she expected; and she
might have been rather doubtful of being deceived by the lightning, had she not
seen an arm move within it at the same time. At length, wearied with
reflection, she strove to compose herself to rest, and fell into a disturbed
slumber.

They assembled to breakfast at a very late hour the next day, (...) (except
Agnes) by no means refreshed by the little rest they had enjoyed. They deferred
visiting the hermit till the afternoon. Matilda took particular notice of her
brother, but could perceive no alteration in his manner from the day before.

Having walked to Father Peter's cave, he received them at the entrance with
his usual cordiality, and set before them some fruits for refreshment.

"I had them," said the old man, "from a peasant in the village, whom I often
visit, and have known for many years, but never could persuade him to come near
my habitation: for being once frightened at passing Grasville Abbey, he has
never dared to venture near it since, not even in the day time!"

All laughed at the man's simplicity, as they called it, yet were all conscious
they were a prey to similar fears.

"Indeed, father," said Alfred, "I have heard so much talk of this abbey, that
I intend to enter it myself, and satisfy that curiosity which has been raised
by the different stories I have heard concerning it."

The hermit's countenance changed at Alfred's words; and he in vain strove to
conceal that agitation which worked in his heart.

"By no means fulfill such a resolution, my son: the attempt may be dangerous. I
am an old man, and know more of that abbey than you do. You must promise you
will give up all idea of it."

Alfred fixed his eyes on Father Peter; Leonard looked chagrined; Matilda
listened with attention, and Agnes trembled with emotion.

"Excuse me," said Alfred, who was the first that broke silence: "but you
forget yourself, father, and in a great degree contradict the usual tenor of
your discourse*"

The hermit raised his eyes, and was offended (...) the remark.

"I did but warn you, signor," answered he: "but follow your own inclination;
do not, however, accuse me of dissimulation."

Alfred felt the rebuke, and made an apology.

Soon after, they took their leave, and returned to the abbey.

Father Peter's behavior appeared now more strange than ever; and Alfred
determined not yet to trust him with the history of his affairs. They took an
early supper, and retired soon after.

CHAPTER XXIX. TERRIFIC SENSATIONS.
Avaunt! and quit my fight! Let the earth hide thee!
Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
Thou have no speculation in those eyes
Which thou do glare with!
MACBETH.
IF, at the beginning of life, mankind in general were to be made acquainted
with the misfortunes they must suffer in a series of years, the greater number
would welcome death, and willingly escape miseries they would suppose
themselves unable to support. But when the trials we are subject to appear one
by one, and we, in regular gradation, get the better of each of them, the last
distress gives us fortitude to go through the succeeding one; and by that
fortitude we struggle through the world, and thus arrive at a state of calm
serenity, in the decline of existence.

Matilda had suffered too much for want of rest the two latter nights, to have
any idea of again watching the west tower, or the unknown visitors to the
abbey; she therefore immediately undressed, and was presently in a profound
sleep.

The next morning she was much refreshed, and, entering the parlour, she once
more, according to her wishes, found Leonard alone. She directly opened the
subject of her former discourse, and now requested him to give that account
which was so critically interrupted by her brother.

Leonard seemed prepared, and answered with firmness, that he hoped she would
not be offended, but he could not.

"Cannot, Leonard!" exclaimed Matilda.

"No, mademoiselle, indeed I cannot; my master suspected the question when we
were last together, and gave me the most positive orders to be silent with
respect to every thing relative to that night."

Matilda, though possessed of the nicest sensibility, and finest feelings, yet
had a warmth in her temper something similar to her brother; and though not
quite so quick to imagine an affront, she was equally (...) in resenting an
insult to her pride. Leonard had hardly ever seen her so hurt; he looked
distressed, yet appeared in every respect firm and resolved to keep his word.
Matilda continued some moments in a haughty silence; but at length thus
addressed him:

"The cause of the slighting behavior I have received since our residence
here, I am at a loss to divine, Leonard; and heaven only knows how I have
deserved it. Every question I have asked, though probably of no less importance
to me than to my brother, has been answered with equivocation and reserve;
while the strange behavior of Alfred, and the melancholy continually fixed on
your countenance, gives every reason for suspicion and apprehension.

"These circumstances, added to the several occurrences that I myself have
lately been witness to in this desolate abbey, make it to me a most disgusting
and unpleasant abode. In short, though I have been taught to despise
superstition, yet I have every reason to believe all is not right in the gloomy
chambers of the west tower; while the words which I plainly heard you repeat on
entering yonder room, confirm to me that you saw something of a dreadful
nature: and, continued Matilda in a voice of displeasure, yet both firm and
determined, these reasons added together have made me resolve to quit this
place immediately and forever."

Had a th^nderbolt at that moment fallen at Leonard's feet, he could not have
started with more surprise and horror.

"Leave the abbey, mademoiselle! leave the abbey! good heavens! you will not
surely leave us!"

"Before two more days are past, you may depend upon it, Leonard; during which
time I shall be able to consider what method will be the most secret for my
departure, on my brother's account; for, unless I am actually detained a
prisoner here, I intend going to France, and becoming a nun in the convent of
N*****, where my mother and aunt were both placed in the beginning of life."

"The Holy Lady protect us!" exclaimed Leonard. "Do not encourage these ideas;
they will drive my poor master distracted."

"You must impart the intelligence to him, and request he will contrive some
method for my conveyance."

Leonard was again going to reply; but Agnes brought in the breakfast, and
Alfred presently entered. Directly after breakfast was over, Leonard requested
to speak with his master; and Matilda had no doubt concerning the subject of
this conference.

When Agnes and Matilda were alone, the latter mentioned her resolution of
leaving the abbey.

Agnes's surprise was not less than Leonard's, but of a very different kind:
joy appeared in her countenance, and she declared, of all things in the world,
it was what she most wished for -- "I can then still attend you, mademoiselle,
and yet leave this dreadful place."

"But will your wishes lead you to attend me to the place where I intend going?"

"Any where, mademoiselle!" exclaimed Agnes, her eyes beaming with love and
gratitude -- "even to the end of the world, with pleasure."

Matilda shed tears; she was greatly affected with the honest simplicity and
good heart of this girl.

"But I am going to the convent of N*****, in France, Agnes, and intend
positively to take the veil immediately."

Agnes turned pale.

"To the convent of N*****, mademoiselle! and take the veil! but I will ^ollow
you there too."

Here she burst into a flood of tears; for in that case all hopes of a union
with Oliver, whom she still loved, must have ended.

Matilda guessed her thoughts, and pitied her situation. She knew not how to
proceed: the little money which they had brought over from England, and which,
as was before related, was the last Alfred had to receive of his fortune, being
now nearly half expended: and on this account it was that she generously
determined (should it be possible to be done without discovering her brother)
to make over to him all that she was possessed of by her mother's death; as she
would, after once becoming a member of the holy community, be no more in want
of money to support her. At all events, however, she resolved, if it was not
agreeable for Agnes to retire with her to the convent, to make her a handsome
present, and, if in her power, see her comfortably settled. This proposal she
acquainted her with; but to part with Matilda was nearly as distressing to the
poor girl as to lose Oliver forever; yet she must consent to one or the other.
In vain she strove to persuade Matilda, by every argument she could think of,
to give up the idea of going to a convent, and live retired in France: and
little did she suppose, while it was repelled with a steady fortitude, that
Matilda had the same tie as herself to make a retreat from the world miserable;
yet, with the most elevated and noble sentiments, she sacrificed her own
happiness for the sake of a brother.

Agnes still wavered, sighed, and wept, but was unable to come to any
resolution.

After some time Alfred and Leonard entered the parlour: both appeared
distressed, and the former requested to speak with his sister alone. They
retired to a chamber above. He informed her, Leonard had been telling him of
her intention to quit the abbey, and retire to the convent of N*****.

Matilda answered that the information was right, and that such was positively
her determination.

He entreated her not to take so rash a step, but well to consider a monastic
life, before she entered into it.

That, she said, she had already done; for the many adversities she had gone
through since her mother's death, had sickened her of the world, and --

"Hold, Matilda!" exclaimed Alfred: "is there not one person in this world,
which you are so disgusted with, whom you may think of with a sigh of
tenderness, and that sigh bring a wish that you had never been immured within
the walls of a convent?"

Matilda felt herself hurt at the the question.

"Let my ideas or remembrances be whatever they may, my resolution is fixed;
nor can my situation be worse than that I am now involved in."

"Do you accuse me of unkindness, Matilda?"

"In some respects I do. But this discourse is ridiculous; let us consider in
what manner I shall escape without injuring you."

"Surely you do not actually intend leaving us?"

"After what I have said, do you suppose I jest?"

"You must not, cannot go," he exclaimed, raising his voice.

"And pray, sir," answered Matilda, her pride piqued; "by what right will you
detain me?"

He seemed chagrined.

"Indeed, Matilda, you must think better of this affair. Give up the idea, and
consider it as romantic."

"Without I am detained by force," answered Matilda with firmness, "I am
determined to leave this abbey before -- "

"Hold," said Alfred, "and inform me for what reason you have thus suddenly
taken so strange a resolution,"

"For various reasons, all of which combined together show that it is
positively necessary for my own happiness. Represent to yourself my situation,
confined within the walls of this awful, gloomy and melancholy abode, the
external part of which, added to the stories that have been circulated
concerning it* terrify people even from the place where it stands; while the
mysterious and strange circumstances that have happened since our residence in
it, confirm in a great measure those reports; yourself and Leonard involved in
a deep melancholy, the cause of which you both refuse to impart, though by your
behavior you give encouragement to the most horrid and dismal suppositions.
The innocent Agnes continually terrifies herself and me by those fears which
are certainly caused by the most powerful reasons, and which prey the more on
my spirits, by my being obliged to support hers, and to talk lightly of those
ideas I feel myself with equal terror. But I will confess my intention was
hastened by Leonard's refusal to give that information I required relative to
your entrance into that room next the parlour on the dreadful night of the
storm. When I first requested the explanation, we were interrupted by you; and
he now tells me, that, suspecting the purport of our discourse, you forbid him
to answer the question. Neither would you give any satisfactory reply during
our conversation on the terrace, but left me to think the worst in a state of
uncertainty. In short, there is an arbitrary principle reigns through the whole
tenor of your conduct, which I am resolved no longer to put up with."

Here her countenance glowed with anger and contempt: she was going to leave
the chamber, when Alfred stopped her.

"Hear me in some measure vindicate myself," exclaimed he, "though I cannot at
present satisfy your curiosity. In the first place, you complain of your
residence in this abbey; but consider for a moment, Matilda, and you will find
that it was my exertion in the preservation of your honor, and the punishment
I gave the villain who dared to insult you, that obliged me to fly hither, and
ignobly conceal myself from pursuit, while double infamy was poured upon my
name, and by hellish contrivance I was proved a deserter unknown to myself. You
well know, when at Dover, I had resolved to give up my person to my country,
and stand my trial for the crime; but Mr. Milverne's letter altered this
resoution, when he informed me that the count wa^ not dead, but that arbitrary
power would be certain to overcome justice in any case in which the wretch
D'Ollifont was concerned. Setting this argument aside, I confess you have had
some cause for resentment for the concealment of what I know it would be
improper to communicate; and I beg you to remember, however diffic^lt it may
appear to account for my actions, I ever have your happiness in view. Only make
me one promise, that you will remain a fortnight longer; and then, if a part of
my conduct is not explained, I swear I will adopt some method for you
departure."

"This I agree to," answered Matilda; "and to show you that I have a just sense
of the part you took with respect to the count, it is my intention, when once I
arrive at the convent, to make over the whol^ of the little property I am
possessed of entirely to you."

"Alas! Matilda," answered Alfred, "that will be of little service; for if some
one does not appear, to make you alter your resolution before the stated time,
I shall have far less occasion for it than yourself"

He sighed heavily; Matilda looked astonished, and left the chamber.

"Generous girl!" he exclaimed, "could I but once see thee happy, and forget
the object of my love, life would have no charms to detain me; and the world
should immediately know that Alfred Maserini could laugh at its malice, and
make tyranny blush at the exertion of its own power."

CHAPTER. XXX.
AGNES and Leonard were soon made acquainted with the agreement that had passed
between the brother and the sister; and it gave both of them pleasure that the
time of Matilda's departure was deferred. Agnes thought she might possibly, in
this interval, bring herself to follow so bright an example, and renounce the
world for ever; and all were rather more cheerful than usual at dinner. Alfred
afterward proposed a walk to the hermit; but when they arrived at the cave,
the place was deserted; and they therefore supposed Father Peter was gone his
round among the villagers. Having returned, Alfred read some poetry aloud,
which amused them till near supper-time; and, soon after a light repast, they
retired to their respective chambers.

Matilda determined to watch again for the strangers and the light in the west
tower. She accordingly took up a book, which occasioned the same excuse as
before to the innocent and unsuspecting Agnes, who was soon in a profound
sleep. The night was serene and beautiful: not a breeze of wind disturbed the
surrounding foliage: all was silent, tranquil, and solitary; while the heavens,
covered with stars, and illumined by a full moon, gave the eye a more clear
view of the dark groves of cypress, and the heavy ruins of the west tower.

Matilda watched with a palpitating heart the upper casement, till near
midnight, when a strong glare of light, as before, appeared: but in less than a
minute all was again dark.

In a little time after, she heard Leonard creep softly out of his room,
descend the staircase, and cross the court. In about five minutes he returned,
accompanied by two other persons, whose figures she now saw more plainly; and
she judged them to be the same who paid the last visit. Alfred joined them in
the parlour. They did not remain in the abbey so long as at the former time;
but Leonard, as before, conducted them to the outer gates.

Just as they got into the middle of the court, the light in the west tower
again appeared; and it was immediately noticed by one of the strangers, who
seemed to utter an exclamation of suprise. Both his companion and Leonard
immediately looked up; and all seemed struck with the utmost astonishment. The
casement had been illuminated about three minutes, when a figure advanced, and
stood in the front of the window. Matilda shuddered, and those below seemed
greatly alarmed.

The form looked to be that of a man; but she could not possibly make out
either its dress or countenance. It continued visible but a very short time,
when it appeared to sink down by degrees, till it was entirely lost; and the
light immediately vanished.

Leonard and the strangers clasped their hands in sign of wonder; the former
attended them to the gates, and then returned to the abbey: but neither he nor
Alfred re- entered their chamber till near half an hour after.

Matilda, fatigued, and terrified with what she had seen, retired to her bed,
but not to sleep. Her mind wandered over such strange events; and the more she
thought of them, the more she was perplexed. Mystery seemed to follow mystery,
and every succeeding one appeared more horrid than the former.

The gloomy look of her chamber encouraged the most dismal ideas; and her eyes,
as if by impulse, were continually fixed on the picture before mentioned, and
which Matilda was so struck with the first night she ^lep^ in the room.
Directly opposite her bed was placed (...) pier glass of uncommon size, and
surrounded by a heavy gilt frame. This piece of furniture had lately been added
to the chamber, it having before stood in one of the apartments below. A small
lighted taper was near it, and the dim, uncertain light which it gave, showed
but faintly the reflection of the objects in the glass. Matilda, unable to
rest, and tired with the continual sight of the painting, turned her eyes
toward the glass; it showed the bed and the recess on each side: but the back
ground of the reflection was nearly dark. She was perfectly awake, and sighed
at those ideas she was unable to repress.

The sigh was answered.

She trembled, thought it might be Agnes, but was convinced she was mistaken.
She heard it again: she thought it certainly could not be fancy.

It was repeated a third time.

At that moment she perceived a light through the glass, and the same figure
she had before seen in the west tower advance, bearing in the same manner a
lamp.

Matilda saw no more* she screamed, and closed her eyes. In about a minute she
opened them again; but the appearance had vanished. Agnes, however, awoke, and
requested to know if she was ill; while her brother knocked at her door, and
asked the same question. She answered both that she was well, out had been
dreaming: and it being a natural supposition that this might be the reason of
her terror, no further inquiry was made. Matilda could not be composed: and the
more she strove to persuade herself it was merely the effects of a disturbed
brain, the more her own senses confirmed the contrary. By her fight of the
figure in the glass, it seemed to come forward from the left hand side of her
bed. There was no opening in the room for the admittance of any human being,
except by the door of the chamber; and that was bolted on the inside. She was
entirely free from sleep, nor had heard the least noise since she had first
entered the apartment in the beginning of the night.

She determined to inform her brother of this circumstance, the first
opportunity on the following morning, as it was of too horrid a nature to be
passed over in silence. She again strove to rest, but it was impossible; and,
fearful of even lifting her head above the bed-clothes, she suffered the most
tormenting and terrific sensations.

Morning at length broke in upon the room, and the sun with glowing splendor
darted through the thick soliage of the trees, till with majestic grandeur he
rose above them, and seemed to change the face of nature to life and joy.
Matilda hailed the morning with a hymn to that Supreme Deity who caused the
change, and at whose nod the same darkness and horror could in a moment be
returned. Agnes soon rose. She perceived Matilda was unwell, and begged she
would not get up to breakfast: but the latter was certain this would be of no
service to her, and she accordingly, after some little time, joined them in the
parlour. (...) inquired if she was ill; she faintly answered, "No;" but her
manner contradicted the reply. After breakfast she requested to speak with him
alone.

Poor Agnes had every day more and more cause for wonder, and now declared to
Leonard she was afraid Mademoiselle was going (...) the same way as he and his
master.

Matilda and Alfred ascended to the chamber of the former, and she related to
him the events of the last night.

Her recital of them was so clear and perfect, and her manner of delivery so
steady and free from every appearance of a flighty imagination, that, however
improbable the tale might seem, Alfred was staggered at the answers she gave to
the arguments by which he attempted to persuade her to think no more of it, and
at last became a convert to her opinion: nor is it so much to be wondered at
that he so readily acquiesced in a belief of the fact, since he himself had
once been witness to a light in the west tower, and seen an object which made a
great impression on him on entering the room next the parlour, and had heard
Leonard, the night before the present morning, relate that he had (as also
those that were with him) seen a light and figure in the same casement of the
tower.

These circumstances, with some others of a like nature, following each other
in due order, were certainly in a (...) degree sufficient reasons for his
belief of a fact which he otherwise would have laughed at and disregarded.

After a pause of silence for a considerable time, during which the
countenances of both brother and sister were expressive of affliction,
distress, and horror; Alfred declared an intention, which both alarmed and
terrified Matilda, but which he seemed ob^tinately bent on executing: it was,
to watch himself for one night in the west tower.

"Leonard," said he, "shall sleep in my room as usual* but by no means acquaint
Agnes with this resolution."

"For heaven's sake, Alfred," answered Matilda, "do not admit such a thought: I
would sooner suffer any thing than you should expose yourself to such a risk."

Alfred smiled.

"Why surely, Matilda," said he, "we have nothing to fear from supernatural
beings."

She still, however, urged and entreated him to think no more of it. But he
continued firm to his plan; and it was in vain his sister used every persuasive
argument she could think of, to make him give up such a dreadful determination.

"Who knows," said he, "Matilda, but one night may unravel mysteries that have
been concealed for years? who knows but by the exertion of a little fortitude,
by banishing idle fears, and showing some degree of spirit, we may defy our
enemies, my conduct may be made clear to the world, and a series of happy years
be a reward for adversities at the beginning of life? what would I not suffer,"
exclaimed he, "for such blessings and happiness! O merciful father! if the
injured spirit of my sire walks in this deserted abbey, and seeks the presence
of his son* should I not strive for the interview, though it might chill my
nature at the time?"

"Go!" pronounced a voice, followed by a dismal groan.

Matilda sunk into a chair. Alfred held her arm, and trembled.

"In the name of our Holy Virgin," said he, "answer me, who and what thou art."

"Go, go, go!" repeated the voice, three times; and then with another groan it
seemed to ascend and die away.

"Surely," said Alfred, "heaven interferes in my behalf, and tells me to
proceed! Now, Matilda, you can urge no objection,"

She sighed deeply.

"But you are ill: we had better go down to the parlour immediately."

"I am indeed," she answered, "hardly able to stand."

Her brother partly carried her down the stairs, and placed her on a sofa; she
directly fell into strong hysteric fits, which lasted a considerable time;
every method was taken for her recovery; and they were greatly alarmed. At
length, however, she seemed more composed, and, after some hours, found herself
much better, though extremely weak.

Leonard, who had hitherto been made acquainted with every extraordinary
circumstance, was now in his turn a wondering spectator; and Agnes, still more
distressed and terrified, declared it would be the happiest moment of her life,
when she once found herself at some distance from so dismal and horrid an
abode. Alfred mused in melancholy silence on the strange voice he had heard^
nor had he now a single doubt of a supernatural being haunting the chambers of
the abbey. "Surely," though he, "that room, where it is likely my father lost
his life, is the most probable place to be visited by his disturbed spirit.
Yet, may not my senses* be so far overcome by seeing the departed shade of a
parent whom I never knew, but who was supposed to have been basely murdered, as
to prevent my utterance at the critical moment of its, appearance?"

Matilda was silent and melancholy: she considered it would now be ridiculous
to strive to prevent Alfred from watching in the west tower, since so strange
an occurrence had strengthened that resolution which (...) had before taken;
yet fears for his safety harassed her ^magination, and almost threw her into a
state of insanity.

Only one method she could think of, that would in any degree alleviate her
anxiety; which was, to propose his having Leonard to attend (...) whole (...)
but then she shrunk with terror from the thought of sleeping at such a distance
from any one but Agnes, and feared again she might see the figure in her
chamber. Her regard, however, for her brother made her resolve to sacrifice her
own feelings, and at least make the proposal to him.

After dinner they contrived to send Agnes into the hall for a few minutes; and
Leonard was then made acquainted with the events of the morning, and with the
determination his master had taken of watching himself that night in the tower.

Leonard turned pale.

"For heaven's sake, sir," said he, "do not attempt it!"

"But consider," replied Alfred, "the words which the voice repeated."

Leonard could make no answer, but turned away with horror and surprise.

"At all events," said Alfred, "Agnes must not know of this affair, nor of my
visit to the deserted chamber. We must therefore contrive to make every thing
ready without her knowledge, and in such a manner that I may first go into my
own room, as if to retire to rest, and after some little time steal to the west
tower."

Matilda and Leonard shuddered at the idea of what might happen there; yet
neither, after what had happened, could attempt, at least they ^new it would be
of no avail to attempt, to persuade him to relinquish his intention. Agnes now
entered. Alfred and Leonard immediately ascended to their chamber, and conveyed
a table, with some books, wine, and provision, to the apartment before
mentioned, where those spots of blood were to be seen, which, in all human
probability, was that of Alfred's father.

Leonard also laid a wood sire, and made the room as comfortable as possible.

Having done this, they returned to the parlour, and Matilda soon found an
opportunity to request he would let Leonard remain with him the whole night;
but her brother positively refused it, though he at last agreed Leonard should
accompany him to the tower, but then return directly. Alfred proposed a walk to
the hermit; but Matilda appeared too ill to undertake it; they therefore
postponed it till the next day. Supper-time at length arrived, and anxiety was
marked on the features of all: Alfred was occupied by the thoughts of what he
might be witness to in the short space of a few hours; and Matilda, alarmed for
his welfare, and terrified at even entering her chamber, dreaded lest the
midnight hour should again show her the phantom. Leonard weighed in his mind
the difference of their situation: when possessed of a tender parent, they knew
no unhappiness, except for the misfortunes and sorrows of others, which they
were ever ready to pity and assist. Agnes was almost afraid to turn her head,
for fear of seeing some hideous spectre.

All wished to delay retiring to rest, and they talked some time after supper
on indifferent subjects, but with heavy hearts; till at length Alfred arose.
They ascended the great staircase, and parted for the night.

CHAPTER XXXI. MYSTERIOUS EVENTS.
-- Prithee, see there!
Behold! Look! Lo! How say you?
Why, what care I? If thou can nod, speak to it;
If charnel-houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury, back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.
SHAKESPEARE.
WHEN an opinion is once formed, every succeeding circumstances seems to
confirm what our ideas have before suggested; and though of a far different
nature, every object is referred to the same point of view.

Thus it was with Matilda; she no longer doubted, and a dreadful certainly took
place: she did not now hesitate whether such things might be, but she fervently
believed such things were; and consequently every trivial event strengthened
this imagination.

Agnes, as usual, was soon in bed; but Matilda resolved to watch the casement
of the tower. "My brother," thought she, "will shortly be there; and if will be
some little comfort to see the dim light that proceeds from his lamp."

A book was her excuse for not undressing, and Agnes in about a quarter of an
hour was asleep.

Alfred and Leonard remained in their chamber some time. It was near midnight
when Matilda heard them leave it; her heart palpitated for their situation, and
she shrunk with horror from her own. Neither was now near! the shadow of the
preceding night presented itself to her fancy, and her blood was chilled at the
very thought. Thunder rolled over the abbey, and pale flashes of lightning
darted on the mouldering ruins. Matilda could not yet discern a light; she
conceived they must be a considerable time ascending, while her fears and
anxiety made her forget that they had first to go down the great stairs, and
afterward up those of the west tower.

At length a faint glimmering appeared, which was a kind of signal to her that
they had entered the chamber.

The thunder became more awful, and awoke Agnes.

"Good heavens, mademoiselle, are you up yet? What a dreadful night!"

"It is rather stormy," replied Matilda, striving to be composed.

"Rather stormy, mademoiselle! why the thunder is horrid, and the lightning too
is extremely bad: you had better move from the window; it is very dangerous to
stand so near it."

Matilda took her advice. The lightning became much worse; she sat down by the
side of the bed, and requested Agnes to compose herself to rest.

"But are you not going to give up reading for the night?"

"I have just finished the book," answered Matilda, "and then shall go to rest."

There being now a little interval in the storm, Agnes was soon in a slumber.

By this time she expected Leonard would have returned to his chamber; but she
had not yet heard him enter it. The light still continued in the casement; but
the storm was so very violent as to prevent her being continually at the window.

Near a quarter of an hour elapsed, and she heard nothing of Leonard. Seated on
the bed, she dared not turn herself toward the glass, but kept her eyes fixed
on the ground, terrified at the idea of even looking round the room. At last a
noise, which seemed to proceed from the court below, made her rise, and go the
window. She could see no one, yet heard a kind of knocking, at the outer gates.
Who or what it could be, she was at a loss to imagine; and, the noise
increasing, she became more uneasy and astonished. She was equally unable also
to account for Leonard's stay, and conceived something very extraordinary must
have happened.

The noise now ceased for some little time, but afterward became more
clamorous; and at last, by the sound, the gates seemed to burst open. A thought
struck Matilda, that they might be discovered, and that the officers of justice
were come for her brother. She trembled at the supposition, but still remained
at the casement.

After a short period, she perceived four men armed approach the abbey: two of
them had lanterns, and the others followed directly after. Matilda was nearly
distracted; she knew not in what manner to act. Leonard might be returned,
though she had not heard him. She tapped at the door, but received no answer.
She knocked louder: all was silent: she entered the chamber, but it was
entirely deserted. Having listened at the top of the staircase, and heard them
enter the hall, from which they proceeded to the parlour, all fears of
supernatural appearances vanished from her mind, and the preservation of Alfred
employed every faculty. She determined to descend, and strive to make out,
unperceived, the occasion of their visit.

But then, if Agnes should awake, and find no one near, what would be her
situation? Matilda hesitated a little, but at last resolved to run the hazard
for the sake of her brother. She therefore took the lamp, and softly stepped
down to the hall, which having crossed toward the door of the parlour, she
stopped, and through the crevice could see that they were all seated round the
supper table, which had been left standing in the same place, and on which was
some wine: this they were making free with, and seemed in high mirth.

Ready to sink with anxiety, she supported herself against a column; and the
door not being quite closed, she had a view of each of their countenances, at
different times, as they turned round to speak to each other. By their dress
and language she found they were Italians.

"Push the bottle about!" cried one, who seemed to be a kind of superior, and
whose visage was, if possible, fiercer than those of his comrades: "nobody
loves good wine better than I do, particularly when it is got cheap.

Here was a loud laugh, and a boisterous chorus of a song used by banditti. At
last silence was in some measure restored; and one who sat on the right side of
him that spoke, reminded him not to make too free with the bottle, and forget
the business they came upon.

"True! true! answered he: "I thank you for your caution, for faith there is
great danger of it, as you say, when we are seated at such a table as this. But
now to business; come, in the first (...), we are to contrive in what manner to
find him; for my own part I propose to -- "

Here a loud clap of thunder rolled over the abbey; and she was unable to
distinguish what followed.

After some time she heard the voice of the third.

"It is very true," says he, "that might do well; but I have reason to think he
is in the west tower tonight, by the light I saw in the casement."

"Pish!" answered the first, "that place is haunted; I have often seen a light
in it, when not a soul inhabited the abbey."

Matilda trembled violently.

"Ah! that I know very well, signor: but by what -- "

Here again the thunder interrupted the distracted listener, and she lost the
remainder of the sentence. At length all was once more silent.

"Well, well," said the first, "if that is the case, why we must directly make
our road to the west tower: but the devil take me if I know which is the way to
it."

"Nor I," exclaimed each of the others, rising.

"Never mind," answered the first: "I Will warrant we will find it."

This was enough for Matilda; -- she heard no more, but immediately departed
toward the staircase that led to the tower, with an intent to acquaint her
brother with the arrival of the unwelcome visitors. Had she been told, half an
hour before, that she could have had the courage to proceed alone at midnight
to the west tower, she would positively have declared it would have been
impossible: but now, though a great degree of terror was left, yet the chief
part was obliterated in the idea of preserving her brother's life.

She hurried across the hall, but, in her agitation, mistook the turning to the
stairs, and found herself before the heavy grate-work gates of the chapel. She
stopped a moment to fetch breath. While her eyes were vacantly fixed on the
ruins of this ancient place of worship, a faint glimmering seemed to move on
one side of the aisles; and, in about a minute, a figure with a lamp glided
along the body of the chapel. This brought Matilda, to a recollection of her
situation; her tottering limbs almost refused to do their office: she partly
staggered from the gates, and returned to find the opening to the staircase.
This she fortunately found, and began to ascend the narrow stone stairs; while
every few minutes she stopped, and thought she heard a footstep behind her;
then looked back, but all was quiet, except the thunder, which still continued
with equal violence. Matilda, faint and breathless, at length arrived at the
first landing. Here she halted, and seated herself for a moment under a
casement.

The lightning darted through into the opposite apartment, which was that which
contained the few implements of war, and martial instruments, and showed the
gloomy appearance of the room. One flash, greater than the rest, illumined the
whole space; and, at the same instant, a figure stalked across, and seemed to
vanish at the further end. Matilda gave a faint shriek, and hurried up the
remainder of the stairs; and, when arrived at the top, burst into the fatal
chamber of the west tower, and there perceived her brother sitting alone at the
table, his hand on his sword, his eyes fixed on a particular part of the room,
with a wild look of horror and agony, while his whole frame shook with
convulsive terror.

"Alfred!" exclaimed Matilda, sinking on a chair.

He turned his eyes toward her, and started.

"Ah! who and what art thou, that appearest to me in the shape -- "

Matilda fell into a fainting sit. When she recovered, she found her brother
standing over her, and administering some wine and water. His haggard
countenance met here when she opened her eyes, and with a look of distraction
he asked her what brought her there.

"Anxiety for your safety," answered she; and immediately related to him, in as
few words as possible, the scene she had been witness to, concerning the men
who were now in the abbey.

"Merciful father!" he exclaimed, "how much longer shall I be harassed with
horror and misfortunes, which follow each other so quickly, that I am not able
to extricate myself from one, before it is succeeded by a greater, which seems
at once to overwhelm me with ruin and despair? What am I saying?" continued he:
"dare I to question the Almighty, wretch that I am, and repine at those
adversities he has ordained I should experience?"

"Stand not here," said Matilda, "but leave this part of the building. They
will, I am afraid, begin to ascend the staircase before we can get down. Pray
make haste. If you can but evade them so as to attain the great staircase, you
may conceal yourself in some of the further apartments beyond our chambers,
while they are searching here."

They now began to descend (Alfred having put out the lamp in the chamber) and
fortunately found themselves at the bottom, without any interruption, but heard
some voices at the further end of the passage, next the chapel by the great
gates. They stopped not to listen, but immediately ran up the principal stairs.
At the top they discovered Leonard.

"For heaven's sake, Leonard," exclaimed both brother and sister, "where have
you been?"

"Faith," returned Leonard, "that I can hardly tell; but, by some means or
other, I turned wrong on the staircase of the west tower when I left my master
to come back to my chamber. It led me into a small passage, and I there found
some stone steps. Thinking that this was only an angle, and that it would lead
me to the same spot as if I had continued right, I descended them, but soon
sound my error, and discovered myself among the ruins of the chapel. These I
crossed, to read a stone which was erected to the memory of the late count."

This explained to Matilda the figure which she had seen as she was going to
her brother; she did not however interrupt him; and Leonard told them that he
soon found his way to the hall, but had also heard strange voices of persons
who seemed to be searching the abbey; on which account he had called Agnes, who
had greatly alarmed herself and him when they found Matilda was absent.

They were now joined by Agnes, who flew into the arms of her fair friend, who,
her imagination had told her, was run away with by the ghosts. The party now
began to proceed toward the further chambers, Agnes supported by Leonard, and
Matilda by her brother.

CHAPTER. XXXII.
WITH solitary and silent steps they crossed several apartments, till they came
to the passage which was before described, and which led to the gloomy chamber
that, it was supposed, had formerly contained a corpse lying in state. Matilda
dreaded to enter it; she well remembered the appearance of it, when with her
brother she examined those rooms.

But there was now no alternative: it ended the suite, and therefore it was the
most likely one to conceal them.

After crossing the passage they arrived at the folding doors: Matilda and
Alfred were foremost; the latter pushed against them, and they flew open. The
chamber was illuminated. All started back with astonishment and horror. Agnes
faintly screamed; and it was some minutes before they proceeded. At length,
however, they advanced, and perceived that the pieces of wax tapers in the
black glasses, which they had before observed, were now lighted, and served to
show the dismal, terrific scene around them. In every other respect the
apartment was exactly the same, nor could the trace of any foot-step he
discovered. Both were silent: their own reflections were sufficient. Alfred had
witnessed so much in the abbey, that he found it impossible to turn off the
subject with jest, or even reasoning. Having seated his sister and Agnes, he
stood by them with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed on the floor; Leonard
was in the same posture, on the other side.

They had not remained in this situation above ten minutes, when a loud clap of
thunder rolled over the building. It was followed by a convulsive shock of
nature, which seemed to take effect on the part where they stood; and at that
moment the Corinthian capital of a large column, greatly decayed, fell to the
ground with a most tremendous noise.

Both Matilda and Agnes were nearly insensible; Leonard was stupefied with
horror, and Alfred distracted. Some moments after, when the latter perceived
something raised above the shaft of the pillar, his curiosity led him to go
near: he did so, and to his surprise found it was a marble hand, holding a
length of silver chain, at the bottom of which was a gold and bloody key. He
called his sister, Agnes, and Leonard, to look at it, then clasped hold of it,
and disentangled the chain from the hand. A flash of lightning, and a clap of
thunder, again called their attention; when, turning from the column, the
figure and its lamp again stood before them, lifted up its arms in token of
pleasure, and vanished through the floor from their sight.

Agnes screamed and fell into strong hysterics, while Matilda, supported by her
brother, sainted away.

It was near an hour before they recovered. The storm had now in some measure
abated: and Alfred, thinking he had heard during the latter part of the time a
noise like the closing of the abbey gates, desired Leonard to look first from
the great stairs, and then proceed down, and search the lower part of the
building.

Leonard having left them, Alfred began to give as much consolation as was in
his power to Agnes and his sister: but his words faultered, as he attempted to
use arguments of comfort, while ideas of misery and distress came too forcibly
to admit the bright and cheering ray of hope. Leonard returned with the
agreeable intelligence that the unwelcome visitors had left the abbey. They
therefore, after the lights were put out, made their way to their chambers, and
retired; yet though their harassed minds received, in some degree, the oblivion
of sleep, it was of that kind which occasioned tormenting and horrid flights of
fancy.

Matilda appeared extremely ill at breakfast; Alfred produced the key which in
so wonderful a manner he had obtained possession of. They were at a loss to
know to what it belonged, when Matilda recollected the cabinet in her chamber;
and, according to the size, it seemed to be designed for that lock. They
deferred, however, trying it, till another opportunity, as they intended
visiting Father Peter before dinner. They were soon equipped for their little
journey, and proceeded for the cave.

Father Peter was seated at a table, in a melancholy posture. On one side of
him was his crucifix, and before him several papers, which he put away
immediately as they entered.

Having testified great pleasure at seeing them, the conversation became
general, and they found that their supposition was right, concerning his being
on a visit to some peasants, when they found him absent from his habitation.

They had been in the cave about an hour, when Father Peter, while talking with
unusual cheerfulness, was suddenly taken ill, and fainted away in Alfred's arms.

Matilda and Agnes administered some cordials which they found near, while
Leonard unbuttoned his vest, in order to give him air; when they beheld
suspended on his breast an elegant miniature of a lady, set in gold, and
adorned with pearls. But how great was Alfred's astonishment, to behold the
exact resemblance of lady Caroline Albourne! No notice was, however, taken: for
all except him were too much engaged to observe the likeness.

Father Peter by degrees recovered, and thanked them for their attention. He
said he was subject to such sits, and expected to pay the debt of nature, at
the approach of each of them: "But oh! my God!" he exclaimed, "spare me a
little longer, till a mighty work is effected! and then I die in peace."

They now took their leave, and returned to the abbey. Alfred mentioned his
observation on the miniature, and it was the cause of reflections the most
uncomfortable and distressing. The sight of a picture which resembled in so
striking a manner the countenance of a beloved object, brought to his memory
scenes of happiness he had once hoped to have enjoyed, but which were now, to
all human probability, for ever blasted.

The charming lady Caroline he supposed to be hundreds of miles distant: and he
considered it as by no means an improbable supposition that she might now be in
the arms of another. He informed his sister and Leonard that he again intended
to watch in the west tower that night; but determinedly refused to accept of
even Leonard's attendance in the chamber, that he might be in readiness to
conduct her and Agnes to the other part of the abbey, should they again be
disturbed by the visitors of the night before. After dinner, Leonard said he
was going to the public market: but Matilda knew this was the usual excuse.
Alfred advised his sister to examine the cabinet after Agnes was asleep: this
was agreed on, and he delivered her the key.

Leonard returned in about two hours, and had a private conference with his
master. Both seemed much pleased with some information they had received.
Supper-time arrived; and after a short repast they retired to their apartments.

Alfred, in about half an hour after, took a lamp, softly left his chamber, and
proceeded to that of the west tower. Agnes was not asleep so soon as usual: she
talked of the horrors they had experienced, and trembled for fear of a
repetition of them in her dreams. At length, however, she fell under the
influence of the heavy god; and Matilda with a palpitating heart, applied the
gold key to the cabinet, when, after a little difficulty, the folding doors
flew open.

It was elegantly adorned with gilt Italian figures, of considerable size, in
the habits of former times. The first three drawers which Matilda opened,
contained coins of gold and silver to a great amount. The sight of the treasure
though it for a moment elevated her, caused, after a little reflection, but a
small degree of pleasure; it was none of their property, nor had they any proof
to the right of possessing it. The fourth and fifth drawers contained jewels,
the most beautiful she had ever seen, carefully preserved in gold caskets. The
sixth drawer was full of papers; some of which were letters that had passed
between the old count Maserini and his lady, in their youth, before their
marriage; and several after, when the count was on business at the court of
Spain. In one of these be mentioned his intention of purchasing Grasville
Abbey, and in the next his having done it, and taken possession of the title to
that estate. He concluded with ho^es that his son Percival Maserini ought live
to enjoy it after him. There were a few fragments of memorandums, which formed
the contents of the sixth drawer.

In the seventh drawer she found four miniature paintings, elegantly mounted
with pearls, gold, and jewels of great value. Two of them represented a lady
and gentleman in the prime of life, whom Matilda supposed to be the count and
his lady; the other two were children, one of whom resembled her own picture of
her father; and ^^s companion was, she had little doubt, intended for his
sister Sisera Maserini. The remaining part of the drawer was filled with
ornaments for women in former times.

Matilda now drew (...) the eighth and last drawer, when the only articles it
contained were a piece of ribband, one end of which showed its remainder had
been parted by force; and a small roll of parchment which was filled with
writing, and, though in some measure defaced by time, with some little ^^^ns it
was easily to be read. The language was French; but what were Matilda's
sensations, when she beheld her father's name at the bottom! A sudden faintness
seized her, and she sunk into an arm chair. A flood of tears, however,
fortunately, gave relief, and she found herself able to peruse the manuscript,
which contained the following words, and showed plainly the distracted state of
mind the writer labored under:

"Oh! father of mercy, where -- where, Oh! my God, is thy thunder, to crush to
the earth those who disgrace thy heavenly image? My wife! my sister! -- I see
ye -- I clasp ye ^ -- Ah! my soul! they are but figures sent by hell to aid my
tormentors, and burst my very heart strings with grief!

"Count D'Oillfont, where are you? Dare me to single combat! use any means but
treachery. -- Damnable villain! -- dragged from all my heart held most dear,
immured in a horrid confinement, with the dreadful expectation of an
ignominious death!

"Clementina Sisera! where are ye? -- Oh! my father, if thou art permitted to
look down from thy blessed abode in heaven, on the miseries of thy son -- will
not tears, such as angles weep, burst forth, and thy frame, though immortal,
receive a shock of horror?

My wife! my sister! -- I am sick at heart -- appear to me -- give me some
comfort within these gloomy walls! -- Oh, D'Ollifont; D'Ollifont! thou a^^
planning a horrid deed; -- Thou thirstest for my blood! -- why not take thy
fill at once, and end this life of torture? -- why shrink? -- why stay the
murderous dagger from my breast -- when thy coward heart must know I am wholly
in thy power, unable to resist the tyrannic rod of oppression?

"Father Peter! I know I have thy pity: -- but thou art entangled in the snares
of a wretch, and unable to extricate thyself from the hellish bondage. -- Thou
know all, and thou will know my end. -- To thee then must I look for
reparation. On thee must it depend, to be an instrument of almighty justice,
and give blood for blood!

"Hark! the tormentors will soon be here; one little hour, and this injured
frame is levelled with the dust. -- Oh! my God, forgive my enemies, protect my
poor deserted wise, and the offspring of our love, if yet in this world of woe.
-- My sister too! defend her from the enemies of our house. -- All Is dark,
all is cheerless; must I not have one ray of light to ease the pang of
dissolution? -- Must no wife, no sister, no friend, nor even charitable
stranger, give one sigh or parting look of pity, ere these eyes are closed for
ever! -- Must none but murderers, grinning at their soul-done deed, receive the
quivering last-drawn breath of life? -- Poison or daggers is the choice! -- It
matters not: each tends to the same great end. -- Hark! hark! I hear them
coming. The bell strikes one! The hour well suits the horrid act. -- Almighty
father! thy influence spreads around me -- and rays of blessed hope give warmth
to my every faculty. -- I am light as air: all misery vanishes: I die with
pleasure. Ye murderers, appear! I am now prepared to receive you, even with
e^stasy. -- Terror, distress, and horror, are no more. -- Hell sinks before me.
-- The dark and gloomy vapors of despair are dispelled by the glorious light
of heaven, and the refulgent beams of a merciful redeemer.

"I see -- Oh! my God! my God! I mount; I fly; -- nature itself seems gone. --
The world's a mass of matter, now to me no more!"

CHAPTER. XXXIII. MIDNIGHT TRANSACTIONS.
-- Now over one half the world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtain'd sleep; now witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate's offerings, and withered murder,
Ala^^m^d by his sentinel the wolf,
Who howls his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin's ravishing strides, toward his design
Moves like a ghost.
MACBETH.
"UNFORTUNATE parent! heaven will surely avenge thy wrongs: the wrath of the
Almighty must at a future time fall on him who, with fiend-like malice, could
plunge the innocent into misery, wretchedness, and despair."

These were the words of Matilda, as she dropped the manuscript from her hands,
and burst into a flood of tears. Such affecting, mournful complaints, such a
picture of horror and distress would have greatly shocked her, had they
proceeded from one not bound to her by the ties of relationship, or even those
of friendship; but the idea of a father undergoing those sufferings,
contributed (...) to increase that grief and melancholy which ^e at present
experienced.

Having wept for a considerable time, she found herself in some degree
recovered. But she was entirely at a loss to know in what manner to act with
respect to the information she should give to her brother relative to the
manuscript. Matilda well knew ^^s natural warmth of temper would not permit him
to use discretion in his inquiries of Father Peter; and the strange, mysterious
behavior of this man had prevented them from even trusting him with their
situation. It was true the paper she had found spoke well of him; but how
easily might her poor father have been deceived by artful professions of
friendship to hide the lurking villainy of his soul, and make his punctuality to
the count's orders appear in less infamous and horrid colors. Now, should this
man be still kept by D'Ollifont as a spy upon the abbey, her brother's
impetuosity might cause him to throw himself in Father Peter's power, without
first knowing either his character or inclination to serve them.

Matilda was perfectly convinced these considerations were just, and wished to
procure herself an explanation from the hermit: but to visit him alone,
undiscovered, was an expedient she was entirely ignorant how to contrive any
means to effect: yet it was actually necessary Father Peter should be
consulted, and that immediately.

After some study a thought struck her that she might see him at night, after
her brother, Leonard, and Agnes, had retired to rest; but then she shrunk from
the idea of walking to the cave at so late an hour. Second reflection, however,
seemed to tell her she had nothing to fear; and that would be the only method
she could take to obtain an interview without the knowledge of any other
person. At length she came to a determination to try her project the following
night; and by the time this resolution was formed, daylight darted through the
casement of her chamber, and seemed to enliven nature with its cheering rays.

She had not yet heard Alfred enter his room: but whenever she had looked
toward the west tower, as she had done several times in the course of the
night, the light seemed to continue in the same place. This trifling
observation gave her some degree of comfort, as she supposed every thing
remained quiet.

Some little time after, she heard Alfred open his chamber door, and speak to
Leonard. Matilda felt considerable happiness at his safety, and, as she was now
perfectly satisfied in that respect, she desired Agnes, when she arose, not to
wait breakfast for her; as, having received but little rest during the night,
she intended now to compose herself to sleep.

She arose at a late hour, and found her brother, Leonard, and Agnes, in the
parlour. The former was reading; and though his countenance was extremely pale,
yet she thought she could perceive an inward satisfaction and serenity she had
lately been seldom witness to.

Alfred soon requested to speak with her alone, and, with considerable
eagerness, asked her if she had found any thing of consequence in the cabinet.
Matilda acquainted him with every article, except the manuscript; he seemed in
some measure disappointed, but showed great pleasure at the idea of the money.

Matilda was rather surprised. "That money," said she, "Alfred, we have no
right to; nor do I know, in our situation, that it would be of any material
service, were it our own."

"We must at all events make free with it, Matilda; I have the strongest reason
to suppose that it does belong to us; and besides we are now in the greatest
want of it."

"How so?" replied his sister, still more astonished. "You told me the other
day we had enough to support us for some time at least."

"True," answered Alfred: "but I have now other uses for wealth; in short,
Matilda, this night had discovered to me circumstances of a most wonderful
nature; and the horrid mystery of this dreadful abbey is at length unravelled.
Perhaps we may remain here a short time longer: but I hope you will soon see
these gloomy scenes of adversity and sorrow transformed to days and years of
tranquillity, happiness and comfort."

Matilda stood the image of amazement; and for a moment she thought her brother
insane; but the glow of pleasure which overspread his face confirmed that his
words were true; and his features once more appeared the same, as when in
former times she had seen him, with his own hands, relieve the shivering,
famished, beggar, and, his countenance glowing with compassion and benevolence,
watch the poor wretch recover vital warmth and strength from the nourishment he
had administered. Matilda catched the heartfelt joy; but on her it took a
different effect, and she burst into tears. Nor was Agnes's joy less, when she
was informed of the good intelligence. She wept with pleasure at the idea of
leaving the abbey, and still remaining with her dear young lady.

The good old Leonard too was seen to wipe his eyes, and heave a sigh of
ecstacy, at this unexpected turn of fortune.

Alfred, however, would give no satisfactory answer to their inquiries
concerning what he had seen in the west tower: he only told them that the abbey
must be still their habitation for a short period; but the time would pass away
with far more comfort than it had hitherto done.

Dinnertime arrived: but the intelligence had cloyed every appetite; and it
was removed almost without being tasted. Alfred, about half an hour after, left
the abbey, and said he should return toward evening.

Matilda had now time to consider whether, after what she had heard, it would
be proper to conceal the manuscript from her brother; and, though many reasons
prompted her to give it to him immediately, yet a little reflection told her
that the same ill consequence she had before conceived, might arise from it. He
might not yet be acquainted with the sufferings of his father, nor with the
knowledge the hermit had of his distress and death. In short, she resolved to
act as she had before determined, and pay Father Peter a visit at midnight. But
she wished not to leave Agnes without speaking; an excuse might serve, that she
had left some books in the parlour which she wished to look over, and which
might take her some time to procure.

Alfred returned at the time he mentioned, and informed them he did not intend
to watch in the tower that night. The evening was spent with some degree of
comfort, and at an early hour they retired to rest. Agnes was soon asleep, and
Matilda read till near midnight. During that time she often looked at the
casement of the west tower, but no light nor figure appeared. Having awaked
Agnes, she informed her she was going to look for a book she had left in the
parlour. Agnes did not by any means like the idea of being left alone in the
chamber; but Matilda reminded her that her brother and Leonard were within
call, in the next room; but she requested her to make no noise without there
was actually a necessity. She waited a little time, and had the pleasure to
find Agnes asleep before she left the apartment.

Matilda took the lamp, and, having softly descended the great stairs,
proceeded through the hall, and from that to the first court, which soon,
brought her to the outer one.

She now began to tremble and feel her situation. To be entirely alone at such
an hour of the night, was an idea in many respects terrific. The pale and
half-obscured moon gave but an imperfect light; and that light was often
eclipsed by dark, heavy clouds, which seemed to rise from the south, and form a
gloomy mountain of dark mist toward the west; while vivid flashes of lightning
darted from the hoizon, and illumined the gathered clouds on the south with
uncommon strength.

Matilda viewed the awful scene with emotion, and was several times going to
turn back; but she chid herself for want of fortitude, and attempted to laugh
at those fears which now almost prevented her from supporting herself.

She had, however, arrived nearly half way to the cave, when a sound of human
voices struck her ear at some distance.

Matilda listened -- thought it might only be a soft breeze which waved the
thick groves of cypress that surrounded her. But she heard it again, and was
convinced she was right: it seemed like a chorus, or the chanting of a funeral
hymn for the soul of a deceased person.

She stopped, and leaning against a broken pedestal which had formerly borne a
statue, listened with some degree of pleasure to the solemn dirge. But the
voices seemed now to approach much nearer; and she perceived a glare of light
at some distance above the foliage, which informed her the persons whom she had
heard were near. Terror at being discovered, now overcame every other
consideration, and with eager eye she scrutinised each side of the grove, to
find a place of concealment. At length she fortunately found a small opening in
one part, which, by putting back the boughs, with some little trouble, admitted
and closed her from view. She now conceived herself to be safe from
observation, though there was a part through which she could plainly discover
whatever passed on the other side.

Five minutes did not elapse before a procession of men entered the path, still
singing in the same solemn manner. A priest of holy orders proceeded first; but
how greatly was she astonished to see him followed by about twelve men, who had
every appearance of banditti in dress and figure! The first six carried
torches; the other half followed after, with slow and melancholy steps. These
were succeeded by six more, bearing a coffin on their shoulders, which was
covered with a black velvet pall, and adorned with trophies.

Matilda could hardly suppose herself awake; yet by the pale moon every figure
seemed perfect, and she thought she could, in the faces of the last four,
discover the visitors to the abbey on a former night. The whole company halted
at the pedestal, when, to the amazement of Matilda, two of them removed a large
stone, which formed the cap, and part of a Corinthian base. The pedestal then
parted, and was let down, which discovered the entrance to a large vault. The
funeral service was then read by the priest, who walked first, after which the
coffin was carried down by four of the bearers. Another dirge was then sung,
and the pedestal was closed, the cap, etc. being replaced. The procession
having turned, proceeded back in the same manner, till she lost sight of them
at the extremity of the grove.

Though elated at the idea of having escaped discovery, she felt considerable
awe at the solemn scene. In short, the sight of this midnight funeral, added to
the strange dresses of the mourners, impressed on her mind a degree of terror
which she was unable to overcome. Having left her secret place of retirement,
she passed hastily the strange sepulcher, and, with burried and trembling
steps, breathless with agitation, arrived a^ the cave of father Peter. His lamp
was burning, and at a distance she could perceive him at his midnight
devotions. His aged, reverend figure was in the same posture as when they first
discovered him; and his crucifix, books, and hourglass, as usual, stood before
him.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
MATILDA stopped a few moments to collect herself, before she discovered to the
inhabitant of this recluse cell his midnight visitor. But while she was
contemplating his aged form, bent on the earth, his hands clasped, and eyes
lifted toward heaven with a fervency of devotion she had hardly ever observed,
ideas struck her that by no means contributed to inspire that fortitude she so
much wished at this critical hour to possess.

That very figure which she now so much admired, nay almost revered and loved,
might have been an assistant in taking away the life of her father! -- and
those very hands which she saw extended in the pious action of prayer, might
have inflicted tortures on her parent!

"Horrid ideas! -- uncharitable consideration!" exclaimed a voice which seemed
to pass by her in a whisper.

Matilda started at the rebuke: but she had not even breathed her thoughts: she
was therefore certain it must be something more than mortal. Heaven itself had
chid her for the supposition.

Trembling at the thought, she supported herself, against the side of the cave,
and stood an object of distress and terror. At length, being in some degree
recovered, she stepped forward, and gasping with anxiety, appeared before the
astonished hermit. His surprise may be well conceived; and with (...) o^
astonishment, nor by any means free from horror (...) asked (...) business at
this unusual hour. Matilda had now partly recovered her scattered senses, and,
with a dignity and fortitude of air peculiar to herself, requested his pardon
for disturbing him at his devotions, and then begged him to listen with
attention to a few circumstances she had to relate.

Father Peter looked at her with a piercing eye. Both being seated, and the
hermit having trimmed his lamp, Matilda thus addressed him:

"Picture to yourself, father, a daughter, who never experienced the embrace of
paternal love, but who was yet taught to revere the name of a parent, though
her eyes were never blessed with one glance of rapture on his countenance.

"Brought up with all the tenderness a fond mother can conceive for her
fatherless children, their unprotected state still more endearing them to her
maternal bosom, she (...) but little the loss she had sustained, in the comfort
and happiness of this remaining tie of duty and parental affection. Now then,"
continued Matilda, bursting into tears, "change this scene of earthly bliss,
and observe her on the couch of sickness, clasping the hand of her child with
looks -- Oh! merciful God! such looks as I cannot describe, nor you conceive."

She turned toward her aged auditor: the drops of sympathy trickled down his
faded cheeks, while he begged her to be composed, and continue her narrative.

"Her countenance, raised toward heaven, brightened at the very thought of
those glorious realms; and a christian's expectation beamed in her eye; yet
when she turned toward her daughter, tears would again burst forth, and she
would clasp to her heaving breast the weeping child, as if afraid to leave her
in a world encircled with horrid guilt, and eternal destruction. She doubted
not the goodness of her God; her faith was great, but yet her feelings could
not be subdued. She died; and, if a good life procures a place of grace, wafted
by heavenly angels, she reached the bosom of a merciful Redeemer.

"Now, father, behold the clouds of adversity gathering over the heads of her
offspring; the brother petitions a noble relation of his mother to receive a
sister to his care, for no pecuniary advantage, but to shield her from insults
to which her age and sex, added to the unprotected state she was left in, every
day subjected her. The only answer they obtain is a direct denial from an
artful priest, who by his perfidious arguments had poisoned his patron's mind
against the childrer of a daughter whom he had before forsaken when he had no
advise but a bad heart.

"They leave their native country, to accept the invitation of a distant
relation in a foreign clime, where an asylum was yet hoped to be gained for the
female wanderer, while her brother fought against the enemies of his country.
Arrived at the principal city of England, they are plunged into dissipation,
surrounded by temptation, and forsaken by those who should have protected them
against oppression. Picture to yourself a villain, a dastardly villain, taking
advantage of the neglect shown to the female relation of his friend, and at a
moment when he thought himself free from molestation employing even force to
crush her to the earth, and blast her future days with shame and sorrow never
to be erased. Her brother, witness to the sufferings and usage of a sister,
who, he knew, had no other friend to guard her from a wretch unworthy to bear
the image of his creator, seizes the villain, who attempts to take his life;
but the rash, though, excusable, injured youth strikes him so the ground,
weltering in his blood, and momentarily, expecting to pay that debt of nature,
at the receival of which he had nothing to hope, but much to fear. They fly
from the laws of England, return to their native land, shrinking from notice,
fearful that the power of their oppressor may overtake them even there. Another
heavy misfortune now surrounds them; through the cursed contrivance of their
enemies, the young officer is proved a deserter, by not attending to an order
which was sent to him the night he left London, and of which consequently he
was entirely ignorant. By the death of him whom he had wounded, it is rendered
impossible for him to clear himself of this stigma. Concealed in a desolate
habitation, they discover the murder -- ah! and the murderer, of their father."

Matilda turned toward the hermit. His color changed, and he gazed at her
with silent awe and astonishment.

She continued -- "Yet a witness must be sound to authenticate the horrid deed,
and give justice to the children of the deceased."

"And is such a person living?" asked father Peter.

"He is," returned Matilda. -- "Were you in his situation, would you not
promote that justice which God and nature require? or would you still screen
the wretch, and suffer the innocent victims of his cruelty to languish in
distress and affliction?"

"Surely you cannot doubt my answer," said the hermit. "I would even part with
life itself to procure justice for the sufferers you mention."

"There is no need of such a sacrifice," answered Matilda. "But now, father, I
put your virtue to the trial. I come to demand reparation for the murder of a
father, and that father the rightful heir of Orlando count Maserini."

Father Peter, though in a great degree astonished, was not actually so
surprised as might have been expected. He asked an explanation.

"The account is brief. In short, Percival Maserini was a prisoner in yonder
abbey: yon pitied him, yet were privy to the deed."

Father Peter seemed at a loss to reply. At length he told her that at an early
hour he would wait on her at the abbey.

"You know my residence then?" said Matilda.

"Perfectly," answered he. "Believe me, you shall have no cause to repent this
visit; and give me leave to foretell that the brightest scenes of happiness,
with the Almighty's permission, now await you."

"There is comfort in your words, father," answered Matilda: "heaven send they
may prove true! But the clouds of adversity have so long eclipsed the cheering
rays of hope, that I hardly feel myself able to admit them to my breast."

Father Peter wished to see Matilda to the abbey-gates: but she positively
refused his offer, and parted with him at the entrance of the cave.

The idea of the funeral again entered her imagination; and she felt a kind of
dread at passing the sepulcher, which almost made her repent that she had
refused the good old man's attendance.

When she had arrived within a few yards of it, she perceived a glare of light
which seemed to spread around the part, and soon observed several torches, the
same as she had before seen, stuck in the ground: the pedestal was also parted,
and laid on the earth.

Matilda's agitation and surprise was greater than before; and she stopped
unable to resolve whether to pass quickly by or remain where she was. While in
this state of suspense, she saw two men ascend from the vault, followed by a
third whose figure excited in her still greater astonishment. He was elegantly
formed, and his clothes were entirely of the English fashion, but seemed
strangely put on: his hair was dishevelled, and his whole frame seemed greatly
disordered.

After some little time they closed the pedestal, and, taking up the torches,
took that path which immediately led to the abbey.

Matilda was again at a loss in what manner to act; but followed them, though
at a distance, with flow and cautious steps. At length she traced them to the
gates of the abbey. Here they halted; and Matilda, with a palpitating heart,
stopped also to observe their motions.

They continued in conversation some little time, when, to her amazement, they
opened the outer gates, and entered.

Matilda, still more alarmed, proceeded on, and ventured to pass into the first
court: she here perceived no one; but having entered the hall, she thought she
heard voices in the parlour. Nor was her conjecture wrong: for having half
ascended the great stairs, she listened for a moment, and heard a conversation
carried on, though in a very low tone: she however could plainly discover the
speech of Leonard and her brother; her fears therefore of a discovery being at
an end, her curiosity did not prompt her to stay any longer, being much
fatigued, and in want of rest. She therefore directly proceeded to her chamber,
and was happy (...) ^^d Agnes still under the influence of the sleepy god.

CHAPTER XXXV. MYSTERIES ELUCIDATED.
We wish removed, what stands in our light,
And nature blame for limiting our sight,
Where you stand wisely winking, that the view
Of the fair prospect may be always new.
WALLER.
"FATHER of light! Almighty God Supreme, who, with an all-seeing eye, surveyest
the transactions of thy creatures here on earth, look down on one unworthy of
thy goodness, though humbly soliciting thy aid -- who craves thy support to see
those mysteries explained, the elucidation of which may strike her soul with
horror; but let thy heavenly assistance inspire her with fortitude and
resignation, to listen to the dictates of thy will!"

Such was the conclusion of Matilda's prayer, as she retired to her pillow.

She enjoyed a calm and serene repose till a late hour in the morning, and
found herself much refreshed. Having descended to the parlour, neither Leonard,
Agnes, nor her brother, had breakfasted.

"I am sorry" said she, "to have made you wait: but this morning I have been
uncommonly lazy."

"We have not waited for you alone," answered Alfred cheerfully: "there is
another person our guest today. In short, you no doubt recollect that, when
you mentioned leaving the abbey, I told you a stranger would soon appear, to
make you alter your resolution. The time is now arrived that my prophecy is to
be fulfilled, and the mysterious behavior I have been guilty of, I hope, in
some measure excused. Look at those folding doors, Matilda: the sight of them
has at a former time occasioned sensations of the utmost terror: do not,
therefore, expect the entrance of a ghost, but a being of flesh and blood. --
Come forth!" cried he.

Matilda expected to see the venerable figure of father Peter.

The doors hastily flew open, when, instead of the aged sage, an elegant young
man sprang forth, and caught her in his arms. Matilda started back, and
instantly exclaimed, "Mr. Milverne!

"Not so," said Alfred: "he does, I must confess, greatly resemble that
gentleman; but you now see before you Archibald lord Milverne."

"Do not believe him, charming miss Maserini," answered the stranger. "I deny
the title; let me only be known to you under the plain name of Milverne --
happy appellation, under which I first became acquainted with the most charming
of her sex!"

Matilda was above the little arts of female coquetry, practiced by the sex in
general; she did not discourage either his lordship's hopes or addresses; and,
after some little time spent in mutual inquiries, they seated themselves at the
breakfast-table.

Leonard and Agnes wished to have taken their meal afterward, out of respect
to lord Milverne; but his noble soul scorned the empty title he possessed, and
considered it of no other consequence than a more than usual call upon him to
act through life with honor and integrity, as an example to those in a lower
sphere, who had never received the advantages of a good education, or the
rudiments of virtue from honest and respectable parents.

He insisted that no unusual ceremony should be observed on his account; and
his request was complied with. Matilda received the pleasing intelligence that
count D'Ollifont was yet living, and that the news they had received of his
death was merely of his own contrivance, executed by his creatures in France;
and that there was not a doubt but the cruel proceeding of proving Alfred
Maserini a deserter, was also effected by schemes of villainy from the same
quarter.

Lord Milverne acquainted them that the last intelligence he received of the
count, was, that he had been some little time at Paris, but that his popularity
in that city was greatly decreased, on the discovery of an assassination he was
proved to be the author of, and which he must certainly have suffered for, had
he not been screened by royal power.

"I shall now," continued his lordship, "acquaint you with my adventures since
you left England, till a certain event happened, which will close my narrative,
and give room for one to be related by my friend here" (pointing to Alfred)
"who will then have an opportunity of clearing up his own conduct so as
entirely to obliterate every suspicion of unkindness to a sister who has shown
the most noble heart and affection for her brother, in her fortitude and
generous behavior through his misfortune."

Here he bowed to Matilda.

"On the night of the masquerade I had not long forced Mr. Maserini into the
coach, when a crowd of people began to assemble, collected by the repeated
cries of murder, from the count's servants, who kept me in hold. I was
immediately delivered into the hands of the watchmen and two constables, who
had by this time arrived, charged with having favored the escape of the
murderer. I was directly taken to a watch-house near, but was soon admitted to
find bail for my appearance, when they were informed who I was.

"The next morning I appeared before a magistrate: my person and name were soon
recognized by that gentleman, who had been acquainted with my family. To him,
and the persons assembled, I related the whole affair, and made it clear that
the second pistol was fired fo^^ defense, as the count first discharged his. In
short, D'Ollifont's conduct appeared in the most black and infamous colors,
and I was honorably discharged. He continued for some time in a dangerous
state: at times he was insane; and when those fits came on, it was his desire,
in his lucid intervals, that no one should attend him but his confidential
servant and steward, R^bourn.

"The news of this shameful, ungenerous transaction of the count's was the
general talk of the town; and most people allowed that punishment had fallen on
the right person.

"As soon as I had settled some business of consequence in London, I
immediately set off for France, on my way toward Italy; two strong reasons
urging me to take the journey -- one to see a dying father, who I understood by
letters labored under a severe indisposition which increased upon him daily;
-- the other, the hopes of finding some exiled friends, whose situation I
greatly pitied and lamented.

"The first news I heard when I arrived at Paris, was the death of my parent,
and that Mr. Maserini was declared a deserter, for not attending to an order
left at his lodgings the very night he departed from London. I made it my
business to obtain an immediate audience with two of his majesty's ministers;
and though I clearly explained the mistake, was unable to procure any redress.
It was an order (they said) by the royal command, and could not be rescinded.

"Finding it was in vain to take any more trouble at court, I proceeded
directly toward the Alps, and stopped at the very house where lady Caroline
Albourne had been saved from the fire, as I supposed by you. I immediately
crossed the mountains, and soon found myself in this country. I directly
proceeded to the residence of my late father, which was now inhabited by a
friend who had accompanied him hither, and his domestics. His will was
produced; and I found myself possessed of eight thousand a year, except a few
legacies, a genteel annuity settled on the person before mentioned, and
handsome presents to all his servants.

"All my affairs being settled in a short space of time, I made every cautious
inquiry concerning you; but all proved abortive; and I was still more
perplexed, as you mentioned no particular place you intended to travel to, in
answer to the letter I sent to Dover, though it was my earnest request. This,
however, I considered as the effect of the hurry and distress you were then in.
An idea at last struck me, that I had heard say Grasville Abbey was the
residence of your ancestors. I had often heard talk of the venerable pile, when
in Italy before, and now determined to visit it, conceiving that you might be
there concealed. I immediately set out for Mont^errat, taking with me only one
servant; and, after two days' journey, we found ourselves near this gothic
mansion. It grew dark; but I resolved to see the external part before I stepped:
we at length entered the thick wood on the left side of the building. Its lofty
towers began to appear above the gloomy, dark foliage, and the rising moon
shone in full splendor on its gray, decayed walls. I stood still for some time
to admire the awful and beautiful scene before me: after which I resolved to
have a nearer view of the abbey. My servant now attempted to dissuade me from
my resolution."

"My lord," said he, 'we were told at the inn we last stopped at that this wood
was infested by banditti: -- for heaven's sake do not venture farther.'

"I laughed at the poor fellow's fears, and considered the report as merely the
consequence of no person daring to go near the abbey. I therefore insisted on
riding forward; and we proceeded into the very heart of the wood, when I began
to be rather alarmed myself: for the moon being obscured by heavy clouds, its
intricacies became so great, that I could not find the path we had first
followed.

"We had not continued in this situation above a quarter of an hour, when we
perceived two men approach, whose appearance gave some reasons for
apprehension. They were armed, and we also had weapons of defense. At length
they accosted us; and by the manner of their address, we found they were
robbers. Having asked a few frivolous questions, they began to use rough
language, and told us we must go no further, for that we were their prisoners.
But our number being equal, I resolved not tamely to submit; and giving my man
the hint, he engaged with one, while I undertook the other. Each of the party
fired a pistol, but not one fell; when one of the men whistled aloud, and in
less than three minutes we were surrounded by a party of the banditti. Having
disarmed us, and taken all our money, they led us in a kind of triumph still
further into the wood, till we arrived at the opening of a large cave.

"The robbers having knocked at a heavy door almost concealed by trees, it was
opened by a youth, seemingly not above fourteen, who conducted us, by the light
of a lamp, down a steep descent, which gradually became wider, and terminated
in a large space partitioned into several apartments. In one of the largest a
cloth was spread for supper, and an elderly man stood cooking of it in another
room. 'Joscelin,' said the leader of the party, 'secure these prisoners; but
mind that they are used well, and give them a hot supper.' 'Signor,' continued
he, turning to me, 'your situation is not so bad as you may suppose: if you are
not refractory, we shall be moderate.' Joscelin conducted us to the further
part of the cave, and placed us in a small but clean chamber, in which was a
good bed. Felix, my servant, now began to rub his hands with pleasure, and
strove to communicate that comfort to me which he derived from the idea of
having a good lodging and supper, instead of a speedy death. But my distress
was not so easily to be alleviated. I was now confined, I knew not for how
long, from the sight of all I held most dear;" (His lordship here looked most
tenderly at Matilda) "and I considered that death itself would have been more
welcome than such an untimely delay. I could, however, blame nothing but my own
rashness, and consequently endeavored to support my mischance with as much
philosophy as possible.

"Supper was brought us, and, although I had no appetite, I tasted of it: But
Felix took care to make up for my deficiency in point of eating.

"I had but little sleep that night, and rose in the morning very unwell.
Breakfast was brought us early; and while I was expecting what would be the
issue of this strange treatment from men whose behavior I expected to find
quite different, our attendant, after a few hems, thus addressed us.

"As you are two persons whose courage and manners I much admire, I shall
entirely deviate from the regular rules of our society, and even put myself in
your power, by acquainting you with circumstances, which were it known I
related, death must be my reward.'

"Having thanked him as well as my surprise would let me, he continued:

"One moon has nearly passed, since we lost two brothers of our order, which
accordingly now wants that number to make it complete. It is our usual custom,
after such events, to seize on the first travelers who fall in our way; and
that lot has happened to you; and you are in consequence now treated in our
customary manner, which I am sure you have no reason to complain of. An offer
is always made to the persons thus taken, to accept the vacant places of our
society, and live with us after the usual method of the brotherhood. You will
both of you shortly receive such proposals: and though no compulsion may appear
in them, yet, mark me, certain death is the consequence of a refusal. We never
choose to enter any one actually against his will, as treachery may be the
result of such a choice. If it is therefore found that your inclinations are
not agreeable to our wishes, you are both certain to fall victims. Do not
discover the information I have given you of our proceedings, as in that case I
must, as I before told you, become a sacrifice to my good will to you. Be
cautious, therefore; maturely deliberate on your situation; profit by the
intelligence I have communicated; nor idly throw away your lives, when you have
it in your power to preserve them.'

"Picture to yourselves my situation, after having heard the information of the
friendly robber; forced, as I may say, either to follow a life of depredation
and villainy, or fall a sacrifice to a set of wretches, who, I had now every
reason to suppose, were destitute of even the common feelings of humanity. I
had hardly time for this reflection, before the captain of the banditti
entered, and presented me with the proposals, the contents of which I knew too
well; and, having desired me to peruse them, left us alone, yet not without
mentioning that he should call again in the evening to receive our answers to
the offers which we should find set before us.

"I was unable to read the detested paper; but after some little time Felix
rehearsed it aloud, and I listened with attention. It declared that we should
share equally in the profits arising from adventures, though every one must
take his share in the danger, and pay implicit obedience to the captain or
leader of the company.

"Never," I exclaimed, "will I submit to the infamous measures of this shameful
crew; instantaneous death is far preferable to the languishing life of misery I
must here endure, frustrated in all those schemes of happiness I had planned to
enjoy within a few weeks.'

"Alas! sir,' answered Felix, 'I have always been taught, that disappointments
are for our good: and if we really consider them as the acts of a Supreme
Being, how can they be bad? Why should we then throw away our lives, and yield
them up to men whom we despise, when we may perhaps, by retaining them, recover
our liberties, with th^se blessings we before had in contemplation?'

"I must confess, the argument of the poor humble Felix brought a blush into
the face of his master. 'That man,' thought I, 'without the advantages of a
refined or liberal education, can give instruction to me, who have had every
advantage in point of learning; as well as an example, to teach me fortitude,
philosophy, and resignation to the divine will.' His words made such an
impression on my disordered imagination, that I resolved at once to submit to
the terms of the banditti, in such a manner as should give them no room to
doubt of my attachment to their cause; as in this case more opportunities might
offer, to release us from so horrid a confinement. The captain at night again
visited us: and both Felix and myself testified the greatest happiness to
accept of the offer; and the better to give reasons for our readiness to
comply, we gave him to understand we were men of desperate character, who knew
no way of living, but by the aid of the riches of others: 'and for those
purposes,' said I, 'we take it by turns to act as servant, and through this
means have accomplished many schemes productive of profit, which at some other
time I will relate to you.' Garbardo (for that was the leader's name) seemed
highly pleased with our willingness, and the account we gave him of our
characters; in short, he determined that we should be entered into the order
that very evening. Accordingly, the whole party were called to assemble; and,
after undergoing the usual forms, we received the dress and arms of the two
deceased robbers; we were then congratulated, under the feigned names we had
given them, as brothers of the society.

"We soon found the good effects of conforming to their will with a seeming
degree of pleasure; for they so far relaxed from their usual methods, as to
permit us to sleep together. One rule, however, they strictly adhered to; for
we were not suffered to go out of the cave together upon any occasion, and were
given to understand that he who remained behind was a kind of hostage for the
other.

"It was a general custom for three to go together to purchase provision, which
was procured from a man who kept a kind of shop on the skirts of the wood. He
was well acquainted with the gang, and proved grateful for their custom, by
providing them with the best food, and keeping their situation an entire
secret. The place was hardly ever intruded upon by any but the banditti: so
retired was the spot where it stood.

"It came to Felix's turn to go first to the victualling booth; nothing,
however, offered, to improve the liberty of leaving the cave; and he was
accompanied by two staunch friends to the society. Nor did my journey prove
more successful; and I returned in some measure in despair of ever finding
means to escape.

"Felix was again my comforter, and inspired me with hopes that at another time
we might meet with more fortunate circumstances, which might enable us to
obtain a release from these heavy chains of slavery.

"The next day when Felix walked to the wood, he returned with a pleasure in
his countenance, which, I could plainly perceive, showed he had met with some
pleasant adventure; nor was my conjecture wrong: for when I eagerly inquired of
him, the first opportunity, if he had any good news, he informed me, to my
great satisfaction, it was no other than that he had seen Leonard at the place
where he had been. 'Nor did either of us,' continued Felix, 'foolishly discover
our joy at meeting one another, as you might have supposed; but he, seeing in
what company I was, acted with the greatest caution. I, however, found means to
whisper to him, unseen, that on such a day he would see you at the same place.'
This relation, though for the moment it inspired me with a kind of joy, yet was
but a poor preface to any ideas of liberty. I determined, however, to make the
most of it; and accordingly, during the interval of time, I wrote, in a letter,
a detail of the circumstances that had involved me in a situation of which I
gave the description. This I sealed up, and put in my pocket, ready to slip
into Leonard's hand, when I saw him.

"I visited, as usual, the place, attended by two men, and, in one corner of
the shop, saw Leonard, as I expected. I found means to convey the paper
unperceived into his hand, and thus returned with some degree of comfort to the
cave.

"I must now," continued his lordship, "give up my narrative, and resign, as I
before informed you, the task to Mr. Maserini."

CHAPTER XXXVI.
TO lord Milverne's concluding words Alfred replied -- "I own, my lord, I feel
considerable pleasure in undertaking the task you have imposed on me, as I
shall now have an opportunity of explaining to Matilda my reasons for that
mysterious behavior which carried in it a strong resemblance to unkindness,
though I had her interest and happiness in view.

"I shall therefore begin from the first appearance of that gloom and
uneasiness which seemed almost to crush every pleasing quality, and give a kind
of morose turn to my temper and manners, doubtless disgusting.

"It was, I believe, the second day after our arrival at the abbey, that
Leonard was dispatched to procure provision from the public market, and set off
accordingly. At his return, you, no doubt, recollect, he desired to speak with
me alone. The subject he had to communicate, was, his having seen Felix at the
place where he had stopped which was (as he described it) extremely retired,
and consequently suited well his purpose on that account. He gave a description
of the persons who were with him, and of the dresses they wore, which confirmed
them in my opinion to be banditti.

"What to make of this adventure, I knew not, and was still more astonished
when Leonard informed me Felix had whispered in his ear, that, if he attended
at the place the next day but one, he would see his master there. This
intelligence, as you may suppose, caused in me the greatest alarm for the fate
of Mr. Milverne. By the accounts I had heard before of the banditti in these
parts, I conjectured he was confined by them, as he really was. To the
uncomfortable sensation which this information gave me before, the next moment
was added another cause of horror, amazement, and, I may say, distress. The
casement in my chamber above stands opposite my bed; as I lay upon it, I could
plainly perceive part of the west lower, nor had I retired above an hour,
before I observed a strong light in one of the windows; and awaking Leonard, he
plainly saw it as well as myself. I determined, however to mention nothing of
this circumstance, or that relative to Mr. Milverne; and he had my orders
accordingly.

"Can you, Matilda, blame me for this secresy? I well knew the situation of
your heart, and was certain the information of either of these circumstances
must have considerably heightened that anxiety and misery which you then
labored under. This may account for my melancholy the next day. The uneasiness
you no doubt observed, when you proposed being of the party to search the rooms
in the west tower, and also on our conference together afterward, when we
consulted how we should act concerning Mr. Milverne, We also, after having
retired to our chamber, spent the best part of the night in conversation on
that, and the light we had seen."

Matilda well recollected that night, which was the same when she listened at
her brother's chamber door, and was so alarmed at the incoherent sentences she
heard. She forbore, however, to interrupt her brother.

"We also watched again for the light, and saw it; when, who can express our
astonishment at plainly perceiving a figure pass backwards and forwards, which
at last seemed to vanish with it?

"Leonard, according to the appointment he had received from Felix, set off
again for the market, as we informed you, to procure wine, the bottles we had
before being broken while he was gone. You questioned me on the strange
alteration in my spirits and behavior, and wished much to be acquainted with
the cause of the change; which information I refused, though I told you I had
reasons for the greatest uneasiness.

"Leonard returned, and (as you no doubt well recollect) with the news of count
D'Ollifont's death, and the search that was making after me, both in France and
Italy. Leonard then asked to speak with me alone; he informed me he had really
seen Mr. Milverne and two other persons, all dressed in the same manner as the
former ones, and that Mr. Milverne, had slipped a letter into his hand
unperceived. This he gave to me, and I eagerly opened and read it. All my fears
for Mr. Milverne were realised; and I four (...) his situation, by his own
description, to be just what I expected. In short, this intelligence, added to
what I had seen the night before -- the idea of the count's death, and my own
situation -- drove me almost to distraction, as my behavior plainly showed. I
drank freely at supper; and you must remember my frantic expressions,
occasioned by the fumes of wine, and a distressed imagination.

"We heard a groan from those folding doors: I immediately ran to them: Leonard
was unable to hold me back, but followed me. I pushed them open, and saw, by
the means of a flash of lightning, a figure, of a deadly pale, stand in the
center of the apartment. The sight of it was but momentary; for all again being
dark, except from the lights in this room, it seemed to vanish at the further
end. Leonard, who was close to me, likewise saw the same; and it was this which
occasioned those exclamations of horror, which we thought your insensibility
had prevented you from hearing.

"I found myself, however, greatly mistaken, when Leonard informed me, the next
day but one, that you had questioned him on the subject. I now told him, if you
made any further inquiries, to say that I had given him positive orders to be
silent on the topic. Lord Milverne had mentioned in his letter, that, through a
fortunate and unforeseen cirumstance, Felix would be again at the same place
the next day: he also hinted he had faint hopes of gaining over two of the
banditti to his interest.

"Accordingly the following day, in the afternoon, the time appointed, Leonard
set off, and found Felix, as he expected, with two others. They exchanged notes
without being perceived; but Leonard could observe the master of the shop, and
the two men, by their looks, seemed to wonder at seeing him just at the time of
their arrival. I had ordered him to read the letter before he returned to the
abbey, that if it was necessary to procure any articles more than we had got,
he might purchase them, and bring them with him: he did so, and they were
carried unopened to my chamber. I was surprised to find a dark lantern, some
wine, and eatables. The letter, however, which he gave me, soon explained this:
his lordship informed me in it, that he had brought over two of the men
entirely to his wishes, who had led that way of life but a short time, and who
entered into it as the only means to avoid starving. Being informed by him, it
was in his power to make them comfortable for life, could they aid his escape,
they had both sworn to serve him to the utmost of their power. He added, that
one of these men and Felix would be at the abbey gates a little before
midnight; Felix being, for the first time, suffered to go out in search of
adventures with this man. The meaning of this visit was, to consult on the most
likely scheme of escaping from the robbers, as too frequent attendance at the
market might excite their suspicion.

"I must own I was not by any means pleased with this plan: I considered that
these two men might act in this manner merely to fathom the inclinations of
their new brother; and, in that case, our residence would be discovered to the
villains also. There was now, however, no alternative; and Leonard attended at
the outside gates exactly at the time."

Matilda here well recollected the surprise and terror she had suffered at
seeing them enter the court, while she was watching for the light in the west
tower.

"He having conducted them to the parlour, I descended; and we began a
consultation on the most probable means of effecting lord Milverne's escape
from the banditti. Nothing that was proposed seemed to carry with it hopes of
success owing to the vigilance of the robbers, who, as was before observed,
detained one as a hostage for the return of the other. In short, we were not
able to come to any determination; and our little party broke up without having
agreed on any plan whatever. Leonard again conducted them out of the abbey, and
we retired to our beds.

"The following day but one, you questioned Leonard again; and, according to my
orders, he gave no satisfactory answer, but was greatly suprised to hear your
determination of leaving the abbey. This he communicated to me; and you, no
doubt, well remember our conversation on the subject, which ended with your
consenting to continue a fortnight longer: and, if the mysteries were not
explained in that interval, you were immediately to repair to the convent of
N**** in France. I mentioned the appearance of another person, to make you
alter your resolution, hoping by that time to have invented some contrivance
for the release of lord Milverne.

"Leonard had, during this time, brought me word that the same visit would be
repeated at the abbey again at midnight. They were punctual at the hour; and he
accordingly conducted them to the parlour, where I again attended.

"The only method that could now be thought of, was by the application of an
herb, which, if taken to a certain quantity, would oc^asion a death-like sleep,
and was similar to the Turkish poppies, though the juice was not of so
dangerous a nature. This idea was suggested by Uloff, the robber who
accompanied Felix. He observed the root might be easily procured, and that, by
the help of a little art, and this properly applied, the robbers might be led
to believe lord Milverne dead; which would at once effect his escape; for it
was a general rule among the banditti, to inter one another immediately in a
vault which stood near their cave -- from which he might with ease extricate
himself, the coffins never being fastened down.

"Strange as this thought was, there seemed no other more likely to succeed;
and I found that his lordship had agreed to carry this plan into execution,
provided it met with our approbation, and Leonard could procure the herb.

"As Leonard was conducting them across the court when leaving the abbey, the
figure again appeared in the west tower; which greatly astonished them all.

"The next morning you informed me of the human form and lamp which you had
seen reflected in the glass that stood in your chamber. This account, added to
the strange voice which we both heard, made me resolve to watch in the west
tower; which I accordingly did.

"The same night, Felix and three others of the banditti (they having brought
over one more to their interest) came to the abbey, unknown to either Leonard
or me, to see if we had got the herb, as they were in hopes the next day to
have a good opportunity of carrying their scheme into execution. They knocked
at the outer gate, then burst it open, and proceeded directly to the parlour.
These were the persons whom we mistook for the officers of justice, as their
arrival was entirely unexpected, and neither Leonard nor myself had a sight of
them. Their intentions, therefore, proved fruitless; and they left the abbey,
unable to find us.

"The next day Leonard attended at the place of rendezvous, and found Felix,
who communicated to him their adventures the night before; and, having given
him the herb, Leonard understood they intended yesterday for the trial of its
effect.

"This was accordingly done; and by the effects of it, and the help of Felix
and his assistants, his lordship was shown to the whole of the banditti, as a
corpse. A coffin was therefore prepared, and in the evening he was conveyed to
the pedestal, and buried with the usual ceremony; one of the robbers being
habited like a monk."

The mystery of the strange funeral which Matilda saw was now entirely
elucidated. -- Her brother continued --

"After the interment, the company returned to the cave; but Felix and one of
the robbers were fixed on to go in search of adventures. They immediately,
therefore, repaired to the vault, and conducted lord Milverne here; after which
both joined their comrades as usual. But his lordship means to go today to a
principal magistrate some few miles from hence, and give an account of these
depredators on the public. The whole of them will consequently be seized: when
Felix and the three converts to their cause will be selected from the banditti,
and the remainder left to take the due course of the law."

Thus Alfred Maserini ended his narrative. But, though Matilda had heard many
circumstances of a strange nature explained, which had caused her considerable
uneasiness, yet nothing had been said to clear up, in a satisfactory manner,
those astonishing events which seemed in every degree to confirm the report of
the abbey being haunted.

These ideas had not crossed her mind but a few minutes, before Alfred informed
her that there was yet another tale to be related by one whom he expected every
moment: "And I am certain," continued he, "that his story will clear away every
mist of doubtful horror concerning this building, and obliterate every
superstitious thought, by a clear elucidation of the mysteries that encompass
it."

In about a quarter of an hour the folding doors again opened, and Father Peter
stood before them. Agnes, Matilda, and even Leonard and lord Milverne, were
astonished how he could enter from that part.

"According to my promise last night," said the hermit, addressing himself to
Matilda, "I now, as you perceive, attend you here, fair lady."

Alfred's countenance was now transformed to the gaze of surprise. "I find,"
said he smiling to his sister, "we have also to expect explanations from you,
Matilda."

"Indeed," answered she, "the task is soon performed."

She then related to them her finding the manuscript, and her journey on that
account to Father Peter's cave, with the reasons for not giving it her brother
the next morning.

Alfred's and the hermit's countenances glowed with pleasure at the mention of
such a paper having been found.

"No doubt," exclaimed the latter, "this will be a principal proof against the
murderer of your father."

Matilda immediately produced it, and it was read by lord Milverne aloud. It is
impossible to describe the emotions of Alfred Maserini, as he listened to the
distracted words of his wretched parent: suffice it to say, they were equal to
his sister's at her first perusal of the parchment.

The party being in some measure composed, Father Peter was requested by Alfred
to relate those circumstances concerning Grasville Abbey, which had for years
occasioned the most horrid reports to be spread, and worked with terrific
sensations on the feelings even of those whose good sense had before taught
them to despise every superstitious idea.

"I shall, by your leave," answered the old man, "begin from the most early
period of my life, and proceed gradually through every event; which will all
tend to now, that, however strange the ways of Providence may appear to mortal
eyes, yet in a due course of time they (...) be productive of the greatest
happiness and good to those who are deserving the protection of the Supreme
^^ing,"

All, being seated, listened with attention (...) venera^^^ speaker.

CHAPTER. XXXVII. ELUCIDATIONS CONTINUED.
-- Something I Would unfold;
-- for something still there lies
In heaven's dark volume, which I read through mists.
DRYD. OEDIP.
Good unexpected, evil unforeseen,
Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene:
Some, raised aloft, come tumbling down amain,
Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again.
DRYD. VIR^.
THE HERMIT'S TALE.
"BORN to a splendid fortune, and brought up in all the elegance of an Italian
noble, I attained my nineteenth year. My father, the baron Sampieno, was
advised to send me to Madrid, not only to finish a particular part of my
education, but for change of air, my health being in that state which gave them
serious alarm.

"At the seminary to which I was sent, another young Italian, of my own age,
was also placed by his friends. His name was D'Ollifont: and our manners being
greatly alike, gay, volatile, and dissipated, it was not to be wondered at,
that a considerable intimacy took place between us: -- in short, we plunged
together into every folly and vice which that gay and voluptuous city offered
to our view; and, neither of us being under the strict rules observed by the
general scholars, we had greater opportunities to follow every wild
inclination, and gratify every wish we could form.

"The consequence of our rash behavior was, a complaint of the governor to
each of our parents, which gave them the greatest alarm and uneasiness -- A
considerable decrease was, in consequence, made in our allowances, and a severe
reprimand sent us, for conduct which threatened, in some degree, to bring
disgrace on our family. The reproof, though to both exceedingly mortifying, was
not so distressing to us as the curtailment of our salaries, which would
prevent our appearing among the extravagant society we had become acquainted
with, as we must be ridiculed by those who had more to expend in the luxuries
of the place.

"As I was sitting, the day after I had received this information from Italy,
meditating on my uncomfortable situation, D'Ollifont entered, and told me of
his having received similar intelligence.

"Do not give way to despair,' said he; 'but let us take some method to
overcome the misfortune.'

"I at first conceived he intended to write conciliatory letters of repentance;
and, I must own, my proud soul did not altogether approve such a manner of
proceeding; I therefore remained silent. But he soon convinced me I had
mistaken his ideas, by informing me, in plain terms, he intended to commence
gambler, and persuading me to follow the same course. 'I have not a doubt,' he
continued, 'but I shall amply make amends for what I have lost in my quarterly
allowance.'

"If I disliked the idea of making concession, how much more did I abhor the
thought of entering into so mean and despicable a profession as D'Ollifont had
proposed! I was, indeed, greatly shocked to find that he had such intentions.
-- I expostulated with him, on the disgrace, the infamy, of such a character,
and attempted, to the utmost of my ability, to paint in their true colors the
mean and pitiful shifts they were obliged to have recourse to on many
occasions. I was, however, disappointed in my endeavors to alarm his pride,
and make him give up so disgraceful a determination. In short, we parted in
enmity.

"He soon after began this direct course to destruction, and in a little time
became connected with a gang who were well known for the defrauds of which they
had been guilty. Necessity, for the sake of my own reputation, now obliged me
to shun one whose principles and morals were universally known and condemned.
The sacrifice was greater than I expected; but at length, with some resolution,
I got the better of my feelings, and enjoyed considerable happiness in the
thought of the danger I had escaped.

"My disposition became now more settled, and my manners entirely changed, from
the wild career of youth to the more thoughtful deportment of manhood. The
consequence of this alteration was a thorough reconciliation with my friends,
and a greater supply of money than I had ever received before.

"It is from this only that I can account for the deadly hate which took
possession of D'Ollifont, against one whom he had at a former period called his
friend, and who still would have done any thing in his power to have reclaimed
him from so contemptible a mode of living -- which it might now be properly
called; his father having died, and left him but a small legacy: the bulk of
his fortune he disposed of to a distant relation.

"Not long after this event, I had the misfortune to lose my parent, and, by
his death, found myself in possession of his title, and the whole of his
property, which amounted to a considerable sum -- there being no other
children, and his wife having died when I was very young.

"My affections had for some time been fixed on a lovely object, who had
resided with her mother, near the academy where I was placed Beauty was her
least ornament; an amiable disposition, added to an excellent understanding,
made her, in my eyes, an object worthy to be the wife of a man even in a higher
situation than myself, though she had no fortune.

"After an interval of a few months from my father's death, I had the exquisite
happiness to receive my charming Cassandra as my own. Spain was her native
country; and, being unwilling to quit it, I resolved to acquiesce with her
desire of settling there, as I had now no particular friends or relations in
Italy. Seventeen years were spent in a round of happiness, which no mortal
could enjoy in a greater degree than myself. One girl and two boys were the
fruits of our constant love; both of the latter died when infants, and the care
of the education of the former was mine and my Cassandra's chief employment. I
need not tell you how we loved her -- your own ideas must paint to you that
affection which possessed our breasts for this remaining pledge of our felicity
-- when we saw in her every grace, and every virtue which could adorn a female.
Alas! those scenes of bliss were not to last for ever, but after this period
were soon to be changed for misery, anguish, and a series of years clouded with
glooms of sorrow and adversity, never to be erased."

The hermit shed a few tears at the recollection, and was under the necessity
of pausing for some minutes, to compose himself.

"I had never seen D'Ollifont from some little time before my marriage till the
time I am speaking of. An interval of near eighteen years had elapsed: but yet
his features were well known to me, though the greatest alteration was visible
in his whole person. I now beheld him in the utmost distress, having, as he
said, been obliged to fly from that part of Spain, where he had remained for a
considerable time in the utmost disgrace, and in a state little better than
starving. He related to me how truly he repented of the vicious life he had
led, and that his only wish was now to procure, in some way, an honest
subsistence by his own industry. I immediately offered him my house, as an
asylum for the present, which he thankfully received, and lived with us after
the manner of my own family. During this time he behaved in a most pleasing and
insinuative manner to all; and there was not even one in the family but greatly
respected and admired D'Ollifont.

"I rejoiced much in the reformation that had been effected in him, and
determined to spare no expense or interest in the procurement of an office for
him, on the emoluments of which he might live comfortable and happy.

"Circumstances continued in this situation for some little time; nor had any
place become vacant, which I thought worthy to present to him: he, however,
still remained in my house, and every day gained more general esteem.

"One evening, having walked in my garden rather later than usual, I cut across
an unfrequented path to my house: on one side of it was a thick grove of trees,
the foliage of which entirely prevented any thing from being seen behind. It
was a spot seldom intruded upon, insomuch that in some parts it was nearly
impassable. I had got about the middle of this place, when I heard D'Ollifont's
voice mention with vehemence the name of my daughter. Though rather surprised
at his manner, yet it awakened in me no suspicion; and I was just going to hail
him, when words of a dreadful nature caught my ear.

"This night,' said he to the person who was with him (a man of infamous
character, and who had formerly been his servant) 'must she be secured. -- You
are sure you well know the place?'

"Oh!' returned the other, 'let me alone for that! -- and, egad! you have found
out an excellent spot; for, were the lady Lucretia's cries to be as loud as the
town-bell, the devil take me if any one can hear her but those who are with
you! You will excuse me though, signor: but I think your manner of proceeding
is ridiculous: why not marry her? for then, some time or other, you may stand a
chance to come in for some of the baron's money.'

"Curses on himself and money!' exclaimed the villain: 'I could have plundered
him of that long ago; but the loss of it, as I told you before, would not make
him half miserable enough: it is revenge I thirst for, not gain; nor have I so
long played the hypocrite with him, but to invent some scheme that may at once
blast his happiness. My hatred commenced against him when he shrunk from the
proposals I made, and turned sage moralist: but it has, if possible, increased
tenfold since I have seen him flourish for years in prosperity and honor,
while I am doomed to live on the narrow limits of a small income. You may say
he acts nobly now, and he has it in his power to be of considerable service to
me; but my proud soul is ready to burst every hour I am looked at as a
dependent on his bounty; and I am continually become more anxious to work his
downfall.'

"I heard no more, but trembled with the emotions of horror and passion. A
wretch, whom I had sheltered under my roof with the truest friendship -- to
plan the dishonor of my child, was too much -- I unfortunately had a loaded
pistol in my belt; and, having torn away the boughs which parted us, I stood
before the astonished roptile.

"He trembled, and turned pale, as did Eburne, who was with him; but the
recollection of the former still remained, to invent one of the most damnable
contrivances man could be the author of.

"Villain!' I exclaimed, and held the pistol to his breast, 'dost thou not
deserve to receive death at the hands of one whom, having the greatest
obligations to him, thou would crush to the earth and, fiend-like, grin at
the misery thou had brought upon himself and family?'

"During the time I uttered these words, a servant from the house appeared in
sight, though not near enough to hear what passed.

"I mean not,' I continued, seeing him shrink from me, 'to assassinate you.
Doubtless, you have weapons, stand, therefore, and defend yourself.'

"I have none,' he cried: 'my life is in your power.'

"Dastardly wretch!' exclaimed I.

"At that moment the servant came up: he was sent from the house to seek me. --
Unfortunately, the last few words of D'Ollifont, with my answer, was the only
part of the conversation he heard. When, how was I astonished, to hear
D'Ollifont exclaim, 'I will die soon than commit such a defraud!' at the same
instant producing a forged note on the bank of Venice. 'Here is a man' (said he
to the servant, pointing to Eburne) 'who can witness that your master just now
threatened my life, unless I consented to be a partner with him in passing
these false notes.'

"It is difficult to say which stood the greatest statue of surprise and
horror, the servant or myself; and it is probable, had I not been prevented by
him, I should have taken away my own life.

"Being at length more composed, I reproached D'Ollifont in the bitterest terms
for his perfidy, and walked forward to my house; but had not entered it above
an hour before I found myself arrested on his accusation, and was that night,
though all my friends interfered, dragged from my wife and child, to experience
the miseries of a gaol.

"Picture to yourself my situation: the night was spent in distracted ravings,
and the morning brought a visit from my Cassandra and her daughter, which in
some measure restored my scattered senses; but it was only to experience pangs
the most poignant and severe.

"D'Ollifont, and the wretch who was with him, swore to my having stopped the
former in the private walk of my own garden, when by himself; Eburne being then
at some distance, though near enough to observe all that passed: that first,
with fair words, I strove to persuade him to be an accomplice with myself in a
forgery on the bank of Venice, and gave him a false bill, informing him that I
had many more of the same sort; but that, finding him continue obstinate in his
refusal, I had proceeded to extremities, and, placing a pistol to his breast,
threatened to deprive him of life, should he refuse; that my intentions were
frustrated by Eburne, who, hearing these words, immediately came forward.

"My own servant was examined, and confessed, that when at some distance, he
saw me hold a pistol to D'Ollifont's breast; and, at his arrival at the spot,
heard him say he was unarmed; and that I only answered, 'Dastardly wretch!'

"It was now the general conjecture that this affair would touch my life; at
all events I was doomed to a public trial. It was in vain I pleaded my own
tale, and the reasons for my behavior: to every one, except those to whom I
was very well known, it carried in it something romantic that D'Ollifont should
wish to debauch my daughter, which was sure to end in his ruin, without even
one chance to be benefited by the crime.

"During the interval between my imprisonment and the day of trial, D'Ollifont
was sent for to his relation, the count Maserini, in Italy, whose health was in
such a state that his life was even despaired of, owing to the false report of
his children's death. He returned, however, at the time my trial was expected
to be brought on, the possessor of his uncle's estates and wealth.

"In the time of his absence from Spain, a number of false bills, the same as
D'Ollifont had produced, were found, by the information of one of my own
servants, buried in a small chest, near a spot I used much to frequent in my
garden: this fresh proof, which I had every reason to suppose to be planned by
some scheme in which the villain Eburne was concerned, and who, I have no
doubt, bribed my servant, added greatly to the horrid accusation against me. I
had, therefore, entirely made up my mind to expect no mercy, and resolved to
prepare myself in that manner which would give me a degree of fortitude in my
last moments, that should impress every one with some ideas of my innocence.

"The night preceding the awful day which was to decide my fate, my
prison-doors flew open, and count D'Ollifont stood before me. He started back
some steps, at my wretched appearance; and a convulsive trembling showed that
his conscience touched him to the soul.

"I fixed my eyes on him with a look which seemed to add to his confusion, and
was going to upbraid him, when he interrupted me. 'Hold!' he cried: 'I have
even a greater power over you than you suppose. Last night your daughter
attempted to plunge a poignard in my breast; and there is little doubt that a
similar sentence to that which passes death upon you, will do the same by
Lucretia.'

"I heard no more, but fainted before him. The keeper of the prison was called,
and after some little time I recovered. We were again left alone.

"D'Ollifont now told me there was yet one way to save both myself and child.
The conditions he proposed were for me to go to Italy, and by a sacred oath
promise to perform some services he should have occasion for. 'And I.' he
continued, 'will swear, in the same manner, that your family shall go with you,
and your fortune in every respect be secured.'

"Was it true that my daughter had made an attempt upon his life, I was certain
the laws of Spain must condemn her to death. Had my own existence been only at
stake, it is probable I should have scorned the villain's offer; knowing my
Cassandra and her child were provided for by money I had placed in the hands of
a friend, so as to keep them above the frowns of fortune, in point of pecuniary
concerns. But the idea of my Lucretia being cut off by an ignominious death,
occasioned most probably by love for me, in her revenge against my bitterest
enemy, cut me to the soul; and almost any alternative would have been accepted
to save her. I demanded, however, the nature of those services, conceiving it
might be some crime he dared not to undertake himself, and therefore had
pitched on me to be the perpetrator of the deed.

"He swore, by the most sacred oath, that my conjectures were ill founded.
Still my soul revolted at the idea of submitting to the villain in so
despicable a manner, which would in the general opinion give testimony of my
guilt. I refused the offer, and he left the apartment in a rage. The next
object which presented itself was my wife in a state of distraction; my child
-- my Lucretia -- was in the same prison, and sure to fall a victim to her
rashness.

"My situation was little short of madness: I raved, but it was useless, and
could not save her. Yet a way had been shown me to preserve her; and I had
refused it. The keeper was called; I sent him to D'Ollifont; the wretch
appeared, and received, with a contemptuous smile, my acquiescence to his
proposals."

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
"THE proceedings, against me and Lucretia," continued the hermit, "were now
immediately stopped. I took the oath required: no one was found to appear
against us on the day of trial: and the same night I embraced my wife and
daughter in my own house.

"But my joy at the event was considerably damped by the general behavior of
my acquaintance, who seemed to shun both myself and family: in short, it was
plain the method I had taken to evade public investigation, was in some degree
known; and, as I had before conceived, it was, in the common opinion, a
confirmation of my conscious guilt. This, at least, reconciled me to one
circumstance, which I was bound to perform -- that of leaving Spain immediately.

"Alas! this country (where I had spent years of felicity -- where I had been
universally respected and esteemed by every rank of people) was now become
hateful to me; since almost every countenance seemed to look toward me with a
gloomy eye of suspicion, even where I had before been welcomed, whenever I
appeared, with smiles of friendship and confidence. My God! what were my
sensations! Sensible of my own innocence, ten thousand deaths (could I myself
alone have suffered) would have been less torturing to me than the present
ignominy. But when I saw Lucretia bow to a young lady in the street where we
lived, as she pensively sat in the window between myself and wife, and saw the
salute contemptuously smiled at, and passed without being returned (while she
and her mother would burst into tears, and move from the spot) -- then would I
utter to myself -- 'Better, had I seen my child executed with me, in the view
of a gazing multitude, declaring my innocence, than thus to be doomed to shrink
under the wounds of blasted fame and supposed infamy.'

"My affairs were very soon settled; and, with my wife and daughter (attended
by one man and a woman-servant) I set out for Genoa, where, according to
appointment, I was to meet the author of all my miseries. Our journey was
necessarily slow, on account of the ill health of my Cassandra, who had
suffered so severe a shock from our late misfortunes, that I was under the
greatest alarm for her life.

"After some little time we arrived at the place of our temporary destination,
and applying to a person to whom I had a recommendation, he informed me count
D'Ollifont had been waiting for me two days, and that I might see him that
night ar a certain place to which he would conduct me. 'It is not publicly
known,' said he, 'that he is in this country; consequently secresy is required.'

"At my return to the inn I found my wife had been taken more violently ill
than usual, insomuch that Lucretia had sent for a physician, who had just
entered the house. I asked his opinion on leaving the chamber: he declared her
disorder to be a total decline, but did not then apprehend any danger. Toward
the latter part of the day she grew better: but I resolved not to mention my
intended visit; and I contrived an excuse, therefore, for my departure at the
hour I had fixed.

"It was some time after the close of the evening, and nearly dark, when I met
the man whom I had before seen in the morning. He told me to follow him. I
rather hesitated. 'You have no reason for alarm,' said he, observing me
attentively.

"I had a brace of pistols in my pocket; and, after a few moments of
consideration, did as he desired.

"He first led me down a passage of considerable length, at the bottom of which
he halted. Having produced a large key, he opened a small door, which
discovered a gloomy Gothic hall, lighted by a lamp, which was suspended from
the top. It was supported by heavy Tuscan columns; and, in different niches,
were placed in order several suits of armor. At the further end was a flight
of steps, on the top of which were a heavy pair of folding doors, arched over
in the antique style above, and secured in front by a grate-work of iron.

"My guide, when he got to the center of this place, seemed to fall back a few
paces, as if thoughtful; and then, holding up the lantern he had in his hand,
looked me full in the face. This behavior I did not by any means like: it had
the appearance of assassination, and the gloom of the hall encouraged the idea.
I immediately drew one of my pistols from my pocket. 'No treachery!' I
exclaimed; 'or, by heavens, you die!'

"He seemed disconcerted. 'By all that is sacred, I mean none; but only wished
to be certain I was right in the person I am conducting.'

"'It Is well!' I answered: 'proceed.'

"He did so and led me up the steps; then, taking from his pocket another key,
he applied it to the lock of the iron grating. It required great exertions to
turn it; but it at length yielded to the force, and divided in the middle, The
door now only remained.

"Put up your pistol, signor:' said he: 'you have nothing to fear.'

"This request I positively refused. He then blew a small horn, which he had in
his belt; when the folding doors immediately flew open, and two blacks with
drawn fabres stood before us.

"A voice from the inner part now uttered -- 'Admit.' They directly drew back,
and we passed through the entrance. The doors instantly closed, with some
noise; and the blacks resumed their station before them.

"My guide walked forward, and I followed with the pistol still in my hand.

"It was a spacious apartment, though gloomy; and fitted up with some degree
^el^^ance. A few wax tapers were placed round the walls; but the light they
gave was dim and uncertain. In the middle was a long table, covered with green
cloth; and on it were spread various papers, pens, ink, and a few books. A
company of persons were seated round it, of about twelve or thirteen, and one
at the head of the table seemed a kind of president in the assembly. Their
cloaks were all muffled round them; and a black feather, which each wore in his
hat, hung over their faces, and added to the solemnity of their dark,
lengthened visages. He at the head, I however observed, wore a white one.

"As I advanced, this person spoke; and I recognized the wretch D'Ollifont. He
asked why I measured my steps so cautiously.

"Because,' I answered in a firm tone, 'I am afraid of treachery.'

"Surely the fear is needless,' said he: have I not sworn --?'

"I interrupted him -- 'Mention it not, D'Ollofont; you have sworn too much.'

"He seemed rather confused; and I could perceive his gloomy countenance frown
for the moment, though he wished to smile. 'Take a (...) he cried: we are all
friends. Nerone, help the signor to a glass of wine.'

"This man, who was in waiting, directly ran to a large side-board, covered
with (...) and wines. He handed the glass: I refused it. D'Ollifont e^^reated
me to take it: I determinately answered, 'No'.

"To business,' said he.

"With all my heart,' I answered. 'But, mark no count! strictly adhere to the
oath I have taken'; no^ in your request infringe on the la^s of general
honestly, morality, or humanity; for on these conditions only will I agree,'

"I mean no otherwise,' said D'Ollifont: 'be judge yourself. I have an estate
situated near Montferrat; and on it stands the residence of my (...) uncle,
Orlando count Maserini. The building is well known by the name of Grasville
Abbey. This, among other properties, was bequeathed to me as his sole (...) his
two children having died in France. Now the country people round this spot for
many miles, have encouraged ideas, from the gloomy appearance and Gothic
structure of this ancient pile, that it is haunted; and it is actually
necessary, for the preservation of the furniture, papers, and other valuables,
of considerable amount, that these suspicions should be kept alive; which will
more effectually prevent intrusion or robbery than any other method we can put
into execution; the peasants of that part being a wild, untractable kind of
people, and little better than general depredators on the public.

"You perhaps may wonder why we do not remove these articles; but my uncle's
will particularly requests every individual atom that was at his death, in the
abbey, should remain there, and only be taken from it as my necessity may
require. Now there are various deeds and memorandums, relative to his different
possessions, that we may never have the least occasion to disturb; and which,
consequently, will be open to the violence of any one whose curiosity or
villainy may prompt him to use force in entering the abbey. The service that I
have to request from you is, the performance of some trifling ceremony, with a
lamp, in the external part of the building, at night, either by passing the
casements with it in your hand, or fixing it for short periods of time at the
different windows. This will be an innocent means of preventing invasion; and,
by constantly visiting the abbey, your scruples will be satisfied i^ point of
the extent of your oath.

"Your fortune will support you so as to enjoy the superfluities of life; and
your residence may be (...) at any part near the abbey. But one condition,
continued he, goes further -- that if at any time, though many years hence, you
discover persons to enter the abbey, and reside there, without notice from me,
you shall immediately take every means in your power to raise in them alarms of
supernatural appearances, and by that means drive them from the spot. For your
better convenience, there is a cave on one side of the wood which surrounds the
abbey, that is never intruded upon, nor indeed hardly known by any one in the
place: -- you may go to it of an evening; and from thence proceed, through a
subterraneous passage, to the building. If, after two years' constant
performance of these injunctions, no interruption is perceived, you will not
then be confined to the usual ceremony; but yet it is requested that a
continual watch shall be kept upon it; and, as I before observed, if intruded
on, even fifty years to come, and both of us living, every means is to be used
in the abovementioned manner, to terrify all visitors to a removal.'

"I must confess, this request, strange as it was, seemed far more agreeable to
me than what I expected; and I conceived that, were there any villainy lurking
under it, I might discover the source, and, without going from my oath, be of
considerable service to the injured; and, one time or other, have it in my
power to retaliate on D'Ollifont. I requested that the agreement should be
drawn up, on paper, that I might adhere to it, in time to come, without an idea
of having forgotten its tendency.

"This was agreed to, and in the course of an hour it was finished. I carefully
read the paper, and found it exactly corresponded with what D'Ollifont had
said, and then again swore, as I had before promised to do, that I would
punctually fulfill it. As we were some miles from Montferrat, it was settled I
should meet one of the company at a certain spot near the abbey, that day
fortnight, who was to conduct me to it through the passage before mentioned,
show the cave, etc. and give a (...) instructions I wished to receive.
D'Ollifont mentioned that (...) leave Italy on the next day, and return to
Spain. As I was leaving the apartment, following my guide, he uttered, as if in
some measure affected, "Adieu!'

"I immediately turned round, and, with a piercing look of horror and contempt,
answered, 'Adieu! I hope, for ever.'

"He seemed chagrined, and looked as if suprised I was not more in awe at such
a place. He again seated himself. We passed the blacks -- the door closed after
us -- and my guide locked the grates. We then left the hall; and, that door
being also locked, I soon found myself at the end of the place where we
entered: -- my companion then wished me a good night, and we parted.

"A heavy load now seemed to have fallen from me; for the expectation of what
D'Ollifont's request might be, had driven me almost to madness; and though even
now I detested the meanness I had submitted to, yet, in some degree, I was
reconciled, when recollection whispered me that I had saved the life of my
Lucretia, the beloved child of my heart.

"Pleased with the ideas of the pleasure I should convey to Cassandra in
relating the service I was to perform (her dread of it having been equal to my
own) I shortly found myself at the inn where we resided. I soon made my way to
our apartments, in one of which I found the womanservant, Stella, in tears,
mixing a draught: I involuntarily exclaimed, 'How is your lady?'

"Her answer hardly articulate, pronounced 'Dying my lord.'

"I heard to more, but flew, half frantic, to her chamber, where (oh! sight of
woe!) on the ^ed was laid my (...) just (...) ^^^nting sit, her (...) by
Lucretia, and (...) physician (...) melancholy posture) on the other side. I
entered time enough to receive her last breath; and, dropping on my knees, I
clasped her hands, while tears flowed in abundance. She knew me (though she had
been insensible for nearly an hour) and exclaimed, 'My husband, the Almighty
aid thee!' Then, turning her eyes toward her daughter, she seemed inwardly to
supplicate heaven in her behalf; and, heaving a soft sigh, expired in my arms.
Lucretia fainted, and was supported by Stella, who had just brought the
draught, while I remained lost for some time in gloomy sorrow and stupidity.

"At length, turning to the physician, I desired to know why he had flattered
me with hopes that she might live for a length of time. He only answered by
shaking his head, and saying the disorder had come to a crisis sooner than he
expected. He left the inn, and I (having ordered my daughter to be put to bed,
and committed the care of the funeral to my confidential servant Jasper)
retired to my own room, overwhelmed with the most poignant grief.

"It is impossible to describe the anguish suffered by myself and child on this
mournful event: I shall therefore draw a veil over the scene, a recollection of
which is even now almost too much for me."

The hermit here was constrained to make a pause of some few minutes, while he
paid a tributary tear to the memory of so beloved a wife.

"Suffice it to say," continued he, "in the course of a week she was interred
near the place where we then resided, and I tore myself from the spot after a
few days, with the two servants, and my now only remaining comfort, my dear
Lucretia.

"After a long day's journey, a prey to the deepest melancholy, we arrived at
Montferrat, and stopped at a tolerably-built cottage; the owner of which,
fortunately, had an inclination, and also convenience, to accommodate us with
board and lodging for some weeks. The situation suited me for the present, as
it was extremely retired.

"On the night and hour appointed, accompanied by Jasper, whom I was permitted
to acquaint with the circumstances I was involved in, I attended the place of
rendezvous, where I was to be met by the person deputed by D'Ollifont.

"We were both punctual; and, as I was still fearful of treachery from so vile
a character, both myself and servant were armed. He was alone: his figure,
which I could now more fully observe, was noble and majestic; his countenance
very handsome, though there was a fierceness in his eyes, added to the turn of
his dark brows, which made it in some respects terrific.

"Follow me,' said he, 'and I will conduct you to the place you have before
heard of.'

"He led us to the cave I now inhabit. We entered, and he showed me the parts
which you have already seen; but after some little time he opened a concealed
door, that discovered a small room. From hence we descended, by a trap artfully
jointed to the floor, a number of steps, at the bottom of which was an arched
subterraneour passage, entirely dark: our guide, however, was provided with a
lamp, by which he lighted another place against the wall. We followed him along
this place for so considerable a length of time that I knew not how far he
might have taken us, and halted at the idea.

"Continue your ^ace,' said he, 'and we shall soon be at the end of our
journey.'

"His word^ were true; for, after a few windings, it terminated at a small
door, hardly large enough to admit one person: this we passed, and ascended a
flight of stonestairs. At the top we entered a small subterraneous room, in
which was a stool, a table, some eatables and wine; with a bed, which showed
(though empty now) it was daily occupied. Our guide pressed against a spring,
in a manner which he particularly explained; and, by a kind of mechanism, aided
by clock-work placed at the further part of the apartment, a square of about
five feet of the cieling above gradually fell within two feet of the floor on
which we stood: this I jumped upon, and, by a second pressure of the foot on a
certain part, it rose in the same manner that it fell, and closed with equal
nicety; by which means I found myself in that room opposite to the one we are
now in.

"The night was exceeding gloomy: considerable claps of thunder followed each
other (though they seemed at a distance) and faint flashes of lightning darted
on the casements. Both my servant and conductor were soon with me, by the same
means that I had ascended; and we all three proceeded through this room to the
hall, where we were met by a mean, meagre-looking fellow with also a lamp in
his hand, that reflected on a countenance I did not by any means approve.

"It was now late, and a more than common oppression seemed to weigh on my
spirits. Our guide saluted this man. 'Enuchio,' said he, 'has there been any
interruption since the count last saw you?

"None, signor,' he answered, 'and I have regularly performed my duty with this
lamp every night.'

"That Is well,' returned the other; 'lead us to the west 'ower.'

"Jasper now whispered to me, 'Be careful, my lord: we know not who may be
concealed there.'

"I strove to quiet his apprehensions by a nod of confidence, though I felt
considerable alarm myself. There was, however, no alternative, and we followed
in silence. I understood from the conversation of Enuchio and the other, as we
were proceeding to the west tower, that the former had attended at the close of
every evening, to perform the ceremony now invested on me.

"In passing through one of the chambers, Jasper (who was behind, and partly in
the dark) ran against a suit of armor that was placed there, with several
implements of war, some of which are now in one of the rooms under the upper
apartments. The crash it made in falling was horrible; and it had nearly
destroyed my faithful attendant; he, however, fortunately escaped, without any
material blow.

"Enuchio said, when we entered the chamber above that he thought he could see,
through one of the casements, by the frequent flashes of lightning, some person
on that side of the building. He accordingly showed his light, and, after a few
minutes, passed the casement with the lamp, in his hand. Having looked over his
room, we descended to the lower part, where we heard several blows against the
outer gates, and many efforts made to force them open."

It is natural to suppose that this was the very night (...) which the late
Percival Maserini, father of Alfred and Matilda, first discovered a light and
figure in the abbey; which made him at the time (distracted with his own ideas)
attempt, by force, to enter the building.

CHAPTER. XXXIX.
"WE were all surprised at the noise: at length signor Ranolpho (which I now
found was the name of our guide) said he supposed it proceeded from the
curiosity of some travelers who were passing that way. -- I cannot say I was
by any means well satisfied with this conjecture; but I made no answer.

"After having received many instructions from him, concerning the different
pieces of mechanism contrived in this building, I remarked, with a look of some
astonishment, that it was to me amazing, count D'Ollifont should have put
himself to such expense and trouble, when the exertions of the civil power,
under just claims, might have answered the purposes he wished to accomplish.

"Ranolpho seemed confused: after a pause he answered, 'Your observation is
just; but were the application made to the superior power of Italy, the
curiosity of the peasantry would be still more considerably heightened; and I
have doubts whether the vigilance of the most scrutinizing persons could
protect this place from their invasion. It also would gain count D'Ollifont a
bad name, which might, through their ignorance, occasion suspicions and remarks
the most injurious to his character. Besides,' he continued, 'the chief part of
these articles of machinery were erected many years back, when this structure
was inhabited by the monks, they made use of them to terrify persons of
different sentiments in religious points to their own way of thinking, whom the
chance of war had made their prisoners, and who accordingly were confined in
their own abbey. By these arts, the victims of their superstition were taught
to believe the holy fathers worked miracles by their faith.'

"There was a kind of equivocation in this speech, which I by no means liked,
though I forbore to make any reply. What he said, however, concerning several
of the traps, etc. being formed at a distant period of time, I found to be
true, by the general appearance of the age of the workmanship; though there was
not a doubt but they had lately been repaired and put in order.

"After a little time we all left the abbey, and proceeded to the cave, where
it was settled that I should meet Enuchio at that spot, and at the same hour,
the following night. Ranolpho said he should leave Montferrat the next morning,
and make the best of his way immediately after D'Ollifont to Spain.

"We then parted. Jasper and myself soon arrived at the cottage, after some
conversation on the strange events we had witnessed.

"I acquainted Lucretia with every circumstance relative to the abbey; and,
though she expressed a considerable anxiety for my safety, yet, like myself,
she was happy to find the request of D'Ollifont was no worse. I, however, made
her still more easy, by assuring her I never intended to visit the building,
unaccompanied by Jasper.

"In less than a month I hired a house, very little distant from the cottage:
it was not large, though neat and elegant; and, there being only my daughter
and myself, a few domestics were sufficient to form our household. I did not,
however, intend to live by any means private or retired, though my own wishes
prompted me to it. I trembled for the health of my child: it had been on the
decline ever since the commencement of our misfortunes; and the poignant grief
she suffered for the loss of her mother, now seemed settled to a deep
melancholy, which I dreaded to observe, and which my own health and spirits, I
conceived, helped to increase.

"It was for these reasons, therefore, that I punished myself, in receiving and
paying visits to persons of distinction, for some miles round; and I could
perceive, in some degree, it contributed to lessen that weight of oppression
which seemed to lie so heavy on her soul.

"A month had not elapsed after my removal to my new dwelling, before a
confused report was spread that Percival Maserini and his sister were yet
living, and in Italy.

"This intelligence seemed, in some respects, to unravel a part of the
mysterious manner and request of D'Ollifont: but I must own, the elucidations I
pictured to myself were by no means favorable to him; and dark schemes of
villainy seemed to unfold themselves to my view. But still I could do nothing; I
was bound by my oath; and suspicions were of no avail. I and Jasper visited the
abbey every night; and, on those occasions, I made every search that was
possible, to find a clue to D'Ollifont's conduct, which I supposed might be
concealed in some part of the building: my endeavors, however, proved
unsuccessful Enuchio still continued near the place: and I could not but
suspect that he was a kind of watch upon my conduct. His very looks seemed to
indicate the blackest thoughts; and his manners confirmed the idea.

"About this period, among the many foreigners who frequented my villa as they
passed through Montferrat, was lord Albourne, a young Englishman of rank and
considerable fortune."

Matilda and Alfred started at the name; but they forbore to interrupt the
hermit, who accordingly proceeded --

"His manner pleased both myself and daughter; in short, there was a kind of
noble sincerity in his disposition, which on a little further acquaintance
charmed me. -- I must allow I felt a considerable happiness, on observing a
mutual affection take place between my Lucretia and this nobleman. -- His
character, I understood from correspondents whom I could depend upon in
England, was unblemished; and I knew I could bestow on my child a fortune
worthy of such a husband. Suffice it to say, he declared his sentiments; and
she, above the little arts of female coquetry, confessed she loved him. But
still there were some obstacles to the marriage. Lord Albourne had not yet been
acquainted with my misfortunes, or with Lucretia's attempt on D'Ollifont's
life. To Lucretia there was also another impediment: she must part with me for
some time; his lordship had promised, after settling his affairs in England, he
would return with her, and consent to remain in Montferrat during my life time.
But it would, at least, take twelve months to transact these affairs. These
twelve months' absence seemed to her a century, and darkened every prospect of
felicity she might have hoped to have enjoyed. At length, however, these
obstacles were overcome; lord Albourne was, by me, informed of the sufferings I
had undergone, and of Lucretia's impetuosity, in attempting to assassinate the
author of my misfortunes. His lordship sympathised with me in my distresses,
and admired the heroic love of my child, though he was sorry she had thrown
herself into the power of such a wretch.

"The latter objection was at length overruled by him and, I may say,
considerably lessened by D'Ollifont, from whom at this period I received a
letter in terms of the warmest friendship, and breathing, in some degree, a
regret for the anguish he had caused. The contents of it informed me, that (it
having been hinted to him that my health was in a precarious state, and that
traveling would, very probably, prove of infinite service) he would undertake
that some one should perform my part in the abbey, if I chose to take a journey
for two months to re-establish my constitution. D'Ollifont's character was now
too well known to me for me to conceive one favorable trait in his
disposition; otherwise, this deception might have passed for an act of kindness
and repentance. I strangely suspected some soul deeds were to be executed in my
absence, and at first resolved not to accept the offer: but, at length,
overcome by the tears of Lucretia, and the persuasions of lord Albourne, I
consented to accompany them to France, but determined to return at least a
fortnight before the limited time.

"My situation was critical; I dared not communicate my suspicions to any one,
except Jasper: my oath forbade it. My surprise, however, was considerably
increased by finding that Percival Maserini and his sister were actually in
Italy; and that the former, by the authority of the king of Sardinia, had sent
to Spain, to demand the keys of Grasville Abbey from count D'Ollifont, that the
building might be searched, to find if another will could be produced of the
late count Maserini, in favor of his children before his nephew.

"An idea now struck me, which I considered would at once give me an
opportunity of discovering the dark machinations of D'Ollifont respecting the
abbey, though absent from Montferrat.

"I therefore wrote a short answer to his letter, saying I should accept the
vacation he offered me. At the same time I determined to leave Jasper at my
house, concealed, that they might suppose he was also with me. I kn^w I could
depend on his fidelity, courage, and understanding. To him, therefore, I
related the forebodings of my own mind, and gave him instructions accordingly,
with a particular caution, that, should he find any one was confined there, or
any treacherous schemes whatever going forward, he should immediately write to
me, and (on the receipt of this token) I should come post, and incognito, to my
villa.

"Lord Albourne and Lucretia were shortly united, after an acquaintance of only
six months; and, as soon as the ceremony was performed, we set off for France.
Our journey was pleasant; and if ever I enjoyed one gleam of comfort after my
misfortunes in Spain, and the loss of my Cassandra, it was in this short
period. A gloom, however, still hung over the countenance of Lucretia; the idea
of leaving me proved a continual drawback on her felicity; and the distressing
day was somewhat hastened by a letter from Jasper, requesting me to return
immediately.

"That fortitude, however, which I conceived I should exert when I parted with
the only prop of my existence, failed me entirely at the afflicting moment; and
(instead of being able to support her through the trial) I found I in a great
measure added to her grief, by the pangs I suffered myself, which were too
acute to be concealed. Lord Albourne seemed to share the sorrows of us both;
and (after shedding tears on my head) he removed his wife from my arms, that
insensibly held her to my breast, and hurried her, in a fainting fit, to the
carriage, which with cruel, swiftness soon bore her from my sight.

"Alas! every beam of pleasure seemed now vanished, and the melancholy
prospects of my mind received another tint of darkness, horror, and misery. But
a few months back, I had been the happiest of mortals -- the father of a
lovely, amiable child, the husband of an angelic wife, the possessor of an
unblemished reputation: now was I an exile, though in my native country; bereft
of wife, child, and even reputation, in the eyes of the world; laboring under
a stigma of shattered fame, never to be recovered.

"Tormented with those ideas, I set out on my return to Italy; but,
unfortunately, was detained, through many incidents on the road, for near three
days. I, immediately on my arrival at my villa, had a private conference with
Jasper.

"His countenance showed he had much to tell, and that of a dreadful nature. He
informed me that, after my departure, he kept himself as secret as possible,
according to my orders, and only went out by night, and then concealed himself
at a place near the cave. The second time of his watching, he perceived Enuchi^
and three others, whom he did not by any means like, cautiously enter it about
midnight, and, some time after, he saw a light pass one of the casements in the
west tower of the abbey; but though he remained at the same place till near
daybreak, he never saw them return. He attended again the next evening at an
early hour, but saw no one go that way, though a light and the figure of a man
moved several times, in the course of three, hours, before the different
windows. He therefore concluded that those whom he had seen the night before
had taken up their habitation entirely in the abbey. He still, however,
continued to keep a watchful eye on the building.

"On the eighth day some confusion was experienced among the peasantry. A
signor Balvolio, a physician, with officers of justice, and a servant of
Percival Maserini arrived at Montferrat, to search for him. He had the night
before, according to the servant's account, entered the abbey, while the man
waited for him without; who fell asleep sleep, and did not awake till morning:
he then entered to look after his master, but his exertions proved fruitless;
he was no where to be found. His footsteps were traced to an apartment in the
west tower; where also a picture, which he wore next his heart, was found, the
ribbon of which seemed ^orn by force; but from this room no other signs of him
could be traced.

"Jasper was equally astonished and alarmed at this intelligence. He had
omitted to attend at the usual place the night before, having been extremely
ill; he, however, contrived to be among those who entered with the strangers to
search the building, and with them examined that very apartment of the west
tower, where with me he had ofttimes performed the usual ceremonies with the
lamp. He then, with the rest, left the abbey, and heard it agreed on, between
the physician and officers, that the doors and outer gates should be left
unlocked.

"On his return home he directly sent off a letter to me, acquainting me with
these proceedings; but, unfortunately, I had, the day before the arrival of it
at the place it was directed to, set off for another part of France; and
Jasper, after some time, had ^he mortification to receive it again unopened.

"In this interval he was, however, by no means idle, and he determined, let
the hazard be what it would, to go over the abbey himself at midnight. He at
the same time resolved to enter from the principal gates, being aware, did he
attempt to pass the secret passage, there was hardly a doubt but he should be
interrupted.

"This scheme he carried into execution, and proceeded, well armed, with a dark
lantern, to the hall. He had not remained, in an obscure part of it, above five
minutes, before Enuchio and two others came forth from that apartment; which
proved they must have been in the subterraneous chamber, and consequently had
ascended by means of the trap. These men had, all three, lamps, and shortly
after they were followed by a figure of noble mien, muffled up in his cloak,
and his hat, in which was a white feather, flapped over his eyes. But how was
Jasper astonished, when, by the light of one of their lamps, which glared on
his countenance, he discovered the features of D'Ollifont!

"Being now more fully convinced that the most horrid treachery and villainy was
going forward, though every moment in danger of being discovered, he persisted
in following them at some little distance. They proceeded slowly through the
iron gate that leads to the ruins of a once magnificent place of worship, and
walked to the center, on which part stands a tomb to the memory of a monk, who
in former times was a superior of this abbey.

"One of the men having put down a small basket, covered lightly over with a
cloth, which seemed to contain some provision, they all four entered the tomb.
But it was impossible for Jasper to follow them here also; as the size would
hardly have admitted five persons to keep far enough apart in it to prevent
discovery.

"He heard a kind of noise which plainly told they were opening a large trap,
and it seemed to require the exertions, of three of them. He heard D'Ollifont
speak: 'Take down the provisions; I will remain here. Leave the basket, and say
nothing.' Jasper supposed they did so; for, after some little time, he heard
them replace the trap; and they passed by him as they returned to the apartment
from whence they came.

"He immediately, by the same method he had entered, quitted the abbey, shocked
at what he had been witness to and entirely at a loss in what manner to act. He
knew himself to be entangled by a promise of secresy, similar to that of mine,
on which terms only I had been suffered to make him my confidant; but yet he
was certain, as well as myself, that it did not prevent our aid or assistance
to any one distressed or confined in the building; or our exertions to
frustrate any plans of wickedness or cruelty which the count might form,
provided we did not discover those circumstances in which we were involved
relative to the light, etc. Our situations were both extremely delicate; and
though we would have risked our lives in the service of the unfortunate, yet we
could not but recollect with horror the forfeiture incurred by the breach of an
awful oath.

CHAPTER XL.
"JASPER at length fixed on a scheme, which effectually confirmed his wishes to
serve the unfortunate, by the courage and ingenuity he displayed in the
execution of it. He determined to let the much injured Percival Maserini know
(if such a person there was in the abbey -- a circumstance of which he had
little if any doubt) that there was one who was acquainted with his unhappy
situation, and pitied him -- nay, would run all hazards to assist him to
escape, if he could contrive any stratagem that carried in it the least
prospect of success. Words to this purpose he wrote on a sheet of paper, at the
same time mentioning he would attend in the tomb the next night, at an early
hour, before the usual attendance of D'Ollifont and his assistants; a feeble
hope inducing him to think they might converse together, though with difficulty.

"A sudden idea now struck him, which had nearly overruled his present
determination. Why not immediately apply to the civil power, whom he could at
once lead to the place of confinement; and, by proof, crush D'Ollifont and the
wretches concerned? The pen dropped from his hand: he rose with joy at the
thought. Hesitation and reflection again stopped him: he knew not how I would
have acted in this case. Strong as were his suspicions, they were as yet but
suspicions. Should he make them publicly known, and, at this crisis, should
they fail, (which, though entirely improbable, was not actually an
impossibility) it was uncertain in what state he might involve both himself and
me. But this might, at least, be done at the last extremity, and in two days
more he expected I should return.

"In short, he proceeded as he had before intended, and accordingly finished
his note -- not without, however, mentioning, at the latter part, hints of the
disagreeable ties that entangled him with D'Ollifont. Another consideration now
interrupted him: he wished to sign a name, but not either his own or mine;
that, in case the letter should be discovered, it might not, at the first
instant, be apparent who was the author of it. After some little time he wrote
at the bottom, 'Father Peter,' that it might be supposed to be some holy man,
who, disdaining the idle talk relative to the abbey, had made it a place for
his meditations, and had consequently discovered what was going forward.

"Jasper, at night, attended at a particular spot in the chapel. In a short
time he heard them enter, but could not perceive D'Ollifont. One of them, whom
he had noticed the night before, he now discovered to be Eburne. -- They
immediately walked to the tomb, and followed each other in; the basket, as on
the former night, was slightly covered with a cloth, and put down on the
outside of the door, while they removed the trap. Jasper now saw the
opportunity he wished to make use of; and, while they were busily employed, he
advanced, turned the cloth on one side from the top of the basket, thrust the
paper down among the provision, and replaced the covering as he found it. In
less than a minute after he had returned to his hiding place, one of them came
forth, and took it away: he soon after heard the trap closed; and, again
passing him, they returned, as he supposed, to the subterraneous room, while he
left the abbey, elated, in some degree, with the success of his scheme.

"The next night arrived; and Jasper, with another letter, repaired, as soon as
it was dark, to the chapel, with a palpitating heart for the issue of his
undertaking. He entered the tomb, put his mouth to the trap, which, with some
trouble, he found; then called several times, but received no answer: he
repeated the name of Maserini still louder, till he was afraid he had
discovered himself to D'Ollifont's party. Soon after, he thought he heard a
kind of groaning from below; but it was indistinct and faint: in short, he was
now certain the cell was so low, it was impossible to exchange words with any
one beneath. His disappointment, however, did not abate his perseverance; and
he now waited to place his note, in which he had related the regret he felt at
not being able to hear him; and, after begging him to support himself with
fortitude, he declared his intending, if every scheme failed, to apply to the
magistracy of the place.

"The men, as usual, approached; but D'Ollifont was again absent. One of them
carried the basket: unfortunately he did not place it before the door, but took
it with him into the tomb; in consequence of which, Jasper was unable to send
the paper he had got ready. After they left the chapel, he departed from the
abbey, overwhelmed with chagrin and distress at the failure of his enterprise.
The next morning brought the letter which he had wrote to me, back again, with
information that no such person could be found at the place where it was
directed. He immediately dispatched another, which found me at B***.

"One more night he resolved to try if Fortune would favor him; and he
determined, should she not, to run all hazards, and apply for justice the
following day.

"He was just going to leave the house, when he observed three men lurking
about it, as if watching it; he therefore waited some little time before he set
off. About half an hour after, he perceived they were gone; and accordingly
walked toward the abbey. He had but just arrived at one of the solitary
avenues leading to the principal gate, when the same three men, as he supposed.
rushed from behind some thick foliage of cedar, and demanded his money. They,
however, waited for no answer, but knocked him down: they then rifled his
pockets; and, after giving him several blows on the head, and stabs with a
dagger in the side and breast, left him, doubtless with an idea that he was
dead.

"In this state he continued till morning, when he in some degree recovered his
senses, though unable to move, and almost to speak. His situation was dreadful:
there was little chance of any one passing that way, it being so near the
abbey; and he seemed to be in such a state that he could not possibly survive
many hours.

"Providentially, however, after a considerable length of time, a peasant
ventured into the path, after a strayed mule; he at first attemped to run at
the sight of Jasper's figure, conceiving him to be something supernatural; but
his feeble voice soon convinced the man, who stood at a little distance, that
he was a mortal. He immediately came up to him; but the exertion he had used in
striving to make him hear, had now rendered him speechless. The poor fellow,
who saw and pitied him, directly ran for another man to help; and they carried
him between them to the peasant's cottage. After some little time he was
recognized, and they sent to the servants at the villa, to acquaint them with
the accident.

"Proper assistance was procured: in about eight hours he recovered his speech;
but yet the physician gave no hopes of his life. In the course of four days his
wounds appeared more favorable, and his fever considerably abated, yet still
he continued delirious at intervals. In the course of six more days, he
recovered his senses entirely, and was pronounced out of danger. He now sat up
some hours every day, and seemed to gain strength as fast as could be wished;
and the following week, which was the time of my return, he left his chamber,
though extremely low.

"In this state I found him, and heard from him the events which had happened
in my absence. I leave you to judge of my feelings and my situation. There was
not a doubt, in my opinion, but that the villains who robbed and so cruelly
used Jasper, were some of D'Ollifont's gang, who knew of his intrusion in^^ the
abbey, and determined to keep him away for some time, if not to murder him. I
therefore resolved, however hazardous it might be, to go to the abbey that
night, though Jasper was unable to accompany me: this resolution, I must own,
was rash: but I thought not on the danger; my passions were worked up to the
highest pitch.

"Soon after it was dark, I repaired to the cave; nothing was altered since my
last visit. I proceeded along the subterraneous passage: all was silent, and
gloomy. In the same manner I ascended to the room; not an article appeared to
be moved. I rose from the trap to these apartments: I could hear nor see
nothing; every thing seemed to show not a soul had entered it since myself: I,
at length, even began to conceive doubts whether Jasper's tale did not proceed
from a disordered imagination. I walked slowly to the gates of the chapel; and,
stopping a few moments, shuddered involuntarily at (...) own ideas. The
horridly desolate aspect of every thing around me encouraged the dismal train
of thoughts that struck on my mind. I shook off this weakness, and walked
directly to the tomb; where I was soon convinced of the truth of Jasper's
report, by finding the trap, which answered every description he had given me.
I was, however, incapable to lift it up, and having fully satisfied myself that
the place was now clear, returned home.

"The next day, I acquainted Jasper with my visit; and we both conceived there
was not a shadow of doubt but the unfortunate Percival Maserini had been made
away with, during the illness of Jasper.

"In the course of a week Jasper was able to attend me to the abbey, and we
proceeded together to the tomb. We both exerted our strength, and soon opened
the trap, which discovered a flight of narrow stone steps, by which we
descended to a considerable depth, and at the bottom entered a small square
cell, arched over at top. This place was entirely clear, nor could any signs of
murder be discovered, till Jasper (as we were leaving of it) by chance stumbled
over a dagger, clotted with blood, partly dried, and in some few places begun
to rust. This I resolved should for the present remain where it was; and, after
we had performed the ceremony with the lamp in the west tower (according to my
oath, which I strictly adhered to) we returned, shocked at our efforts being
frustrated, relative to discovering the manner in which Percival Maserini had
been treated.

"For about a month I was undetermined in my conjectures on these
circumstances, and considerations in what manner to act. Every (...) of nature
and justice, however, seemed to demand I should if possible, make what
intelligence I had received known, and bring D'Ollifont to account, on the
charge of Jasper.

"My resolution to this purpose had not been fixed above a day, when the poor
fellow was taken ill with a relapse of the fever that had before been caused by
his wounds; and one of these wounds which he received on the breast, and which
he had taken less account of than the rest, now showed signs of mortification.
Advice from every part near was sent for; but their consultations proved of no
avail; for, in less than a week, I saw him breathe his last, in a state of
insanity.

"Every idea of bringing D'Ollifont to justice now vanished; and the death of
this faithful servant preyed on my spirits (which, though bad at the time of my
leaving Spain, had gradually grown worse ever since) insomuch that, at this
period, it almost affected my senses at certain times. Still it was a kind of
melancholy madness, which was of short duration in its intervals; and,
consequently, could not be discovered, but by the few persons who were
continually with me; and they took no notice of it, as they apprehended no ill
consequences from it on my behavior, which was neither frantic nor outrageous

"Seven months elapsed under these circumstances; during which time I received
two letters from my daughter, who informed me of the tenderness and affection
of her husband, of his settling his affairs as soon as possible, to return with
her to me in Italy (a period she most sincerely longed for) though she supposed
it would be deferred, on account of an addition to their party, in the person
of a near relation to myself.

"This intelligence, at two different times, gave me the most sincere pleasure
and happiness. Like a poor shipwrecked mariner, I looked forward through a
gloomy prospect to a little glimpse of returning comfort. Alas! that glimpse
was soon extinguished; and I arrived at the crisis of my misfortunes. At the
end of near five months' expectation after the last letter I had received,
another came from his lordship, who, in the most soothing manner, (though
himself, by the appearance of his writing, nearly distracted) informed me of
the death of my Lucretia, in childbirth; the infant, which was a girl, having
survived.

"Excuse these tears," said the old man.

After a pause of some minutes, while he seemed stifled with grief, "Look on
them," said he, "not as the effects of womanish ideas, or a superannuated mind;
but consider them as indicating one worn down by the rod of adversity, till
fortitude itself seems to forsake him, and remembrance even yet fills his eyes
with drops of anguish -- of regret."

CHAPTER. XLI.
"ALFRED, lord Milverne, and Matilda, venerated the grief of the hermit too
much to interrupt his sorrow, which, after a few minutes' indulgence, he
overcame, and continued his narrative.

"This intelligence, as I before observed, brought me to the very crisis of my
misfortunes; and the delirious fits I labored under became more frequent,
though not more violent. My ideas were tinctured with a kind of misanthropy,
which every day increased, and served to encourage horrid thoughts that had
never before gained the least ascendancy over me: and the result of what I felt
was a wish (though I shrunk from it with affright) to put an end to my own
existence. But the gloom of my mind becoming each day more terrible, worked up
every evil influence with double strength. Pernicious arguments floated in my
brain; they seemed to say I could not do wrong in ridding myself of a
burdensome life. In short, in less than three months, I came to the dreadful
determination of drinking poison.

"I had seen no company whatever since the last news from England, but a
reverend father belonging to a neighboring monastery, with whom I spent some
hours when perfectly collected; but I had, for the last month before I took
this resolution, seldom even seen him. My heated imagination prompted me to ask
him to dine with me the very day I resolved to commit the crime. In my victuals
at that meal, I intended to mix a quantity of the poisonous drug I had already
procured. It is necessary, however, to inform you, that, at this period, I was
partly insane, though possessed in some degree of recollection.

"The day arrived; and Father Phineas, by appointment, waited on me. We began
dinner, and (I even now tremble at the idea) before it was finished, I executed
the dreadful project, and took, with a seeming calmness, the tinctured food. I
immediately turned our discourse on the subject of religion; knowing I had only
a few hours to live, I wished to be satisfied in some points which my
disordered intellects had latterly made me doubt.

"The good man answered my questions with solemnity and truth. In the course of
his observations, he treated on suicide: I involuntarily shuddered. With a
steady firmness, which I shall never forget, he spoke on the horrid act, and
the eternal punishment that awaited it. I turned pale; my lips trembled with
convulsive terror at the idea of what I had done, and drops of perspiration
fell from my face. Father Phineas observed these emotions, and inquired if I
was ill. The greatest alarm prevailed over his features; he guessed the cause;
but delicacy forbade him to mention it, for fear his conjectures should be
wrong. After a few moments I burst into an agony of tears, and confessed myself
guilty of the deed, that would (as he had clearly explained) produce
everlasting destruction.

"He hardly heard the confession, but darted like lightning from the room. In
less than ten minutes he returned with a medicine which he had procured at a
relation's of his, who resided near. I immediately took it; but there was great
doubt whether it would take the wished for effect, as I had swallowed the
poison some time. The agony I suffered, in doubtful suspense and horror for
half an hour, could not be balanced by all my griefs put together; momentarily
expecting dissolution with no hope of forgiveness hereafter.

"At length I brought from my stomach the dreadful poison: the operation was
violent; and, when over, I found myself unable to stand; the servants were
therefore informed by Father Phineas, that I had suddenly been taken ill. I was
accordingly conveyed to my bed; nor was any one ever acquainted with the real
nature of the case, he having made an excuse even in procuring the medicine.

"In the morning, after some hours' sleep, I found the good man at my bedside;
his manner was now severe, and I received from him a sharp though affecting
rebuke; when, after having joined with me in a thanksgiving for my escape, he
departed and I remained alone the remainder of the day.

"An inclination which I had before imbibed at intervals, now assailed me with
redoubled force; it was a wish to retire entirely from the world, and live
secluded and unknown, in the cave which led to Grasville Abbey: by this I
should at once gratify my own desire and (if possible) more strictly adhere to
my oath, which I now more and more, as my health became impaired, considered as
a duty to my God.

"The next day I communicated the thought to father Phineas, who at first
attempted to dissuade me from it, but at last agreed that it was a resolution
in some degree necessary, as a penance for the crime I had been guilty of. I
determined that no one, except himself, should know of my retirement; and
between us the following scheme was therefore contrived.

"I gave it out among my household, that I intended to travel again to France,
on account of my health; and, if I found the climate agree with me, might
perhaps continue there some years, or entirely settle for the remainder of my
life. My domestics were therefore ordered away of ascertain time. I^ as was
supposed, left the country; and my villa was sold by Father Phineas. At
different times of the night he had conveyed for me various utensils and
conveniences, to form the necessary articles of life, to the cave: he likewise
procured the dress, etc. of a hermit; and I took possession of my now abode,
giving the whole amount that my villa and furniture sold for, to father
Phineas, to distribute in charitable uses, besides a very handsome present for
himself.

"My sudden departure, and the melancholy state I had so long been in, was
talked of for some time, after which I was partly forgotten, and seldom
mentioned.

"But it was necessary ou^ proceedings should not stop here: and, in the course
of six months, Father Phineas, (who visited me daily) by my desire, spread the
report of my death at Paris, and wrote a letter to D'Ollifont, who was then in
Spain, to the same purport; mentioning it was my request, when living, that,
after my decease information of it should be sent him.

"Whether he believed the account, I know not: but it is certain he might have
been convinced to the contrary, had he taken the trouble to send and make
inquiries in that city. But, conceiving* I suppose, that there were already
alarms enough concerning the abbey, to keep it free from intrusion, and that
the principal person to contend with him was, by his diabolical arts, no more;
knowing that, even if it was searched, no material proofs could be brought
against him, he thought my death rather a release than a misfortune, on account
of the thorough knowledge I had of his character.

"But, as if Providence favored his villainy, I could not bring me to disregard
the oath I had taken, so that his wishes still continued to be fulfilled. You
may, perhaps, wonder at my strict adherence to it: but you must consider my
situation; every trifle swelled in my imagination, which had now nothing to
relax it; and my fervency of religion, in respect to repenting of the crime I
had been guilty of in an attempt to take away my own life, every day became
more violent; insomuch that my horror and misery increased, instead of
lessening, the more I thought of its fatal tendency.

"The good father constantly visited me during the remainder of his life, and
regularly brought me food; but he has now been dead twelve years. After that
period I was necessitated to go to the public market, and upon this account
took the name of Father Peter, recollecting the signature which Jasper put to
the letter he sent to Percival Maserini. Time, and the disguise I was in,
totally prevented me from being know. I have, since my appearance at the town,
received visits from some of the peasantry, who have been more courageous and
more curious than their companions.

"I had now but one wish to be gratified, which was, to see lord Albourne and
his child, if living. The good father had, by my desire, wrote to his lordship,
some time after my retirement: but we received no answer. He wrote again; but
this letter proved as fruitless as the former. His illness and death prevented
a third from being sent: the only conjecture I could form, to make me suppose
both letters had miscarried, ^as, that, in case of his lordship's death, I
should have received an answer to them by some one invested with the management
of his affairs. Father Phineas had transmitted all my money to a very
respectable relation of his in France, an eminent banker, under a feigned name;
and with this gentleman was also placed my will, wherein I had bequeathed the
whole of my fortune to lord Albourne and his child, if living, if not, to be
divided equally among six convents in France, and a considerable sum to be
given to the poor.

"Lord Albourne, his child, and the recollection of almost every one that had
been dear to me, in a great measure vanished from my mind, in the space of ten
years. Wholly absorbed in an enthusiastic mode of living, I became indifferent
to every thing in the world, and obtained a serenity to which I had before been
a stranger. I kept a constant watch upon the abbey, though I did not enter it
for sometimes six months together: yet at these times I could see no one had
intruded there since my last visit.

"I remained in this state for near twenty years, when, the second night, as I
suppose, that you were at the abbey, walking rather later than usual,
meditating on the events of my past life, which seemed like a fleeting dream to
my imagination, my reverie was suddenly interrupted by a glare of light from
one of the windows on the east side of the building. I stopped involuntarily;
and a kind of horror, I had long been a stranger to, crept through every vein.
I stood some minutes, as if fixed to the earth: but, knowing I could do nothing
then, I made the best of my way to the cave, though unable to sleep the
remainder of the night, from the ideas that tormented me.

"In the morning I rose, harassed and distressed. I first determined, if
possible, to seek out who and what the inhabitants were, as I could more easily
find out the best methods to terrify them from it, according to my oath, which
I still resolved strictly to adhere to. I went through the subterraneous
passage to the room, and from thence ascended to the apartment above, the next
to this, in which you were all four assembled.

"I could not perceive the features of any person, but found you had taken up
your residence here only two nights. I determined to begin my operations
without hesitation, and accordingly, the latter part of the evening of the same
day, repaired to the west tower, and at midnight, in one of the casements,
exhibited the lamp. This ceremony I performed the next night, and passed the
window in a manner which I was certain must cause alarm, if I was seen. Having
done this, I returned to my cave, with scarcely a doubt but I had frightened
the visitors from their abode.

"I found myself, however, mistaken; for the next morning, in the subterraneous
room, I heard voices, but did not then ascend to the upper apartment. I
attended rather earlier than usual at night, and found you had not retired to
rest, but were at supper. I placed my lamp below, and waited above, though
unable to observe any one, the folding doors being quite closed.

"The night was stormy, (you no doubt, well recollect it) and I afterward
regretted the uneasiness I had caused the female part of the company. The
behavior of Mr. Maserini appeared strange and boisterous: in short, I
immediately conjectured he had been drinking freely. The conception was, I
believe, right; and I must confess, at that time, it gave me no high opinion of
his character. In consequence of this idea, I did what I should otherwise,
perhaps, have omitted.

"On my first entrance, I heard him call for lights. His sister in vain
persuaded him to retire to rest; he swallowed several bumpers of wine after
each other, with the avidity of a madman: at length he called a name which
struck me almost senseless. I uttered an exclamation of horror, which was
drowned by a very loud clap of thunder that burst over the abbey at that time.
My flighty imagination, wounded by a degree of returning insanity, urged me to
think that the name of my daughter was mentioned to hurt my feelings; and this
vague thought spurred me to terrify the author of it with more than usual
inclination. The armor that had been thrown down by Jasper at the time we were
viewing the abbey with signor Ranolpho, had been gathered together, and placed
in the subterraneous room. I descended, and soon heard him drink to the 'old
ghost that inhabited the abbey;' upon which I directly pushed against the pile
with all my force: it fell to the ground, and, as it did before, made a most
violent crash.

"I immediately ascended to hear what emotions it had caused. I heard all in
confusion: every one seemed by the noise to have removed from their seats; upon
which I immediately placed myself upon the trap, ready to sink on a sudden, if
required.

"Mr. Maserini uttered the name of his father -- I groaned.

"He heard it, and declared he would find from whence it came: but some one
seemed to hold him. I repeated the groan.

"Two persons approached the folding doors; they flew open: I stopped just time
enough to be seen, and then vanished.

"Thus ended a night, no doubt, to you, of the greatest horror and distress --
to me of the keenest anguish and reflection; which, weighing on my mind,
prevented the refreshment of sleep: in short, the next day I was unable to
leave my bed, or take any account of the abbey.

"The following morning, as I was at my prayers, you all entered on me rather
suddenly. I, as usual, prayed for the forgiveness of the sin I had been guilty
of, in the attempt to deprive myself of existence. I had an uncommon oppression
on my spirits; and tears, which I could not stifle, flowed at the recollection
of events in the early part of life. I turned my head, and observed four
persons assembled round, two of whom bore so strong a resemblance to the
picture of the late count Orlando Maserini, that, weak with indisposition, and
overcome by my own ideas, I fell senseless on the floor. Even on my recovery
from this fit, I did not, I believe, rightly recover my scattered senses. You
took your leave, and promised to visit me the next day.

"I supposed you were inhabitants of the abbey, and had but little doubt of
your near relationship to the family of Maserini. My very soul seemed to cling
to you: but my oath again came to my imagination, and I dreaded even the very
thought of breaking it. I considered, if I could but adhere to that, and still
be of service to you, I might yet die with some degree of happiness. At night,
as usual, I displayed the light in the west tower, and afterward returned to
my cave.

"According to promise, you were with me in the morning. We discoursed on
several subjects: Mr. Maserini mentioned Grasville Abbey: I found myself
confused, and thought I could also perceive symptoms of embarrassment and
terror in the countenances of all. Indisposition again prevented me from
attending with the light in the west tower at night. In the afternoon of the
next day you visited me again, and, no doubt, well remember our conversation.

"I advised you not to enter the abbey. Mr. Maserini answered me rather warmly,
and I found myself hurt: he immediately apologized, and we parted. I was again,
at night, necessitated to defer the ceremony of the light, by an unexpected
event, which I shall hereafter make known.

"The next day you visited my cave; but I was absent on the business of the
preceding evening. At midnight, however, I displayed the light in the west
tower, and could plainly perceive some one move with a lantern in the court
below. Supposing by this that you were none of you then retired to rest, I
conceived, that, in a little time, I might venture through the apartment where
you slept" (turning to Matilda) "to one which I have distinguished by the name
of the state-chamber, which contains the beavers, feathers, etc. and which was
formerly hung with black, to receive the corpse of Orlando count Maserini, for
the short interval of time before he was interred.

"There is a door artfully concealed on one side of Miss Maserini's bed, which
cannot possibly be discovered, on account of the tapestry that covers it: this
opening leads to a private passage that communicates immediately with the
stairs of the west tower; for I wished to get to the statechamber, without
appearing on the ground-floor of the abbey, where I naturally conceived you all
were. This door I softly unclosed. I thought I heard a sigh, and my own
feelings prompted me to answer it twice: yet I ventured further, till I
supposed the reflection of my figure with the lamp was seen in a large pier
glass directly opposite to where I stood. I heard a violent shriek, and hastily
retired.

"I knew the key of the cabinet in this room was placed by myself on the
remains of a decayed column in the statechamber. I had fixed the silver chain,
which was hung to it, to a marble hand, which I found by chance among the
broken ornaments that lay about the different apartments; the cap of the
pillar, however, entirely concealed it from view. I had examined this cabinet,
and knew there was money, jewels, etc. in it, but never saw the manuscript. The
only account I can give for its being concealed there is, that it must have
been found by one of the assassins in the abbey, who (not knowing the contents,
by its being wrote, perhaps, in a different language from his own) carelessly
placed it in an obscure drawer of the cabinet; and was prevented, probably,
from robbing the other parts of it, by the dread of count D'Ollifont's
resentment, or from haste in not examining any further than where he placed the
paper. Suffice it to say, that, after Jasper's death, I found the key of it in
the west tower; and, taking only a superficial view of what it contained, fixed
it in the manner and place I have before mentioned. I wished to put you in
possession of it, that without violating my oath, I might in some respects
assist you. It was for this purpose I was going to the state-chamber, with an
intention of moving it into Mr. Maserini's room. Being fully convinced that all
were retired to rest, I left the abbey, determining to put this scheme in
execution the next morning.

"I accordingly attended at an early hour, and walked directly to the concealed
door; when, stopping a moment, to listen, I heard Mr. Maserini and his sister
in conversation, and found he resolved to watch in the west tower that night.
I, at a particular part of his observations, interrupted him, by pronouncing
three times, with an energetic voice, 'Go!' to the inexpressible horror of both.

"A thought now entered my imagination, that I might bring every thing relative
to the abbey partly to a crisis, and still adhere to the vow I had made. I
resolved to let the key of the cabinet remain in the same place, and at night
appear to Mr. Maserini, in the apartment of the west tower: conceiving that if
his resolution failed him in point of seizing me and discovering the deception,
I (...) means to lead him to the state-chamber, and there discover to him the
key. This, though at first it may seen equivocal, I was certain would in no
degree infringe on the general tendency of my oath.

"I entered the abbey at midnight, but stopped at least an hour in the lower
rooms of the tower, before I made my appearance in the upper one. At length,
however, I ascended to it, by means of one of the same sort of traps which are
contrived in the upper part of the building.

"I stood before him about a minute; but hearing some one on the staircase,
immediately, by the same means, vanished from his sight.

"My scheme, in some measure, being frustrated, I made the best of my way to
the state-chamber, through the private passage I have before mentioned: wishing
to regain the key of the cabinet, I wanted more light than my lamp, and
accordingly lighted those tapers that were placed in the different glasses. I
had no sooner done this, than I heard some footsteps approach the door: I
immediately concealed myself behind the column that contained what I have
before mentioned. The voices, I found, were those of the inhabitants of the
abbey. The night was exceedingly stormy; and a kind of shock, similar to that
of an earthquake, seemed to take effect on the room where we stood. I availed
myself of this circumstance, and immediately pushed the cap of the column down,
which directly discovered the marble hand, and key suspended from it. Mr.
Maserini by these means procured it. I then came forward and stood on the trap,
clasped my hands with ecstasy, and descended through the floor.

"The next morning you all visited me: I was looking over some papers, of
infinite consequence to your welfare; but it was not then a time for discovery.
I was, if you recollect, suddenly taken ill, with a kind of fit I have for
years been subject to: I prayed that my life might be prolonged till a mighty
work was effected, which was to procure justice for the murder of Percival
Maserini, and restore his children to their rights.

"I had no doubt but Mr. Maserini would again watch in the west tower that
night; and I accordingly appeared there in the same manner as before. His
behavior answered my purpose; he seized me, and discovered my person: secresy,
in my ideas, was now at an end: an explanation took place: I, however, put off
a regular detail of events till another period, but gave him hopes of once more
being restored to the world and happiness, in a manner that would at once wipe
off every stigma that had so long defamed his character.

"He visited me the next afternoon, but did not stop long, and only received
from me further proofs that I had power and will to serve him. I received
another visit from miss Maserini alone, at midnight. My surprise may well be
conceived: the interview was occasioned by her finding of the manuscript. I
promised to wait on her in the morning, and explain every circumstance, as far
as I was capable. This promise I have now fulfilled, by relating every
principal event of my past life, which has been chequered with scenes of
happiness contrasted with those of the most poignant misery and distress."

Thus ended the hermit's tale, who, for an act of the greatest generosity to a
villain, fell under the lash of the severest misfortunes.

A total inconsistency of conduct, however, may be observed through the latter
part of his life, occasioned, most probably, by a nervous constitution,
entirely broken by adversity; for it was certainly strange that a man of
enlightened understanding, and refined education, should so closely adhere to
an oath, tyrannically (as it may be said) forced on him by an act of the
blackest ingratitude and injustice; and at the same time reconcile himself to a
premeditated plot of discovering his person; which he knew must consequently
develope every transaction.

CHAPTER. XLII. MISCELLANEOUS OCCURRENCES.
The love of wicked fiends converts to fear;
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger, and deserved death.
SHAKSPEARE, Richard II.
THE mist of doubtful horror, which had so long brooded over the apartments of
Grasville Abbey, was now totally dispersed, and the gloom of superstitious
weakness dispelled by the bright ray of truth and reason. The inhabitants, in
some degree, wondered at the fears that had assailed them; and could not, even
for a moment, reflect on them, but with a mixture of contempt and vexation at
their want of fortitude to withstand the shock of mere visionary terrors.

The baron Sampieno received the united thanks of the whole company for his
recital; Matilda and Agnes dropped a tear at the misfortunes of the venerable
orator. A sensation, however, they had long been strangers to, of delight and
comfort, ran through the whole assembly. Every mystery, every supernatural
idea, was elucidated to their satisfaction, and at once relieved them from that
load of anxiety and distress they had so long encouraged by gloomy
apprehensions. In the course of the conversation, Matilda also understood that
the answer she supposed to be given to her thoughts the night before, as she
entered the cave, was nothing more than an involuntary exclamation of the
hermit's which (by the construction of the place) echoed to the part where she
stood, in a kind of whisper.

After having taken some refreshments, lord Milverne declared his intention of
setting off to the residence of the magistrate, as the critical situation of
Felix demanded that the banditti should be immediately apprehended. It was
resolved that Leonard should attend him, as, in some parts of the information,
he might be useful. They accordingly departed, and were not expected to return
till the evening, as they would be necessitated to accompany the guards to the
spot, and afterward be present at the examination.

The baron now began, to Alfred and his sister, another narrative, which,
though shorter, gave them nearly as much surprise and pleasure as the former.

One night, which he mentioned, neglecting to show the light in the west tower,
he was, at an early hour, called by a voice that he had somewhere heard, and
which seemed to come from the outer part of the cave. He immediately repaired
to the spot, and perceived a man whose countenance he directly knew: he was a
peasant that had sometimes visited him, but who had latterly not so often
attended, on account of the indisposition of a relation. The man's features
carried in them the utmost horror and affright, occasioned by three causes:
first, his relation was dying, as he supposed; secondly, though he had often
called upon the hermit by daylight, he had never before ventured near his
habitation after dark, on account of the path leading directly to the abbey,
consequently was under considerable alarm; and, thirdly, that alarm was
heightened beyond measure, by seeing a light in one of the casements of that
building, which occasioned his calling on the hermit's name, being unable to
proceed any further.

With breathless agitation the poor fellow related what he had seen, and then
requested Father Peter would accompany him to his cot, as he was woefully
afraid something lay heavy on the mind of the sick man that was there, who had
expressed a wish to see a confessor: none, however, being there to be found, he
thought of Father Peter, and had even ventured, at that hour, to procure him.

The baron, after some hesitation, consented to go with him; and they
accordingly walked to this man's home, where he was conducted to a room, in
which, on a miserable, bed, lay an emaciated figure extended, and seemingly in
the last state of consumption. His face was of a deadly paleness; his cheeks,
sunk to the very bone, were covered with a shrivelled skin; while those parts
of his eyes which had once been white were turned to a kind of pale yellow: his
nose and mouth, which had been no bad features, now appeared predominant ones,
owing to the thinness of his face; while in his whole person was painted
anguish and remorse in the extreme, and a gloom at intervals, which showed all
joy, all hope, had forsaken his soul. What were the sensations of the baron,
when this change, great as it was, did not prevent him from recognizing the
wretch Eburne! Ah! and what were the sensations of that Eburne, when he beheld
and recollected, under the garb of a hermit, the much-injured baron Sampieno!
He shrieked aloud, and hid his face below the bed-clothes. The cottagers were
astonished: the baron desired they would leave the room; which they accordingly
did.

After a few minutes, hearing every thing quiet, the wretched man raised
himself; but the delirious fit he ha^ labored under for some days before, now
returned with violence. His black shaggy hair, discomposed by the efforts he
had made to hide from his sight the figure before him, gave a double horror to
his ghastly looks, which carried in them every appearance of insanity. He
raved, called on the names of count Maserini and his children -- then the baron
Sampieno -- wept, and, clenching his hands together, sunk on the bed, exhausted
and fatigued. The baron well knew it was useless to attempt to speak while this
fit of a guilty conscience remained: he was therefore a silent spectator of the
scence, and greatly affected.

After the violent ravings of Eburne had ceased, he lay panting on the bed,
with his eyes fixed on a vacant part of the chamber. The baron conceived this
would be a good opportunity to address him: he therefore drew near the bed; but
Eburne again shrunk from him, and put out his hand, as if struck with horror at
his approach. The good man spoke in the mildest terms, and begged he would be
composed: again the languishing eyes of the culprit were raised toward the
venerable comforter; and again he shrunk back, as if the figure brought to his
mind ideas that rent his very soul.

Two hours elapsed, during which time the baron addressed him on several topics
relative to religion; and his disordered intellects gradually became more
connected and regular, though he, almost every five minutes, gave a convulsive
shudder, and a loud sigh of anguish and regret.

At length the baron promised to call on him the next day, and left the
chamber. He desired the cottager not to disturb his relation; but, at
daybreak, to send for the most eminent physician they could procure; and he
would make up to them the expense. With many thanks, they promised to do as he
desired. He accordingly left the cottage; and, it being considerably past the
time of illuminating the tower, immediately on his return to to the cave,
retired to rest.

The remainder of the night was spent in a train of melancholy reflections on
this strange accident. The sight of this man brought to his mind those scenes
of felicity and happiness which he and his diabolical master had forever
blasted: yet, after the state in which he had beheld the miserable wretch,
pity, in opposition to those reflections, entered his bosom; and those very
scenes, as they more confirmed his wickedness, seemed to draw from the
benevolent heart of the baron greater concern and sorrow for his dreadful
situation. It was necessary, however, if Eburne survived till morning (which
seemed rather doubtful) that he should be got into as composed a state as
possible, and that by persuasion (if persuasion should be found necessary) he
should do what justice he could to the offspring of that family which he most
probably had aided to destroy. The baron considered that he might be acquainted
with the whole of D'Ollifont's transactions; if, therefore, he could he brought
to give an explanation of them, his words might be taken down in writing; and
such a confession (if it could be proved by respectable witnesses who could
answer for his being in a state of sanity) would nearly tend to answer every
wished-for purpose.

Such were the baron's thoughts; and at an early hour he repaired to the
cottage. A physician of some eminence was already arrived: he gave but little
hopes of the patient, but said he might probably survive a few days. Eburne had
enjoyed considerable sleep for some hours, and seemed perfectly calm. The
physician departed, after promising to call again in the evening.

The baron now took the man who belonged to the cottage, on one side, and
requested to know what relation Eburne was to him. The man answered, he was a
cousin of his wife's; they had always understood he led a very wicked life; nor
had any acquaintance been kept up between them for many years, till about six
months past, when he came to their cottage, very much distressed in mind, and
laboring under every symptom of a decline. He fully confessed to them that he
had been a most abandoned character, and claimed their pity. The cottager and
his wife accordingly admitted him into their house; but, as his health
gradually grew worse, his melancholy increased. He, however, made his will, and
left them the whole of the little property he was possessed of.

"Last night," continued the man, "he was suddenly taken much worse than we had
ever before seen him (though he has at times been deranged in his intellects
for some days past) and begged I would bring him a confessor: I accordingly set
off for Father Leolin; but I found he was some miles from Montferrat. I then
thought your presence would answer the same purpose."

The baron desired the cottager to go into the chamber of the sick man, and
mildly inform him that Father Peter had called to see him; that he would give
him no uneasiness, but rather comfort and consolation.

The man did as he was desired, and in about five minutes returned. "Eburne,"
said, he, "is perfectly sensible, and wishes to see you: but I am sure there is
something strange about him; for, when I only mentioned your name, he started,
as if afraid of being murdered."

The baron entered the room alone. Eburne again convulsively shook at the sight
of him; but, being addressed by the mild and condoling voice of the visitor, he
so far recovered as to look on him, and listen to what he said, without any
violent emotions.

The baron, after an hour's conversation with him, which seemed entirely to
compose his mind, conceived he might venture on a topic it was before
impossible for him to mention, concerning the murder of Percival Maserini, and
also of those doubts, relative to the count his father. He opened the subject
with such caution and mildness, that, though the remembrance might be seen to
work in every feature of Eburne's face, he did not fall into any fits of
insanity, but continued perfectly collected during the whole of the
interrogation.

At the close of it, he heaved a sigh of the most acute anguish and horror, and
in some measure relieved his bursting soul by a flood of tears. At length he
recovered so far as to speak, and declared that Orlando count Maserini was
poisoned; and that Percival Maserini, his son, was assassinated in Grasville
Abbey, after having been kept there a prisoner some little time: "and however,"
said he, "I may break the oath I have taken, I can no longer conceal the
murderer: it was my late master, the count D'Ollifont. But," continued the
unhappy man, "I am equally culpable with him. I was privy to both transactions,
and to every plot of villainy he was concerned in, particularly that by which
you were so great a sufferer. Oh, my God!" he exclaimed, clasping his hands in
agony, "thou only know what are my sufferings. It is thou only can
conceive the pangs which drive me to madness."

He was near fainting: but the baron administered a cordial, which soon
recovered him. He now informed Eburne that there was one essential way of
atoning for his guilt; and that was to do justice to the descendants of the
deceased; for this purpose it was necessary, as his wife was uncertain, that a
paper should be drawn up, declaring the facts relative to both murders, which
in a court of justice would be certain to crush the wretch that was the cause
of them, and give to the children of the injured those possessions they had so
long unlawfully been deprived of. Eburne gladly and immediately consented to
the proposal, and the more particularly so, when it was explained to him that
the breaking of an oath in such a case could not be deemed an act of
wickedness, or be disapproved of by the Supreme. The baron then drew up a paper
containing all the circumstances which were related to him by Eburne, before
Father Leolin, who was now arrived, and acquainted with the affair.

In the evening the physician arrived; and before him and the cottager, Eburne
signed the paper; declaring it on oath to be the truth of every transaction it
contained. Eburne seemed considerably better, and after some little time the
whole company departed; the baron taking possession of the paper, which was the
same he was looking over when visited by the inhabitants of the abbey.

The confession it held forth was partly as follows: -- That he was taken into
the service of D'Ollifont when very young, shortly after that gentleman
commenced gambler in Spain. He was soon distinguished as his confidential
servant, and assisted him in most of his defrauds -- that they led that kind of
life till his master's character was well known in those parts, where he
resided for some time -- that they were necessitated to fly to the place where
the baron Sampieno and his family resided, and, knowing his riches, determined,
if possible, to make him a dupe to their artifice; insinuating himself into the
baron's family, though he bore a deadly hatred to that nobleman: This hatred he
resolved to gratify by a diabolical scheme of malice and villainy. He determined
to take away by force Lucretia, the baron's only daughter; and, by ruining her
honor, to make a public disgrace and ignominy fall upon her father, which he
knew would more effectually blast his happiness than any pecuniary fraud he
could invent. This scheme was frustrated by the baron's over-hearing a
conversation which he and his master had on that subject; but which gave rise
to another opportunity for D'Ollifont to execute a second fiend-like
contrivance, which tended to the same horrid purpose, and which, if possible,
exceeded the former one in ingenuity and contrivance.

The manner and issue of this horrid plot against the baron was related by
himself, and the success of it answered but too well.

Eburne confessed in the testimony, that he was the person who found means to
bury some of the false notes in the baron's garden, and who, by D'Ollifont's
orders, bribed one of his servants to their interest. He attended his master to
Italy, where the old count Maserini was extremely alarmed, on account of a
report which had been spread concerning his children, who had been some time in
France. He had been informed that Percival, his son, had contrived to rob the
convent of N***** of a young lady of family and distinction, and that both,
with his sister, had fled. -- This report seemed the more to be credited, as an
interval of some time had passed since the count had heard from them.

The old gentleman was extremely ill on the arrival of his nephew, but
testified great pleasure at seeing him, having never heard of his misconduct.
He slowly recovered; and D'Ollifont was dispatched to procure some further
intelligence of his children. It was during this journey that he made Eburne
acquainted with his intentions, and promised him large rewards if he succeeded.
They returned to the abbey with a feigned letter, which gave information that
Percival Maserini and his sister were no more; that the former fell by the hand
of an officer who was going to secure them, and that the latter, in a fit of
insanity, had poisoned herself. The letter concluded with saying that lady
Clementina was confined in the Bastile, on a suspicion of having murdered her
sister, who was found dead in her bed the morning after the elopement from the
convent.

The grief of the count was excessive, and brought on a relapse of his former
disorder; and this, added to a slow poison, which Eburne, procured, and which
D'Ollifont mixed with every small quantity of food he partook of, put an end to
his existence, without any signs of murder being committed. The count made a
will about two days before he died, in which he bequeathed the whole of his
estates and property, except a few legacies, to his nephew. Eburne, by his
master's order, gave it out the abbey was haunted, and, the better to make this
believed, D'Ollifont himself left it suddenly in the night, after the funeral
of his uncle. He returned immediately to Spain, and left orders that nothing
should be moved from the abbey.

Eburne, however, was left behind, though it was supposed round the country
that the abbey was entirely free from inhabitants. He each night showed the
light in the west tower, and secretly employed three mechanics to put the traps
and machinery in order. These works he superintended; and finding one of these
men, whose name was Enuchio, fit for his purpose, retained him, by D'Ollifont's
desire, to reside in the subterraneous chamber, and show the light, while
Eburne departed for Spain, to come forward on the trial of baron Sampieno.

Eburne also confessed that the passage which formed a communication between
the abbey and the cave, the traps, etc. were found out by himself, and the
secrets conveyed directly to his master, from whom he received a considerable
present.

The paper next contained an account of the terms to which the baron consented,
to save the life of himself and daughter, which the reader has before been
acquainted with; also an account of D'Ollifont's entering into a society of
depredators while in Italy, whose birth and situation in life were all above
the common rank, and whose defrauds were carried to the most considerable
amount on people of rank. It was at one of their places of rendezvous, at
Genoa, where the baron was introduced to D'Ollifont, at the time he took his
oath. After that conference, the latter departed to Spain; but Eburne still
remained concealed, as his agent in Montferrat, a watch upon the baron, and
every circumstance which concerned the abbey. He sent him information that
Percival Maserini was actually arrived though, by D'Ollifont's orders, several
men were placed on the roads to assassinate him.

Immediately that the keys were delivered in Spain, he set off from that
country, and secretly arrived at Montferrat, where he kept concealed in the
subterraneous room, with Eburne, Enuchio, and three men whom he had hired. It
has before been mentioned that the baron was absent many miles; which answered
every wish of D'Ollifont: but he did not know that Jasper was left behind. The
resolution of this party was, to seize Percival Maserini and his servant,
should they search the abbey alone; which it was rather expected they would.
Enuchio and the three men were dispatched in the day time, about three miles
round the spot, each taking different roads, and met at the cave at an
appointed hour at dark.

It was about the fifth night, when, after one of these excursions, Enuchio
brought word that Percival Maserini, whom he personally knew, with his servant,
had just called at an inn for some refreshment; and, by their manner, he judged
they were coming to the abbey, as they did not seem inclined to stop, as it was
now late.

Every thing, therefore, was prepared; Enuchio and two of the men were planted
in the west tower. Eburne and another man were concealed in the hall; and the
count himself waited the issue of the scheme, in the tomb, in which the unhappy
victim was to be shut up. He entered the abbey, agreeably to their
expectations, even unattended by his servant; and crossed the hall without any
interruption. Eburne being now certain he was within their power, he and his
companion joined the count, while the unfortunate Percival ascended to the west
tower.

On his entrance, he was immediately seized by the ruffians: in the struggle, a
picture of his wife was torn by force from his bosom, with a part of the
ribbon; and several drops of blood, proceeding from a blow which he received in
the face, stained the floor: these were discovered by Edward, his man, when he
made a search after his master in the morning; and also by signor Balvolio, the
officers of justice, and other persons who attended the abbey for the same
purpose afterward. Percival Maserini was conveyed down to the cell described
by the baron, and discovered by Jasper; and a short allowance of food was given
him each night.

A few days after, Jasper was discovered to be left behind in Montferrat; and
it was determined he should be made away with, or at least so far hurt as to
prevent any interruption from him. Eburne and two of the men assaulted him in
one of the private avenues leading to the front gates, and left him for dead.

The next night it was resolved between Eburne and his master, that a period
should be put to the life of their wretched prisoner, for fear of the baron's
return. D'Ollifont, however, did not wish any one of the men to be privy to the
actual commitment of the murder: Enuchio and the others were therefore
discharged with large presents, and, by his desire, departed to Spain: there
they were seized, through the agency of an alguasil with whom he was connected,
put a-board a ship of war, and fell in the first engagement.

At midnight D'Ollifont, with his own hand, stubbed his cousin Percival
Maserini; Eburne being unable to perpetrate this last deed of darkness, though
^e assisted poison was at first offered the unhappy man; but, on refusing to
take it, he received the wound which at once released him from a wretched
existence.

Eburne and his diabolical employer buried the body near the tomb, in a grave
which had been prepared in the day; and then, placing every thing in the abbey
as it was before they came, departed, and in disguise returned to Spain.

Here Eburne received a considerable sum from D'Ollifont, and remained in his
service about six months: when he was one night suddenly seized, and carr^^^ on
hoard a similar ship to that in which his companions, were conveyed; but,
fortunately, did not meet with the same fate. He escaped from the crew, after
twelve months, and entered into service in France; being (...) from making what
he knew public relative to the count, on the idea of the strong oath he had
taken to the contrary. (...) not a doubt but it was through his means, he was,
by force taken from Spain; and his very soul recoiled against him, for those
very schemes he had aided him in executing.

He was driven from France by nearing of D'Ollifont's arrival there, and
crossed over to England, torn with remorse, and harassed by a guilty
conscience. He was often tempted, in defiance of the oath he had taken, to
impeach his late master; but the doubt how such an accusation might be received
from him, against one who was every day growing more popular in Paris,
prevented this act of justice. He resided in England some years, as servant to
a private gentleman; but was again necessitated to fly, on being informed that
D'Ollifont was there likewise, dreading the power and inclination he had to rid
the world of one who (...) privy to so many of his crimes. He therefore made
the best of his way back to France, and from thence soon returned to Italy,
where he made himself known to his relations, and claimed their pity; ^^^ding
his health totally dec^ined, and his mind loaded with horror, anxiety, and
bitter remorse.

To this purport was the paper which the baron now delivered to Alfred
Maserini^ it was a precious gift; for it would most likely tend, with
correspondent evidence, to subdue the inveterate and malicious for (...) their
family, while it procured them that comfort and affluence which they had so
long been deprived of.

CHAPTER. XLIII.
THE baron further informed them that Eburne in the course of two days so far
recovered at to be able to sit up for some hours; but, after his confession, he
seemed to express such an impatience for his dissolution, as indicated his mind
was in some degree disordered; and, on the third morning after, he was
discovered hanging by a cord, which he had found means to procure from a part
of his bed, and fixed to a hook in the ceiling; thus adding another crime to
the many that he had already committed, by an act of suicide.

The conclusion of this man's life held forth a striking lesson of villainy and
cruelty; his destroying of that existence which he had every reason to suppose
had nearly run its course, confirmed at once how much he suffered from the
horrors of a guilty conscience, and the effects of a truly vicious mind.

As there was now no doubt but the abbey, with all the possessions and estates
belonging to it, was the sole and lawful ^ight of Alfred and his sister, no
scruples of honor could prevent them from making use of the money and other
valuables that were in the cabinet: but as the baron considered that the whole
business must go under a regular course of inspection before the government,
and count D'Ollifont be brought in the face of his country to answer for those
crimes which could now be partly proved against him (though the facts did not
actually amount to demonstration) they conceived it would be better to let
every article remain in the same place.

The baron insisted on their receiving from him supplies necessary for their
present demands. It was, he said, his intention, if possible, publicly to clear
that part of his character, which had for so many years remained under the
aspersions of a villain; and bring his accusations against D'Ollifont on the
foundation of Eburne's manuscript, which explained events relative to that
affair with as much accuracy as it did the circumstances respecting count
Maserini and his children.

The baron wrote to his banker in Paris, who was possessed of his property, for
remittances; giving him notice, at the same time, that he should shortly appear
in person, to demand the whole of his fortune. The old gentleman consented to
the entreaties of Alfred and his sister to remain in the abbey, as they could
easily have a bed made up for him in a chamber next to Alfred's.

In the latter part of the day, lord Milverne returned with Leonard and Felix:
his lordship informed them that the banditti were taken, the men who had
assisted him were singled out, released, and received from him a handsome
reward, while the others were reserved for a public trial. Lord Milverne had
spoken to the magistrate (whose politeness was extreme) concerning Alfred
Maserini's affairs; he appointed to see him, with his lordship, the next
morning, and promised to take every method in his power, to recover for them
their just and lawful right.

His lordship was much surprised and pleased to hear the account of Eburne, and
the manuscript they had got in their possession. He congratulated them on the
hopes of a very speedy end to their misfortunes: nor was the baron less pleased
to hear that his son-in-law lord Albourne, and the daughter of his one beloved
Lucretia, were both known to Alfred and Matilda. Pleasure beamed in his
countenance, whe^^^ (...) former spoke of her with the rapturous praises of a
lover.

Leonard on his return was dispatched with the letter. -- In it the baron
requested of his banker to remit him the sun^ for which he wrote by the
speediest conveyance. Lord Milverne partook of Alfred's bed; another was made
up for ^he baron, and a third (...) below for Leonard and Felix.

The happy party assembled at breakfast at an early hour the next morning;
after which they employed themselves in taking a regular survey of the abbey;
and the baron explained to them those pieces of mechanism it contained, which
now fully accounted for the strange things they had been witness to. They also
descended to the subterraneous room, and from thence walked to the cave, from
which all the articles that the baron wished to preserve, were carried to the
abbey by Leonard and Felix.

Alfred, lord Milverne and the baron now set off for the magistrate, attended
by Leonard. Matilda and Agnes dined alone: and though the latter would
sometimes survey the gothic structure of the room, it was with that degree of
pleasure and confidence, which confirmed how well she was satisfied that every
fear she had before encouraged was groundless.

"I am now, mademoiselle," said she to Matilda, "happy indeed; and I may truly
say that this happiness is increased by seeing all around me so: in short, I
know nothing that could add to my present felicity, but...." Here she
stammered; the blush of true innocence glowed on her cheek, and heightened that
pleasing simplicity which graced every feature.

Matilda guessed the cause of this embarrassment, and archly reminded her of
Oliver.

The poor girl burst into tears --

"Indeed, mademoiselle, though I own I love Oliver, yet even the presence of my
poor mother, however she may in some respects have treated me, would add to my
present joy."

Matilda was struck with her gratitude, and commended it.

"Both your wishes, Agnes," said she, "shall, if in my power, be gratified.
Your mother shall be reconciled to your marriage with Oliver, by my making him
a present that shall give him importance enough to gain her good will."

"A thousand blessings on you, mademoiselle! I know not how to thank you,
unless you will look on these tears as in some degree an acknowledgment for
your goodness."

Felix now entered the room to take away the dinner things; which put an end to
the conversation.

The latter part of the day, Alfred and his friends returned. They brought with
them two Italian women servants. One of the lower apartments was fixed for
their kitchen, and they slept in a small room next to Matilda's chamber. The
magistrate had given them every hope of a speedy issue to their cause. By their
orders he was the next day to send off an arrest against count D'Ollifont, to
detain his person wherever found, on three several charges -- first, for the
murder of his uncle the count Orlando Maserini -- second, for the murder of his
cousin Percival Maserini and unlawfully detaining the property of his heirs to
his own use.

The third charge was in the name of the baron Sampieno, for false accusations,
and defamation of character.

The magistrate informed them that the count's power in France was no more: he
had offended the royal party by an attempt to assassinate one of their class,
and in short was in every respect no more than a prisoner in the country, being
afraid to leave it, though by no means wishing to remain there.

This gentleman's politeness was extreme: he offered the services of himself
and lady to introduce them into public, under their proper names; which was now
in many respects absolutely necessary. The next day was appointed for Matilda
to visit them. The fore part of the following morning the baron proposed a walk
to the cottage of Eburne's relations, as he conceived both Alfred and Matilda
should be made known to them, as well as to the physician and father Leolin.
They accordingly visited those persons; and all of them declared their
readiness to come forward in their behalf.

After this walk they set off for signor Salvarino's, the magistrate's. Agnes,
however, declined the invitation to attend them, as it was her intention to see
some things put in order by the servants, necessary for the reception of a
large party, which Alfred had resolved to entertain before he left the abbey.

They were received by signor Salvarino and his lady with the utmost
politeness; some of the principal persons of the place were assembled,
purposely to be introduced to the baron and the young recluses; and all
testified their joy that the right heirs of the Maserini family were now likely
to be restored to the possessions of their ancestors. Alfred was informed that
dispatches against D'Ollifont were already sent off, and a regular process in
their behalf commenced against him. In the evening they attended a public place
of entertainment, and received considerable applause from the audience; for
their story had already spread through the principal part of Montferrat.

The following day was fixed on by signor Salvarino, the baron, and Alfred, for
the settlement of some necessary circumstances relative to the suit in hand. He
waited on them at the abbey, and was taken all over it. Every contrivance was
explained to him; and he showed the greatest astonishment at what he saw. The
remainder of the day was dedicated closely to business. Lord Milverne was
absent on some of his own affairs. In the evening signor Salvarino took his
leave, with an invitation to himself and lady, with most of the persons who
were present at his house, to spend the next day at the abbey. The whole party
accordingly met at the dinner hour: they surveyed the building, and received an
elucidation to every mystery. Agnes undertook to manage the entertainment; and
it was conducted in a manner that did her infinite credit.

They now began to make preparations for leaving Italy, as their presence would
shortly be absolutely necessary in France. It was agreed that lord Milverne
should cross over from that country to England, as he had some concerns to
settle; and, at the same time, make inquiries if lord Albourne and his daughter
were in London, as they all conceived it probable he might return immediately
after the accident of the fire at the inn. Signor Salvarino procured them an
elderly man and woman to look after the abbey, and reside there in their
absence; and in the course of a fortnight they set off on their journey, with
the two Italian servants whom they had hired.

Before their departure the baron received the sum he had wrote for from his
banker, with a polite invitation to his house on their arrival at Paris. They
had also information that the arrest was executed against count D'Ollifont, and
that he was now a prisoner in his own house.

They traveled slowly, and arrived in France without any particular accident.
They engaged handsome apartments. Lord Milverne remained with them but three
days, and then tore himself from the happy party; not, however, without
obtaining a promise from Matilda, to become his immediately on his return. They
also understood that D'Ollifont had been confined to his bed some time, and had
totally lost the royal favor. Since his arrest he had often shown fits of
insanity; and it was doubted by the physician whether he would survive to take
his trial. Signor Salvarino had given them letters of introduction to many
persons of fashion and distinction in France; and those, added to their being
known before, procured them admittance to the first parties.

Before their arrival, they were informed that the charge against Alfred was
rescinded, even previous to the arrest against D'Ollifont. They visited the
baron's banker, who introduced them to the whole of his friends.

They had been in Paris about a week, when they one evening attended the
theater: in leaving of it, as they passed through one of the passages, a
gentleman before them, seemingly intoxicated in a small degree, was addressing
himself to a young lady rather against her will, though personally he appeared
to be known to her. She had an elderly lady with her: they were, however,
before Alfred and the baron; consequently, their faces could not be observed.

His importunities at length seemed to become exceeding disagreeable, and his
remarks carried in them some impropriety. Alfred advanced, and declared the
lady should not by insulted! The gentleman turned round, and exclaimed with the
utmost surprise, "Mr. Maserini!" no^ was Alfred's astonishment less to behold
Henry Peviquil. The young lady turned pale at the name of Maserini, and sat
down on a seat near; which gave Alfred an opportunity to recognize lady
Caroline Albourne, and the baron the picture of his departed wife and daughter,
in the person of his grandchild.

Alfred, disengaging himself from the levity of Peviquil ran to her assistance:
but, before he could catch her in his arms, she had fainted in those of the
lady who was with her, and who was totally unknown to both Alfred and his
sister.

The baron and Matilda now advanced. The former clasped the hand of the
inanimate yet beautiful form, with ecstasy; but that ecstasy caused a tear to
flow at the recollection of her mother. A considerable crowd of persons were
now assembled round: a gentleman, who stood by, invited them into a room in the
interior part of the theater; which offer they gladly accepted. Henry Peviquil,
elevated with wine, yet haggard with dissipation, attempted to follow: but
Alfred politely requested he would desist: this he at last agreed to; but
requested his address, that he might call and congratulate him on his return to
France. -- They accordingly exchanged cards, and he directly left the place.

Matilda privately entreated the baron that he would not discover himself to
lady Caroline that night, as the present alarm had so greatly overcome her
spirits.

Alfred hung over the charming invalid with a mixture of joy and concern. Her
countenance was much altered since he had last seen her: though her beauty was
not greatly diminished, yet it was of that delicate and languishing kind which
plainly told she had suffered the most heartfelt and poignant uneasiness. He
knew, from Caroline Albourne's sincere and artless conduct, that she once loved
him; but he also knew his character had suffered the severest shock in the
opinion of her father. She might now be the wife of another! The thought no
sooner darted on his brain, than its effects might be observed in every
feature. Lady Caroline recovered, and looked round with some surprise on the
little party near her. She clasped the offered hand of Matilda with pleasure:
and her eyes spoke toward Alfred, more than she dared to utter.

She had accompanied her father, after the accident of the fire, into Italy;
but remained there a very short time. They then returned to France, as his
lordship conceived the climate to agree with his constitution, which still
seemed on the decline. The elderly lady, who was with her, had resided in
France all her life, and was a distant relation of lord Albourne's, at whose
house his lordship now resided with his daughter. They had heard of Alfred's
arrival at Paris, with the information that the charge against him was
withdrawn, and another of a very high and criminal nature brought by him
against D'Ollifont. But lord Albourne was now by no means satisfied with that
part of his character which he had formerly been a witness to, in point of
gambling: nor did he give his daughter the least hopes of a favorable
alteration in his sentiments toward the young Frenchman. Alfred wished them to
permit him to attend them home; but this was absolutely refused, as they had
their visitors and two servants in waiting.

Alfred, therefore, had only the consolation of finding that she was still
unmarried, and declaring, as he handed her to the carriage, that in a very
short time the whole of his conduct would, he hoped, be explained to lord
Albourne satisfactorily, and himself made the happiest of men, by being
permitted to solicit of her that, the very thought of which had supported him
through every misfortune.

The baron requested of the old lady his lordship's address, having business,
as he informed her, of great importance with him the following day; and, after
a rather confused farewell, the whole company parted with still more confused
ideas.

CHAPTER. XLIV. VARIOUS INTERVIEWS.
Alas, I Am sore beset! -- Let never man,
For sake of lucre, sin against his soul.
Eternal justice is in this most just.
HOME.
SENSATIONS of pleasure oft-times produce a train of reflections that bring
with them the recollection of past scenes of happiness, and present to us
former objects in which our very soul appeared entwined in one common
existence, and the parting of which seems almost to separate ourselves.

So it was with the baron Sampieno, at the sight of lady Caroline. He felt that
enthusiastic glow of rapture which swells the veins of a parent at the recovery
of a long-lost and beloved child; but reflection soon whispered that she was
neither that beloved daughter nor wife whose figure still floated in his brain.
Every feature, every look of each of them, shone forth in the beautiful
representative he had seen; and the idea of what they were followed, and called
up those trivial scenes of endearment, which opened wounds that for a time had
been healed by the balm of a religious frenzy.

Immediately on his return home, he apologized to Alfred and Matilda, hurried
to his chamber, and gave vent to those passions he had struggled to conceal.
The baron was possessed of a degree of fortitude by no means inconsiderable: he
had courage and resolution, a refined education and understanding and a noble
heart. Yet there was a constitutional weakness, a something in his disposition,
which, by the generality of mankind, might be called a womanish defect, but by
others would be looked upon as one of the excellencies of human nature. The
regret, however, for the loss of his wife and daughter, did not lessen the tie
which drew him toward his grandchild: he suffered that which can only be
conceived by a person in a similar situation.

Alfred and his sister met him the next morning at breakfast. His countenance
was serene, yet melancholy: still, however, they could perceive he anticipated
the pleasure of clasping lady Caroline to his heart, and once more embracing
his much beloved son-in-law.

Alfred, though he might wish to accompany him, immediately refused the
invitation; but the baron requested that Matilda would go with them.

At rather an early hour, they were introduced by madame Bosivi's servant to
the breakfast-room, in which were seated that lady, lord Albourne, and his
daughter. Lady Caroline was at her harp, and his lordship listening to her
harmony, while he took his chocolate. All three rose at the entrance of the
visitors, and madame Bosivi introduced the baron as the gentleman whom she had
mentioned to his lordship the night before.

Lord Albourne bowed; and, though he seemed rather struck with the countenance,
did not recognize the person: he, however, advanced, and took the hand of
Matilda.

"Believe me, miss Maserini," said he, however, unexpected this visit may be,
the pleasure I receive from it is unlimited; and I am sure Caroline will join
with me in thanks for the honor you confer on us."

Matilda bowed, and returned a suitable answer to this polite compliment.

During a short interval the baron's eyes were fixed, first on lord Albourne,
and then on his daughter; while madame Bosivi, who was the most disengaged of
the party, thought she could perceive a likeness between the picture of the
late lady Albourne that hung over the fireplace, and the stranger before her.

Each being seated, lord Albourne, turning to the baron, requested to know his
business; and while this request was made, as he more earnestly observed the
features of the person to whom he was speaking, they seemed to make some
impression on his memory; and a something appeared to cross his mind, that
occasioned considerable emotion.

The baron hesitated: a kind of sympathy worked upon both; and, while Matilda
trembled with anxiety, lady Caroline and madame Bosivi looked at each other
with the utmost surprise. The baron at length spoke.

"I will not so much wrong your lordship as even so suppose you have forgot
some scenes at an early period of life; the tendency, and I may say, happiness
of which have, no doubt, stamped on your recollection some objects to whom you
were then nearly allied, and in whose fortune you were much interested: but I
am far from being surprised that my face does not call these circumstances to
your recollection, when I consider the alteration that time and misery have
made in my person."

Lord Albourne heard no more: he clasped the offered hand of the baron with an
ardour that bordered on madness; and, as he lifted his eyes toward heaven, he
heaved a heartfelt sigh, which, in some degree, relieved the fullness of his
soul.

Lady Caroline and madame Bosivi still remained silent spectators of this
affecting scene; though, with Matilda, they were rather alarmed at the
situation of his lordship.

The baron received lord Albourne in his arms with a pleasure that partook of
paternal love. They were both unable to speak: his lordship took the hand of
his daughter, and presented her to her grandfather. Another affecting scene now
took place, and the baron almost supposed he clasped the figure of his Lucretia.

After some time he gave them a brief account of his life since that period
which he termed the crisis of his misfortunes -- his parting with his daughter.

In the course of this relation he oft-times had occasion to mention Alfred, at
whose name his lordship looked reserved, and lady Caroline with anxiety.

Though lord Albourne found him so much prejudiced in his favor, he could not
forget events he had been witness to, which left behind them traits very
injurious to his general character. In the course of their conversation they
found that his lordship had never received any letter from the baron; but had
for answer to inquiries which he sent to Italy, that he was no more; nor could
he ever gain any further information. To procure, however, some account of his
father-in-law, was one reason, though known only to himself, that induced him
to lengthen his journey into Italy; but, on his arrival there, finding his
health worse, he left it rather precipitately. During the short stay he made,
he used every means in his power to find out some one who was acquainted with
affairs relative to the death of the baron: but all proved ineffectual; for he
understood that he left his villa suddenly, and settled in France, where he
died. His lordship now gave up every thought of searching any further, and
himself departed for Paris.

As a minute investigation concerning Alfred's conduct could not very well be
entered into before a third person, the baron agreed to lord Albourne's
invitation to sup that evening with him; and, after many congratulations on
both side^, they parted; not, however, without a promise from Matilda to spend
the next day with them. Alfred was informed of the proceedings of this visit,
and was somewhat surprised and hurt at lord Albourne's doubts respecting his
character being so difficult to be obliterated; but a moment's reflection soon
ended his astonishment; he knew his lordship had more than once seen him deeply
engaged in play with men notoriously known as professed gamblers, and in every
respect a disgrace to society. The little pique he had at first conceived now
vanished, and he admired that particularity he had before condemned. The baron
attended his lordship at an early hour; while Alfred and his sister spent the
evening among a private party of friends.

The baron, on his return, mentioned that he had removed every objection lord
Albourne had entertained against Alfred Maserini, and that he had brought him
an invitation to accompany Matilda and himself the next day, to dine with his
lordship. With heartfelt joy he returned the old gentleman a thousand thanks,
who now declared he must shift for himself, relative to any other wish he had
to gratify through the reconciliation.

The next day Alfred had the felicity to be received with the cordiality of
sincere friendship by lord Albourne, the utmost politeness by madame Bosivi,
and in a manner that answered his most sanguine expectations by lady Caroline.

They parted at rather a late hour, with an appointment for lord Albourne,
madame Bosivi, and lady Caroline, to spend the next day but one with the baron,
and, as he was pleased to term them, his adopted children. Alfred obtained
permission to call at madame Bosivi's the next morning, to inquire after their
health, and, as lord Albourne laughingly added, to sigh away an hour with
Caroline.

They found, on their return home, Henry Peviquil's card, which mentioned he
should call on them the next day. Tiresome as his company might be to them,
common politeness dictated they should receive him. At a late hour the figure
of the once elegant and handsome Henry Peviquil knocked at their door, worn out
in constitution, though, according to years, hardly in the prime of life. He
was only the shadow of what he formely was; and his appearance, in point of
dress, indicated that his pecuniary circumstances were by no means affluent;
yet still he was gay to a folly, and cheerful almost to madness: in short, he
was a professed gambler, and a noted debauchee; accounted an Englishman of the
first t^n in France, and a man of the first taste and fashion in his own
country; he was the very quintessence of high life in London, and allowed at
Paris to be possessed of that je ne sai quoi, which stamped on him the real
character of a fine gentleman. Among the generality of the ladies of rank of
both nations, he was adored as a man of gallantry; nor were their ideas wrong:
a man of gallantry he certainly was; for, to his great honor, he had seduced
more women, and afterward forsaken them, than one half of his sex; and, in
these circumstances, the etiquette of both kingdoms encouraged his noble and
spirited conduct.

The poor innocent girl whom his cursed arts had taught to love him, entangled
like the defenseless fly in the web of a spider, falls a sacrifice to the
ensnarer. Mark the result of his enterprise: the miserable object finds herself
betrayed by the man whom her guiltless heart taught her to suppose as generous
as he was insinuating; the delicacy of virtuous women forces them to discard
the child of affliction, and victim of unmanly cruelty; while the author of her
disgrace receives double splendor from the deed becoming coming public, and is
cherished by that society, and nourished by those comforts, from which he has
hurled her for ever. Shameful prejudice! Though a national custom, it is a
disgrace to its followers, and stands the criterion of a narrow mind, and
unfeeling soul.

Henry Peviquil, as was before mentioned in the former part of this little
history, did not, when he found Matilda forsaken by her friends (at least by
those who should have proved themselves such) behave to her in a manner
altogether consistent with rectitude or politeness; and his manners at last
became rude and insulting. He once had the audacity to make proposals which
gave her the most serious alarms while she remained in his power. The scene was
entirely changed; the distressed orphan of the Maserini family, despised by his
mother, contemptuously treated by his sister, forgot by his father, and
insulted by himself, was now possessed or in every respect likely to be
possessed of rank, fortune, and friends. Even the assurance of Henry Peviquil,
now quite sober, could not overcome a little embarrassment as he addressed
them; he, however, soon got the better of this vulgar failing.

For fear, however, that the spirit or honor of this accomplished gentleman
should be called in question for thus seeking to recommence an acquaintance he
formerly disdained, and with persons who received his offers of friendship with
that coolness which could not prompt him to go on with the pursuit, it will be
necessary to inform the reader that he had interest in view: besides gratifying
his pride, to class them among other persons of distinction whom he could
familiarly nod at in public places of entertainment, or chat with at the rout
of a woman of fashion, he was actuated by another motive, more powerful by far;
he knew Alfred had loved play; he was himself a perfect master of the art, and
was well acquainted with the powerful infatuation that encircles the votaries
to that way of destruction; therefore, whatever he might have heard relative to
his having entirely given up the gaming-table, he conceived to be merely
fabulous, and only raised either to introduce him to lord Albourne's esteem, or
to be of service in the intended trial. Now Henry Peviquil knew, if he could
but once more draw him among those scenes he had formerly frequented, he would
prove a very fit person to become a dupe to his artifices; and this was the
more to be desired, as he had just entered into a party something similar to
that in which D'Ollifont had been engaged, and into which the baron Sampi^n^
was introduced at Genoa.

With these very honorable determinations, he waited on his distant relations;
but he had the mortification to observe that all the advances he made were
received with mere civility, and that there appeared very little hopes of
Alfred ever again attempting the faro table.

With great coolness they parted, and Henry Peviquil satisfied himself with
declaring, at all the fashionable parties, that the whole trio, meaning the
baron, Alfred, and his sister, were quite outre; and informing his new
colleagues, whom he had fed with hopes of bringing a new pigeon to exert their
abilities on, that he found the fellow void of all spirit, and questioned if he
had integrity enough to pay a debt of honor before a tradesman's bill.

CHAPTER. XLV.
MATILDA now proposed a visit which she had in contemplation ever since their
arrival in France, which was to the mother of Agnes. She li^ed some distance
from Paris. Accordingly the fair fugitive and herself set off the next day,
attended by one servant; while the baron and Alfred were engaged to dine with
lord Albourne. They that morning received a letter from lord Milverne, which
mentioned his having made every inquiry relative to his lordship and lady
Caroline, but that all his endeavors proved useless.

Alfred had, however, dispatched a letter to inform him of their unexpected
discovery, and his own happiness; which he supposed would have come to his
hands before the date of his from England.

Agnes and Matilda pursued their journey, and, after a day's quick traveling,
found themselves at the place of their destination. The heart of the former
throbbed with various emotions: love, fear, joy, and doubt, alternately
possessed her bosom; while the effects might clearly be perceived in her
countenance. The servant knocked at the door, and a young girl, whom Agnes did
not know, opened it. She instantly exclaimed, "My mother is dead!"

Unable to proceed further, she nearly fainted. Matilda, with as much composure
as she could assume, asked if the person who inhabited that cottage some months
past, was living.

The girl answered, "Yes, and within."

Agnes clasped her hands in ecstasy. Matilda first alighted, and entered. A
middle-aged woman was seated knitting: she arose at the entrance of the
stranger, and seemed rather confused.

"You had," said Matilda, "a daughter?"

She changed color, and could hardly articulate "Yes." "And you lost her?"

She with still greater difficulty repeated the same answer.

The conversation proceeded no further: Agnes rushed into the room, and was
instantly in the arms of her mother.

Tears relieved them both, and the latter then requested to know by what act of
providence she was thus blessed beyond expression. Matilda related to her most
of the circumstances that had happened to her daughter since she left the
cottage, and concluded with an inquiry after M^ Le Selet.

The question confused her greatly; and, after a few moments, she replied, she
had seen him but once since her daughter left her; but had heard he was dead.

Matilda now turned the discourse relative to her behavior to that gentleman
and her child. Her words carried in them a severe rebuke to the imprudent
mother, who appeared to be perfectly convinced of her error, and declared she
had not enjoyed one moment of felicity since her daughter's elopement, torn as
she was with remorse for her cruel conduct toward her.

Oliver, they understood, was well, and lived only for Agnes. He was sent for;
and their meeting can only be conceived -- not described. -- Matilda
experienced the most heartfelt pleasure in settling every point with the old
lady relative to their marriage, and rewarding this faithful and truly innocent
girl with the best gift she could bestow on her, a good husband. She gave
Oliver an invitation to return with Agnes to Paris (who was to stay with her
mother a few days) when they should be united, and he receive with his bride a
portion sufficient to put them into a way of life that with industry would
procure them every necessary and comfort they could wish to possess.

Matilda remained at the cottage that night; the next day returned alone, and
joined Alfred and the baron at madame Bosivi's in the evening, where they were
engaged to supper. Here she was informed that it had been reported the whole
day that D'Ollifont was no more: it was not, however, by any means confirmed.

On their entering their lodgings they were told by the servant that a strange
gentleman had called, who particularly wished to see Mr. Maserini, or the
baron. In vain they endeavored to imagine who it could be; their efforts were
fruitless, and they retired unsatisfied.

They had just set down to breakfast the next morning, when they were informed
the same gentleman requested to be admitted. He was accordingly introduced; but
he was entirely unknown to them all. His dress was plain; yet there was much of
the gentleman in his manner, and he seemed to be in the decline of life. They
politely asked to know his business.

"My business," he answered, "is rather of a strange nature; and the character
I come under, will, I doubt, give you no very good opinion of my honor or
integrity."

Alfred, Matilda, and the baron, were astonished.

"I am, continued the visitor, "the steward of count D'Ollifont."

They were still more surprised.

"I perceive your countenances change," said he. "But suspend your exclamations
for a moment, while I inform you, not now of the murderer or usurper of
another's right, but the dying guilty wretch, who waits, with all the horrors
of a hell before him, to receive the awful change that plunges him into
eternity."

They were in some degree affected, and he was requested to be seated.

"Alas!" he cried, "I am not without my share of misery, which fell on all that
came within his destroying power. My name is calumniated for ever: by the
multitude I am called the confidant of a fiend whom I detest as much as they,
but whose infernal snares beguiled my unsuspecting soul, and hurled me to
destruction. Yet I now come to fulfill his last request. Before his eyes are
closed for ever, he wishes to behold, what I should suppose would blast his
very sight -- the baron Sampieno, Mr. Maserini, and his sister."

It is impossible to conceive the amazement of all three.

"The count," he continued, "four days ago made his will, in which he resigns
all right to the estates of his late uncle; and, in some degree, to make what
poor reparation is in his power, he has bequeathed the whole of his fortune,
except some small annuities in charity, to be equally divided between the baron
and the two surviving heirs of the Maserini family. The amount of this property
is nearly sixty thousand pounds. No scruples need prevent your receiving it,
since it has not been accumulated by the frauds he has been guilty of, but by
the favor he was once in at the court of France."

He begged to know their determination; for, if they consented to the wishes of
the dying man, he would himself conduct them at any hour of the day they chose
to appoint. It required some little time to resolve; but at length compassion
for the sufferings of the criminal D'Ollifont overcame every other argument
against the visit, and they fixed three o'clock that day.

The ^eward departed, and promised to be with them at that hour.

They considered that at all events there could be no danger whatever in this
request, as officers of justice resided in the house. They, however, determined
to take two of their own servants. The person whom they had just seen, was,
they had no doubt, Rabourn, whom they had heard lord Milverne mention in no
very favorable manner; but they had found, since their residence in Paris,
that his character had been cleared by D'Ollifont's own confession.

At three o'clock Rabourn arrived, and all four set off in the baron's
carriage, attended by two men, to the count's mansion. Their ride was short, as
he lived at no great distance from their own residence. -- During the time,
however, they understood by the steward that he was much worse than in the fore
part of the day, and that he left him in strong convulsions; he therefore
conceived (as the sight of him might be too great a shock to miss Maserini's
feelings) that she had better not enter his chamber, unless he should so far
recover as to mention again a wish to see her. This was settled, and they
presently stopped at the house.

They were conducted through a superb hall into an elegant apartment: the
servants were desired to follow, and remained here with them, while Rabourn
went into the sick man's chamber, which was the next room. He returned, and
informed them his convulsions were gone off, but he was afraid he was
speechless; though he seemed, however, to look as if he wished to know whether
they were come. Matilda begged to remain where she was, unless he should, by
signs or words, express a desire to see her.

The steward led the way; Alfred and the baron followed, through a pair of
folding doors, to an elegant bed-room, beautifully furnished in the richest
taste. At the further end was the count's bed, of crimson satin, with gold
trimmings. Two physicians, two nurses, a confessor, and three servants, stood
round, and, at intervals, administered cordials to their patient. The curtains
were pulled on one side; and, extended on the bed, lay the wretched man,
surrounded with elegance, clothed in the finest linen, and reclined on a
mattress of down. But what were the luxuries, the paltry elegances, that
surrounded him? Could the structure of the room, the beauty of the furniture,
the richness of the canopy under which he lay, or the downy softness of his
bed, give to him that comfort, that consolation or fortitude, which the awful
crisis required?

Alas! no; every moment did the trembling victim of guilt and ambition expect
to see the gilded scene of earthly pride vanish into darkness, and that
darkness open to him he knew not what -- but which it was hell to him only to
conceive.

Alfred and the baron advanced slowly. D'Ollifont's eyes turned upon them: a
kind of cold shivering seized him, and drops of perspiration appeared on his
forehead, which one of the nurses dried off with a muslin handkerchief.

During the course of his diabolical existence, many were the sighs he had
wrung from the widow, the fatherless, and the unprotected; yet the damp muslin
that received these guilty drops of horror and remorse of conscience, might be
said in some measure to atone for the innocent tears he had drawn from female
distress. Who could tell his pangs, the inward workings of his soul? Who could
tell the convulsive terror that shook every limb? Who could tell his secret
thoughts that blasted every hope?

His senses failed him the moment the visitors appeared. His convulsions
returned with double force, and a fourth servant was obliged to be called in,
to assist the others in holding him. He raved on the names of Maserini and
Sampieno; then, spent with exertion, bit his under lip with such violence that
blood flowed abundantly from his mouth.

His ravings again returned. By a sudden snatch he disengaged himself from
hold; and, with a kind of exultation in hi^ ^ace, which was now partly black,
he tore a large root of h^^ from his head; then, with a stifled laugh, fell
lifeless ^n the pillow.

Such was the end of the most tyrannical, cruel and unexampled villain -- a
disgrace to the world, a scourge to his fellow creatures, and a curse to
himself. Ambition was the bait that beguiled him: and that ambition did but
mock him when he lay a disfigured corpse under the hangings of an elegant
canopy.

Alfred, the baron, and Rabourne, withdrew to the next apartment, all greatly
shocked. They were informed that Matilda was in one of the lower rooms; the
cries of the dying D'Ollifont were too much for her.

The news of the count's death was no sooner told than the whole house was in
considerable confusion, and the baron requested to know who was to have the
management of his affairs. The steward informed them, the will mentioned it
should be jointly executed by Mr. Maserini and himself. He assured them every
thing was left in so exact a manner that it would occasion them very little
trouble. -- The count, before their arrival, had confessed every circumstance
relative to the murders, which would, without any trial, put them at once into
possession of their right.

Rabourn produced the will, and it contained every thing he had mentioned.
After having invested him with po^^er to give all necessary orders relative to
the funeral and other matters, they departed to their lodgings.

The disagreeable scene they had just witnessed, was repaid by the sight of
lord Milverne, who received Alfred's letter the very day he sent off his own,
and followed himself immediately.

He congratulated them on the fortunate conclusion of their affairs, though he
declared he was malicious enough to wish these events had happened after his
alliance with Matilda, that he might have been able to have proved to the world
the disinterestedness of his love.

That evening he accompanied them to madame Bosivi's. Lord Albourne received
him as an old friend, lady Caroline, as an acquaintance whom she had much
esteem for, and madame Bosivi, with the utmost politeness.

It is impossible to conceive a more happy party than the persons who then sat
down to supper. The recollection of their past misfortunes endeared to them
their present felicity; and they all agreed that a life tinctured with
adversity, receives that glow of happiness which an insipid medium never
produces.

CHAPTER. XLVI.
-- Evening comes at last, serene and mild:
When after the long vernal day of life,
Enamored more, as more remembrance swells
With many a proof of recollected love,
Together down they sink in social sleep;
Together freed, their gentle spirits fly
To scenes where love and bliss immortal reign.
THOMPSON.
-- Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history.
SHAKSPEARE.
THAT virtue and vice are their own rewards, is a proverb generally allowed; it
is certainly founded on truth, and exemplified in almost every occurrence of
life.

It requires but little observation, to perceive that the comforts, even the
superfluities of the world, procured by means not consistent with the moral
government of mankind, lose the chief part of those allurements which tempted
the possessor to gain them by illicit transactions. The man who partakes of a
scanty, hard-earned meal by his own industry, enjoys more than he who eats of
the sumptuous repast, at the expense of a fellow-creature's misery and
oppression.

This position was proved in D'Ollifont, and the principal sufferers by his
villainy, the baron, Alfred, and his sister: by accounts they now heard from
Rabourn, the count underwent far more than (...), though all three under the
severest lash of adversity: for he was tortured by a guilty conscience, and
haunted by phantoms of a disturbed and disordered brain.

His funeral was conducted by the steward, who in the will was left a small but
decent competency; and to it Alfred, his sister, and the baron, added a
considerable sum. The legacies were many of them overpaid, by their joint
consent, to those who were in want of it. In a very short time all the affairs
were properly settled, and the children of the Maserini family became possessed
of all their right, by a short though regular process in law. Agnes and Oliver
returned at the time appointed; the latter was introduced to the baron, and
Alfred (now count Maserini) and received from them no inconsiderable marks of
favor.

Matilda conceived it would be proper Agnes's mother should be sent for, to be
present at her daughter's marriage, which was consummated about a fortnight
after their arrival at Paris. She returned the count and his sister a thousand
thanks, and received from both a handsome present. It was now determined,
Oliver and his wife should set off for Grasville Abbey. Count Maserini intended
to have it put in repair, and fixed upon him as a proper person to superintend
them, as he had been originally brought up in that line; for Leonard, who was
still there, was too much advanced in years to take the care upon himself. It
was, however, left entirely to their own inclination, and they both gladly
accepted the offer.

It was about a week after their departure, when the count Maserini and lady
Caroline Albourne, lord Milverne and Matilda, were on one day united. Lord
Albourne and the baron sighed at the altar, and could hardly stifle a (...),
the mixture of acute sorrow and extreme pleasure; half of it might be said to
arise at the recollection of the time when they were together at a similar
ceremony, the former as the enraptured bridegroom, the la^ter as the doting
parent: the other half was occasioned by their present felicity, though under
different characters; the bridegroom transformed to the parent, and the parent
to the still further title of grandfather, viewing in the child of his departed
daughter every virtue, every female accomplishment, he though^ he had for ever
lost, when deprived of the affectionate tie of parental tenderness.

Both the count and lord Milverne now saw themselves possessed of every
happiness they could even form a wish to have procured: this thought, as it
crossed the mind of the former, by a rain of ideas incident to it, brought to
his imagination that moment, when, with the sword of his departed father, he
was going to put an end to his existence in a sit of phrensy and despair. He
blushed at the recollection of an event which he now almost shuddered to think
of; it held forth to him a striking lesson against a want of fortitude, and a
rash unmanly precipitation.

They remained at Paris but a week after the marriage, and then set off for
England, as it was their invention to spend in London the remainder of the
winter season (which was now just commenced) return to France about June, and
the latter end of the year proceed to Grasville Abbey, which would by that time
be ready for their reception.

Their arrival in this metropolis was immediately known in the fashionable
world; and one of the first parties that received the general whisper, was that
of lady Peviquil. They had slept in their house in Berkley-square but one
night, when the next morning their breakfast table was covered with cards of
invitation and congratulations from different quarters, and among them one from
sir Anthony and his lady.

Most of the persons whose names they mentioned, called in the course of the
morning, and formed a complete groupe or levee; the chief part of which had
shunned them with adverse eyes in the chilling part of their misfortunes, but
who now courted their acquaintance with a sycophantic earnestness, when they
found them encircled by the warm rays of prosperity and affl^^^^e. All these
were received with a very cool and distant civility, and among them was lady
Peviquil, who, with the true deceitful simper of a courtier, descended from an
elegant equipage, and, forcing her way through a crowd of the great world to
the upper end of the drawing room, in the most whining tone of tenderness
declared herself "happy beyond expression at seeing them returned to England."
Her compliments were received as those of a person whom they had never before
seen; and her ladyship had the mortification to return with her pride extremely
hurt at the reception she received.

Having spent the allotted time in London with considerable happiness and
felicity, their time equally divided among select friends and public places of
amusement, they returned to Paris, and the hours floated, away here in the same
round of enjoyment. They several times saw both Henry Peviquil and his sister;
the former every day became more low and depraved; the latter, forsaken by the
man whom she eloped with from her father's house, was now the ^here (...) of an
Italian marquis, whose character by no means added luster to his title.

At their return to Grasville Abbey they found all the repairs finished
entirely to their liking; and though the structure was by no means robbed of
its gothic elegance in the external part, yet it was made far more convenient
and comfortable in the internal: the chapel was handsomely fitted up, and a
tomb erected to the memory of their father, mother and aunt. They found the
good old Leonard in perfect health; and his happiness at seeing them was
extreme.

The count received a promise from lord Milverne and his sister that they would
spend three months in every year with them at the abbey. It was settled the
baron and lord Albourne should do the same; Paris agreed with them both far
better than Italy; and they determined to live together the remainder of their
lives.

The mansion of D'Ollifont was fixed on for their habitation; and madame Bosivi
consented to take the care of their household upon herself. No great distance
from it lord Milverne bought an elegant chateau, which both himself and Matilda
determined to make their general residence; though his lordship made her
promise to spend some little time every two years in England.

Both lord Milverne and the count had the felicity, about twelve months after
their marriage, to clasp to their bosoms, under the tender title of father, a
blooming infant; the former a girl, the latter a boy. The families were seldom
divided; for, when lord Milverne and his lady, with the baron and lord
Albourne, had spent the allotted time with the count, both he and the countess,
after a very short interval, returned the visit at Paris.

Agnes and Oliver, as soon as the repairs were entirely finished at Grasville
Abbey, returned to lord and lady Milverne at Paris; the latter was made steward
and principal overseer of the chateau, while his wife was the favorite and
friendly attendant of Matilda.

Leonard remained at Grasville Abbey; and, being too much advanced in years to
take upon himself the office of superintendant, lived in it with a servant to
attend him, received a handsome income from the count, and an annual present
from lady Milverne.

The principal persons of this little history enjoyed their present happiness,
by a recollection of former scenes of adversity, which taught them to feel for
the unfortunate, and at the same time gave them the highest gratification, by
being enabled to alleviate their distresses.

Sir Anthony and lady Peviquil continued their round of fashionable folly, till
age impeded their course, and cast an insipidity on those scenes which had
constituted the chief pleasure of their lives. No relief opened itself to their
view; dissipation had been their whole study; and, when that failed, their
existence became a burden.

Void of all fortitude, disgusted with each other, and the world in general,
they sunk into their grave much about the same time, and with the same horrors
before them; leaving behind but just property enough to pay their debts, and
bury them in the pompous manner they had ordered.

Henry Peviquil continued his run of gambling in France for near four years,
when he became so notorious in that country as to be obliged to quit it for
England. From his father, however, he could get no assistance; and, after a
period of eight years, during which time he subsisted by common swindling, he
was taken up for a highway robbery, received sentence of death, but took the
king's mercy by accepting transportation, and died on the voyage.

His sister lived with the Italian marquis before mentioned, for about two
years; when she eloped with his valet de chamber into Switzerland, where he
used her exceedingly ill; and, for an attempt on his life, she was obliged to
fly to a remote part of the country, was suddenly taken ill, and died in her
twenty-eighth year.

Oliver and Agnes led a life of the utmost serenity and comfort: they had
several children, which proved a comfort to their increasing years (...) and
all turned out valuable members of society.

The good old Leonard enjoyed but a few years of felicity; he however lived to
spend some time with every blessing he could wish, and to see all those scenes
realised that his most sanguine ideas could have formed.

Lord Albourne died about twelve years after his daughters's marriage; the
baron felt most severely his loss; in short, this might be said to be the first
event that occasioned any considerable damp on the happiness of the two
families. The chief part of his lordship's fortune was left to his daughter,
and a considerable legacy to lord and lady Milverne.

The baron Sampieno, after lord Albourne's death, resided with lord Milverne,
as madame Bosivi died of an apoplexy a few months before his lordship. He lived
to a very advanced age, blessed with years of happiness, that might be said in
a great measure to repay him for former misfortunes. He left the whole of his
fortune between the count and lord Milverne.

The count and countess of Maserini, with lord and lady Milverne, enjoyed a
long series of happiness and felicity. They had each several children, and
lived to see them prove an ornament to their rank and the community at large.
Time heightened their blessings, and their declining years were like a setting
sun, which gathers fresh splendor as it gradually vanishes from our sight.

THE END.

