ELECTION SERMON, 1799.

A SERMON PREACHED AT CONCORD, JUNE 6 th 1799, BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THE
GOVERNOR, THE HONORABLE COUNCIL, SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.

BY SETH PAYSON, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH AT RINDGE.

PORTSMOUTH: NEW HAMPSHIRE, PRINTED BY JOHN MELCHER, PRINTER TO THE STATE,

1799.

A SERMON PREACHED AT CONCORD, JUNE 6th, 1799.
ECCLESIASTES, IX -- 18. --:BUT ONE SINNER DESTROYS MUCH GOOD.
THE tendency of our holy religion to promote order, good government, and
social happiness is indisputable. To invalidate this proof of the divinity of
the scriptures, we find the infidel pleading, that this excellent system of
doctrines was doubtless the contrivance of some crafty politician to restrain,
the otherwise ungovernable passions of the human heart. Let him enjoy his
argument -- still will we glory in a Revelation, which, while it opens the way
to immortal bliss, affords the most important maxims of wisdom to direct our
present conduct, and the most effectual restraints for the corrupt propensities
of human nature. In his word, no less than by his providence, is Jehovah
pleased to express a parental care for our happiness in this world. There we
are taught the important lessons of industry, economy, and prudence, and warned
against those ruinous paths to which youth and inexperience, as well as a wrong
temper often expose us. The sacred volume is indeed a stranger to that
machivalian policy, so necessary to promote the purposes of a lawless ambition;
but in every sphere in which we can be called to act, he who wishes to unite
dignity and usefulness, with a good conscience, may find in the scriptures a
light to his feet, and a lamp to his paths. Copying after the model there
prescribed, he will ever act honorably, he will compel respect, he cannot fail
to be useful. Infinite wisdom made use of the observing and penetrating genius
of Solomon to communicate those ethical and political remarks, which more
immediately relate to the economy of human life, and which so much abound in
his writings. -- Among these, the aphorism in the text leads to several
observations not entirely foreign to the present occasion. -- The object of the
following discourse will be --

To illustrate the general observation in the text, that one sinner destroys
much good.

AND, to attempt an answer to this question, which the subject naturally
suggests, viz. whence wicked men derive their ability of destroying good, or
doing mischief.

AGREEABLY to the proposed method let us

FIRST attend to the illustration of this truth, that one sinner destroys much
good.

IT is observable that no particular kind of good is here specified. We are
left to apply the observation to every species of good which creatures can
enjoy, and still it will be found a truth that one sinner destroys much good.
-- Sin is misery. -- It is the bane of every thing which deserves the
appellation of good; and blasts every blessing, which the kind parent of the
universe bestows upon his creatures. -- It has expelled the morning stars of
glory from their original heaven, and banished man from his primeval paradise.
Of all the multiplied sorrows attendant on human life, sin is the fruitful
source. -- The celebrated Milton did not exhibit the creature of a poetical
fancy, but a solemn truth, when he represented sin bringing forth death. But
however general the observation, the inspired writer doubtless had some
particular kind of good more specially in view; and which, from the connection,
appears to be political or national good. -- The text stands in connection with
this sentence, "wisdom is better than weapons of war;" that is, wise and
prudent measures often secure to a nation speedily, and honorably, without
danger, and without expense, those blessings and privileges, which rash and
foolish men plunge into all the horrors of war to obtain. A truth happily
illustrated, I conceive, by the conduct of our Federal Government under the
cruel injuries, and commercial depredations, both of England and France, wisdom
is better than weapons of war; this observation is immediately followed by the
text; but one sinner destroys much good; -- When in such national
embarrassments the voice of wisdom is disregarded, and some rash counselor
prevails to hurry a nation into arms, we then have a glaring conviction of this
truth, that one sinner destroys much good. Glory to him who still affords
America his divine guidance and protection, that he has preserved us from
following such pernicious counsels; by many so strenuously advocated.

But granting that the inspired writer had a more particular reference to
political good, which it appears he had, still, the unlimited nature of the
expression was doubtless designed to teach us, that sin is destructive of every
good.

OF this truth, the proofs are so numerous, that the only task is to select
those which are calculated to impress the mind with the deepest conviction. --
Every page in the history of man is a comment on the text, and the experience
of every day affords a new confirmation of its truth.

WHAT ruin does the sinner bring upon himself? "He who does this destroys
his own soul, is the language of inspiration." Such is the nature and faculties
of the human soul, its vast susceptibility both of pleasure and suffering, its
amazing activity, and growing capacities, its high destination, and endless
existence, that its importance exceeds all calculation. -- The enjoyment, or
the sufferings of a kingdom, and indeed of the whole human race, as it respects
the present life, cannot be compared with what each individual soul in the
whole duration of its existence, will either enjoy in the possession of the
Supreme Good, or suffer under the tokens of his displeasure. He who rebels
against his maker -- hardens his heart in impenitency, and rejects the offers
of reconciliation and peace, destroys his own soul, and with it, all that good
which he is capacitated to receive in the enjoyment of his Maker. The mind
under the influence of a wicked temper is no less incapacitated for happiness,
than the blind of enjoying the pleasures of sight; or the deaf of receiving
entertainment from the harmony of sounds.

BUT these considerations, substantiated as they are by the declarations of
eternal truth, are no proofs of the point in the view of the unbeliever. -- He
regards them as the dreams of enthusiasm, and demands evidence of which he can
feel the force. -- Such evidence there is in a melancholy abundance as will
convince him, if he is not as destitute of reason as he is of faith.

WHEN we see the slave of avarice, or ambition, destroying the comfort of life
to hoard useless wealth, and acquire an empty name; or the prodigal, wasting
his goods and destroying his health in riotous living. When we look into
families where boisterous passion reigns, and drives far away peace and
domestic comfort -- or into families where the vicious courses of a parent has
introduced poverty and distress, and entailed diseases on his posterity, how
naturally do such scenes evidence the propriety of the wise man's observation,
that one sinner, etc. -- Whence flow the tears of the weeping penitent but from
a reflection on the far greater good he might have enjoyed himself, and been
instrumental of to others, had he not harkened to the allurements of folly? and
often at the gloomy close of a guilty life has the sinner himself been compelled,
by the torturing reflections of his own mind to acknowledge, that the ways of
transgressors are hard. As we raise our views to the higher scenes of life, we
find, as men became possessed of power, or are distinguished for their
abilities, their capacities for doing mischief are proportionably increased.
How often do we find the heavy calamities which fell an ancient Israel
attributed to the corrupting influence of Jeroboam and Ahab? When we trace the
victories of an Alexander, and the ambition of a Caesar, or take a view of the
more modern lives of Louis XIV, or the celebrated Prussian Frederick, we find
the groans of enslaved millions, of depopulated kingdoms, and nations bleeding
at a thousand wounds attesting the truth of the text, and witnessing the
calamities which a lawless ambition po^^s on the human race. What seeds of
misery did Mahomet bring from his cell, when he came forth a pretended prophet
of the Most High, to propagate by fire and sword his fabulous revelation? Of
what incalculable mischiefs was Loyola the author when he invented the
celebrated order of the Jesuits, which, for so many years were the disturbers
of the peace, and corruptors of the morals of mankind? And judging from what
has already taken place, may we not predict still greater evils from the
jesuitical author of the present existing order of the Illuminati. -- An order
professedly founded on Atheism, at war with every religious principle and moral
sentiment, and with every Government which refuses submission to its influence.
But it is needless to recur to particular instances, which might be multiplied
without number. What is the history of mankind but pages of mourning, of
lamentation and woe; scenes of tyranny, oppression, carnage and destruction,
the natural fruit of the unrestrained lusts of the human heart?

IT may be proper however to observe here, that no less destructive is the
poison which ha^ flowed from the pens of those who have endeavored by their
publications to promote vice and irreligion. The writings of a Shaftsbury, a
Volney, a Voltaire, a Chesterfield, and a Pain, among many others, will be
considered as proofs of this truth by all who believe that virtue and piety are
the basis of happiness.

IT will also doubtless be expected, that so convincing an instance of the
pernicious tendency of corrupt principles and practices as the French nation
has exhibited in their late revolution, will not be passed in silence. This
instance is indeed perfectly in point; but the speaker must beg leave to refer
the application of it to your private reflections; as time, and abilities would
both fail him in the attempt to describe such surpassing scenes of horror.
Scenes, in which every principle both of natural and revealed religion, every
moral sentiment, and dictate of humanity have been prostrated in the dust; and
in which every effort of that wisdom which the Apostle characterizes as
earthly, sensual, and devilish has been exerted to obtain universal domination,
and to rivet heavier chains on those whom she had lulled into security with
promises of freedom. Happy will be America, if the injuries which we have
received, do but teach us to avoid her crimes, to escape her destructive
policy, and to cherish those virtuous sentiments, the annihilation of which in
France, has rendered her wretched in herself, and a scourge to mankind. But
some may ask with surprise, can France, surrounded with a train of victories;
be wretched! Yes, if the detestation of the good and virtuous part of mankind,
if a most unjust and tyrannical government, if religious persecution, a ruined
commerce, and exhausted finances, if a boundless ambition, if robbery and
injustice in their blackest forms, or the blood of innocent millions crying for
vengeance, if these things can make a nation wretched, then is France wretched
-- and if we draw just conclusions from the sacred volume, what she has already
suffered will be but the beginning of sorrows.

AND wretched every nation must be where similar principles prevail. With as
much reason may it be asserted, that poison may be taken without danger, and
that fevers and consumptions have no tendency to effect the dissolution of the
body, as, that the prevalence of wickedness is not destructive to the body
politic. -- Indeed the most mortal diseases may be lingering, and poison may
not produce immediate death; so those corruptions which sap the foundations of
national existence may be gradual in their operation -- internal strength or
weakness of constitution, and many foreign considerations, may either retard or
accelerate the final catastrophe, and the ablest State physicians may be
disappointed in prognosticating the particular period of its dissolution; but,
that national wickedness tends to, and persisted in will produce national ruin,
is as sure as the truth of history, as the truth of revelation.

THE tendency of national wickedness to the destruction of (...) good, may be
inferred -- from the (...) tendency of things -- and from the moral perfections
of the Supreme Governor, as exhibited in his word.

FIRST, this event results from the natural constitution, and tendency of
things -- the progress of wickedness, and its connection with the ruin of the
people among whom it prevails, may be easily traced. We find, that in
proportion as the principles of religion and morality are weakened, those lusts
and passions, which are so prevalent in the human heart come into operation.
Vice begins to lay aside her mask, and come forward with open face. The humble
domestic virtues are despised, and plainness and simplicity of manners become
the objects of ridicule. In consequence of this depraved taste the youthful
mind is suffered to grow up, unformed by instruction, unrestrained by
discipline; or instructed only to aim at frivolous and showy accomplishments. A
generation rises up which "fears not GOD, nor regards man; self willed are
they, and not afraid to speak evil of dignities." The social feelings give
place to selfishness, envy, and emulation; an emulation to excel, not in
substantial virtues, but in titles, in wealth, and splendid appearance. Every
thing now yields to a rage for show and parade; and honest industry fails to
supply the waste of prodigality. The next consequence is, that public taxes,
however reasonable or necessary, become a ground of complaint, and every
expense, which is not devoted to luxury is submitted to with reluctance.
Extortion, oppression, and all the tricks of fraud and knavish speculation are
resorted to, for a supply to the demands of extravagance. Bribery and
corruption are of course introduced -- justice becomes venal -- the most
important interests of the public, are compeled to give way to private and
selfish views -- and pretended patriots become as numerous, as real ones are
rare; that is, persons who are seeking public favor and emolument, under the
covert of a pretended zeal for the public good. This is the proper crisis for
ambitious men to promote parties and factions, to mislead the unwary multitude,
and to turn the tide of public odium against those virtuous few, who are the
remaining props of a sinking State. And this is the time for any foreign enemy,
by the secret influence of bribery, by supporting internal enemies, and
dividing and distracting the Counsels of a nation, to effect that, which the
most powerful armaments, in a virtuous state of society would have attempted in
vain. This is the progress, and evident tendency of vice; and by this progress
it has overturned Empires and States deemed unconquerable. The efforts by which
the small republics of Athens and Sparta withstood, and finally defeated, the
almost incredible armaments of Darius and Xerxes, are instances never to be
forgotten, of the irresistible force which republican virtues give to a nation.
And the sequel of the Grecian history affords an equally memorable proof of the
fatal effects of a prevailing thirst for gold, and the enfeebling influence of
luxury and dissipated manners. The Persians had long found them invincible in
arms, they at length applied their gold and silver to obtain partisans, and
promote divisions among them. By these weapons they succeeded. The heroic
virtues displayed at Marathon, and the straits of Thermopyloe, were found no
more in Greece. Their Councils became divided, every measure of defense was
weakened, if not entirely defeated, and those arms, which had been so
successfully employed against their enemies, were turned upon themselves.

As a further evidence of the tendency of sinful practices to destroy national
good; we may ask, why is not America quiet and happy? In the enjoyment of every
privilege and blessing which any human government can bestow, surrounded with
the rich bounties of an indulgent providence, and possessing resources, which,
properly applied, would leave us nothing to fear from the united powers of
Europe, yet why, in such circumstances of security, are we filled with
continual alarms? Why are men of the most approved wisdom and fidelity, men who
have been firm to their country's cause in her most trying scenes, and whom we
have justly acknowledged as our political saviors, yet, why are these men,
without the least apparent cause, held up as objects of suspicion; and every
art used to fill the minds of the citizens with groundless jealousies? Why is
every measure of our Federal Government, though evidently marked with wisdom,
and especially every measure calculated for our defense, the object of censure?
Why in particular cannot a dangerous alien be required to depart, nor a
seditious citizen punished, who has been convicted of having invented and
propagated known falsehoods, with a design to injure the government, and raise a
prejudice against its officers, but immediately a cry of unconstitutional
oppression is sounded through the Union? And still more to astonish us, we find
those very persons who have such a refined sense of the liberties of the
subject, and such a jealous concern for the freedom of mankind, approving in
the gross all the measures of the French Government -- even of that most
arbitrary act of oppression which drove her worthiest, and most honorable
citizens into banishment, without the form of a trial -- and of that, which
compels every citizen to open his doors to customers on the christian Sabbath,
however disposed he may be to spend the sacred hours in devotion. And why, we
may further ask, are the greatest exertions of the yet firm friends of America,
necessary to prevent her from flying, like a fascinated bird, into the ravenous
maw of that monster, which has already devoured so many nations, whom she had
first deceived with her wiles? -- These are questions which any one can answer;
and they lead to the sentiment expressed in the text, that one sinner
destroys much good.

SECONDLY, from the moral perfections of the Supreme Ruler, as exhibited in his
word, no less than from the evident tendency of things, we are assured, that
national iniquities are connected with national ruin, and therefore, that he
who is instrumental in corrupting the morals of a nation, is a sinner who
destroys much good. As societies do not exist, as such, in a future state, it
seems reasonable in this view to expect, that God in his righteous providence
will reward, or punish nations here with a degree of exactness, which, we are
not to expect will take place with respect to individuals, in this present
life. This idea is fully confirmed by the account the sacred history has
transmitted to us of the divine dispensations toward the Jews, and other
nations. Even the chosen people of God, could not obtain possession of the
promised land, until the inhabitants had filled the measure of their
iniquities; but when in the judgment of infinite wisdom, it became necessary to
make them a public example, in vain they looked for safety to their chariots of
iron, or their cities walled to heaven. The same divine impartiality, and moral
rectitude appears in his conduct toward his favored Israel; when they forgot
his benefits, and forsook their GOD, they fell an easy prey to every invader,
but when by unfeigned repentance they sought his favor, again they were blessed
with his indulgent smiles. But it is needless to multiply particular instances,
for Jehovah has published the following as the fixed universal rule of his
government, that "when I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a
kingdom, to build and to plant it, if it shall do evil in my sight, that it
obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would
benefit them." From this principle, that national guilt is connected with
national misery, the inference is plain, that the sinner is virtually the enemy
of his country, and a destroyer of its good. In this view we find both Achan,
and Ahab denounced, the troublers of Israel. The sinner is eminently a troubler
of Israel when he is a person in authority, and entrusted with the important
interests of a people. The wise advice of Jethro to Moses was, to select for
his copartners in government, not only able men, but such as feared GOD, men of
truth, and hating covetousness; such only will prove truly blessings to their
country. One of the important advantages resulting from the study of history
is, the striking view it gives of the dangerous consequences of entrusting men
with power, who are destitute of any fixed principle of morality and religion.
As far as a regard to interest and reputation will stimulate, we may expect a
degree of fidelity; but in those critical and trying periods, when, to be
faithful to his trust, would probably deprive him of an honorable post, injure
his worldy interest, or draw upon him the odium of the public, what, in such
circumstances, can induce a magistrate, who fears not GOD, has no respect to
the rights of conscience, nor feels the powers of the world to come, to be
faithful to his country's cause? And besides, the examples of unprincipled men
will be more or less contaminating. Their immoral feelings, and their contempt
of those institutions, which are the great supports of religion, will
unavoidably influence their conduct; and we need not be told how powerfully the
examples of exalted characters, and especially their bad examples operate on
the public mind.

BUT perhaps the sinner will consider the text as compliment to his abilities,
and be pleased with the idea, that he is capable of destroying so much good:
for most men consider great capacities as more honorary than a good heart; and
do mischief, merely to raise themselves into consequence; as he who burned the
temple of Diana to perpetuate his name. -- Whether a capacity to do mischief is
so honorable as some imagine, will appear in the consideration of a question
which arises from the subject, and to which the proposed method leads us,

SECONDLY, to attend, viz. Whence sinners derive their ability of destroying
good. The success of the evil doer is no evidence of his abilities; but results
from the excellent nature of good -- and the various means and instruments of
mischief which this imperfect state affords.

FIRST. The excellent nature of good, and the delicacy of its constitution
renders it very liable to injury. -- All good depends on the existence of
certain proportions, and exact relations, and which must be kept complete, or
the good they produce is at an end. To destroy good is but to derange that
order, or alter that nice proportion; to stop a wheel, or to draw a pin. --
What a trifling cause may disorder that amazing display of wisdom, the human
frame. -- A spark, which a child may communicate, may destroy what the most
ingenious artists have been years in erecting. And we are not insensible what
disturbances, very contemptible agents have been able to produce both in this,
and other nations. -- Hence, to do good, is infinitely more excellent, and
requires unspeakably greater abilities than to do mischief. Good, can result
only from proportionate power, wisdom, and benevolence; but ignorance, or
malice, with a small degree of power, may destroy much good.

SECONDLY. It is further observable, that in this imperfect state the means of
doing good are few, and the difficulties to be overcome are great, whereas, the
ignorance, the weakness, and wickedness of mankind, afford innumerable ready
instruments to the workers of iniquity -- The way of doing good, like the way
of salvation is strait and narrow. -- Much patience, fortitude, and
perseverance are necessary. -- We must expect to encounter the prejudices, the
passions, and ignorance of mankind -- we shall find but few to assist, but many
to oppose and counteract us.

But he who is set on doing mischief has both wind and tide. No scruples
usually restrain such men from using any means which will best promote their
designs. Falsehood, and all the base arts of deception are their common weapons.
The evil doer will embrace you as a friend that he may better direct the fatal
dagger to your heart, and appear as an Angel of Light, to give the surer
success to his infernal purposes. Instruments of mischief are easily found. The
prejudices, the lusts, and passions of men, all which strongly oppose him who
wishes to promote any good design, lend their willing aid to the workers of
iniquity. For instance, is the sinner aiming to blast the reputation of his
neighbor? He can scarce invent any thing so absurd, or notoriously false, but
he will find many eager to hear, and as eager to propagate, and to give
credibility to the scandal. Or is he disposed to foment divisions in Church or
State? In one he meets with a restless factious spirit, whose soul is an enemy
to peace. -- In another he finds a man of a ruined fortune who pants for
revolutions, and public disturbances, in which he can lose nothing, but may
gain much. A third, according to his wishes, is already looking up with a
mixture of envy and ambition, to those possessing stations of dignity, of which
his vanity tells him he alone is worthy. And a large multitude, who, through
want of information lie open to all the arts of deception. These, and many
similar characters, which exist in every society, are the ready instruments of
the evil doer, and willingly join their forces to promote his pernicious
designs. Therefore, that wicked men of weak capacities are capable of doing
much mischief, is no just ground of exultation to them, nor of surprise to
others.

THIS view is calculated to excite caution in those who wish to counteract
their devices.

THE works of evildoers are works of darkness. They often obtain their ends by
arts too secret to be seen, and too abominable to be suspected. -- Hence, good
men have oftener been foiled by the arts, than by the arms of their enemies.
Inexperienced themselves in fraud, it is not easy for them to believe, what
they are often compeled, when too late, to acknowledge for truth.

THE virtuous Swiss could not believe that the French Government had no regard
to treaties; nor could the King of Naples credit the idea, that the officers of
his army were in the pay of the Directory. And who in America could have
credited a few years past, what is now abundantly substantiated, that, while
France apparently espoused our interests with so much warmth, its real objects
were, not simply the humiliation of her hated rival, but to reduce America
itself to a state of dependence, more abject than that from which she pretended
to raise it. That, their utmost policy was exerted to exhaust all our resources
by continuing the war; or otherwise to have subjected us to terms of peace far
more disadvantageous, than our professed enemies themselves would have imposed.
Such arts are usual weapons of evildoers, and against these weapons a wakeful
caution is a necessary shield. It is far from the object of these remarks to
introduce a spirit of jealousy into society; a spirit productive of none of
those advantages some attribute to it, but generating endless tumults and
disorders, feuds and insurrections. There is however another extreme, a supine
negligence, an incredulous confidence, which is at no time a real virtue, and
is often found a dangerous weakness. To suspect those who merit our confidence,
is hateful jealousy; to repose confidence in one who has evidenced a
disposition to betray and injure us, is certainly a weakness. The countenance
given to those whose principles and practices are notoriously unfriendly to the
interests of America, and the backwardness of many to contribute to the
necessary means of defense, even while they acknowledge the danger which
threatens their country, indicate, that we need to be more deeply impressed
with the dangers which surround us, and more attentive to this truth, that one
sinner may destroy much good.

THE addresses, which the occasion dictates, will now close the subject. -- In
the first place, I would beg leave to address myself to your Excellency, whom
the free, and general suffrages of your fellow-citizens, have again called to
the first office in the State. Possessed with sentiments of sincere esteem for
your personal virtues, with a grateful sense of the important services you have
already rendered your country, and venerating your official character as the
minister of high heaven, and the representative of the Supreme Ruler, I cannot
in this address be guilty of intentional rudeness; but ill should I discharge
the duties of this day, were I to substitute flattering titles, for those
solemn truths, the occasion is calculated to inspire.

YOU will, therefore, permit me sir, to remark, that proportionate to the
dignities, are the duties of your exalted station. Power, and authority are
perverted talents, when they are not exercised in doing good. In the expressive
language of the poet.

" Heaven's favors here are trials, not rewards;
" A call to duty, not release from care."
O SIR, you will not forget that He who has appointed us our respective
stations, and has furnished us with capacities and opportunities for doing
good, observes our conduct; that at his impartial tribunal we must render our
final account, and receive according to our works. You will not be unmindful of
the solemn trust with which you are invested; while the most important concerns
of your county, the interests of religion, and all that is dear to man are
committed to your care, in connection with the other guardians of the State,
and at a period so interesting as the present, when the powers of darkness are
exerting all their subtilty to involve this happy country, this asylum of
religion and liberty, in ruin; and when the danger is so much increased by the
unhappy prevalence of a jealous disorganizing spirit, which has infected not
individuals only, but too visibly appears in our public councils. To do good is
as laborious, as it is easy to destroy it. Weighty are the cares of Government
when their importance is felt. No small degree of self denial is necessary to
encounter the prejudices and passions of mankind. But how animating the
reflection, that our Glorious Master beholds with an eye of approbation the
trials and conflicts of those, who are faithfully endeavoring to do good, and
that his rich rewards are the blessings of an approving conscience, and crowns
of immortal bliss. Animated and supported by these views, still may it be your
Excellency's highest honor to do good. As a benefactor of your country, may you
long live in the grateful feelings of Americans; and at some far distant
period, possess the more substantial rewards which await the friends and
benefactors of mankind.

To the honorable Council, the honorable Senate, and House of Representatives,
would I also beg leave to present respectful addresses, and cordial
congratulations on this pleasing occasion. To promote the growing greatness of
your happy country, to lead her in the paths of peace, to protect her important
rights, and counteract the devices of her enemies, is the arduous, but
honorable task to which you, our political fathers are now called. If the
observations which have been made are productive of the effects most earnestly
desired by the speaker, you will enter on those important services with minds
penetrated with these sentiments -- that sin is misery -- that religion is the
source, and security of all human blessings -- and that laws are but weak
restraints, where the fear of GOD, and the moral sense of right and duty have
ceased to exist. Under this view you will labor by your private influence and
example, no less than by your official transactions to encourage virtue, and to
discountenance vice and immorality.

MORE effectually to counteract the devices of evil doers, the importance of
united Councils is obvious. The present, is one of those interesting periods,
when a sense of common danger tends to draw to a closer union the real friends
of their country. May these sentiments be fervently cherished, and all local
prejudices, and party views be made to yield to the common interest.

RELIGION has become, if possible, of increased importance to Americans, in
consequence of an uncommon connection between our political and religious
interests. Our enemies are evidently seeking the destruction of our civil
privileges, by undermining their surest defense, our religious and moral
systems. This fortress taken, we fall their prey without resistance. To advance
the interests o^ religion and virtue, and as a direct means thereto, to promote
useful knowledge, and moral instruction, we flatter ourselves will be a leading
object in your deliberations.

ON the preparations for this occasion, it has been my fixed purpose, to avoid
the arrogance of appearing to dictate to the superior wisdom of this venerable
body, the political measures proper to be pursued. I cannot however, leave this
place, with a mind free from guilt, should I neglect to beg your attention to
the existing act of this State for the observation of the christian sabbath. I
shall not pretend to enter into the merits of the question, whether the civil
authority can properly give their legislative support to an institution, which
has been justly considered, not only as the great palladium of religion, but as
contributing, in a variety of ways, to promote the civil interests of mankind;
and as particularly favorable for communicating moral instruction to the public
mind. The existence of the act is a proof, that the interference of government
was considered as proper. But if any interference was proper, why not an
effectual one? The act referred to, is manifestly loaded with embarrassments,
apparently designed to prevent its efficacy. Whether an act of this nature, is
more injurious, or beneficial I shall not pretend to determine; but it is
devoutly to be wished, that the governments of a christian country would appear
as engaged to support the christian sabbath, as the government of France is to
support the honors of their decadi. The call of duty is obeyed, and your wisdom
must decide. Feeling the dependence of all created nature on its glorious
author, you will seek, and I pray that you may receive, instruction from the
great fountain of light.

A few observations to this numerous assembly will conclude this discourse.

FATHERS, BRETHREN AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
WITH pleasure we recognize on this joyful occasion, this great leading
principle both in our State and Federal Government, that the scource of power
is the people. This day brings into view the pleasing truth, that we are still
in the full, and undisturbed possession of the important privilege of choosing
to whom, among many worthy citizens, we will commit our most precious political
interests. You now see before you those venerable characters to whose superior
wisdom, information and patriotism you have committed the weighty concerns of
government. -- Let me ask! are they not men in whom you can confide? men of
known wisdom, and approved fidelity? men of your own choice? Let them then have
your confidence; and cordially and firmly unite with them in maintaining the
authority of the laws, and the inviolability of the constitution. As we would
exhibit a character becoming men and christians, and approve ourselves capable
of enjoying the blessings of a rational freedom, let us fixedly discountenance
a practice, which has unhappily become too prevalent, of speaking evil of
dignities, of indulging groundless suspicions of our rulers, and criminating,
with unbounded licentiousness, the measures of Government. A practice as
unreasonable and wicked, as it is ruinous and destructive. Our enemies have
discovered this weakness, and have made it their principal point of attack, to
separate us from our Government, and to destroy our confidence in those exalted
characters, whose faithful exertions in the cause of their country, have justly
rendered them the admiration of the world. It is of no small importance to
Americans to distinguish their real from their pretended friends. In a
political, no less than a religious sense, does the divine caution merit your
attention; beware of false prophets who come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. The man who would persuade you that religion
is calculated to enslave the free born mind, and atheism the only basis of
independence; that a spirit of jealousy is necessary to support a republican
government, that France is a friend to the rights of mankind in general, or of
America in particular; that the venerable character who presides over these
States, is either ignorant of, or unfriendly to their interests, and that
WASHINGTON is betraying the country he so gloriously preserved from ruin at the
hazard of life, and by the sacrifice of every domestic comfort, of men, who
would possess you of such sentiments, beware. They are destroyers of your good.
It would be unjust indeed to attach the odious epithet of sinner to all who
advocate such political opinions -- many doubtless who are real friends to the
interests of their country, are led astray, by the cunning craftiness of those
who lie in wait to deceive, but the prevalence of such principles will
assuredly reduce us to a level with those unhappy nations, from whom we are now
so gloriously distinguished.

O my countrymen! can you endure to see the rising glories of America erased,
and the beautiful fabric which you have erected at such expense sinking into
ruins? will you renounce that GOD who has been so remarkably the GOD, and
Benefactor of America, for the vain phantom of philosophy; and abjure your
religion, that precious boon, for which our pious ancestors prefered a dreary
wilderness, to all the delights of cultivated Europe? Will you servilely bow
the neck to a foreign yoke, and give up your dear posterity to the fraternal
embraces of Frenchmen? To consent to sin, is virtually to consent to this; for
in something thus reproachful, thus deplorable will sin end. We have no enemy
to fear but sin. The united powers of earth and hell cannot wrest from us these
important privileges, until by our own folly and wickedness, we have thrown
down our guard. The perfections of the Supreme Disposer assure us, that he will
not withdraw the blessings his goodness has bestowed, unless our prevailing
iniquities render such a dispensation necessary.

ROUSE then, my countrymen, from your slumbers, and seize the moment of
salvation -- fly from sin as from destruction and death -- fear GOD and keep
his commandments. -- Let not the arts of infidelity rob you of your religion --
(...) to your hearts that dearest gift of indulgent (...) -- beware of the
allurements of luxury -- deal not in bribing gold -- cultivate the humble,
domestic virtues -- pursue useful knowledge -- by instruction and discipline --
endeavor to form the minds of your children to the habits of virtue -- let not
the contracted views of self-interest blind you to the more weighty concerns of
your country, nor tempt you to withdraw your support from religion -- remember
with gratitude your benefactors -- let not the important privilege of choosing
your own rulers be, "as a price in the hand of a fool, who has no heart to
improve it" -- weigh the importance of choosing not only able men, but those
who fear GOD, and regard his oath -- having chosen such, let them have your
confidence; revere them as the ministers of GOD, and be in subjection not only
for wrath, but for conscience sake. In this, and in no other way can we
reasonably expect to enjoy the continuance of our civil and religious
privileges, transmit them to remote posterity; and hope for the plaudit of our
Judge.



