AN ORATION, SPOKEN AT GREENFIELD, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE,
JULY 4th 1799

BY RICHARD E. NEWCOMB, ESQUIRE.

PRINTED AT GREENFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, BY THOMAS DICKMAN, 1799.

THE under signed Committee, in behalf of the Citizens of Greenfield, return
their thanks to RICHARD E. NEWCOMB, Esquire. for his Oration, delivered on the 4th
of July, 1799, and request a Copy, that it may be printed.

CALEB CLAP, THOMAS CHAPMAN, ELIEL GILBERT.

JULY 5, 1799.
AN ORATION.
AT a period like the present, we should discover a degree of ungrateful
stupidity, not to notice an event, so important as the birth day of our
national existence. Standing as I do, young and untaught in the Jurisprudence
of nations, it will not be expected that I should entertain you with an
elaborate political harrangue, or that I should trace, with precision and
accuracy, the causes of the rise and downfall of States and Empires. It shall
be my endeavor, however, to point you to those events that are taking place in
the political and moral world, in which, as a nation, we are immediately or
more remotely interested.

THE history of the discovery and first settlement of this country is, I
presume, familiar to most of you. You need not be told that the heavy hand of
oppression drove our virtuous ancestors from the land that gave them birth,
that the noble spirit of enterprise and the glorious love of Liberty,
stimulated them to build towns and cities in the Wilderness of America. Our
revolutionary war, and the causes that operated to set it in motion, are still
fresh in the minds of many now present, who have witnessed the manly, arduous,
and bloody conflict. The beneficial and glorious effects of that happy event,
are now felt and acknowledged by every grade in society, from the extremity of
Newhampshire, to the remotest boundary of Georgia.

THAT event was succeeded by another, equally important to our respectability
as a nation, and our existence as a government, the adoption of the Federal
Constitution, a system most happily calculated to the genius of our country,
secured equally against the encroachments of Despotism on the one hand, and
Anarchy on the other; a system which has received the plaudits and admiration
of the political sages throughout the world. Under the mild, wise, and virtuous
administration of this government, we have experienced perhaps, a greater share
of peace and prosperity, than was ever the lot of any other people. Our
citizens, enured to habits of industry and economy, neither vicious, nor
extravagant, have acquired to themselves ease and affluence; unaccustomed to
the pomp and parade of European greatness, they have enjoyed the blessings of
their liberty, and the sweets of their labor.

But are there not causes in operation, which are ultimately intended to bring
about a new order of things, and wrest from us these invaluable privileges? Is
there not an extensive combination of artful, designing, and unprincipled
characters, even in our own country, who, with their associates in different
parts of Europe, are conspiring and devising every possible mean, to overthrow
the Federal Government, and introduce the same system of terror and confusion,
of profligacy and vice, which for more than five years past has ravaged and
depopulated no inconsiderable part of the European World.

FRANCE, noted for her ambition, perfidy, insiduousness and intrigue, has, ever
since the close of our revolution, manifested a design upon our Independence,
with an evident intention to annex us to her own dominions; this,
notwithstanding her "Diplomatic Skill," has been discovered in a great variety
of instances. Her first effort was made at concluding the Treaty of Peace, and
about the same time her influence was first discovered to be operating upon,
and biassing certain of our public characters; and to the dishonor of America,
one of our own citizens, a man, who then stood high in the confidence of the
people, was so far duped as to consent to the terms of a treaty, which, if
ratified as was proposed, would have obliged us to look to France, as the
guarantees of our independence, and the protectors of our political privileges;
which would have embarrassed our commerce, abridged the limits of our
territory, and eventually subjugated us to that country. But the penetration
and integrity of Jay and Adams were found sufficient to baffle the policy of
the French Court, and the duplicity of the unprincipled Franklin. These facts
are stated very minutely in the letter of the Secretary of State, which
accompanied the President's message to both Houses of Congress, on the 19th of
January, 1797, and which was published throughout the United States. They are
also particularly detailed in letters from our Commissioners in Paris, in the
years 1782 and 1783, and from members of Congress at the time when the points
with France, and the general treaty of peace were in discussion, and from the
original correspondence of French Agents, and other authentic documents. These
last mentioned papers are principally copied at large by the Rev. Dr. MORSE, in
the Appendix to his Thanksgiving Sermon, in November, 1798.

From these papers it is very clear, that Dr. FRANKLIN was strongly implicated
in French affairs, that he was generally in opinion with the French minister,
count de Vergenes, and contrary to the determination of Mr. JAY, wished to
begin the negotiation with Mr. OSWALD, the British minister, under his first
commission, which did not recognize our Independence, but considered us in the
degrading situation of Colonies, that he (Dr. FRANKLIN) frequently urged the
instructions, to be governed by the advice of the court of France in the
negotiation, alleging that it was their duty to be guided by such advice; the
opinion and the advice of that court as declared by VERGENES, was, "That our
Commissioners should treat with Mr. OSWALD under the first commission,
alleging that it was such as we might have expected, that it was sufficient,
and that our Independence might be secured by treaty." -- The court of France
were opposed to us as to the (...), the boundaries, the Mississippi, and the
Refugees, and used every means in their power, to deprive us of the three
former, and saddle us with the latter; and gave it frequently as their opinion,
(through their minister) that the claims of the British, for compensation to
the Tories were just and politic, and that we ought to accede to them. It
finally appears that "Dr. FRANKLIN was so much in the French interest, at that
time, that he was not consulted on those points which it was necessary to
conceal from the count de Vergenes." The reader who still has doubts of French
intrigue, and the extent of French influence, is requested to turn to the
aforementioned documents, and read for himself.




Here we discover the nature and design of their connection and alliance with
us: Here, also, is shown the extent of their claim upon us for gratitude, that
"National Gratitude," which the Partisans of France in this country have so
repeatedly and exultingly mentioned, to justify their conduct in advocating the
cause of the enemies to Government and Religion, to Order and Morality
throughout the Universe. It Is true that they assisted us; the immediate benefit
of their aid has never been denied; we contracted for their assistance, and we
have given them the compensation stipulated; they have no pecuniary demands,
and why are they entitled to our gratitude? It Is clearly established that their
motives were not only to harrass and weaken their powerful, inveterate, and
mortal enemies, the British; but to unite, inseparably, our interest with
theirs, to strengthen and aggrandize themselves; and they are not the less to
be detested by us, although by our vigilance, under the smiles of the ARRYTER
of EVENTS, we have as yet escaped the vortex, and thwarted their policy. Their
friendship to us, has been the friendship of Joab, and their embraces the kiss
of Judas.

FROM that time to the present they have studiously pursued the same measures;
their diplomatic characters amongst us, have been agents, clothed with
instructions, proper to accomplish this great object. The history of their
different proceedings is a complication of the most unparalleled insolence, and
the most barefaced intrigue, in support of which their official communications
furnish the most undeniable testimony. They have even dared to engage in
rebellion and insurrection against the laws of our country, and to treat with
the most pointed indignity, the virtuous administrators of our Government; they
have not hesitated to "appeal to the people" in language calculated to catch
the popular ear, inflame the passions, and stir up groundless jealousies and
discontents; they have had recourse to misrepresentation and falsehood, to
bribery and corruption; and they have but too well succeeded in creating
divisions and animosities amongst us, in revolutionizing and demoralizing a
party in our country which have at times made an alarming appearance.

When our government began to rouse, to speak in the manly tone of
Independence, these ministers were recalled; and with apparent indignity, and
overbearing haughtiness, they announced the cessation of their public
functions, and departed, leaving behind them the bitterest imprecations, and
threatening us with the vengeance of the "Terrible Republic."

IMMEDIATELY subsequent to this, their astonishing successes in blood and
carnage, in assassination and robberies, gave a new edge to their audacity, and
pushed them on more furiously than ever in their mad career of plunder. Our
overtures for negotiation were spurned at, the Olive Branch was rejected, and
our Envoys, men of the highest respectability, and most unimpeachable
integrity, were trifled with, insulted, and even denied an audience with the
imperious Directory; and without offering to indemnify us for the most
unjustifiable depredations, they demanded a loan, a heavy tribute, as the
preliminary requisite to an examination of the existing controversy, boasting
of our division, their party in this country, and menacing us with the
deplorable condition of Venice and Switzerland.

OUR government in this situation, has conducted with that magnanimity, and
adopted those measures which will do them infinite honor, so long as the rights
of nations, and rational liberty shall be respected in the world. To oppose a
barrier to the career of a nation, who had virtually waged war with all civil
and religious establishments, who had murdered their king, massacred their most
virtuous citizens, and destroyed their government; who had overturned their
altars, slain their priests, burned the oracles of sacred truth, and amidst the
acclamations of deluded thousands denied the existence of a God; who had, with
a rapidity unequalled in the history of nations, spread devastation and misery
wherever they had turned their victorious arms, marking their way with the most
unheard of barbarity, and the most cruel and wanton abuse: I say, to oppose a
sufficient barrier to this wide spreading torrent of desolation, was the
herculian task of the American Counsels. No sooner were the preparatory
measures of defense brought forward, than this same party, these emissaries of
Talleyrand, made their appearance, rallied round the standard of faction, and
more vigilant than a sentinel upon his post, most vehemently opposed every step
which declared our indignation at the treatment of France, which was designed
to protect our commerce from the avaricious grasp of these rapacious monsters,
and defend our country from the threatened invasion. But these pitiful minions
of the "Five headed Monster," these incendiary tools of the "apostate Bishop,"
although taught in the school of Jefferson, although aided by the cunning,
intrigue, and sophistry of Gallatin, and supported by the delusive eloquence of
Nicholas and Livingston, were not able to dupe the steady friends of our
government, and frustrate the policy of the ILLUSTRIOUS ADAMS; a man, whose
name needs not the aid of panegyric, whose merit, abilities, integrity, and
firmness language cannot exalt. Notwithstanding this opposition, warlike
measures were adopted, and a naval system was established, which already makes
a formidable appearance: More than three hundred armed ships are now floating
to protect us from the Pirates of the Sea; by their exertions a new spring is
given to commerce, and business is invigorated; already does the American flag
vie with the mistress of the Ocean; and the GALLANT TRUXTON, whose heroic and
spirited conduct has stamped his name with valor, and entwined his brow with
laurels, has entered the list with the Pride of Europe, the IMMORTAL NELSON.

WASHINGTON, too, the tried VETERAN, who stands unrivalled on the list of same,
who never stretched forth his arm without doing a valiant deed, who never
lifted his sword but to protect and defend the injured rights of human nature,
whose presence is a shield, and whose name is a helmet, He has thrown off the
habiliments of domestic life, laid aside the implements of agriculture, clad
himself with the apparatus of war, and left the tranquil walks of Mount Vernon,
-- and for what? Not to gain to himself new honors, not to enrich his coffers;
but to render a service to that country which he loves as his own, and for
which he has spent the flower of his strength, and the vigor of his abilities.
Our system of defense, and the dissolution of our treaties with France, has
added new luster to the American character, in the view of all Europe, and
given us an elevated situation in the scale of nations; has evinced to the
world that we are not a weak and pusillanimous people; but that we are
determined to maintain our Independence, and support the Government of our own
choice, without being guided by the dictates, awed by the threats, or
influenced by the interference of any foreign power. We ought to know, and to
feel that we are Americans, and as such we ought to be united; united, not only
to repel an invading foe from abroad, but to extirpate the designing and
traitorous enemy from our counsels, from the bosom of our country; united, not
only to support the administration of that government, which protects our
lives, secures our property, and guarantees to us our rights; but to encourage
that religion and morality, which gives a zest to all our enjoyments, sweetens
life, ameliorates affliction, and brightens futurity.

IT has been the vain boast of America, that she was an assylum for the
oppressed from all parts of the world; this has invited not only those who were
disaffected with their own government, traitorous rebels, the enthusiastic
advocates for civil and religious innovations; but fugitives from justice, and
abandoned villains, to fly to our shores. We have received them, with extended
arms, given them our confidence, and elevated them to the seats of legislation:
And it is a fact, that almost every foreigner thus noticed, has been uniformly
and violently opposed to the administration, embarrassed our national concerns,
disgraced our councils, and dishonored our country. To these, and their
mercenary adherents, may we look for the great source of our disunion, and
political dissentions; they have been incessantly sowing the seeds of discord,
haranguing the mob, talking of liberty and equality, the rights of man, and the
reign of reason, which, reduced to practice upon their scheme, is anarchy and
licentiousness, immorality and deism.

THESE are characters, which, if encouraged, which, if suffered to proceed,
will prove more deadly enemies, more hostile to the peace and existence of our
Government, than the spears and bayonets of all the world besides. Their
conduct has a direct tendency to sap the foundation of a Republican Government,
and mar the very pillars of Liberty: They aim a deadly blow at virtue and
religion, and laugh at the idea of moral obligation, without the support and
restraints of which, they know that our government is an easy prey. To destroy
this great tie of civil society, is the grand object of that new species of
philosophy, which is making such astonishing strides through the world,
defacing and destroying the beauties of antiquity; which has made its way into
our own country, and is zealously disseminated amongst us by the man who
disgraces the second office in the Union.

THESE are the principles which gave rise to the French revolution, and all the
horrid scenes of murder and debauchery which have been exhibited in that
"devoted country:" These are the principles which actuated the tyrants of that
nation, to send forth their armed banditti, commissioned to destroy the peace
and existence of all the flourishing Republics in Europe; which have laid
desolate the most beautiful towns in Germany; Villages, where the rude insults
of the lawless debauchee, the hand of the rober, and the midnight assassin,
were never known before; these are the principles which have hurried them, with
more savage ferocity, into every place where the blessings of liberty, and the
practice of virtue, had made the people happy and respectable; and these are
the principles, the progress of which, we devoutly hope, that God in his
infinite mercy is about to arrest. From the ever memorable naval victory at the
mouth of the Nile, we may date the commencement of the retrograde career of
this revolutionary phrenzy, this "Indivisible Republic." The order of things is
now changing, French laurels are withering, and those steps which they formerly
made with inpious triumph and wanton sacrilege, they are now measuring back,
with slaughter and confussion, with bloodshed and despair.

With us, too, the spirit of party is subsiding, the scales are falling from
our eyes, the clouds are dissipating, and the prospect brightens. The great
body of the people are united to oppose the influence of this vain philosophy,
and the fatal effects of these pernicious principles: United, may I not say, to
support the dignity of our national character, by purging our government, in
all its departments, of these foreign miscreants, and their abetters; and
united also, to repair to the Standard of our Country, and, under the Eagle of
America, pledge our lives to defend it. If I do not mistake in this, we may
indulge the idea, the hope, the assurance, that, under the guardian protection
of HIM who has been the GOD of our armies and our counsels, we shall still be a
FREE, FLOURISHING, HAPPY, and INDEPENDENT NATION.


