AN ORATION DELIVERED AT BYFIELD JULY 4, 1799.

By Rev. ELIJAH PARISH, A. M.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY ANGIER MARCH.

ORATION, etc.
THE invisible atom, which floats in the air, has its use, and aids in
balancing the universe; possibly, therefore, neither the obscurity of our
situation, nor the inability of the Speaker may exclude benefit from the
present hour.

May not this apologize for our zeal of adding a spark to the flame, which now
bursts from Memphremagog to St. Mary's tide?

IF the birth of a hero, or legislator, be celebrated with gladness, the natal
day of an Empire ought not to be forgotten. This day a nation was born.

AMERICA now gratefully reviews her past, rejoices in her present, and, with
rapture, anticipates her future scenes.

About the year 1602 the Fathers of New England separated from the rest of
mankind, and entered into covenant with one another.

GIVING up human forms and creeds, they engaged to honor God with a worship
purely scriptural. Meeting with opposition from their neighbors, on account of
their puritanic simplicity, they exiled themselves to Leyden, a City of the
Netherlands.

DIFFICULTIES pursuing them, they resolved to cross the Atlantic, to seek an
asylum in the woods of America.

A VESSEL is provided for a part, who prepare the way for the rest.

THEY descend to the wharf. Those, who are to tarry, unite with the
adventurers, and continue their devotion while wind and tide permit. Never did
angels view a scene, more social or tender.

ON the 5th of Aug. 1620, they failed; on the 9th of Nov. they descried the
principal Cape of these shores; on the 25th of Dec. they began to erect the
first House of New England.

IN less than three months more than half were stricken by the hand of death.
About 50 survive. These lay the base of an empire.

HAVING sacrificed all, that men hold dear, for the enjoyment of rational
liberty, they were jealous of their rights; they ever boldly remonstrated on
the least appearance of tyranny.

IN 1765, in consequence of an oppressive act of the British parliament,
opposition assumed a bolder tone. The fire of freedom blazed. The flame spread
through the provinces. The conflagration was general.

THE obnoxious act was repealed. Britons were pleased, the flags of the Thames
were displayed, the streets of London illuminated, America was glad. But in
1767 provocation was again given, and again burst forth the flame of liberty.

IN Committees, Conventions, and Congresses, opposition was organized.

ON the 19th of April 1775, we were compelled to adopt a new style of
resistance. The plains of Lexington and Concord were drenched in blood.
Death-daring Putnam on the heights of Charleston soon taught the veterans of
Briton a lesson, never to be forgotten.

ON July 4th, 1776, while formidable fleets and armies darkened our coasts,
INDEPENDENCE was declared.

AFTER a long, a bloody contest, a series of sieges, of battles, of incredible
hardships, after the flight of St. Clair had opened a field for the valor of
Gates on the banks of the Hudson; after a Washington had terminated the marches
of Cornwallis at Yorktown; in 1782 our independence was acknowledged by the
court of London.

THE God of armies carried us through the dismal struggle. He put the flag of
triumph in our hands. Peace was proclaimed. The war-worn Veteran retired to
plow the field, his courage had secured; to level the mounds, and sow the
harvest in the footsteps of the flying foe.

IN a few years there was found energy to conceive, and wisdom to adopt the
Federal Constitution, the boast of man and the wonder of the world. Even
Jacobins have not, in general, waded so far in the mire of depravity as to
slander this Ark of our safety. Under the administration of a Washington and an
Adams we have enjoyed prosperity. Wealth has incalculably increased; industry
prevailed; the means of moral and intellectual improvement multiplied. -- Long,
long may they live to honor the Christian name; to bless the world with their
Codlike services.

SHOULD any stranger in our Israel enquire, as the man of Seir did of the
prophet in Judah's court, Watchman what of the night? We must answer in the
style of cautious diffidence: Yet might we not reply? The morning comes -- is
come. The morn of civil and religious freedom. Here is her permanent home. The
heavenly visitant dwells in our houses, in our churches, is our companion in
every walk. She diffuses cheerful ease, gives energy to every exertion.

UNDER her genial smiles, the sails of commerce whiten every sea; labor sings,
as she reaps the field, she sowed; science unfolds her mysteries; religion
leads her holy train to heaven.

WHAT a contrast with the Hag of France, named Liberty and Equality. She
tyrannizes over the souls and bodies of men, punishes without the form of a
trial, persecutes religion, tramples on all law: She gorges four million of her
own children and cries, 'Give, give:' she tears out the vitals of her enemies,
and with malice more refined spreads moral death among her friends; She moves,
and the river of Egypt is blood, the vales of Palestine a dreary desert.

THE time of the day is somewhat evident. The angel is pouring out the sixth
vial of the divine wrath. Euphrates, or the defense of spiritual Babylon, is
drying up.

WHETHER her strength consists in her military force, in bigotry and
superstition, in her prodigious revenues, in the ecclesiastic orders devoted to
her service, she is sinking. Like the falling temple of Dagon, when Sampson
shook the pillars, she spreads death around.

PROBABLY the last drops of this vial are falling. Other events, mentioned
after this vial, have taken place, or are now existing. Rev. 16 -- 13, 14. --
"And I saw THREE unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirit of
devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the
whole world to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.'

AT first THREE, Though it is never wise to apply figures or prophecies too
minutely, yet no sentence or word is inserted at random. The exile of Patmos
saw 'THREE unclean spirits..'

Barruel says, "About the middle of this century, there appeared THREE men
leagued against christianity, Voltaire, d'Alembert, Frederic." Again, "It was
the coalition of the adepts of impiety, of the adepts of rebellion, and the
adepts of anarchy, which formed the club of the jacobins. Under this name,
common to the TIRPLE sect, we shall see the adepts following up their TRIPLE
conspiracy.


or a small number of Agents are seen. They are unclean, as frogs. Bold and
intruding, like those of Egypt, which entered the houses, the chambers, and the
beds; they proceed from the 'dragon' or satan. They have his rebellious spirit.
They proceed from 'the beast' or civil power of Antichrist: from 'the false
prophet,' or antichristian church. They are the spontaneous fruit of her pious
frauds, her superstition and ignorance.

THEY are not like, they are the spirit of devils. They work miracles or effect
wonders. Their influence is inconceivably great. They go forth to the kings or
governments of the earth; to those, who have the greatest influence in society.
Not having power, by intrigue, by deceit, by 'skill' they engage them to fight
against God, to crush his cause. In a most wonderful manner these things have
been accomplished. Glance an eye to Europe. These things are visible in real
life.

AMONG the sober people of Germany, sheltered by the civil laws of antichrist,
from the bosom of the Romish church, in the spirit of the adversary, such a
combination springs into existance.

IT was reserved for Weishaupt, whose name would figure in a biography of
Devils, to organize a society to overturn all the governments and religions of
the world: A society, which for depravity of design and address in execution,
far exceeds any scheme of Lucifer, any plot of rebellion conceived in the
councils of hell: A society, which would indubitably place its author first in
the catalogue of the damned, were he not rivaled in impiety by d'Alembert,
Frederic and Voltaire.

THEY taught that conjugal faithfulness, chastity and all the moral virtues,
were mere prejudices of education; that modesty was resined voluptuousness;
that self-murder was no crime; that the possession of property infringed on
human rights, that the motive justifies the means; that civil government is the
only fall of man; that there is no future state -- no God. These opinions are
propagated over countries, inhabited by more than a hundred million souls.

THE apostles of these doctrines introduced each other into every department of
the community. They sat in the reviewers chair; they guided the public taste
for books; they taught in the schools; they lectured in the universities; they
prescribed to the sick; they were the tutors of Princes; they hovered round the
throne, and directed the scepter. To finish this climax of guilt, they ascended
the Pulpit, and with unhallowed lips, perverted the truth, and polluted the
pages of God.

THIS society, after extending itself through Germany, Holland, Switzerland,
and Italy, was formally introduced to Paris, to all France. The persevering
industry, the indefatigable pains, with which they pursued their object, would
have honored a better cause.

THEIR secret papers have been discovered, which prove there are 2660 of these
lodges in the world; seventeen of which are in the United States. How many more
there may be, it is not easy to conjecture. These were the mines, the explosion
of which has effected a revolution, answerable to such a cause.

THESE dens of impiety vomit forth their contents, and in one day a million of
men start up in arms to overturn altars and thrones, to destroy government and
religion. Enlightened by science, assuming the name of Philosophers, they have
access to the highest class of society. Poisoning the hearts of kings and
rulers of States, by art they persuade them to combine to crush the son of God,
to raze his empire from its foundation. Atheism, immorality and brutism haunt
their steps.

THE sabbath disappears, religion flies, man is the prey of man.

THEIR influence has effected "miracles." The world is amazed at their
progress. "Satan, when seeking vengeance against his divine creator, would have
been proud to become the pupil of this modern Spartacus." From the Dykes of
Holland to the tomb of Virgil, to the pillar of Pompey, they have "gathered"
numerous armies to fight with God Almighty.

THE battle is now raging, millions have fallen, millions will fall, till "an
angel standing in the sun shall cry with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls
that fly in the midst of heaven: Come and gather yourselves together unto the
supper of the great God, that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of
captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and them that
sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and
great." The blood flows and will "flow to the horses bridles." These are the
miracles of the unclean spirits. These are the wonders of Illuminism.

YET when a learned Abbe founded the alarm in 1797, and proclaimed this
conspiracy against heaven and earth, Incredulity rejected the story as
impossible; but, when in 1798 all places of christian worship were abolished in
Paris, the nations of christendom were shocked.

HEATHEN gods had their temples, but not a single altar was consecrated to the
Almighty Father or the divine Savior -- Him they blasphemed -- they swore "to
crush the wretch."

THE illuminated Reviewers and Masons, trembling for the honor of the craft,
elaborate the forced sneer against those, who have given the most important
information to mankind -- it is too late. The existence of such a society is
certain in the public mind. We have only to quote a passage from a respectable
Mason Dr. MANN.
to silence all cavils. He says, "That societies, called illuminati, have for
some years existed in Germany, and from thence have extended themselves into
other parts of Europe, whose object has been to overturn arbitrary governments
and even christianity itself, cannot be reasonably controverted."

Their future sarcasms, therefore, ought to be viewed, as the flutterings of a
wounded bird in its last agonies.

BUT again the masonic Doctor enquires, "Are Masons to be accountable for the
villainy and degeneracy of the illuminati? Or is their institution to be
debased, because societies exist, who have assumed its denomination and have
under it distracted the world by their principles of impiety and
disorganization?" We answer: No. Neither do we "debase" the American masons on
account of the illuminati -- excepting those who show such resentment on their
behalf. May not charity, pure as the heart of masonry, suspect a connection
between two persons, when one voluntarily receives the blow, aimed only at the
other?

WHEN Masons cease to hurl their darts against the historians Robison, Barruel,
Morse.
of illuminism, they will not "be accountable for their villainy and degeneracy."

IF it be enquired again: "Watchman what of the night?" We answer, in
connection with these events, a warning, a threatening, a promise, is published
to the christian world.

THE king of kings says: Rev. xvi. -- 15, 10.
"Behold I come as a thief." These astonishing evils, which have been
mentioned, shall come unexpectedly, imperceptibly, shall not be distinguished
from other visitations, 'till they are in great part accomplished. Decked with
the name of Liberty, muffled in the trappings of philosophy, the enemy flatters
to betray, and smiles till the fatal stab is given.

"BLESSED is he that watches and keeps his garments" clean. As the pious
houses of Egypt were blessed, not visited by the unclean frogs, so blessed are
they, who recognize the baleful designs of these children of the dragon; who
abhor the disorganizing systems of the day. But those, who do not watch, who do
not escape the deadly contagion, shall discover "the nakedness," the baseness
of their hearts, and be detested by all good men.

PERSONS, families, communities, nations, who do not separate from this foe to
human nature, shall drink the cup of her plagues. Already this prophecy or
threatening begins to be fulfilled.

A MAN must shut his eyes, and like the adder stop his ears, not to see the
shame, and hear the sighs of those, who unite with the unclean spirits, the
atheists of the age. The world, the attending universe must confess: "Those who
partake in their sins, receive their plagues." From a lofty summit of
Switzerland, glance an eye round their fertile vales. A short time since their
fields were loaded with corn, their pastures white with flocks, their mountains
blushing with vines, their houses the abode of every joy, their churches
resounding with holy song.

BEHOLD the change. Their vineyards are trodden by the foot of Desolation;
property is plundered; smoking towns and villages hide their towering cliffs;
widows and orphans, frantic on the hill of slaughter, call for their husbands,
their fathers and their sons. "The blood of the just flows, crimes triumph,
hell is let loose." These people received the Missionaries of Atheism; they
listened to the whispers of their impiety; they were charmed with the prattle
of their philosophy; they were illuminized; they were undone.

So the revolutionary Serpent was received into paradise, and damnation
followed.

UNHAPPY people, humanity weeps over your fall. Had you bid defiance to the
slaves of France, submitted to the expense of defending yourselves, and been
faithful to your God, you might have secured your farms, your domestic
delights, all the blessings of your fathers' valor; but now all, all are lost.
Ye partook the sins of your Savior's foe -- ye receive his miseries.

NEW witnesses rise. See the depressed Hollander groaning under his new task
masters: the wretched Belgian mourning over a beggared priesthood, a ruined
country.

TURN to Italy. All is sad and desolate. Princes and kings are fled. The palace
is solitary. The cottage is in tears, or swept away in a torrent of blood. They
accepted the doctrines of illuminism; they escape not the plagues.

BE warned, oh my country, to fly the fatal abyss. To put the least confidence
in French promises; to hazard any thing dear on the sincerity of their
treaties, would be, like failing to the torrid zone in a ship of ice. Their
friendship, to remedy our woes, would be like the hissing lava of Vesuvius to
quench the thirst of his burning atmosphere.

AN alliance with them, like the Syroc of Italy, would waft death and ruin to
our shores.

IF our country make a common interest with them; our government will vanish;
our name be blotted from the catalogue of nations. The officer, signing the
instrument, with his country falls.

HAD I a voice to be heard, I would say, Be warned, all ye nations of the
earth. Approach not the raging, dying monster. His contagion is the sting of
death.

IF being "drunk with the blood of the saints," if "forbidding to marry," or
abolishing the ordinance itself, if "blaspheming God," if "deceiving those who
dwell on the earth," if "changing times and laws" constitute a character, is it
not visible? Is there not a power, which "as God sits in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God?"

THOSE, who in imagination have demolished the throne of God, and
revolutionized the universe, have exalted themselves above kings, in scripture
called gods. They have, as God, directed in the temple of God. Did the Almighty
more, minutely, model the worship of Israel, than they have that of their
country? Have not they changed the time, and the agents, and the doctrines, and
the object of worship? Have they not formally made gods of one another,
"showing that they are gods?"

MIRABEAU and Marat have received religious adoration. The people of France
HAVE bowed the knee to those Demons of vice. Have they not a claim, to have it
acknowledged, that they as God, sit in the temple of God, 'showing themselves
that they are God?'

FINALLY -- It is a time of day that requires cautious jealousy. Not jealousy
of your Magistrates, for you have given them your confidence, but of those who
slander their administration.

SUSPECT not an Adams, or Washington; but those, who blaspheme their unspotted
virtues. To be jealous of your Rulers would be, as if a person were to choose
him a bride from all the beauties of the world, and then, instantly, without
cause, be jealous of her alone. Your public characters are your own CHOICE.
Depending on your support, they have accepted the arduous, the difficult, the
dangerous post. Unless the good sense of America be a chimera, they are
doubtless the best men of the world.

WATCH those ungrateful souls, who murmur about taxation and oppression, the
burdens of government and religion. They have fellowship with our enemies --
they are traitors to God and christianity.

BE jealous of those, who preach about gratitude to France for her insidious
favors. She help to break our CHAINS! Thank GOD, we never wore any. Where are
the scars of the galling bolts? Where is the wood we hewed; the water we drew?
Where the mad frenzy, shown by the boasting slaves themselves, while changing
the flaxencords of monarchical tyranny, for the iron chains of military
despotism? No, my countrymen, you never were in bondage to any man. Your
Parent, suspicious of your filial obedience shook a rod. -- You rose, you
seized, you shivered it to atoms. Have those creatures so mighty thankful to
France, ever shown any remarkable gratitude to the poor soldier of the
revolutionary war? to a Washington, an Adams for their long, their useful
services; for their dignified fortitude under the tempests of their calumnies?

A MARBLE eye it is, that drops not the tear of grateful affection, viewing
these pillars, which support the social and moral world, amid crashing temples
and falling empires.

THE gratitude of a jacobin, like the plague, appears in spots; and like the
plague, it is a deadly disease. Be jealous of those, who declaim against alien
and sedition laws; they probably, have a hankering for lying and rebellion
themselves.

IN a word, let honest men, let the friends to God and humanity, spurn from
their embrace every man, who trifles with his fathers' religion, the hope and
salvation of the world; who alarms weak minds with the designs of government;
-- who discourages the most FORMIDABLE means of defense.

MENTIONING the means of defense I spontaneously address the military present.
It was the sword, which gave courage to declare INDEPENDENCE. Such is the
present state of human nature, that nothing but the sword can defend our
INDEPENDENCE. Under God, you my fellow Citizens, are our defense and our hope.
To you and your brother soldiers, your parents, your wives, your children, your
ministers, look up for protection, for safety, for every comfort.

IF the American soldiery lay aside their arms, how soon, how very soon, would
the blaze of your habitations give double horror to the carnage of the night;
how soon would your religion be banished -- yourselves slaves -- your wives --
your sisters -- But, Oh forbid it heaven, forbid it, ye brave warriors of
America.

IF your vengeance burn ^ot, the shades of a Standish, a Church, and other
venerable soldiers of New England would indignant rise and drive the
blaspheming columns from the land; never would they see the tree, planted in
their blood, bear fruit for the enemies of their God. Never, never while there
is a crimson drop in your hearts will you suffer an armed foe to breathe your
native air. At a distance the tempest roars; we see the lightnings blaze, we
hear the thunders roll; it may soon reach your fields, your houses; desolation
follows the storm. Should your country call, should martial music rouse your
slumbering swords; rise, rise, repel the ungodly foe. Cursed be he that keeps
back his sword from blood; let him, who has none, sell his coat and buy one.

YOUR cause is the cause of God. Your enemy is the enemy of God.

BEFORE they threatened you, they had declared war against GOD, against the
DIVINE SAVIOR.

IN the councils of heaven, they are already destroyed, and given to the fowls
of the air.

WHAT have you to fear from such an enemy? As surely, as God, the Governor of
the universe, is almighty, they shall fall.

THE contest is desirable. The most obstinate war with Antichrist is safer
than peace. Peace may introduce their daring vices, their unexampled atheism;
unexampled it is, for hell believes and trembles.

GO, then, be the soldiers of God. Like David assaulting the giant of Gath, go
in the name of the God of battles. Go and conquer; then shall there be a new
song in heaven -- "BABYLON is fallen -- is fallen."

FINIS

