AN ANSWER TO THE JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE SELECT AND COMMON COUNCILS OF
PHILADELPHIA, ON THE SUBJECT OF A PLAN FOR Supplying the City with Water, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
IN compliance with your desire -- that I should state in as concise and clear
a manner as possible, the detail of the plan proposed to be executed for
supplying the city of Philadelphia with pure and wholesome water, which has
been adopted by the councils, and also, the progress which has been made
toward carrying the same into effect -- I now submit to you the following
statement:

IT is proposed that a short canal shall be cut from the Schuylkill, near the
middle ferry, to terminate at the foot of the bank at the end of
Chesnut-street, upon which stands an old redoubt. This canal is to be deeper
than the lowest water-mark, and may be so furnished with gates, as to receive
only the water of the ebb. -- When the canal arrives at the foot of the hill,
it will be continued through a short tunnel into a well, sunk in the old fort,
of about eight feet diameter. Over this well will stand the first engine-house.
From the engine-house along Chesnut-street and Broad-street, a brick tunnel of
considerable dimension, and lying at least three feet below the surface, will
convey the water pumped into it by the engine, into Centre-square. The steam
engine will be of sufficient power to supply in twenty-four hours, whenever
required, three million of gallons. Supposing that 10,000 houses are to be
supplied, the daily demand, in the winter months, cannot often exceed 300,000
gallons. -- In rainy weather, when the river may be turbid, the demand will
also be confined to domestic consumption, and cannot easily exceed the same
quantity. The tunnel will contain about 8,000,000 gallons, being a supply for a
much greater length of time than any rain can, in common seasons, be expected
to continue. In the tunnel the water will not only become cool, but should it
have been pumped up in a turbid state, which will scarcely ever be necessary,
it will deposit its sediment.

An engine of a power twice as great as that proposed, might not only have
pumped up the water from the Schuylkill, but have forced it into the reservoir
in Centre-square, and thus have rendered a second engine unnecessary. No
immediate saving would have been effected by this means; such an engine could
not have been constructed in America, but might have been imported. Expense
might have been saved during the time of the greatest supplies, as the power of
an engine increases in a greater ratio than its consumption of fuel. But the
advantage of the tunnel, considered in the point of view stated above, and the
avoiding of those risks to which pipes are liable, far outweigh any trifling
saving which could thus have been made.

In Centre-square another engine is to be erected, which, raising the water to
an elevated reservoir, will, from thence, distribute it in wooden pipes over
the whole city and suburbs. Every citizen will have the choice of supplying his
family, either at the public plugs, or by leading the water through private
pipes to any part of his house, at an easy water rent. There are few houses in
Philadelphia, to the highest apartments of which it could not be conducted, and
during the day it may run a constant stream. The subscribers to the proposed
loan, will, on the terms offered by the corporation, have the advantage of
receiving it for three years free of rent.

At every square, opposite to the public alleys, a fire plug will be placed. By
this an inexhaustible quantity of water will be supplied to the fire engines,
in cases of fire; and as the method used in London may be adopted, the engines
will be filled by means of leathern hose or pipes, and the citizens, being
relieved from the fatiguing duty of handing the buckets, will be at liberty to
give the most active assistance to the preservation of the lives and property
of the sufferers.

Considerable progress has been already made toward the completion of this
plan. The steam engines are already ordered, and some progress is made in their
construction: and although a great variety of obstacles have occurred, and some
delay has thereby been occasioned, there is still remaining a very reasonable
hope that they will be completed by the time originally contemplated. The
expense, at which these engines are contracted for, does not exceed the
estimate which has been stated to the committee. One of the principal persons
engaged in constructing them, was the agent of Messrs. Bolton and Watt in
Holland, where he put up a very large engine for the purpose of draining a
lake, the success of which was complete. Under his management, and that of
several other very skilful workmen, an excellent engine has already been
constructed in this country; and any gentleman, to whom it may be convenient to
call at Mr. Rooseveldt's works, on Second River, near Newark, in the Jerseys,
may convince himself how well founded are the expectations that I have
entertained on this subject. Very accurate information respecting the
maintenance of the engines is before you, and it is evident from thence that
their annual expense will not, at an average of their greatest and smallest
supply, very materially exceed the annual expense of the pumps, with which I
have been furnished.

Several other conditional contracts have been entered into, all of which are
for less sums than the estimate submitted to you, and especially in the very
important article of distribution, conditional agreements have been made for
logs, and boring, which authorize me to believe that the estimate of half a
dollar per foot, will cover every expense contemplated under it. Thus far the
business has proceeded, and I think a reasonable hope may now be entertained,
that no common obstacles can prevent an early completion of the work under your
direction.

The many attempts which have been made in this country to adapt steam engines
to the navigation of boats against the stream, and which have miscarried, have
occasioned a prejudice against them, which does not exist in Europe, where also
every attempt to apply them to the same purpose has failed, but where, in every
other respect, they have completely succeeded.

Another prejudice, respecting the repairs of steam engines, prevails, which I
am anxious to remove. It is necessary that the joints of the machine should be
frequently oiled; and the piston of an engine in constant work, requires
packing, or refurnishing with tow, perhaps once a week -- this is the work of
an hour, and is done by the man who attends the fire. Other repairs are
trifling, and arise in general from the bad original construction of some
detailed part of the work. But once in ten years it is necessary to furnish the
engine with new valves. The valves are the only part of an engine liable, from
their necessary construction, to injury. The contractor for the city engines
estimates, in his contract, the renewal of this part of the engine at 500
dollars, which appears to me to be a reasonable charge. As to the annual
repairs, they form the least considerable item in the contract for maintenance.

Unwilling to recommend to you any scheme which has not been ascertained, and
the success of which might be therefore precarious, I subjoin the following
account of engines which are applied to the use of supplying large cities in
Europe with water. As many of our fellow-citizens have been in Europe, its
authenticity may be easily verified; and, though I state it from memory, I
believe there is no reason to doubt its perfect correctness.

I am, with great respect, Yours, faithfully, B. HENRY LATROBE, Engineer.
Philadelphia, March 2d, 1799.
ACCOUNT OF STEAM ENGINES, etc.
THE cities of London and Westminster are in part supplied with water by the
following engines.

I. Chelsea waterworks: Two engines. The water is received from the Thames at
high water, into several basins and canals, through floodgates which shut when
the tide falls, and prevent its return. The water supplies the lower parts of
Westminster, and is in part forced up into Hydepark by the engines. A smaller
engine forces it still higher than the park reservoir. This reservoir and the
smaller engine supply the extreme north-western part of the town.

II. Hungerford waterworks. -- A large, but badly constructed, atmospheric
engine, near the Adelphi, raises the water to the top of a high tower, from
whence it supplies a considerable part of the town about the Strand.

III. The New River-head, is sufficiently elevated to supply a very extensive
portion of the cities, but not sufficiently for some parts about Islington and
Mary-lebone. A large quantity is therefore raised by an engine near Sadler's
wells, into an elevated reservoir, from whence it is then distributed. In the
year 1794, a cast iron main had been nearly completed, by which the New River
water was to be conveyed across a very deep valley, falling, and again rising,
with the ground. A steam-engine was to be erected at the end of Tottenham-court
road to raise the supply to an elevated reservoir. By this measure near a
million feet of wooden pipe will be saved.

IV. Stratford le Bow. A very large engine forces the water of the river Lee
into an elevated reservoir, from whence many eastern parts of the town are
supplied.

V. Wapping near Shadwell: This is the largest engine in London, and receives
its waters from the Thames.

VI. Lambeth Marsh on the south side of the Thames, takes also its water from
the river.

In Southwark there are more engines than one. My memory does not retain their
exact situations. Mr. Whitebread's brewery, Mr. Thrale's, Mr. Dickinson's, and
Mr. Sellon's, and many others, have all engines of considerable power, which
pump the liquor, and do all the other work.

For the purposes of manufactories, etc. their number is also very great.

The city of Worcester is entirely supplied with water by a very excellent
engine. There are many other cities in England of which I know that they are in
the whole, or in part, supplied with water by steam engines; but as I cannot
detail the extent of their power or effect, I omit to mention them.

Every one who has been at Paris, knows that water was carried about in the
streets by innumerable water-porters, whose cry had something remarkable in it,
to the ear of a foreigner. This was very inconvenient, and (I believe in the
year 1784 or 1785) a very extraordinary steam engine was erected in Paris, for
the purpose of raising and conveying the water by means of pipes, to different
parts of the city. It was constructed in England, by Mr. Wilkinson, and was (if
I am not mistaken) the largest double engine which, till then, had been made.
Its cylinder is, I believe, 4 feet, 2 inches in diameter. It was in operation
in the year 1788, and I have good authority for asserting, that lately the
shares in this concern were sold at an advance of 600 per cent. upon their
original cost. Soon after the invention, steam engines were justly considered
as dangerous, man had not yet learned to control the immense power of steam,
and now and then they did a little mischief. A steam engine is, at present, as
tame and innocent as a clock.

B. H. LATROBE, Engineer.
Philadelphia, March 2d, 1799.

