THE UNFORTUNATE LOVERS, AND CRUEL PARENTS. A VERY INTERESTING TALE. FOUNDED ON
FACT.

Written by Mrs. Patterson.

(...) EDITION.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by READ and MORSE. 1799.

INTRODUCTION.
Parents are either the dupes or tyrants of their children. Some parents keep
their children at such an awful ^^tance that home becomes a prison; and they
will (...) to their neighbor's fire side for refuge, to screen themselves from
the frowns of a turbulent parent. Others, (...) by misfortunes, by their
parents not granting them the object of their wishes, are driven into a state
of melancholy -- languish and die. Mankind are not desirous of having their
faults exposed to public view, but vent all their passions at the domestic fire
side, where all should be calm and serene. Others will indulge their children
from their infancy until they arrive to a state of maturity, then check them
for the same familiarities which they always indulge them in, and will not
(...) for themselves, but they must have (...) which is many times the cause of
(...) and death, as will appear in the follow (...).

THE UNFORTUNATE LOVERS.
IN the year 1666, Mr. Benjamin Beaumont and Mr. Samuel Gauze, were partners in
mercantile concerns in the town of Boston. -- They were not related, but lived
in perfect friendship. They were men of the first characters in town, and had a
rapid run of business, both the wholesale and retail, by which they accumulated
great property. At length Mr. Beaumont got married, and his partner, Mr. Gauze,
in the space of three months afterward. Notwithstanding they lived in perfect
friendship for the term of three months, then by mutual consent of both
parties, dissolved partnership; but still had a good understanding. However, at
the end of nine months, Mr. Beaumont was favored with a handsome boy; and on
account of the love and good will (...) Mr. Gauze, invited him in (as their
houses were adjoining) to make merry with him on the occasion. Dinner being
over, Mr. Beaumont and Mr. Gauze, retired into a private room for amusement.
After conversing upon different topics, Mr. Beaumont turns to Mr. Gauze, with a
joyful countenance, saying, if it was so ordered by Deity, that your wife
should bring forth a daughter, so that their tender minds might be filled with
love and gratitude toward each other from their youth up to the age of
maturity, and then be joined in the bands of wedlock -- with all my heart,
replied Mr. Gauze, God grant that to be the case. With that they renewed it by
a solemn vow, that nothing would be wanted on their part, to endear them to
each other. And they had their wish; for scarcely had three months revolved,
when Mrs. Gauze was delivered of a handsome daughter. Then Mr. Beaumont was
sent for to make merry on the occasion; where they renewed their former
promises, and confirmed it with a solemn oath. At the end of a year, the
children were baptized. The boy, Samuel Beaumont, and the girl, Nancy Gauze --
in memory of Mrs. Beaumont. And when old enough to go to school, were sent to
school together, and all the pains imaginable taken, to endear them to each
other: Mr. Beaumont would often say, Samuel, if you go any where to day, you
must go with Miss Nancy; And Mr. Gauze would frequently say, Nancy, be sure and
call for Samuel, when going to school today.

Thus a few days had elapsed, when they became attached to each other to such a
degree, that it was beyond the art of human reason to keep them apart for any
length of time. However, Samuel was sent to College at the age of fourteen,
which proved very grievous to Nancy, and brought her immediately into a state
of despondent melancholy. But their parents indulged them as much as possible,
by the privilege of frequent visits, and by unfolding their minds to each other
by letters.

During the time of Samuel's collegiate life, his father (Mr. Beaumont) was
deeply engaged in the East India trade, which proved so unfortunate, by storms
at sea, that he lost all his shipping, and in less than one month after his son
took his degree, his creditors called upon him and found him unable to pay ten
shillings on the pound. Notwithstanding this sudden and unfortunate change, he
bore it with the greatest fortitude.

Now let us turn to the young lovers, who were encouraged by indulgent parents.

By this time their passions became more strong. As they increased in years,
Cupid's arrows were implanted strongly in both their breasts; and they lived in
as much love and unity, save the nuptial bed, as though bound by the tenderest
ties of a nature. But pride, rank pride, the destroyer of peace and happiness,
soon made a separation: For Gauze, finding his intended son-in-law (Mr.
Beaumont, as his age gives him the title) reduced to poverty by the misfortunes
of his honored father, denies him the privilege of coming to his house or
paying any further respects to his daughter. This refusal was so sudden and
unexpected, that he remained speechless for some minutes. At length he
exclaimed, with a loud and bitter cry -- In the name of justice, from what
motives have you altered your mind! This is beyond my conception, to have an
open denial of the privileges you always indulged me in, even from my infancy.
Oh! Good heavens! is it possible for us to part, who have been so long, united,
and have been taught by indulgent parents to accent the first words of our
utterance, love? By this time his courage began to return, and he addresses
himself to Mr. Gauze in the following manner: --

Sir, I beseech you to take a retrospective view of your past conduct
respecting this unhappy affair, which appears to be so at present. Don't you
remember the solemn promises that passed between you and my father, that Nancy
and I should be bound by the bands of wedlock, provided we were agreed, which
you know to be the case? And not only so, but you confirmed it with an oath. I
am not ignorant of this matter. This was not done in a corner; for the lowest
class of people in town are well acquainted with it. Now, Sir, please to let me
know what you ever observed in me or my conduct, to give you any reason to
treat me with neglect, and deprive me of the object of my wishes, which you
ever indulged me in. Mr. Gauze remains speechless -- at length replies: I have
ever observed your conduct to be good, but do not wish to have my daughter go
to the arms of a beggar. Your father was in good circumstances when I passed my
word, which I don't consider binding, since he has been reduced to poverty.

The young man replied: Your riches perish with you -- and departed with a
heavy heart. Miss Nancy was then in her apartment, and knew nothing of the
conversation; but no sooner had Mr. Beaumont retired, than her father entered
the room and said, I Am determined to break up a scene that has been long in
agitation, both to your ruin and the dishonor of your father.

Nancy replies with a look of wildness -- good God! Father, what scene! what
scene? The scene between you and Beaumont, that has been so long brewing. Don't
you know that his fortune is not adequate to yours? But still you keep his
company to the injury of your credit, as it will throw you into the meanest
company in town. I look upon him no better than the off^couring of humanity --
Nancy cries forbear, I pray forbear, with her eyes brim full of tears. She
could not utter more -- at length recovering, says: Father, was not the first
seeds of love sown in my tender breast by your own hand, cherished by your
insinuations, and have budded and blossomed, and arrived to such a degree of
perfection that they are past (...)? Oh! father, how often have I heard you
say, be sure and go with Samuel to school today, when I was incapable of
comprehending your meaning: And now I must tell you, with tears in my eyes,
that nothing can part us but death. On hearing of this, her father interrupted
her, and said: You are under my commands, and to them you must submit

Her mother, who remained in tears during the time of their conversation,
addressed Mr. Gauze in the following manner:

[Nancy retires.]

You know that she is our child who is near (...) dear to us, and why will you
undertake to (...) her ruin by separating her from her (...) held dear. Your
conscience must certainly tell you that she is not the aggressor, for she has
obeyed your commands from her youth up to this day; and why will you stifle
flame which was yours, and your partner, Mr. Beaumont's concupiscible motives.
With that, Mr. Gauze replied. You talk like one of the foolish women; you would
bring the family under an everlating disgrace by joining her to a man that is
so poor. Then let her be poor, says Mrs. Gauze -- I would rather see her happy
than rich; but there is no need of her being poor; your interest is great;
bestow a part upon her. How often has it been the case that there was not
equality of property on the same occasion. Do comply with my request; for if
there is not something done shortly, we must follow her in sorrow to the grave.
Mr. Beaumont replies: Enough -- I will hear no more -- I will go this moment
and confine her. He goes immediately, and engaging two maidens to attend her,
confines her to the room, saying, there is your place of residence till you
alter your mind -- then retires, charging the servants not to assist her,
either by letter, or verbal information, on the penalty of being discharged.

Now the unfortunate lovers are bewailing their unhappy fate in a state of
separation and despair. At length her lover sits down and writes in the
following manner:

Dear Madam,
It is needless for me to inform you of the trouble that daily surrounds me, as
I know you to be under the same predicament, and consequently share in each
other's difficulties, unless our minds are very much altered from what they
were in our last interview. I speak from the bottom of my heart; mine is not
altered, nor ever shall be till separated by death. I know not what will be the
event of your father's treating us with so much cruelty. Time will not permit
me to go into a lengthy detail of things in the past tense, but must mention
something of a serious nature, which concerns the present, which I hope will
prove fortunate to us both, and make the remainder of our days happy. Time
hangs heavy over my head since our last conversation. You cannot tell the
anxiety I undergo. Sleep is departed from me. Pardon me for writing so, for I
am so well acquainted with your heart that I know you share with me in my
troubles. My mind is so confused that I have dropped the subject I meant to
treat upon respecting our future happiness. I have taken the matter into
serious contemplation, and see no method we can take to obtain the object of
our wishes; and I have resolved or embark for England to seek my fortune. You
must not blame me, for you know that our parents are the cause of all this --
My father's poverty, and your father's pride. It is disagreeable to part, but
we must bear it with fortitude -- hoping in the course of six or seven years to
make each other happy -- hoping to return in that time, if life is spared. My
method of conveying this letter is this -- I have engaged a boy to go this
night with the letter on the end of a pole, that you may receive it at your
chamber window at twelve o'clock, hoping you will send me an answer at the same
hour tomorrow night.

I am with respect, your unfortunate lover, SAMUEL BEAUMONT.
Miss NANCY GAUZE.




At half past eleven, the boy appears to receive his message, which he conveyed
in the following manner: On approaching the window, he tapped it gently with
the pole three or four times unnoticed. -- Miss Nancy lay musing on her bed. A
thought immediately (...) her that it was the solemnities of love --
approaching the window, found it to be the message from her lover, which she
eagerly seized, and the boy retired. After the perusal of the letter, which she
did by gently watering it with tears, she sits down and writes in the following
manner:

Dear Sir,
I have received your letter, and observe the contents, which give me great
anxiety to think of our parting, but more particularly for such a length of
time. -- The distance of the journey, and the dangers you are exposed to, I
fear will end my days in a state of melancholy, in this solitary retirement.
But may he who governs futurity and struck us into existence, direct your
steps; and when you are ploughing the raging billows, pray keep me in
remembrance, as I shall ever prove true until death* And as property is the
cause of our separation, which never ought to purchase love, I hope on your
return you may be possessed of more (...) my cruel father. We know not what is
in the womb of providence: A trembling hand, the agitation of my mind, and
troubles of my heart, cause me to retire, hoping the best of heaven's blessings
may attend you and enable you to bear with fortitude so trying a scene.

From your distressed lover, NANCY GAUZE.
Mr. SAMUEL BEAUMONT.




Mr. Beaumont receives the letter agreeable to his expectations, and after
perusal, which was done with tears, he communes with himself saying, I have
laid the plan, but how shall I put it in execution? my property is not adequate
to the task, and my father is unable to help me; but I will communicate my
ideas to my father, which he did in the following manner:

Honored Father,
You know the cause of my misfortunes better than I, as you and Mr. Gauze were
the origin: Your misfortunes turned the mind of Mr. Gauze against me, which I
fear will prove my ruin -- Now I will inform you what I am about to do: I am
resolved to embark on board the ship Good Success, bound for London, and seek
my fortune. You know my situation here as to property, and to the anxiety of my
mind it is best known to myself -- I am not destitute of feelings, and those of
the tenderest nature. It is hard parting with parents who have brought me up so
tenderly, and have cultivated my mind in the days of my youth, by giving me
good education, which will remain with me when my property is all exhausted;
which is the case with us both: this he speaks with tears, saying, it is hard
and cutting to human nature, to be once in affluent circumstances, and then
reduced to poverty: And how to procure money to perform my journey I know not.


His parents, who were in tears all this time, knew not what to say. At length
his father answered: My son, I know your situation is bad, as well as my own: I
have given you a good education, and was under circumstances to have given you
a handsome fortune; but if it was the will of Providence that we should come to
poverty, let us not repine, but be content. If it is your determination to go
in quest of a fortune, I will procure money sufficient of my brother to bear
your expenses, (which he did) and in the course of three days was ready to
sail. Previous to his embarcation, there came three gentlemen merchants to his
father's, and talked with him, on the necessity of his being very attentive to
his business; and as they were acquainted in London, gave him letters of
recommendation to the merchants; which he received with a heart of gratitude
and thankfulness. Next morning he took his leave of his parents and a large
circle of acquaintance, and set fail.

Now let us turn to the parents of the unfortunate lovers.

Mr. Gauze hearing of his embarcation, immediately releases his daughter from
her confinement, who had the privilege of walking out: Her mind being
perplexed, and being confined so long, she ran eagerly to unfold her heart to
Mrs. Beaumont. Her father, hearing of this, run in haste to frustrate her plan.
No sooner had he entered the door, than he (...) Mr. Beaumont. Mr. Gauze
exclaimed with a peremptory tone of voice: Who gave you the liberty of
harboring my daughter? Mr. Beaumont answered him with a great degree of
calmness: She is not your daughter, for you have given her to my son in her
infancy, and confirmed it by a solemn oath, which has proved their ruin. Mr.
Gauze answers: Would you have my daughter go to the arms of a beggar? You have
ventured your property and lost it, and by that means broke up the match. It
never was my intention to have them joined unless there was an equality of
property. Mr. Beaumont replies: Your property perish with you -- it never gave
ease to a perjured soul. Go home and contemplate on the former promises that
passed betwixt us, respecting the happiness of the young couple you have lately
separated. I have ever treated you with benevolence, but you have treated me
with ingratitude, which is the blackest of crimes.

Mr. Gauze and his daughter returns very solitary. Mr. Beaumont arrives in
England, after a tedious passage of twelve weeks, and suffered every thing but
death itself. On his arrival in London, one of the first characters, who was
deeply engaged in the East and West India trade, employed him as first clerk of
the counting room. He remained in this situation for the term of one year; gave
perfect satisfaction, and treated every man with politeness, but never appeared
to smile: which was observed by his employer, who one day took an opportunity
to ask him, saying, What is the cause of your dejection? Are you not treated
handsomely by your fellow clerks? Or have I given you any reason for this
heaviness of heart! Mr. Beaumont replies with tears: You have ever been my
friend and brother according to the bonds of society. My sickness is of the
mind. I cannot carry smiles and sunshine in my face when discontent sits heavy
on my heart -- His employer replies: May I know the cause without intruding too
far? To you alone I will reveal it, as I know you have a heart that will ever
conceal, and a tongue that will never reveal (...) then gives him a narrative
of all his misfortunes. His employer heard him with astonishment, and with a
heart full of gratitude, answers him in the following manner: You have passed
through many scenes of difficulty in your youthful days, but I hope it will all
terminate for the best. My business is such that I want your assistance for
years to come; but I will not require it any longer than it will terminate for
your health and happiness. I would advise you to take a journey to France for
your health, as new objects are commendable for a persson in your situation. I
will give you letters of recommendation to some of the first characters in
France, which I presume will introduce you into business. Furthermore, I will
help you to money to bear your expenses. Mr. Beaumont immediately complied with
his offer, and in three days from that time, embarked for France: But
misfortune seemed to await him: For within a few leagues of the desired haven,
the vessel was castaway, and only he and two others had the good fortune to
escape.

Now his cup of calamities was entirely full. He was left wholly destitute of
money. His letters of recommendation were gone, and in fact, every thing but
what was on his back. Being cast on a desolate island, it made his situation
still more desperate. But his comrades, being endowed with a great share of
fortitude, set out in quest of inhabitants; and in twenty four hours came to a
coffee house, where they told their misfortunes and got some refreshment.

Mr. Beaumont thought it unnecessary to enquire for business of a public
nature, on account of the loss of his recommendations, but enquired of the
landlord for some private employment.

Sir, replied his host, you do not appear to me like a man brought up to such
business -- Your address and conversation speaks different.

Mr. Beaumont answered with a blush: Necessity is the mother of invention.

His host replied: There is a Nobleman three miles distant who employs a great
number of servants, but is something singular in his treatment toward them. He
never gives any abuse; for when one breaks a law, he is immediately dismissed,
and the next lowest is raised to his station.

His regulations I am pleased with, said Mr. Beaumont.

He will be here this evening replied his host.

Accordingly he appeared and made an agreement. He served him with all the
faithfulness and stability imaginable, and declared, that when he was cleaning
knives, his mind was most at ease: For when he was not employed, and no kind of
business called his attention, his thoughts were in Boston, placed with the
deepest impression on his beloved. And no sooner had night spread her fable
curtain, than his mind was filled with anxiety; and often on his bed he would
commune with himself, saying, The limited time of my absence will shortly be
expired, and how shall I accomplish my design. I must return by the time
appointed, or break my vow, and loose the object of may wishes -- Unless some
future event takes place, my plans are frustrated, as the business I am in at
present will not add much to my fortune.

Next morning he arose and went about his business with great composure of
mind. In the course of the day the Nobleman dismissed his body servant, for
some misdemeanor, and Mr. Beaumont arrived to his station which increased his
salary to one hundred sterling per annum.

His business was now to wait on the Nobleman when he rode out, and inspect the
tables, and see that every thing was in order; and likewise to ride on errands
for the Nobleman's daughter (a little Miss, aged thirteen years) who was then
under the care of a writing master, who attended upon her twice a day, to teach
her the definitive part of writing.

One morning his business led him into her room, and seeing her copy book lying
on the table, he took up the pen and carelessly wrote a line under the copy.

Shortly after, the writing master came in, cast his eye on the paper, and says
to the lady, did you write that line? No Sir, replied little Miss. Who did
write it? I do not know, Sir, unless it was Mr. Beaumont, (the servant) and I Am
sure it could not be him.

Call him in, said the teacher. He came forth. Did you write that line, Samuel?

I did, Sir, but I am very sorry. I came in and catched hold of the pen, and
wrote it carelessly, without a thought of injuring the feelings of any. Pardon
me, Sir, for my insolence.

You are quite excusable, replied the teacher, for it far exceeds the copy.

The little Miss informed her father of what had taken place. Mr. Beaumont was
immediately brought before the Nobleman, who examined him in the languages and
all other intricate branches of learning, and found him much preferable to
himself; then turns to Mr. Beaumont, saying: You shall no longer be my servant.
It was never predestined by Deity that a man of your abilities should be a
servant to any man of any rank or station whatever.

Mr. Beaumont remained speechless some time -- at length replies: I am
contented with my situation, and am willing to serve you until better business
offers.

The Nobleman answers: I have an old gentheman with me who serves in the
capacity of a clerk, and has been in that employment for many years past, but
has solicited me strongly to release him, as he has accumulated property
enough, and wishes to live a retired life. If you please, you may have his
birth, which will bring you in two hundred sterling per annum.

Mr. Beaumont thanked him kindly, and accepted his offer.

He remained in that situation for several years, and gave perfect
satisfaction. But the change of his condition added great luster to his beauty,
and being a person of handsome address and graceful conversation, united with a
most agreeable disposition, soon drew the attention of the Nobleman's daughter.

As the increased in years, her passions became more strong; but she never made
it known, lest it should prove disagreeable to her father.

The young lady was an only daughter, and her mother had been deed a
considerable time.

Her affection was not wholly unnoticed by Mr. Beaumont, who could plainly
discover that she embraced every opportunity to be in his company; but more
particularly when her father was absent. Her passion at length became so strong
that she could no longer conceal it. Taking an opportunity when her father was
absent, she very deliberately divulged her mind to Mr. Beaumont, in full;
telling him that she had harbored a fondness for him in her breast, which she
could no longer conceal.

If you are endowed (said she) with unanimity sufficient to ease my troubled
mind, answer me frankly.

Mr. Beaumont stood amazed for some time, but recovering, answers her in the
following manner:

Dear Madam
I am struck with astonishment, to think that a person of your birth and
breeding should set their affections so low. My fortune is by no means adequate
to yours; neither is my station in life so honorable as many of your suitors,
which you have denied the privilege of a second interview. As to my birth and
breeding I leave you to judge.


The young lady makes this brief reply:

Sir, as to your birth and breeding, your conduct proves that to be good; and I
find by experience, that money never purchased love.

The Nobleman appears, and breaks up the scene -- She retires to her own
apartment.

They conversed together every opportunity, until the end of the year, which
was the sixth year of his absence from home.

The Nobleman then solicited him strongly to continue with him another year;
but he refused, knowing that the time of fulfilling his former promise was near
at hand.

In the time he was preparing to return, the Nobleman was taken sick, and died;
but before him death he appointed Mr. Beaumont to settle his estate, and for
the love and good will he owed him, made him a present of five thousand pounds
sterling.

During the time he was settling this Nobleman's estate, the young woman,
recovering the troubles, in some measure which were caused by the death of her
father, accosts Mr. Beaumont in the following manner:

I have made you an offer of my heart and hand, but you never have given me an
answer. Now I see nothing to hinder our being joined in the bands of wedlock.
My fortune is all at your command. If you must return to your place of nativity
I am willing to bear you company, as I cannot live out of your sight. She could
not utter more for the rapidity of tears which flowed from her eyes, and run
gently down her rosy cheeks.

Mr. Beaumont for some time stood motionless -- then burst forth in tears and
said, Good Heavens! What shall I do? Shall I break my former promises? Can I be
so cruel?

On hearing of this, Miss Betsy starts up with an air of wildness -- What
promises?

Mr. Beaumont now gives her a narrative of all the transactions at home -- with
an account of the treatment he received from Mr. Gauze -- how Miss Nancy was
confined -- and his promise of returning at the close of that year.

On hearing of this, she flew to his arms and embraced him, when they both wept
bitterly.

Miss Nancy now cries out in the following manner: True genuine love never was
purchased by riches; but may heaven reward you for your constancy. I have
nothing to lay to your charge. You have ever treated me with respect and
tenderness. -- As my days here below are of short duration, and the treasures
of this world are as filthy rags, I impart my portion to you, hoping it may in
some measure constitute your happiness in this world of trouble and sorrow,
which I hope to leave shortly.

A heart of adamant would have melted to have seen these unfortunate lovers in
so melancholy a situation. But they did not remain so long: For in the course
of three days, Miss Betsy languished and died. She willed to Mr. Beaumont, just
before her death, thirty thousand pounds sterling, and made him executor of her
estate, which brought him a handsome sum; beside, now finding himself clear of
a scene of trouble and difficulty which he was deeply engaged in for upwards of
six long years.

He now sets out to obtain the object of his wishes, by returning to his native
country -- After furnishing himself and his intended spouse with two suits of
the best clothes France could afford, he takes leave of his beloved
acquaintaince, and sets out of his passage home.

When he arrived at port, he found a vessel bound for Boston, and ready to sail
in a few days. After strict examination, he found the vessel belonged to Mr.
Gauze, his intended father in law. On his passage, he became acquainted with
the captain, who gave a narrative of the transactions at home in the time of
his absence. He also informed him that Miss Nancy was courted by captain
Sheldrick, who belonged to the East India company.

On his arrival he found it to be in fact the case; and that the intended
marriage was to be celebrated the next day.

After some refreshment on board, Mr. Beaumont divulges the whole matter to the
crew, begging their assistance, saying, I will dress myself in sailors' habit,
and go with the hands, and inform Mr. Gauze of the vessel's arrival. After
writing a letter, they proceeded and entered the house sailor like, and
informed Mr. Gauze of the arrival of the vessel and the good voyage she had
made. He, being overjoyed, ran for a bottle to treat them. In his absence, Miss
Nancy came into the room. Mr. Beaumont fixed his eyes upon her, though at first
sight he did not know her. He was however, quickly convinced; and hands her the
letter. She secretly returns to her chamber, and immediately writes an answer.

Mr. Beaumont and the company continued in the house, making merry with Mr.
Gauze. At length he retires, charging them to send the captain up immediately.
Yes, Sir, replied Mr. Beaumont. Miss Nancy hands him the letter, and casts a
wishful look, though he was in a sailor's apparel.

Mr. Beaumont informed her in his letter, that he meant to take her by force,
and bring assistance enough to fight their way through, if he should be
molested.

She answers him: I have received your letter from your own hand, and observe
the contents: and most cordially acquiese in all your proposals.

Accordingly he came and found her by the kitchen door, ready to receive him
with open arms. He conveyed her to a Coffee-House, sent for a Justice of the
Peace, and were joined in the bands of wedlock, it being on Saturday evening.

The next morning they dressed and walked out: and tow such suits of clothes
were never before seen in the town of Boston.

On Monday the wedding was attended by the parents and relations of both
parties; and all those was would wish to partake, were made welcome.

Mr. Beaumont distributed his property, in part to his parents, so as to make
them comfortable through life; and was left then in possession of more property
than Mr. Gauze.

They crowned the remainder of their days in love and unity; and thus enjoyed
all the pleasures which can contribute to the happiness of a rural life.

FINIS.

