LECTURES UPON ANIMAL LIFE.

THREE LECTURES UPON ANIMAL LIFE, DELIVERED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA,
BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES OF MEDICINE, AND OF
CLINICAL PRACTICE IN THE SAID UNIVERSITY.

Published at the Request of his Pupils.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BUDD AND BARTRAM, FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE
HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH SECOND STREET. 1799.

PREFACE.
A REQUEST was made to me some years ago by my pupils, to publish the following
lectures. I declined complying with it, because I did not think them fit for
the public eye; but a more importunate application of the gentlemen who
attended them last year, has prevailed upon me to commit them to the press in
their present imperfect state. The reader will soon perceive, that I disclaim
being the author of the great and original conception upon which they are
founded. I have done but little more than carry the hod, to assist in
completing part of a fabric, the foundations of which were laid by two of the
most distinguished master builders in medicine of the eighteenth century.

I have endeavored to render the facts and principles contained in these
lectures, intelligible to gentlemen of all professions as well as to
physicians. This attempt to diffuse medical knowledge more generally, has been
made necessary, by the controversies about systems of medicine, and remedies,
which now divide the physicians of every part of the world. They can never be
settled, but by men who do not trade in physic, and who will not be actuated in
deciding upon medical questions, by an improper competition for interest, or
fame.

BENJAMIN RUSH.
PHILADELPHIA, 25 th June, 1799.
CONTENTS.
LECTURE I.
INTRODUCTION, 1 The constituents of perfect life in man, 5 Preliminary
propositions, 6 Of the stimuli which produce life, 8 Of external stimuli, ibid.
-- Of light, ibid. -- sound, 10 -- odors, 13 -- air, ibid. -- heat, 14 --
exercise, 15 -- pleasures of the senses, 16 Of internal stimuli, ibid. -- Of
food, ibid. -- chyle, 18 -- blood, ibid. -- tension of the glands, and of other
parts of the body, 19 -- the exercises of the faculties of the mind, ibid. Of
the state of life in different parts of the day. 24
LECTURE II.
Page. Of the state of animal life in sleep, 26 -- in the foetus, 34 -- in
infants, ibid. -- in youth and middle life, 39 -- in old age, 40 -- in persons
who are blind, deaf, and dumb, 44 -- in idiots, 46 -- in persons under the
effects of long fasting, ibid. -- in persons supposed to be dead from drowning,
freezing, and other causes. 50
LECTURE III.
Of the state of life in the different inhabitants of the (...) as varied by
civilization, diet, situation, and (...), 55 Of the influence of certain mental
stimuli which act nearly alike upon the individuals of all nations, 62 Of the
causes of life in all the different classes of animals, 68 Of the causes of
life in vegetables, 72 Of the causes of death, 75 Inferences, from the doctrine
of animal life being the effect of impressions upon the body. 78
LECTURES ON ANIMAL LIFE.
LECTURE I.
GENTLEMEN,
MY business in this chair is to teach the institutes of medicine. They have
been divided into Physiology, Pathology, and Therapeutics. The objects of the
first are, the laws of the human body in its healthy state. The second includes
the history of the causes, and seats of diseases. The subjects of the third,
are the remedies for those diseases. In entering upon the first part of our
course, I am met by a remark delivered by Dr. Hunter in his introductory
lectures to his course of anatomy. "In our branch (says the Doctor) those
teachers who study to captivate young minds with ingenious speculations, will
not leave a reputation behind them that will outlive them, half a century. When
they cease from their labors, their labors will be buried along with them.
There never was a man more followed, and admired in physiology, than Dr.
Boerhaave. I remember the veneration in which he was held. And now, in the
space of forty years, -- his physiology is -- it shocks me to think, in what a
light it appears." Lect. xi. p. 98.
Painful as this premonition may be to the teachers of physiology, it should
not deter them from speculating upon physiological subjects. Simple anatomy is
a mass of dead matter. It is physiology which infuses life into it. A knowledge
of the structure of the human body, occupies only the memory. Physiology
introduces it to the higher, and more noble faculties of the mind. The
component parts of the body, may be compared to the materials of a house, lying
without order in a yard. It is physiology, like a skilful architect, which
connects them together, so as to form from them an elegant, and useful
building. The writers against physiology, resemble in one particular, the
writers against luxury. They forget that the functions they know, and describe,
belong to the science of physiology; just as the declaimers against luxury,
forget that all the conveniences which they enjoy beyond what are possessed in
the most simple stage of society, belong to the luxuries of life. The anatomist
who describes the circulation of the blood, acts the part of a physiologist, as
much as he does, who attempts to explain the functions of the brain. In this
respect Dr. Hunter did honor to our science; for few men ever explained that
subject, and many others equally physiological, with more perspicuity and
eloquence, than that illustrious anatomist. Upon all new and difficult
subjects, there must be pioneers. It has been my lot to be called to this
office of hazard, and drudgery; and if in discharging its duties, I should meet
the fate of my predecessors, in this branch of medicine, I shall not perish in
vain. My errors, like the bodies of those who fall in forcing a breach, will
serve to compose a bridge for those who shall come after me, in our present
difficult enterprise. This consideration, aided by just views of the nature,
and extent of moral obligation, will overbalance the evils anticipated by Dr.
Hunter, from the loss of posthumous fame. Had a prophetic voice whispered in
the ear of Dr. Boerhaave in the evening of his life, that in the short period
of forty years, the memory of his physiological works would perish from the
earth; I am satisfied, from the knowledge we have of his elevated genius and
piety, he would have treated the prediction with the same indifference, that he
would have done, had he been told, that in the same time, his name should be
erased from a pane of glass, in a noisy and vulgar country tavern.

The subjects of the lectures I am about to deliver, you will find in a
syllabus which I have prepared, and published, for the purpose of giving you a
succinct view of the extent, and connection of our course. Some of these
subjects will be new in lectures upon the institutes of medicine, particularly
those which relate to morals, metaphysics, and theology. However thorny these
questions may appear, we must approach and handle them; for they are intimately
connected with the history of the faculties, and operations of the human mind;
and these form an essential part of the animal economy. Perhaps it is because
physicians have hitherto been restrained from investigating, and deciding upon
these subjects, by an erroneous belief that they belong exclusively to another
profession; that physiology has so long been an obscure, and conjectural
science.

In beholding the human body, the first thing that strikes us, is its LIFE.
This, of course should be the first object of our inquiries. It is a most
important subject; for the end of all the studies of a physician is to preserve
life; and this cannot be perfectly done, until we know in what it consists.

I include in animal life as applied to the human body, motion -- sensation --
and thought. These three, when united, compose perfect life. It may exist
without thought, or sensation; but neither sensation, nor thought, can exist
without motion. The lowest grade of life, probably exists in the absence of
even motion, as I shall mention hereafter. I have preferred the term motion to
those of oscillation, or vibration which have been employed by Dr. Hartley in
explaining the laws of animal matter; because I conceived it to be more simple,
and better adapted to common apprehension.

In treating upon this subject, I shall first consider animal life as it
appears in the waking, and sleeping states in a healthy adult, and shall
afterward inquire into the modification of its causes, in the foetal, infant,
youthful, and middle states of life, in certain diseases, in different states
of society, in different climates, and in different animals.

I shall begin, by delivering three general propositions.

I. Every part of the human body (the nails and hair excepted) is endowed with
sensibility, or excitability, or with both of them. By sensibility is meant the
power of having sensation excited by the action of impressions. Excitability
denotes that property in the human body, by which motion is excited by means of
impressions. This property has been called by several other names, such as,
irritability, contractility, mobility, and stimulability. I shall make use of
the term excitability, for the most part, in preference to either of them. I
mean by it, a capacity of imperceptible, as well as obvious motion. -- It is of
no consequence to our present inquiries, whether, this excitability be a
quality of animal matter, or a substance. The latter opinion has been
maintained by Dr. Girtanner, and has some probability in its favor.

II. The whole human body is so formed, and connected, that impressions made in
the healthy state upon one part, excite motion, or sensation, or both, in every
other part of the body. From this view, it appears to be an unit, or a simple
and indivisible quality, or substance. Its capacity for receiving motion, and
sensation, is variously modified by means of what are called, the senses. It is
external, and internal. The impressions which act upon it, shall be enumerated
in order.

III. Life is the EFFECT of certain stimuli acting upon the sensibility, and
excitability which are extended in different degrees, over every external, and
internal part of the body. These stimuli are as necessary to its existence, as
air is to flame. Animal life is truly (to use the words of Dr. Brown) "a forced
state." I have said, the words of Dr. Brown; for the opinion was delivered by
Dr. Cullen in the University of Edinburgh in the year 1766, and was detailed by
me in this school, many years before the name of Dr. Brown was known as a
teacher of medicine. It is true, Dr. Cullen afterward deserted it; but it is
equally true, I never did; and the belief of it, has been the foundation of
many of the principles, and modes of practice in medicine which I have since
adopted. In a lecture which I delivered in the year 1771, I find the following
words, which are taken from a manuscript copy of lectures given by Dr. Cullen
upon the institutes of medicine. "The human body is not an automaton, or
self-moving machine; but is kept alive, and in motion by the constant action of
stimuli upon it." In thus ascribing the discovery of the cause of life which I
shall endeavor to establish, to Dr. Cullen; let it not be supposed, I mean to
detract from the genius, and merit of Dr. Brown. To his intrepidity in
reviving, and propagating it, as well as for the many other truths contained in
his system of medicine posterity, I have no doubt, will do him ample justice,
after the errors that are blended with them, have been corrected, by their
unsuccessful application to the cure of diseases.

Agreeably to our last proposition, I proceed to remark, that the action of the
brain, the diastole, and systole of the heart, the pulsation of the arteries,
the contraction of the muscles, the peristaltic motion of the bowels, the
absorbing power of the lymphatics, secretion, excretion, hearing, seeing,
smelling, taste, and the sense of touch, nay more, thought itself, are all the
effects of stimuli acting upon the organs of sense and motion. These stimuli
have been divided into external, and internal. The external are light, sound,
odors, air, heat, exercise, and the pleasures of the senses. The internal
stimuli are food, drinks, chyle, the blood, a certain tension of the glands,
which contain secreted liquors, and the exercises of the faculties of the mind;
each of which I shall treat in the order, in which they have been mentioned

1. Of external stimuli. The first of these is light. It is remarkable that the
progenitor of the human race was not brought into existence until all the
luminaries of heaven were created. The first impulse of life, was probably
imparted to his body by means of light. It acts chiefly through the medium of
the organs of vision. Its influence upon animal life is feeble, compared with
some other stimuli to be mentioned hereafter; but it has its proportion of
force. -- Sleep has been said to be a tendency to death; now the absence of
light we know invites to sleep, and the return of it excites the waking state.
The late Mr. Rittenhouse informed me, that for many years he had constantly
awoke with the first dawn of the morning light, both in summer and winter. Its
influence upon the animal spirits strongly demonstrates its connection with
animal life, and hence we find a cheerful and a depressed state of mind in many
people, and more especially in invalids, to be intimately connected with the
presence or absence of the rays of the sun. The well known pedestrian traveller
Mr. Stewart in one of his visits to this city informed me, that he had spent a
summer in Lapland in the latitude of 69 during the greatest part of which time
the sun was seldom out of fight. He enjoyed he said during this period,
uncommon health and spirits, both of which he ascribed to the long duration,
and invigorating influence of light. These facts will surprise us less when we
attend to the effects of light upon vegetables. Some of them lose their color
by being deprived of it; many of them discover a partiality to it in the
direction of their flowers; and all of them discharge their pure air only while
they are exposed to it. "Organization, sensation, spontaneous motion and life,
exist only at the surface of the earth, and in places exposed to light. We
might affirm the flame of Prometheus's torch was the expression of a
philosophical truth that did not escape the ancients. Without light, nature was
lifeless, inanimate and dead. A benevolent God by producing life has spread
organization, sensation and thought over the surface of the earth." Lavoissier.


2. Sound has an extensive influence upon human life. Its numerous artificial
and natural sources need not be mentioned. I shall only take notice, that the
currents of winds, the passage of insects through the air, and even the growth
of vegetables, are all attended with an emission of sound; and although they
become imperceptible from habit; yet there is reason to believe they all act
upon the body, through the medium of the ears. The existence of these sounds,
is established by the reports of persons who have ascended two or three miles
from the earth in a Balloon. They tell us that the silence which prevails in
those regions of the air is so new and complete, as to produce an awful
solemnity in their minds. It is not necessary that these sounds should excite
sensation, or perception in order to their exerting a degree of stimulus upon
the body. There are a hundred impressions daily made upon it, which from habit,
are not followed by sensation. The stimulus of aliment upon the stomach, and of
blood upon the heart and arteries, probably cease to be felt, only from the
influence of habit. The exercise of walking, which was originally the result of
a deliberate act of the will, is performed from habit without the least degree
of consciousness. It is unfortunate for this, and many other parts of
physiology, that we forget what passed in our minds the first two or three
years of our lives. Could we recollect the manner in which we acquired our
first ideas, and the progress of our knowledge with the evolution of our
senses, and faculties; it would relieve us from many difficulties, and
controversies upon this subject. Perhaps this forgetfulness by children, of the
origin and progress of their knowledge, might be remedied by our attending more
closely to the first effects of impressions, sensation, and perception upon
them as discovered by their little actions; all of which probably have a
meaning, as determined as any of the actions of men or women.

The influence of sounds of a certain kind in producing excitement, and thereby
increasing life, cannot be denied. Fear produces debility which is a tendency
to death. -- Sound obviates this debility, and thus restores the system to the
natural, and healthy grade of life. The school boy and the clown, invigorate
their feeble and trembling limbs, by whistling or singing as they pass by a
country church yard, and the soldier feels his departing life recalled in the
onset of a battle by the noise of the fife, and of the poet's "spirit stirring
drum." Intoxication is frequently attended with a higher degree of life than is
natural. Now sound we know will produce this with a very moderate portion of
fermented liquor; hence we find men are more easily and highly excited by it at
public entertainments where there is music, loud talking, and hallooing, than
in private companies where there is no auxiliary stimulus added to that of the
wine. I wish these effects of sound upon animal life to be remembered; for I
shall mention it hereafter as a remedy for the weak state of life in many
diseases, and shall relate an instance in which a scream suddenly extorted by
grief, proved the means of resuscitating a person, who was supposed to be dead,
and who had exhibited the usual recent marks of the extinction of life.

I shall conclude this head by remarking that persons, who are destitute of
hearing and seeing, possess life in a more languid state than other people; and
hence arise the dullness, and want of spirits which they discover in their
intercourse with the world.

3. Odors have a sensible effect in promoting animal life. The greater
healthiness of the country, than cities, is derived in part from the effluvia
of odoriferous plants which float in the atmosphere in the spring and summer
months, acting upon the system, through the medium of the sense of smelling.
The effects of odors, upon animal life, appear still more obvious in the sudden
revival of it, which they produce in cases of fainting. Here the smell of a few
drops of hartshorn, or even of a burnt feather, has frequently in a few minutes
restored the system, from a state of weakness bordering upon death, to an
equable and regular degree of excitement.

4. Air acts as a powerful stimulus upon the system through the medium of the
lungs. The component parts of this fluid, and its decomposition in the lungs,
will be considered in another place. I shall only remark here, that the
circulation of the blood has been ascribed by Dr. Goodwin exclusively to the
action of air upon the lungs and heart. Does the external air act upon any
other part of the body besides those which have been mentioned? It is probable
it does, and that we lose our sensation and consciousness of it, by habit. It
is certain children cry, for the most part, as soon as they come into the
world. May not this be the effect of the sudden impression of air upon the
tender surface of their bodies? And may not the red color of their skins, be
occasioned by an irritation excited on them by the stimulus of the air? It is
certain it acts powerfully upon dinudated animal fibers; for who has not
observed a sore, and even the skin when deprived of its cuticle, to be
affected, when long exposed to the air, with pain, and inflammation? -- The
stimulus of air, in promoting the natural actions of the alimentary canal,
cannot be doubted. A certain portion of it seems to be necessarily present in
the bowels in a healthy state.

5. Heat is an uniform and active stimulus in promoting life. It is derived, in
certain seasons and countries, in part from the sun; but its principal source
is from the lungs, in which it appears to be generated by the decomposition of
pure air, and from whence it is conveyed by means of the circulation, to every
part of the body. The extensive influence of heat upon animal life, is evident
from its decay and suspension during the winter in certain animals, and from
its revival upon the approach and action of the vernal sun. It is true, life is
diminished much less in man, from the distance and absence of the sun, than in
other animals; but this must be ascribed to his possessing reason in so high a
degree, as to enable him to supply the abstraction of heat, by the action of
other stimuli upon his system.

6. Exercise acts as a stimulus upon the body in various ways. Its first
impression is upon the muscles. These act upon the blood vessels, and they upon
the nerves and brain. The necessity of exercise to animal life is indicated, by
its being kindly imposed upon man in paradise. The change which the human body
underwent by the fall, rendered the same salutary stimulus necessary to its
life, in the more active form of labor. But we are not to suppose, that motion
is excited in the body by exercise or labor alone. It is constantly stimulated
by the positions of standing, sitting, and lying upon the sides; all of which
act more or less upon muscular fibers, and by their means, upon every part of
the system.

7. The pleasures we derive from our senses have a powerful and extensive
influence upon human life. The number of these pleasures, and their proximate
cause, will form an agreeable subject for two or three future lectures.

We proceed next to consider the internal stimuli which produce animal life.
These are

I. FOOD. This acts in the following ways. 1. Upon the tongue. Such are the
sensibility and excitability of this organ, and so intimate, is its connection
with every other part of the body; that the whole system is invigorated by
aliment, as soon as it comes in contact with it. 2. By mastication. This moves
a number of muscles and blood vessels situated near the brain and heart, and of
course imparts impressions to them. 3. By deglutition, which acts upon similar
parts, and with the same effect. 4. By its presence in the stomach, in which it
acts by its quantity and quality. Food, by distending the stomach, stimulates
the contiguous parts of the body. A moderate degree of distention of the
stomach and bowels is essential to a healthy excitement of the system.
Vegetable aliment, and drinks, which contain less nourishment than animal food,
serve this purpose in the human body. Hay acts in the same manner in a horse.
Sixteen pounds, of this light food, are necessary to keep up such a degree of
distention in the stomach and bowels of this animal, as to impart to him his
natural grade of strength and life. The quality of food, when of a stimulating
nature, supplies the place of distention from its quantity. A single onion will
support a lounging Highlander on the hills of Scotland for four and twenty
hours. A moderate quantity of salted meat, or a few ounces of sugar, have
supplied the place of pounds of less stimulating food. Even indigestible
substances, which remain for days, or perhaps weeks in the stomach, exert a
stimulus there, which has an influence upon animal life. It is in this way the
tops of briars, and the twigs of trees, devoid not only of nourishing matter,
but of juices, support the camel in his journeys through the deserts of the
Eastern countries. Chips of cedar posts, moistened with water, have supported
horses for two or three weeks, during a long voyage from Boston to Surinam; and
the indigestible cover of an old Bible, preserved the life of a dog,
accidentally confined in a room at New Castle upon Tyne, for twenty days. 5.
Food stimulates the whole body by means of the process of digestion which goes
forward in the stomach. This animal function is carried on in part by
fermentation, in which there is an extrication of heat, and air. Now both
these, it has been remarked, exert a stimulus in promoting animal life.

Drinks when they consist of fermented or distilled liquors, stimulate from
their quality; but when they consist of water, either in its simple state, or
impregnated with any sapid substance, they act principally by distention.

II. The chyle acts upon the lacteals, mesenteric glands, and thoracic duct, in
its passage through them; and it is highly probable, its first mixture with the
blood in the subclavian vein, and its first action on the heart, are attended
with considerable stimulating effects.

III. The blood is a very important internal stimulus. It has been disputed
whether it acts by its quality, or only by distending the blood vessels. It
appears to act in both ways. I believe with Dr. Whytt, that the blood
stimulates the heart and arteries by a specific action. But if this be not
admitted, its influence in distending the blood vessels in every part of the
body, and thereby imparting extensive and uniform impressions to every animal
fiber, cannot be denied. -- In support of this assertion it has been remarked,
that in those persons who die of hunger, there is no diminution of the quantity
of blood in the large blood vessels.

IV. A certain TENSION of the glands, and of other parts of the body,
contributes to support animal life. This is evident in the vigor which is
imparted to the system, by the fullness of the seminal vesicles and gall
bladder* and by the distention of the uterus in pregnancy. This distention is
so great, in some instances, as to prevent sleep for many days and even weeks
before delivery. It serves the valuable purpose of rendering the female system
less liable to death during its continuance, than at any other time. By
increasing the quantity of life in the body, it often suspends the fatal issue
of pulmonary consumption, and ensures a temporary victory over the plague and
other malignant fevers; for death, from those diseases, seldom takes place
until the stimulus, from the distention of the uterus, is removed by
parturition.

V. The exercises of the faculties of the mind have a wonderful influence in
increasing the quantity of human life. They all act by reflection only, after
having been previously excited into action by impressions made upon the body.
This view, of the reaction of the mind upon the body, accords with the
simplicity of other operations in the animal economy. It is thus the brain
repays the heart for the blood it conveys to it, by reacting upon its muscular
fibers. -- The influence of the different faculties of the mind is felt in the
pulse, in the stomach, and in the liver, and is seen in the face, and other
external parts of the body. Those which act most unequivocally in promoting
life, are the understanding, the imagination, and the passions. Thinking
belongs to the understanding, and is attended with an obvious influence upon
the degree and duration of life. Intense study has often rendered the body
insensible to the debilitating effects of cold, and hunger. Men of great and
active understandings, who blend with their studies, temperance and exercise,
are generally long lived. In support of this assertion, a hundred names might
be added to those of Newton and Franklin. Its truth will be more fully
established by attending to the state of human life in persons of an opposite
intellectual character. The Cretins, a race of idiots in Valais in Swisserland,
travelers tell us, are all short lived. Common language justifies the opinion
of the stimulus of the understanding upon the brain, hence it is common to say
of dull men, that they have scarcely ideas enough to keep themselves awake.

The imagination acts with great force upon the body, whether its numerous
associations produce pleasure or pain. But the passions pour a constant stream
upon the wheels of life. They have been subdivided into emotions and passions
properly so called. The former have for their objects present, the latter,
future good and evil. All the objects of the passions are accompanied with
desire or aversion. To the former belong chiefly, hope, love, ambition, and
avarice; to the latter -- fear, hatred, malice, envy, and the like. Joy, anger,
and terror, belong to the class of emotions. The passions and emotions have
been further divided into stimulating and sedative. Our business at present is
to consider their first effect only upon the body. In the original constitution
of human nature, we were made to be stimulated by such passions and emotions
only as have moral good for their objects. Man was designed to be always under
the influence of hope, love, and joy. By the loss of his innocence, he has
subjected himself to the dominion of passions and emotions of a malignant
nature; but they possess, in common with such as are good, a stimulus which
renders them subservient to the purpose of promoting animal life. It is true,
they are like the stimulus of a dislocated bone in their operation upon the
body, compared with the action of antagonist muscles stretched over bones,
which gently move in their natural sockets. The effects of the good passions
and emotions, in promoting health and longevity, have been taken notice of by
many writers. They produce a flame, gentle and pleasant, like oil perfumed with
frankincense in the lamp of life. There are instances likewise of persons who
have derived strength, and long life from the influence of the evil passions
and emotions that have been mentioned. Dr. Darwin relates the history of a man,
who used to overcome the fatigue induced by traveling, by thinking of a person
whom he hated. The debility induced by disease, is often removed by a sudden
change in the temper. This is so common, that even nurse; predict a recovery in
persons as soon as they become peevish and ill-natured, after having been
patient during the worst stage of their sickness. This peevishness acts as a
gentle stimulus upon the system in its languid state, and thus turns the scale
in favor of life and health. The famous Benjamin Lay of this state, who lived
to be eighty years of age, was of a very irascible temper. Old Elwes was a
prodigy of avarice, and every court in Europe furnishes instances of men who
have attained to extreme old age, who have lived constantly under the dominion
of ambition. In the course of a long inquiry, which I instituted some years ago
into the state of the body and mind in old people, I did not find a single
person above eighty, who had not possessed an active understanding, or active
passions. Those different and opposite faculties of the mind, when in excess,
happily supply the place of each other. Where they unite their forces, they
extinguish the flame of life, before the oil which feeds it is consumed.

In another place I shall resume the influence of the faculties of the mind
upon human life, as they discover themselves in the different pursuits of men.

I have only to add here, that I see no occasion to admit, with the followers
of Dr. Brown, that the mind is active in sleep, in preserving the motions of
life. I hope to establish hereafter the opinion of Mr. Lock, that the mind is
always passive in sound sleep. It is true it acts in dreams; but these depend
upon a morbid state of the brain, and therefore do not belong to the present
stage of our subject; for I am now considering animal life only in the healthy
state of the body. I shall say presently, that dreams are intended to supply
the absence of some natural stimulus, and hence we find they occur in those
persons most commonly, in whom there is a want of healthy action in the system
induced by the excess, or deficiency of customary stimuli.

Life is in a languid state, in the morning. It acquires vigor by the gradual,
and successive application of stimuli in the forenoon. It is in its most
perfect state about midday, and remains stationary for some hours. From the
diminution of the sensibility and contractility of the system to the action of
impressions, it lessens in the evening, and becomes again languid at bedtime.
These facts will admit of an extensive application hereafter in our lectures
upon the practice of physic.

LECTURE II.
GENTLEMEN,
The stimuli which have been enumerated, when they act collectively, and within
certain bounds, produce a healthy waking state. But they do not always act
collectively, nor in the determined and regular manner that has been described.
There is in many states of the system, a deficiency of some stimuli, and in
some of its states, an apparent absence of them all. To account for the
continuance of animal life under such circumstances, two things must be
premised, before we proceed to take notice of the diminution, or absence of the
stimuli which support it.

1. The healthy actions of the body in the waking state, consist in a proper
degree of what has been called excitability, and excitement. The former is the
medium on which stimuli act in producing the latter. In an exact proportion,
and a due relation of both, diffused uniformly throughout every part of the
body, consists good health. Disease is the reverse of this. It depends in part
upon a disproportion between excitement and excitability, and in a partial
distribution of each of them. In thus distinguishing the different states of
excitement and excitability in health and sickness, you see I dissent from Dr.
Brown, who supposes them to be uniform and equable, in the morbid, as well as
the healthy states of the body.

2. It is a law of the system, that the absence of one natural stimulus is
generally supplied by the increased action of others. This is more certainly
the case, where a natural stimulus is abstracted suddenly; for the excitability
is thereby so instantly formed and accumulated, as to furnish a highly sensible
and moveable surface for the remaining stimuli to act upon. Many proofs might
be adduced in support of this proposition. The reduction of the excitement of
the blood vessels, by means of cold, prepares the way for a full meal, or a
warm bed, to excite in them the morbid actions which take place in a pleurisy
or a rheumatism. A horse in a cold stable eats more than in a warm one; and
thus counteracts the debility which would otherwise be induced upon his system,
by the abstraction of the stimulus of warm air.

These two propositions being admitted, I proceed next to inquire into the
different degrees and states of animal life. The first departure from its
ordinary and perfect state, which strikes us, is in

I. Sleep: This is either natural or artificial. Natural sleep is induced by a
diminution of the excitement, and excitability of the system by the continued
application of the stimuli which act upon the body in its waking state. When
these stimuli act in a determined degree, that is, when the same number of
stimuli act with the same force, and for the same time, upon the system; sleep
will be brought on at the same hour every night. But when they act with
uncommon force, or for an unusual time, it is brought on at an earlier hour.
Thus a long walk, or ride by persons accustomed to a sedentary life, unusual
exercise of the understanding, the action of strong passions, or emotions, and
the continual application of unusual sounds seldom fail of inducing premature
sleep. It is recorded of Pope Ganganelli, that he slept more soundly, and
longer than usual, the night after he was raised to the papal chair. The
effects of unusual sounds in bringing on premature sleep, is further
demonstrated by that constant inclination to retire to bed at an early hour,
which country people discover the first and second days they spend in a city,
exposed from morning till night to the noise of hammers, files and looms, or of
days, carts, wagons, and coaches rattling over pavements of stone. -- Sleep is
further hastened by the absence of light, the cessation of sounds, and labor,
and the recumbent posture of the body on a soft bed.

Artificial sleep may be induced at any time by certain stimulating substances,
particularly by opium. They act by carrying the system beyond the healthy grade
of excitement, to a degree of indirect debility which Dr. Brown has happily
called the sleeping point. The same point may be induced in the system at any
time by the artificial abstraction of the usual stimuli of life. For example.
Let a person shut himself up at midday in a dark room, remote from noise of
all kinds, let him lie down on his back upon a (...) in a temperate state of
the atmosphere, and let him cease to think upon interesting subjects, or let
him think only upon one subject, and he will soon fall asleep. Dr. Boerhaave
relates an instance of a Dutch physician who having persuaded himself that
waking was a violent state, and sleep the only natural one of the system;
contrived by abstracting every kind of stimulus in the manner that has been
mentioned, to sleep away whole days and nights, until at length he impaired his
understanding, and finally perished in a public hospital in a state of idiotism.

In thus anticipating a view of the cause of sleep, I have said nothing of the
effects of diseases of the brain in inducing it. These belong to another part
of our course. The short explanation I have given of its cause, was necessary
in order to render the history of animal life, in that state of the system,
more intelligible.

At the usual hour of sleep there is an abstraction of the stimuli of light,
sound and muscular motion. The stimuli which remain, and act with an increased
force upon the body in sleep are,

1. The heat which is discharged from the body, and confined by means of bed
clothes. It is most perceptible when exhaled from a bed fellow. Heat obtained
in this way, has sometimes been employed to restore declining life to the
bodies of old people. Witness the damsel who lay for this purpose in the bosom
of the king of Israel. The advantage of this external heat will appear further,
when we consider how impracticable, or imperfect sleep is, when we lie under
too light covering in cold weather.

2. The air which is applied to the lungs during sleep probably acts with more
force than in the waking state. I am disposed to believe that more air is
phlogisticated in sleep than at any other time, for the smell of a close room
in which a person has slept one night, we know, is much more disagreeable than
that of a room under equal circumstances, in which half a dozen people have sat
for the same number of hours in the day time. -- The action of decomposed air
on the lungs and heart was spoken of in a former lecture. An increase in its
quantity must necessarily have a powerful influence upon animal life during the
sleeping state.

3. Respiration is performed with a greater extension, and contraction of the
muscles of the breast in sleep than in the waking state; and this cannot fail
of increasing the impetus of the blood in its passage through the heart and
blood vessels. The increase of the fullness and force of the pulse in sleep, is
probably owing in part to the action of respiration upon it. In another place I
hope to elevate the rank of the blood vessels in the animal economy, by
showing that they are the fountains of power in the body. They derive this
preeminence from the protection and support they afford to every part of the
system. They are the perpetual sentinels of health and life; for they never
partake in the repose which is enjoyed by the muscles and nerves. During sleep,
their sensibility seems to be converted into contractility, by which means
their muscular fibers are more easily moved by the blood, than in the waking
state. The diminution of sensibility in sleep is proved by many facts to be
mentioned hereafter; and the change of sensibility into contractility will
appear, when we come to consider the state of animal life in infancy and old
age.

4. Aliment in the stomach acts more powerfully in sleep, than in the waking
state. This is evident from digestion going on more rapidly when we are awake
than when we sleep. -- The more slow the digestion, the greater is the stimulus
of the aliment in the stomach. Of this we have many proofs in daily life.
Laborers object to milk as a breakfast; because it digests too soon, and often
call for food in a morning, which they can feel all day in their stomachs.
Saussages, fat pork, and onions are generally preferred by them for this
purpose. A moderate supper is favorable to easy and sound sleep; and the want
of it in persons who are accustomed to that meal, is often followed by a
restless night. The absence of its stimulus is probably supplied by a full gall
bladder (which always attends an empty stomach) in persons who are not in the
habit of eating suppers.

5. The stimulus of the urine, accumulated in the bladder during sleep, has a
perceptible influence upon animal life. It is often so considerable as to
interrupt sleep; and it is one of the causes of our waking at a regular hour in
the morning. It is moreover a frequent cause of the activity of the
understanding and passions in dreams; and hence we dream more in our morning
slumbers when the bladder is full, than we do in the beginning, or middle of
the night.

6. The faeces exert a constant stimulus upon the bowels in sleep. This is so
considerable as to render it less profound, when they have been accumulated for
two or three days, or when they have been deposited in the extremity of the
alimentary canal.

7. The partial and irregular exercises of the understanding and passions in
dreams have an occasional influence in promoting life. They occur only where
there is a deficiency of other stimuli. Such is the force with which the mind
acts upon the body in dreams, that Dr. Brambilla, physician to the emperor of
Germany, informs us, that he has seen instances of wounds in soldiers being
inflamed, and putting on a gangrenous appearance in consequence of the
commotions excited in their bodies by irritating dreams. The stimulating
passions act through the medium of the will; and the exercises of this faculty
of the mind sometimes extend so far as to produce actions in the muscles of the
limbs, and occasionally in the whole body, as we see in persons who walk in
their sleep. The stimulus of lost often awakens us with pleasure or pain,
according as we are disposed to respect, or disobey the precepts of our Maker.
The angry and revengeful passions often deliver us in like manner, from the
imaginary guilt of murder. Even the debilitating passions of grief, and fear,
produce an indirect operation upon the system that is favorable to life in
sleep, for they excite that distressing disease called the night mare, which
prompts us to speak, or halloo, and by thus invigorating respiration, restores
the languid circulation of the blood in the heart and brain. Do not complain
then, gentlemen, when you are bestrode by this midnight hag. She is kindly sent
to prevent your sudden death. Persons who go to bed in good health, and are
found dead the succeeding morning, are said most commonly to die of this
disease.

I cannot dismiss the subject of the stimulating effects of dreams, without
taking notice of an opinion of Dr. Darwin which is connected with it. He
supposes dreams are never attended with volition. The facts which have been
mentioned, prove, that the will frequently acts with more force in them, than
in the waking state.

I proceed now to inquire into the state of animal life in its different
stages. I pass over for the present its history in generation. It will be
sufficient only to remark in this place, that its first motion is produced by
the stimulus of the male seed upon the female ovum. This opinion is not
originally mine. You will find it in Dr. Haller. "Novum foetum a seminis
masculi stimulo vitam concepisse." Elementa Physiologiae, vol. viii. p. 177.
The pungent taste which Mr. John Hunter discovered in the male seed, renders
it peculiarly fit for this purpose. No sooner is the female ovum thus set in
motion, and the foetus formed, than its capacity of life is supported,

1. By the stimulus of the heat which it derives from its connection with its
mother in the womb.

2. By the stimulus of its own circulating blood.

3. By its constant motion in the womb after the third month of pregnancy. The
absence of this motion for a few days, is always a sign of the indisposition or
death of a foetus. Considering how early a child is accustomed to it, it is
strange that a cradle should 'ever have been denied to it after it comes into
the world.

II. In infants there is an absence of many of the stimuli which support life.
-- Their excretions are in a great measure deficient in acrimony, and their
mental faculties are too weak to exert much influence upon their bodies. But
the absence of stimulus from those causes, is amply supplied

1. By the very great excitability of their systems to those of light, sound,
heat, and air. So powerfully do light and sound act upon them, that the author
of nature has kindly defended their eyes and ears from an excess of their
impressions by imperfect vision, and hearing, for several weeks after birth.
The capacity of infants to be acted upon by moderate degrees of heat is evident
from their suffering less from cold than grown people. This is so much the
case, that we read in Mr. Umfreville's account of Hudson's Bay, of a child that
was found alive upon the back of its mother after she was frozen to death. I
before hinted at the action of the air upon the bodies of new born infants in
producing the red color of their skins. It is highly probable, (from a fact
formerly mentioned) that the first impression of the atmosphere which produces
this redness is accompanied with pain, and this we know is a stimulus of a very
active nature. By a kind law of sensation, impressions, that were originally
painful, become pleasurable by repetition, or duration. This is remarkably
evident in the impression now under consideration, and hence we find infants at
a certain age, discover signs of an increase of life by their delightful
gestures, when they are carried into the open air. Recollect further gentlemen,
what was said formerly, of excitability, predominating over sensibility in
infants. We see it daily, not only in their patience of cold, but in the short
time in which they cease to complain of the injuries they meet with from falls,
cuts, and even severe surgical operations.

2. Animal life is supported in infants by their sucking, or feeding, nearly
every hour in the day, and night when they are awake. I explained formerly the
manner in which food stimulated the system. The action of sucking, supplies by
the muscles employed in it, the stimulus of mastication.

3. Laughing and Crying, which are universal in infancy, have a considerable
influence in promoting animal life, by their action upon respiration, and the
circulation of the blood. Laughing exists under all circumstances,
independently of education or imitation. The child of a negro slave born only
to inherit the toils and misery of its parents, receives its master with a
smile every time he enters his kitchen, or a negro-quarter. But laughing exists
in infancy under circumstances still more unfavourable to it, an instance of
which is related by Mr. Bruce. After a journey of several hundred miles across
the sands of Nubia, he came to a spring of water shaded by a few scrubby trees.
Here he intended to have rested during the night, but he had not slept long,
before he was awakened by a noise which he perceived was made by a solitary
Arab equally fatigued, and half famished with himself, who was preparing to
murder and plunder him. Mr. Bruce rushed upon him, and made him his prisoner.
The next morning he was joined by a half starved female companion, with an
infant of six months old in her arms. In passing by this child, Mr. Bruce says
it laughed and crowed in his face, and attempted to leap upon him. From this
fact it would seem as if laughing was not only characteristic of our species,
but that it was early and intimately connected with human life. The child of
these Arabs had probably never seen a smile upon the faces of its ferocious
parents, and perhaps had never, (before the sight of Mr. Bruce), beheld any
other human creature.

Crying has a considerable influence upon health and life in children. I have
seen so many instances of its salutary effects, that I have satisfied myself
that it is as possible for a child to "cry and be fat," as it is to "laugh and
be fat."

4. As children advance in life, the constancy of their appetites for food, and
their disposition to laugh, and cry, lessen, but the diminution of these
stimuli supplied by exercise. The limbs, and tongues of children are always in
motion. They continue likewise to eat oftener than adults. A crust of bread is
commonly the last thing they ask for at night, and the first thing they call
for in the morning. It is now they begin to feel the energy of their mental
faculties. This stimulus is assisted in its force, by the disposition to
prattle which is so universal among children. This habit of converting their
ideas into words as fast as they rise, follows them to their beds, where we
often hear them talk themselves to sleep in a whisper, or to use less correct,
but more striking terms, by thinking aloud.

5. Dreams act at an early period upon the bodies of children. Their smiles,
startings, and occasional screams in their sleep appear to arise from them.
After the third or fourth year of their lives, they sometimes confound them
with things that are real. From observing the effects of this mistake upon the
memory, a sensible woman whom I once knew, forbad her children to tell their
dreams, lest they should contract habits of lying, by confounding imaginary,
with real events.

6. New objects whether natural or artificial, are never seen by children
without emotions of pleasure which act upon their capacity of life. The effects
of novelty upon the tender bodies of children may easily be conceived, by its
friendly influence upon the health of invalids who visit foreign countries, and
who pass months, or years in a constant succession of new and agreeable
impressions.

III. From the combination of all the stimuli that have been enumerated, human
life is generally in excess from fifteen to thirty-five. It is during this
period, the passions blow a perpetual storm. The most predominating of them is
the love of pleasure. No sooner does the system become insensible to this
stimulus, than ambition succeeds it in,

IV. The middle stage of life. Here we behold man in his most perfect physical
state. The stimuli which now act upon him are so far regulated by prudence,
that they are seldom excessive in their force. The habits of order the system
acquires in this period, continue to produce good health for many years
afterward, and hence bills of mortality prove that fewer persons die between
forty and fifty-seven; than in any other seventeen years of human life.

V. In OLD AGE the senses of seeing, hearing and touch are impaired. The
venereal appetite is weakened, or entirely extinguished. The pulse becomes
slow, and subject to frequent intermissions, from a decay in the force of the
blood vessels; Exercise becomes impracticable, or irksome, and the operations
of the understanding are performed with languor and difficulty. In this
shattered and declining state of the system, the absence and diminution of all
the stimuli which have been mentioned are supplied,

1. By an increase in the quantity, and by the peculiar quality of the food
which is taken by old people. They generally eat twice as much as persons in
middle life, and they bear with pain the usual intervals between meals. They
moreover prefer that kind of food which is savoury and stimulating. The stomach
of the celebrated Parr, who died in the one hundred and fiftieth year of his
age, was found full of strong, nourishing aliment.

2. By the stimulus of the faeces which are frequently retained for five or six
days in the bowels of old people.

3. By the stimulus of fluids rendered preternaturally acrid by age. The urine,
sweat and even the tears of old people, possess a peculiar acrimony. Their
blood likewise loses part of the mildness which is natural to that fluid; and
hence the difficulty with which sores heal in old people; and hence too the
reason why cancers are more common in the decline, than in any other period of
human life.

4. By the uncommon activity of certain passions. These are either good or
evil. To the former belong an increased vigor in the operations of those
passions which have for their objects the Divine Being, or the whole family of
mankind, or their own offspring, particularly their grandchildren. To the
latter passions belong, malice, a hatred of the manners and fashions of the
rising generation, and above all, avarice. This passion knows no holidays. Its
stimulus is constant, though varied daily by the numerous means which it has
discovered of increasing, securing, and perpetuating property. It has been
observed that weak mental impressions produce much greater effects in old
people than in persons in middle life. A trifling indisposition in a
grandchild, an inadvertent act of unkindness from a friend, or the fear of
losing a few shillings, have in many instances produced in them a degree of
wakefulness that has continued for two or three nights. It is to this highly
excitable state of the system that Solomon probably alludes, when he describes
the grasshopper as burdensome to old people.

5. By the passion for talking, which is so common, as to be one of the
characteristics of old age. I mentioned formerly, the influence of this
stimulus upon animal life. Perhaps it is more necessary in the female
constitution than in the male; for it has long ago been remarked, that women
who are very taciturn, are generally unhealthy.

6. By their wearing warmer clothes, and preferring warmer rooms, than in the
former periods of their lives. This practice is so uniform, that it would not
be difficult in many cases to tell a man's age by his dress, or by finding out
at what degree of heat he found himself comfortable in a close room.

7. By dreams. These are universal among old people. They arise from their
short and imperfect sleep.

8. It has been often said that "We are once men, and twice children." In
speaking of the state of animal life in infancy, I remarked that the
contractility of the animal fibers, predominated over their sensibility in that
stage of life. The same thing takes place in old people, and it is in
consequence of the return of this infantile state of the system, that all the
stimuli which have been mentioned act upon them with much more force than in
middle life. This sameness, in the predominance of excitability over
sensibility in children and old people, will account for the similarity of
their habits with respect to eating, sleep, exercise, and the use of fermented
or distilled liquors. It is from the increase of excitability in old people,
that so small a quantity of strong drink intoxicates them; and it is from an
ignorance of this change in their constitutions, that many of them become
drunkards after passing the early and middle stages of life with sober
characters.

Life is continued in a less imperfect state in old age, in women than in men.
The former sew, and knit, and spin, after they lose the use of their ears and
eyes; whereas the latter, after losing the use of those senses, frequently pass
the evening of their lives in a torpid state in a chimney corner. It is from
the influence of moderate and gently stimulating employments, upon the female
constitution, that more women live to be old, than men, and that they rarely
survive their usefulness in domestic life.

Hitherto the principles I am endeavoring to establish, have been applied to
explain the cause of life in its more common forms. Let us next inquire, how
far they will enable us to explain its continuance in certain morbid states of
the body, in which there is a diminution of some, and an apparent abstraction
of all the stimuli, which have been supposed to produce animal life.

I. We observe some people to be blind, or deaf and dumb from their birth. The
same defects of sight, hearing, and speech, are sometimes brought on by
diseases. Here animal life is deprived of all those numerous stimuli, which
arise from light, colors, sounds, and speech. But the absence of these stimuli
is supplied,

I. By increased sensibility and excitability in their remaining senses. The
ears, the nose, and the fingers, afford a surface for impressions in blind
people which frequently overbalances the loss of their eyesight. There are two
blind young men, brothers, in this city, of the name of Dutton, who can tell
when they approach a post in walking across a street, by a peculiar sound which
the ground under their feet emits in the neighborhood of the post. Their sense
of hearing is still more exquisite to sounds of another kind. They can tell the
names of a number of tame pigeons, with which they amuse themselves in a
little garden, by only hearing them fly over their heads. The celebrated blind
philosopher Dr. Moyse can distinguish a black dress on his friends, by its
smell; and we read of many instances of blind persons who have been able to
perceive colors by rubbing their fingers upon them. One of these persons
mentioned by Mr. Boil, has left upon record an account of the specific quality
of each color as it affected his sense of touch. He says, black imparted the
most, and blue, the least perceptible sense of asperity to his fingers.

2. By an increase of vigor in the exercise of the mental faculties. The poems
of Homer, Milton and Blacklock, and the seize of Sanderson in
mathematical knowledge, all discover how much the energy of the mind is
increased by the absence of impressions upon the organs of vision.

II. We sometimes behold life in idiots in whom there is not only an absence of
the stimuli of the understanding and passions; but frequently from the weakness
of their bodies, a deficiency of the locomotive powers. Here an inordinate
appetite for food, or venereal pleasures, or a constant habit of laughing, or
talking, or playing with their hands and feet, supply the place of the
stimulating operations of the mind, and of general bodily exercise. Of the
inordinate force of the venereal appetite in idiots we have many proofs. The
Cretins are much addicted to venery; and Dr. Michaelis tells us that the idiot
whom he saw at the Pesaiac falls in New Jersey, who had passed six and twenty
years in a cradle, acknowledged that he had venereal desires, and wished to be
married, for the Doctor adds, he had a sense of religion upon his fragment of
mind, and of course did not wish to gratify that appetite in an unlawful manner.

III. How is animal life supported in persons who pass many days, and even
weeks without food, and in some instances without drinks? Long fasting is
usually the effect of disease, of necessity, or of a principle of religion.
When it arises from the first cause, the actions of life are kept up by the
stimulus of disease. The absence of food when accidental, or submitted to as a
means of producing moral happiness, is supplied,

1. By the stimulus of a full gall bladder. This state of the receptacle of
bile, has generally been found to accompany an empty stomach. The bile is
sometimes absorbed, and imparts a yellow color to the skin of persons who
suffer or die of famine.

2. By increased acrimony in all the secretions and excretions of the body. The
saliva becomes so acrid by long fasting, as to excoriate the gums, and the
breath acquires not only a foetor, but a pungency so active, as to draw tears
from the eyes of persons who are exposed to it.

3. By increased sensibility and excitability in the sense of touch. The blind
man mentioned by Mr. Boil who could distinguish colors by his fingers,
possessed this talent only after fasting. Even a draught of any kind of liquor
deprived him of it. I have taken notice in my account of the yellow fever in
Philadelphia in the year 1793, of the effects of a diet bordering upon fasting
for six weeks, in producing a quickness and correctness in my perceptions of
the state of the pulse, which I had never experienced before.

4. By an increase of activity in the understanding and passions. Gamesters
often improve the exercises of their minds when they are about to play for a
large sum of money, by living for a day or two upon roasted apples and cold
water. Where the passions are excited into preternatural action, the absence of
the stimulus of food is scarcely felt. I shall hereafter mention the influence
of the desire of life, upon its preservation under all circumstances. It acts
with peculiar force when fasting is accidental. But when it is submitted to as
a religious duty, it is accompanied by sentiments and feelings which more than
balance the abstraction of aliment. The body of Moses was sustained, probably
without a miracle, during an abstinence of forty days and forty nights, by the
pleasure he derived from conversing with his Maker "Face to face, as a man
speaking with his friend." Exodus xxxiii. 11. xxxiv. 28.


I remarked formerly that the veins discover no deficiency of blood in persons
who die of famine. Death from this cause seems to be less the effect of the
want of food, than of the combined and excessive operation of the stimuli,
which supply its place in the system.

IV. We come now to a difficult inquiry, and that is, how is life supported
during the total abstraction of external and internal stimuli which takes place
in asphixia, or in apparent death, from all its numerous causes?

I took notice in a former lecture, that ordinary life consisted in the
excitement, and excitability of the different parts of the body; and that they
were occasionally changed into each other. In apparent death from violent
emotions of the mind, from the sudden impression of miasmata, or from drowning,
there is a loss of excitement; but the excitability of the system remains for
minutes, and in some instances for hours afterward unimpaired, provided the
accident which produced the loss of excitement has not been attended with such
exertions as are calculated to waste it. If for example, a person should fall
suddenly into the water, without bruising his body, and sink before his fears,
or exertions had time to dissipate his excitability; his recovery from apparent
death might be effected by the gentle action of heat, or frictions upon his
body, so as to convert his accumulated excitability gradually into excitement.
The same condition of the system takes place when apparent death occurs from
freezing, and a recovery is accomplished by the same gentle application of
stimuli, provided the organization of the body be not injured, or its
excitability wasted, by violent exertions previously to its freezing. This
excitability is the vehicle of motion, and motion when continued long enough
produces sensation, which is soon followed by thought; and in these, I said
formerly, consists perfect life in the human body.

For this explanation of the manner in which life is suspended, and revived in
persons apparently dead from cold, I am indebted to Mr. John Hunter, who
supposes, if it were possible for the body to be suddenly frozen by an
instantaneous abstraction of its heat, life might be continued for many years
in a suspended state, and revived at pleasure; provided the body were preserved
constantly in a temperature barely sufficient to prevent reanimation, and never
so great, as to endanger the destruction of any organic part. The resuscitation
of infects that have been in a torpid state for months, and perhaps years, in
substances that have preserved their organization, should at least defend this
bold proposition from being treated as chimerical. The effusions even of the
imagination of such men as Mr. Hunter, are entitled to respect. They often
become the germs of future discoveries.

In that state of suspended animation which occurs in acute diseases, and which
has sometimes been denominated a trance: the system is nearly in the same
excitable state that it is in apparent death from drowning, and freezing.
Resuscitation in these cases is not the effect as in those which have been
mentioned of artificial applications made to the body for that purpose. It
appears to be spontaneous; but it is produced by impressions made upon the
ears, and by the operations of the mind in dreams. Of the action of these
stimuli upon the body in its apparently lifeless state, I have satisfied myself
by many facts. I once attended a citizen of Philadelphia, who died of a
pulmonary disease in the 80th year of his age. A few days before his death he
begged that he might not be interred until one week after the usual signs of
life had left his body, and gave as a reason for this request, that he had when
a young man, died to all appearance of the yellow fever in one of the
West India islands. -- In this situation he distinctly heard the persons who
attended him, fix upon the time, and place, of burying him. The horror of being
put under ground alive, produced such distressing emotions in his mind, as to
diffuse motion throughout his body, and finally excited in him all the usual
functions of life. In Dr. Creighton's essay upon mental derangement there is a
history of a case nearly of a similar nature. "A young lady (says the Doctor)
an attendant on the princess of --, after having been confined to her bed for a
great length of time, with a violent nervous disorder, was at last, to all
appearance, deprived of life. Her lips were quite pale, her face resembled the
countenance of a dead person, and her body grew cold. She was removed from the
room in which she died, was laid in a coffin, and the day for her funeral was
fixed on. The day arrived, and according to the custom of the country, funeral
songs and hymns were sung before the door. Just as the people were about to
nail on the lid of the coffin, a kind of perspiration was observed on the
surface of her body. She recovered. The following is the account she gave of
her sensations; she said, "It seemed to her as if in a dream, that she was
really dead; yet she was perfectly conscious of all that happened around her.
She distinctly heard her friends speaking and lamenting her death at the side
of her coffin. She felt them pull on the dead clothes, and lay her in it. This
feeling produced a mental anxiety which she could not describe. She tried to
cry out, but her mind was without power, and could not act on her body. She had
the contradictory feeling as if she were in her own body, and not in it, at the
same time. It was equally impossible for her to stretch out her arm or open her
eyes, as to cry, although she continually endeavored to do so. The internal
anguish of her mind was at its utmost height when the funeral hymns began to be
sung, and when the lid of the coffin was about to be nailed on. The thought
that she was to be buried alive was the first which gave activity to her mind,
and enabled it to operate on her corporeal frame."

Where the ears lose their capacity of being acted upon by stimuli, the mind by
its operations in dreams, becomes a source of impressions which again set the
wheels of life in motion. There is an account published by Dr. Arnold in his
observations upon insanity, Vol. ii. p. 298.
of a certain John Engelbreght a German, who was believed to be dead, and who
was evidently resuscitated by the exercises of his mind upon subjects which
were of a delightful and stimulating nature. This history shall be taken from
Mr. Engelbreght's words. "It was on Thursday noon (says he) about 12 o'clock
when I perceived that death was making his approached upon me from the lower
parts upwards, insomuch that my whole body became stiff. I had no feeling left
in my hands and feet, neither in any other part of my whole body, nor was I at
last able to speak or see, for my mouth now becoming very stiff, I was no
longer able to open it, nor did I feel it any longer. My eyes also broke in my
head in such a manner that I distinctly felt it. For all that, I understood
what they said, when they were praying by me, and I distinctly heard them say,
feel his legs, how stiff, and cold they have become. This I heard distinctly,
but I had no perception of their touch. I heard the watchman cry 11 o'clock,
but at 12 o'clock my hearing left me. After relating his passage from the body
to heaven with the velocity of an arrow shot from a cross bow, he proceeds, and
says that as he was twelve hours in dying, so he was twelve hours in returning
to life. "As I died (says he) from beneath upwards, so I revived again the
contrary way from above to beneath, or from top to toe. Being conveyed back
from the heavenly glory, I began to hear again something of what they were
praying for me, in the same room with me. Thus was my hearing, the first sense
I recovered. After this I began to have a perception of my eyes, so that by
little and little, my whole body became strong, and sprightly, and no sooner
did I get a feeling of my legs and feet, than I arose and stood firm upon them
with a firmness I had never enjoyed before. The heavenly joy I had experienced,
invigorated me to such a degree, that people were astonished at my rapid, and
almost instantaneous recovery."

The explanation, I have given of the cause of resuscitation in this man, will
serve to refute a belief in a supposed migration of the soul from the body in
cases of apparent death. The imagination, it is true, usually conducts the
whole mind to the abodes of happy or miserable spirits, but it acts here in the
same way that it does when it transports it in common dreams, to numerous and
distant parts of the world.

There is nothing supernatural in Mr. Engelbreght being invigorated by his
supposed flight to heaven. Pleasant dreams always stimulate and strengthen the
body, while dreams which are accompanied with distress, or labor debilitate,
and fatigue it.

LECTURE III.
GENTLEMEN,
Let us next take a view of the state of animal life in the different
inhabitants of our globe, as varied by the circumstances of civilization, diet,
situation and climate.

I. In the Indians of the northern latitudes of America, there is often a
defect of the stimulus of aliment, and of the understanding and passions. Their
vacant countenances, and their long and disgusting taciturnity, are the effects
of the want of action in their brains from a deficiency of ideas; and their
tranquillity under all the common circumstances of irritation, pleasure or
grief, are the result of an absence of passion; for they hold it to be
disgraceful to show any outward signs of anger* joy, or even of domestic
affection. This account of the Indian character, I know is contrary to that
which is given of it by Rousseau, and several other writers, who have attempted
to prove that man may become perfect and happy, without the aids of
civilization and religion. This opinion is contradicted by the experience of
all ages, and is rendered ridiculous by the facts which are well ascertained in
the history of the customs and habits of our American savages. In a cold
climate they are the most miserable beings upon the face of the earth. The
greatest part of their time is spent in sleep, or under the alternate influence
of hunger and gluttony. They moreover indulge in vices which are alike contrary
to moral and physical happiness. It is in consequence of these habits, that
they discover so early the marks of old age, and that so few of them are
long-lived. The absence and diminution of many of the stimuli of life in these
people is supplied in part, by the violent exertions with which they hunt, and
carry on war, and by the extravagant manner with which they afterward
celebrate their exploits, in their savage dances and songs.

II. In the inhabitants of the torrid regions of Africa, there is a deficiency
of labor; for the earth produces spontaneously nearly all the sustenance they
require. Their understandings and passions are moreover in a torpid state. But
the absence of bodily and mental stimuli in these people, is amply supplied by
the constant heat of the sun, by the profuse use of spices in their diet, and
by the passion for musical sounds which so universally characterises the
African nations.

III. In Greenland the body is exposed during a long winter to such a degree of
cold as to reduce the pulse to 40, or 50 strokes in a minute. But the effects
of this cold in lessening the quantity of life, are obviated in part by the
heat of close stove rooms, by warm clothing, and by the peculiar nature of the
aliment of the Greenlanders, which consists chiefly of animal food, of dried
fish, and of whale oil. They prefer the last of those articles in so rancid a
state, that it imparts a faetor to their perspiration which, Mr. Crantz says,
renders even their churches offensive to strangers. I need hardly add, that a
diet possessed of such diffusible qualities, cannot fail of being highly
stimulating. It is remarkable that the food of all the northern nations of
Europe is composed of stimulating animal, or vegetable matters, and that the
use of spiritous liquors is universal among them.

IV. Let us next turn our eyes to the miserable inhabitants of those eastern
countries which compose the Ottoman empire. Here we behold life in its most
feeble state, not only from the absence of physical, but of other stimuli which
operate upon the inhabitants of other parts of the world. Among the poor people
of Turkey there is a general deficiency of aliment. Mr. Volney in his travels
tells us "That the diet of the Bedouins seldom exceeds six ounces a day, and
that it consists of six or seven dates soaked in butter-milk, and afterward
mixed with a little sweet milk, or curds." -- There is likewise a general
deficiency among them of stimulus, from the operations of the mental faculties;
for such is the despotism of the government in Turkey, that it weakens not only
the understanding; but it annihilates all that immense source of stimuli which
arises from the exercise of the domestic and public affections. A Turk lives
wholly to himself. In point of time, he occupies only the moment in which he
exists; for his futurity, as to life and property, belongs altogether to his
master. Fear is the reigning principle of his actions, and hope and joy seldom
add a single pulsation to his heart. Tyranny even imposes a restraint upon the
stimulus which arises from conversation, for "They speak (says Mr. Volney) with
a slow feeble voice, as if the lungs wanted strength to propel air enough
through the glottis to form distinct articulate sounds." The same traveller
adds, that "They are slow in all their motions, that their bodies are small,
that they have small evacuations, and that their blood is so destitute of
serosity, that nothing but the greatest heat can preserve its fluidity." The
deficiency of aliment, and the absence of mental stimuli in these people is
supplied,

1. By the heat of their climate.

2. By their passion for musical sounds and fine clothes, and

3. By their general use of coffee and opium.

The more debilitated the body is, the more forcibly these stimuli act upon it.
Hence according to Mr. Volney, the Bedouins, whose slender diet has been
mentioned, enjoy good health; for this consists not in strength, but in an
exact proportion being kept up between the excitability of the body, and the
number and force of the stimuli which act upon it.

V. Many of the observations which have been made upon the inhabitants of
Africa, and of the Turkish dominions, apply to the inhabitants of China, and
the East Indies. They want in many instances the stimulus of animal food. Their
minds are moreover in a state too languid to act with much force upon their
bodies. The absence and deficiency of these stimuli are supplied by,

1. The heat of the climate in the southern parts of those countries.

2. By a vegetable diet abounding in nourishment, particularly rice and beans.

3. By the use of tea in China, and by a stimulating coffee made of the dried
and toasted seeds of the datura stramonium, in the neighborhood of the Indian
coast. Some of these nations likewise chew stimulating substances, as too many
of our citizens do tobacco.

Among the poor and depressed subjects of the governments of the middle and
southern parts of Europe, the deficiency of the stimulus of wholesome food, of
clothing, of fuel, and of liberty, is supplied in some countries by the
invigorating influence of the Christian religion upon animal life; and in
others, by the general use of tea, coffee, garlic, onions, opium, tobacco, malt
liquors, and ardent spirits. The use of each of these stimuli seems to be
regulated by the circumstances of climate. In cold countries where the earth
yields its increase with reluctance, and where vegetable aliment is scarce, the
want of the stimulus of distention which that species of food is principally
calculated to produce, is sought for in that, of ardent spirits. To the
southward of 40 a substitute for the distention from mild vegetable food is
sought for, in onions, garlic and tobacco. But further, a uniform climate calls
for more of these artificial stimuli than a climate that is exposed to the
alternate action of heat and cold, winds and calms, and of wet and dry weather.
Savages and ignorant people likewise require more of them than persons of
civilized manners, and cultivated understandings. It would seem from these
facts that man cannot exist without sensation of some kind, and that when it is
not derived from natural means, it will always be sought for in such as are
artificial.

In no part of the human species, is animal life in a more perfect state than
in the inhabitants of Great Britain, Haller's Elementa Physiologiae, vol. viii.
p. 2. p. 107.
and the United States of America. With all the natural stimuli that have been
mentioned, they are constantly under the invigorating influence of liberty.
There is an indissoluble union between moral, political and physical happiness;
and if it be true, that elective and representative governments are most
favorable to individual, as well as national prosperity, it follows of course,
that they are most favorable to animal life. But this opinion does not rest
upon an induction derived from the relation, which truths upon all subjects
bear to each other. Many facts prove, animal life to exist in a larger quantity
and for a longer time, in the enlightened and happy state of Connecticut, in
which republican liberty has existed above one hundred and fifty years, than in
any other country upon the surface of the globe.

It remains now to mention certain mental stimuli which act nearly alike in the
production of animal life, upon the individuals of all the nations in the
world. They are,

1. The desire of life. This principle so deeply, and universally implanted in
human nature, acts very powerfully in supporting our existence. It has been
observed to prolong life. Sickly travelers by sea and land, often live under
circumstances of the greatest weakness, till they reach their native country,
and then expire in the bosom of their friends. This desire of life often turns
the scale in favor of a recovery in acute diseases. Its influence will appear,
from the difference in the periods in which death was induced in two persons,
who were actuated by opposite passions with respect to life. Atticus, we are
told, died of voluntary abstinence from food in five days. In Sir William
Hamilton's account of the earthquake at Calabria, we read of a girl who lived
eleven days without food, before she expired. In the former case, life was
shortened by an aversion from it; in the latter, it was protracted by the
desire of it. The late Mr. Brissot in his visit to this city, informed me that
the application of animal magnetism (in which he was a believer) had in no
instance cured a disease in a West India slave. Perhaps it was rendered inert
by its not being accompanied by a strong desire of life; for this principle
exists in a more feeble state in slaves than in freemen. It is possible
likewise the wills and imaginations of these degraded people may have become so
paralytic by slavery, as to be incapable of being excited by the impression of
this fanciful remedy.

2. The love of money sets the whole animal machine in motion. Hearts which are
insensible to the stimuli of religion, patriotism, love, and even of the
domestic affections, are excited into action by this passion. The city of
Philadelphia between the 10th and 15th of August 1791, will long be remembered
by contemplative men, for having furnished the most extraordinary proofs of the
stimulus of the love of money upon the human body. A new scene of speculation
was produced at that time by the scrip of the bank of the United states. It
excited febrile diseases in three persons who became my patients. In one of
them, the acquisition of twelve thousand dollars in a few minutes by a lucky
sale, brought on madness which terminated in death in a few days. Dr. Mead
relates upon the authority of Dr. Hales, that more of the successful
speculators in the South Sea Scheme of 1720 became insane, than of those who
had been ruined by it.
The whole city felt the impulse of this paroxysm of avarice. The slow and
ordinary means of earning money were deserted, and men of every profession and
trade, were seen in all our streets hastening to the coffee house, where the
agitation of countenance, and the desultory manners, of all the persons who
were interested in this species of gaming, exhibited a truer picture of a
bedlam, than of a place appropriated to the transaction of mercantile business.
But further, the love of money discovers its stimulus upon the body in a
peculiar manner in the games of cards and dice. I have heard of a gentleman in
Virginia who passed two whole days and nights in succession at a card table,
and it is related in the life of a noted gamester in Ireland, that when he was
so ill as to be unable to rise from his chair, he would suddenly revive when
brought to the hazard table, by hearing the rattling of the dice.

3. Public amusements of all kinds, such as a horse race, a cockpit, a chase,
the theater, the circus, masquerades, public dinners and tea parties, all exert
an artificial stimulus upon the system, and thus supply the defect of the
rational exercises of the mind.

4. The love of dress is not confined in its stimulating operation to persons
in health. It acts perceptibly in some cases upon invalids. I have heard of a
gentleman in South Carolina, who always relieved himself of a fit of low
spirits by changing his dress; and I believe there are few people who do not
feel themselves enlivened, by putting on a new suit of clothes.

5. Novelty is an immense source of agreeable stimuli. Companions, studies,
pleasures, modes of business, prospects, and situations with respect to town,
and country, or to different countries, that are new, all exert an invigorating
influence upon health and life.

6. The love of fame acts in various ways; but its stimulus is most sensible
and durable in military life. It counteracts in many instances the debilitating
effects of hunger, cold and labor. It has sometimes done more, by removing the
weakness which is connected with many diseases. In several instances it has
assisted the hardships of a camp life, in curing pulmonary consumption.

7. The love of country is a deep seated principle of action in the human
breast. Its stimulus is sometimes so excessive, as to induce disease in persons
who recently migrate, and settle in foreign countries. -- It appears in various
forms; but exists most frequently in the solicitude, labors, attachments, and
hatred of party spirit. All these act forcibly in supporting animal life. It is
because newspapers are supposed to contain the measure of the happiness, or
misery of our country, that they are so interesting to all classes of people.
Those vehicles of intelligence, and of public pleasure or pain, are frequently
desired with the impatience of a meal, and they often produce the same
stimulating effects upon the body.

8. The different religions of the world, by the activity they excite in the
mind, have a sensible influence upon human life. Atheism is the worst of
sedatives to the understanding, and passions. It is the abstraction of thought
from the most sublime, and of love, from the most perfect of all possible
objects. Man is as naturally a religious, as he is a social, and domestic
animal; and the same violence is done to his mental faculties, by robbing him
of a belief in a God, that is done, by dooming him to live in a cell, deprived
of the objects and pleasures of social and domestic life. The necessary and
immutable connection between the texture of the human mind, and the worship of
an object of some kind, has lately been demonstrated by the atheists of Europe,
who after rejecting the true God, have instituted the worship of nature, of
fortune, and of human reason; and in some instances, with ceremonies of the
most expensive and splendid kind. Religions are friendly to animal life, in
proportion as they elevate the understanding, and act upon the passions of hope
and love. It will readily occur to you, that Christianity when believed, and
obeyed, according to its original consistency with itself, and with the divine
attributes, is more calculated to produce those effects, than any other
religion in the world. -- Such is the salutary operation of its doctrines, and
precepts upon health and life, that if its divine authority rested upon no
other argument, this alone would be sufficient to recommend it to our belief.
How long mankind may continue to prefer substituted pursuits and pleasures, to
this invigorating stimulus, is uncertain; but the time we are assured will
come, when the understanding shall be elevated from its present inferior
objects, and the luxated passions be reduced to their original order. -- This
change in the mind of man, I believe, will be effected only by the influence of
the Christian religion, after all the efforts of human reason to produce it, by
means of civilization, philosophy, liberty, and government, have been exhausted
to no purpose.

Thus far, gentlemen, we have considered animal life as it respects the human
species; but the principles I am endeavoring to establish, require that we
should take a view of it in animals of every species, in all of which we shall
find it depends upon the same causes, as in the human body.

And here I shall begin by remarking, that if we should discover the stimuli
which support life in certain animals, to be fewer in number, or weaker in
force than those which support it in our species; we must resolve it into that
attribute of the Deity which seems to have delighted in variety in all his
works.

The following observations apply more or less, to all the animals upon our
globe.

1. They all possess either hearts, lungs, brains, nerves, or muscular fibers.
It is as yet a controversy among naturalists whether animal life can exist
without a brain; but no one has denied, muscular fibers, and of course
contractility, or excitability to belong to animal life in all its shapes.

2. They all require more or less air for their existence. Even the snail
inhales it for seven months under ground, through a pellicle which it weaves
out of slime, as a covering for its body. If this pellicle at any time become
too thick to admit the air; the snail opens a passage in it for that purpose.
Now air we know acts powerfully in supporting animal life.

3. Many of them possess heat equal to that of the human body. Birds possess
several degrees beyond it. Now heat, it was said formerly, acts with great
force, in the production of animal life.

4. They all feed upon substances more or less stimulating to their bodies.
Even water itself, chemistry has taught us, affords an aliment not only
stimulating, but nourishing to many animals.

5. Many of them possess senses, more acute and excitable, than the same organs
in the human species. These expose surfaces for the action of external
impressions, that supply the absence, or deficiency of mental faculties.

6. Such of them as are devoid of sensibility, possess an uncommon portion of
contractility, or simple excitability. This is most evident in the Polypus.
When cut to pieces, it appears to feel little or no pain.

7. They all possess locomotive powers in a greater or less degree, and of
course are acted upon by the stimulus of muscular motion.

8. Most of them appear to feel a stimulus, from the gratification of their
appetites for food, and for venereal pleasures, far more powerful than that
which is felt by our species from the same causes. I shall hereafter mention
some facts from Spalanzani upon the subject of generation, that will prove the
stimulus, from venery, to be strongest in those animals, in which other stimuli
act with the least force. Thus the male frog during its long connection with
its female, suffers its limbs to be amputated, without discovering the least
mark of pain, and without relaxing its hold of the object of its embraces.

9. In many animals we behold evident marks of understanding, and passion. The
elephant, the fox and the ant, exhibit strong proofs of thought* and where is
the school boy that cannot bear testimony to the anger of the be, and the wasp?

10. But what shall we say of those animals, which pass long winters in a state
in which there is an apparent absence of the stimuli of heat, exercise and the
motion of the blood. Life in these animals is probably supported,

1. By such an accumulation of excitability, as to yield to impressions, which
to us are imperceptible.

2. By the stimulus of aliment in a state of digestion in the stomach, or by
the stimulus of aliment restrained from digestion by means of cold; for Mr.
John Hunter has proved by an experiment on a frog, that cold below a certain
degree, checks that animal process.

3. By the constant action of air upon their bodies.

It is possible life may exist in these animals, during their hybernation, in
the total absence of impression and motion of every kind. This may be the case
where the torpor from cold, has been suddenly brought upon their bodies.
Excitability here, is in an accumulated, but quiescent state.

11. It remains only under this head to inquire; in what manner is life
supported in those animals which live in a cold element, and whose blood is
sometimes but a little above the freezing point? It will be a sufficient answer
to this question to remark, that heat and cold are relative terms, and that
different animals according to their organization, require very different
degrees of heat for their existence. Thirty-two degrees of it are probably as
stimulating to some of these cold blooded animals (as they are called) as 70,
or 80 are to the human body.

It might afford additional support to the doctrine of animal life, which I
have delivered, to point out the manner in which life and growth are produced
in vegetables of all kinds. But this subject belongs to the professor of
botany, and natural history, Dr. Barton.
who is amply qualified to do it justice. I shall only remark, that vegetable
life is as much the offspring of stimuli as animal, and that skill in
agriculture consists chiefly in the proper application of them. The seed of a
plant, like an animal body, has no principle of life within itself. If
preserved for years in a drawer, or in earth below the stimulating influence of
heat, air and water, it discovers no sign of vegetation. It grows, like an
animal, only in consequence of stimuli acting upon its capacity of life.

From a review of what has been said of animal life in all its numerous forms
and modifications; we see that it is as much an effect of impressions upon a
peculiar species of matter, as sound is of the stroke of a hammer upon a bell,
or music, of the motion of the bow upon the strings of a violin. I exclude
therefore the intelligent principle of Whytt, the medical mind of Stahl, the
healing powers of Cullen, and the vital principle of John Hunter, as much from
the body, as I do an intelligent principle from air, fire, and water.

It is no uncommon thing for the simplicity of causes, to be lost in the
magnitude of their effects. By contemplating the wonderful functions of life,
we have strangely overlooked the numerous and obscure circumstances which
produce it. Thus the humble but true origin of power in the people, is often
forgotten in the splendour and pride of governments. It is not necessary to be
acquainted with the precise nature of that form of matter, which is capable of
producing life, from impressions made upon it. It is sufficient for our
purpose, to know the fact. It is immaterial moreover whether this matter derive
its power of being acted upon wholly from the brain, or whether it be in part
inherent in animal fibers. The inferences are the same in favor of life being
the effect of stimuli, and of its being as truly mechanical, as the movements
of a clock from the pressure of its weights, or the passage of a ship in the
water, from the impulse of winds, and tide.

The infinity of effects from similar causes, has often been taken notice of in
the works of the Creator. It would seem as if they had all been made after one
pattern. The late discovery of the cause of combustion, has thrown great light
upon our subject. Wood and coal are no longer believed to contain a principle
of fire. The heat and flame they emit, are derived from an agent altogether
external to them. They are produced by a matter which is absorbed from the air,
by means of its decomposition. This matter acts upon the predisposition of the
fuel to receive it, in the same way that stimuli act upon the human body. The
two agents differ only in their effects. The former produces the destruction of
the bodies upon which it acts; while the latter excite the more gentle, and
durable motions of life. Common language in expressing these effects is
correct, as far as it relates to their cause. We speak of a coal of fire being
alive, and of the flame of life.

The causes of life which I have delivered, will receive considerable support,
by contrasting them with the causes of death. This catastrophe of the body
consists in such a change induced on it by disease, or old age, as to prevent
its exhibiting the phenomenon of life. It is brought on,

1. By the abstraction of all the stimuli which support life. Death, from this
cause, is produced by the same mechanical means that the emission of sound from
a violin is prevented by the abstraction of the bow from its strings.

2. By the excessive force of stimuli of all kinds. No more occurs here than
happens from too much pressure upon the strings of a violin preventing its
emitting musical tones.

3. By too much relaxation, or too weak a texture of the matter which composes
the human body. No more occurs here than is observed in the extinction of sound
by the total relaxation, or slender combination of the strings of a violin.

4. By an error in the place of certain fluid, or solid parts of the body. No
more occurs here, than would happen from fixing the strings of a violin upon
its body, instead of elevating them upon its bridge.

5. By the action of poisonous exhalations, or of certain fluids vitiated in
the body, upon parts which emit most forcibly the motions of life. No more
happens here than occurs from enveloping the strings of a violin in a piece of
wax.

6. By the solution of continuity by means of wounds in solid parts of the
body. No more occurs in death from this cause, than takes place when the
emission of sound from a violin is prevented by a rupture of its strings.

7. Death is produced by a preternatural rigidity, and in some instances by an
ossification of the solid parts of the body in old age; in consequence of which
they are incapable of receiving and emitting the motions of life. No more
occurs here, than would happen if a stick, or pipe-stem were placed in the room
of catgut, upon the bridges of the violin. But death may take place in old age
without a change in the texture of animal matter, from the stimuli of life
losing their effect by repetition, just as opium from the same cause, ceases to
produce its usual effects upon the body.

Should it be asked, what is that peculiar organization of matter, which
enables it to emit life, when acted upon by stimuli, I answer, I do not know.
The great Creator has kindly established a witness of his unsearchable wisdom
in every part of his works, in order to prevent our forgetting him, in the
successful exercises of our reason. Mohammed once said "that he should believe
himself to be a God, if he could bring down rain from the clouds, or give life
to an animal." It belongs exclusively to the true God to endow matter with
those singular properties, which enable it under certain circumstances, to
exhibit the appearances of life.

I cannot conclude this subject, without taking notice of its extensive
application to medicine, metaphysics, theology and morals.

The doctrine of animal life which has been taught, exhibits in the

First place, a new view of the nervous system, by discovering its origin in
the extremities of the nerves on which impressions are made, and its
termination in the brain. This idea is extended in an ingenious manner by Mr.
Valli in his treatise upon animal electricity.

2. It discovers to us the true means of promoting health and longevity, by
proportioning the number and force of stimuli to the age, climate, situation,
habits and temperament of the human body.

3. It leads us to a knowledge of the causes of all diseases. These consist in
excessive, or preternatural excitement in the whole, or a part of the human
body, accompanied generally with irregular motions, and induced by natural, or
artificial stimuli. The latter have been called very properly by Mr. Hunter
irritants. The occasional absence of motion in acute diseases, is the effect
only of the excess of impetus in their remote causes.

4. It discovers to us that the cure of all diseases depends simply upon the
abstraction of stimuli from the whole, or from a part of the body, when the
motions excited by them, are in excess; and in the increase of their number and
force, when motions are of a moderate nature. For the former purpose, we employ
a class of medicines known by the name of sedatives. For the latter, we make
use of stimulants. Under these two extensive heads, are included all the
numerous articles of the Materia Medica.

5. It enables us to reject the doctrine of innate ideas, and to ascribe all
our knowledge of sensible objects to impressions acting upon an innate capacity
to receive ideas. Were it possible for a child to grow up to manhood without
the use of any of its senses, it would not possess a single idea of a material
object; and as all human knowledge is compounded of simple ideas, this person
would be as destitute of knowledge of every kind, as the grossest portion of
vegetable, or fossil matter.

6. The account which has been given of animal life, furnishes a striking
illustration of the origin of human actions, by the impression of motives upon
the will. As well might we admit an inherent principle of life in animal
matter, as a self determining power in this faculty of the mind. Motives are
necessary not only to constitute its freedom, but its essence; for without
them, there could be no more a will than there could be vision without light,
or hearing without sound. It is true, they are often so obscure as not to be
perceived; and they sometimes become insensible from habit, but the same things
have been remarked in the operation of stimuli; and yet we do not upon this
account deny their agency in producing animal life. In thus deciding in favor
of the necessity of motives, to produce actions, I cannot help bearing a
testimony against the gloomy misapplication of this doctrine by some modern
writers. When properly understood, it is calculated to produce the most
comfortable views of the divine government, and the most beneficial effects
upon morals, and human happiness.

7. There are errors of an impious nature, which sometimes obtain a currency,
from being disguised by innocent names. The doctrine of animal life that has
been delivered, is directly opposed to an error of this kind, which has had the
most baneful influence upon morals and religion. To suppose a principle to
reside necessarily, and constantly in the human body, which acted independently
of external circumstances, is to ascribe to it an attribute, which I shall not
connect, even in language, with the creature man. Self existence belongs only
to God.

The best criterion of the truth of a philosophical opinion, is its tendency to
produce exalted ideas, of the Divine Being, and humble views of ourselves. The
doctrine of animal life which has been delivered, is calculated to produce
these effects in an eminent degree, for

8. It does homage to the Supreme Being, as the governor of the universe, and
establishes the certainty of his universal, and particular providence. Admit a
principle of life in the human body, and we open a door for the restoration of
the old Epicurean or atheistical philosophy, which supposed the world to be
governed by a principle called nature, and which was believed to be inherent in
every kind of matter. The doctrine I have taught, cuts the sinews of this
error; for by rendering the continuance of animal life, no less than its
commencement, the effect of the constant operation of divine power and
goodness, it leads us to believe that the whole creation is supported in the
same manner.

9. The view that has been given of the dependent state of man for the blessing
of life, leads us to contemplate with very apposite and inexpressible feelings,
the sublime idea which is given of the Deity in the scriptures, as possessing
life "within himself." This divine prerogative has never been imparted but to
one being, and that is, the Son of God. This appears from the following
declaration. "For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the
Son to have life within himself." John v. verse 26.
To this plenitude of independent life, we are to ascribe his being called the
"life of the world," "the prince of life," and "life" itself, in the New
Testament. These divine epithets which are very properly, founded upon the
manner of our Savior's existence, exalt him infinitely above simple humanity,
and establish his divine nature upon the basis of reason, as well as revelation.

10. We have heard that some of the stimuli which produce animal life, are
derived from the moral, and physical evils of our world. From beholding these
instruments of death thus converted by divine skill into the means of life, we
are led to believe goodness to be the supreme attribute of the Deity, and that
it will appear finally to predominate in all his works.

11. The doctrine which has been delivered, is calculated to humble the pride
of man; by teaching him his constant dependence upon his Maker for his
existence, and that he has no pre-eminence in his tenure of it, over the
meanest insect that flutters in the air, or the humblest plant that grows upon
the earth. What an inspired writer says of the innumerable animals which
inhabit the ocean, may with equal propriety be said of the whole human race.
"Thou sendest forth thy spirit, and they are created. Thou take away their
breath -- they die, and return to their dust."

12. Melancholy indeed would have been the issue of all our inquiries, did we
take a final leave of the human body in its state of decomposition in the
grave. Revelation furnishes us with an elevating, and comfortable assurance
that this will not be the case. The precise manner of its re-organization, and
the new means of its future existence, are unknown to us. It is sufficient to
believe, the event will take place, and that after it, the soul and body of man
will be exalted in one respect, to an equality with their Creator. They will be
immortal.

Here, gentlemen, we close the history of animal life. I feel as if I had waded
across a rapid and dangerous stream. Whether I have gained the opposite shore
with my head clean, or covered with mud and weeds, I leave wholly to your
determination.

THE END

