THAT PLAINNESS NECESSARY IN DELIVERING THE GOSPEL-MESSAGE WITH A PROSPECT OF
SUCCESS.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE INSTALLATION OF THE REV. SAMUEL TOMB, TO THE
PASTORAL CARE OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH AND SOCIETY IN NEWBURY, Nov. 28, 1798.

BY WILLIAM PIDGIN, A.M. PASTOR OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN HAMPTON.

Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech.

Apostle PAUL. NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY EDMUND MARCH BLUNT. 1799

N. B. Some things, omitted in the delivery of this discourse through want of
time, are here inserted, which the candid reader will readily excuse.

2. SAMUEL, xii. 7. AND NATHAN SAID TO DAVID, THOU ART THE MAN.
NEVER, perhaps, had one man a more solemn message to deliver to another than
Nathan had to David in this instance.

Although David was a man after God's own heart, and divinely appointed king
over his people Israel, yet, we may venture to assert, of none are such
shocking iniquities left on sacred record, as of him. This while it affords a
warning for the righteous in every age, does not in the least excuse them, when
found guilty.

In the instance before us, David had most unlawfully taken the wife of Uriah,
and because he could not conceal his guilt, had caused him to be put to death.
Thus murder and adultery became the crimes with which he was chargeable. --
These aggravated crimes were bighly provoking to the God of holiness. He beheld
them with indignation. Nathan, therefore, is divinely commissioned to sound in
the ears of David an alarming report, that he may be awakened hereby to
confession and repentance; for he was now, it appears, sleeping in his
iniquity. -- Nathan, instructed of God, went well furnished to perform his
errand. He knew how to take the wife in their own craftiness: as must be fully
evident, when we look into the sermon which he preached to his royal heater and
consider his application, which naturally follows. And the Lord sent Nathan
unto David; and be came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one
city; the one rich and the other poor. The rich man had exceeding many flocks
and herds: But the poor man had nothing face one little ewe-lamb, which he had
bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him and with his
children: in did eat of his own meat, and drink of his own cup, and lay in his
bosom, and was unto him as a daughter. And there came a traveller unto the rich
man, and be spared to take of his own flock, and of his own herd, to dress for
the way-fairing man that was come unto him, but took the poor man's lamb, and
dressed if for the man that was come to him.

When Nathan had thus uttered the body of his discourse, it seems, he made some
pause; gave David an opportunity to reply; and, perhaps, he thought that a
person of such discernment would at once see his intention, and there would be
no necessity that he should be more particular or pointed. -- But alas! the
deceitful, the infatuating nature of sin! -- David, with all his wisdom did
not, at this time, know himself. He readily saw the horrid crime of the rich
man in Nathan's parable, and deeply incensed at it, denounced against him
immediate and inevitable death: but he saw not himself involved in this
description. His mind was sadly blinded. The prophet, therefore, was put to the
painful necessity of applying his discourse plainly, otherwise it was likely to
have no good effect. -- Thou art the man, said Nathan who has done this. Thus
says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered
thee out of the bands of Saul: And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy
master's, wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah;
and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and
such things. Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do
evil in his sight? thou have killed Uriah the Hittite, and have taken his wite
to be thy wife. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house.

Nathan having told him his transgression in this plain manner, and the
punishment he was doomed to suffer because of it, David said, I have finned
against the Lord. He freely acknowledged his guilt, and was ready to take to
himself the condemnation of death.

The text and context thus viewed will naturally furnish us with the following
leading proposition, as the subject of discourse on this occasion, viz.

That such is the moral blindness and insensibility of men, that it is
necessary for ministers to use great plainness in delivering to them the
gospel-message with any good prospect of success.

The speaker would remark, that he is far from presuming to dictate a mode of
preaching to his fathers, and brethren in the ministry. It is his wish and aim
only to offer his own opinion with freedom and candor upon a subject of the
last importance; a subject which so nearly cencerns the everlasting weal or woe
of the souls of men. This, he flatters himself, will be disagreeable to none,
who has the least sincere desire of turning many to righteousness, and thus of
shining forever as distinguished stars in the firmament of divine glory.

To proceed, then, according to the proposition.

Men are prone to look upon their own character with a partial eye, and to
think of themselves more highly than they ought to think. They quickly perceive
when others do amiss, but in respect to themselves they have little or no
discerning. They see not their own picture, when clearly and fully drawn to
their view; and will not think it resembles them, unless positively told it
does in the plainest terms. So unwilling are they to think their own conduct
wrong, that when it is painted before them in the most striking light, they are
ready to apply it to others; and hastily condemn them while themselves are the
persons criminal. Thus instead of considering that a beam is in their own eye,
they would fain discover a mote in the eye of their brother. Such is naturally
the disposition of mankind, and such the turn which sin has given to the human
mind. Experience and observation must have shown us all the truth of these
remarks; and scripture examples fully confirm them. The case of David just
noticed, seems sufficient for this, even did the Bible contain nothing more of
a similar nature.

David, we have every reason to suppose, was a man of no common or inferior
abilities. Without doubt his penetrating judgment, his clearness of perception,
and wisdom of discernment were far above the level of men in general: This we
must conclude from his advanced station, and the many advantages attending it.
Add to all these the special grace of God, with which his mind was richly
furnished. Under all these superior endowments and advantages, David must be
considered as a person eminently qualified to hear divine truth, and make right
application of it. And one would have thought, that a word to a person of his
talents would be sufficient; -- that a mere hint would answer the purpose. But
it was found quite the reverse. He had foolishly forsaken God, and was left to
sink in the mire of his own guilty pollution. His conscience was at this time
put to silence, and the gracious principle within him was stifled. He had left
his great Head; his strength was consequently gone; and he was like other men,
save only that his superior judgment and understanding remained. This evidently
appears to have been his melancholy situation, when Nathan came to him; for
otherwise, how could he be so insensible to his aggravated impiety! The prophet
finding his condition to be such, was inclined to catch him, as it were, with
guile. He knew him to be still capable of judging between right and wrong,
although so blinded respecting himself; he therefore related his conduct in the
person of another. He told him of a man who had done thus and so. David
immediately discovered the wickedness of this man's deed, and declared what his
fate should be.

Now had Nathan left the matter here; had he gone his way and said no more; we
cannot see that what he had already said would have been of much benefit to his
bearer, for his meaning was not taken. The person to whom he spoke was still in
darkness as to his own state. But Nathan did not mean to leave him so. He was
^^nt to be an instrument for awakening him from his stupor, and he intended
that nothing should fail through his unfaithfulness. When, therefore, he saw
that the parable in itself had not the desited effect, he explained and applied
it. He told David that be was the person who had done thus wickedly; and laid
before him a particular statement of the crimes which he had committed, and the
circumstances which rendered thein singularly heinous. This plain dealing,
these home truths made him tentibly seel their sorce. And what was the
consequence? He began to come to himself. He found where he was. His guilt
stared him in the face. He saw himself condemned out of his own mouth. In no
way could he justify himself. Indeed, he had no disposition to attempt this.
Nathan had stated facts so clearly and pungently, that conviction at once
slashed upon his mind. He confessed his sin before the Lord. And from what the
prophet afterward said to him, it appears, he was willing to abide the
sentence which he had uttered against one of his character. But Nathan told him
he should not die, for the Lord had put away his sin; and declared what
judgments should come upon him, and upon his family, for his iniquity.

What could more directly prove the truth of the proposition before us than the
things now mentioned? If the renowned king of Israel, a man greatly favored of
God, with all his sagacity, must have truths closely pressed to his conscience,
in order to find them applicable to himself, and in order to his being profited
by them; then we may, it is thought, safely conclude that the same is necessary
for all hearers of the gospel now. Nathan might have repeated parable after
parable to David, but it does not appear that they would have been of any real
advantage to him, unless he had said, Thou art the man. This plain sentence
struck him more powerfully than all things else which he said. So ministers may
describe the general character of wicked men once and again, but unless they
take some method to let their hearers know that they are these wicked persons,
and show in what their wickedness consists, it will not be likely to profit
them, or effectually impress their minds. They will be inclined to apply the
description to others, instead of taking it to themselves.

The speaker would not be understood here as in the least insinuating, that
ministers are sufficient of themselves to say any thing as of themselves which
shall be savingly profitable to their hearers. All their sufficiency is of God.
His Spirit alone can crown their labors with success. But this can in no
degree lessen their solemn obligations to faithfulness and plainess in warning
their people, by declaring to them their sinfulness, and what must await them
without repentance. For unless they are thus faithful and plain in their
addresses, they can have no ground for expecting the Sprit's influence to
accompany their endeavors; nor will what they deliver have a tendency to affect
the heart, but will leave it insensible as before.

That men are by nature morally blind and insensible the scripture^ of truth
are full in declaring. As a full demonstration of this, we need only hear it
said of them, that they have the understanding darkened, being alienated from
the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their heart: being past feeling: And that they seeing, see not:
and hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand. They are sottish
children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge. The ox knows his owner, and the as^ his master's
crib: but Israel does not know, m^ people does not consider.

That because of this moral blindness and insensibility of men great plainess
is to be used in delivering to them the gospel-message, is no less a dictate of
reason than of revelation. It is obvious, that blind persons must have plan and
particular descriptions, or they will not understand; and persons insensible to
a great degree must have direct and pointed things, or they will not feel. But
let us recur to the law and to the (...). The precepts and examples of (...)
are binding. The divine commission to Isaiah was, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up
thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people them transgression, and the house
of Israel their sins: that is, describe their transgressions so clearly and
fully as that they cannot but see them. Spare not through fear or favor. The
message from God to Ezekiel was, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto
the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning
from me. When I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die; and thou give him
not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his
life: the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity: but his blood will I
require at thine hand. Most weighty was the motive here held before the prophet
for being plain and pungent in addressing the people of his charge. It is
recorded of the people in Isaiah's time, that they said to the seers see not:
and to the prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth
things, prophecy deceits. It is evident, that this blind and insensible people
wished not to have plain and pointed things told them, lest they should be
constrained to see and feel: they therefore desired the prophets to go directly
aside from their duty. In the Apostle Peter we have a direct example of
plainness in preaching and the happy effects of it. Ye men of Israel, said he,
hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you, by
miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as
yourselves also know: Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands crucified and slain.
-- Know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified,
both Lord and Christ. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their
heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren,
what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, repent, and be baptized every one
of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. And we find,
that they did repent, and were savingly converted, to the number of three
thousand.

We may next come to the perfect examplar of all.

Christ, who must be acknowledged the standard of preaching, and the great
pattern for all who publish his gospel, spoke to his hearers in the plainest
and most direct terms. His admirable sermon upon the mount was close and
searching, aimed directly at the heart, and excellently adapted to expose its
hidden iniquity. It shows clearly and fully the insufficiency of all outward
forms and rites in religion, while inward, vital piety, is neglected; and thus
it was directly suited to detect the characters and conduct of the
self-approving Pharisees, who regarded only the externals of divine worship.
The hypocrisy, the worldly-mindedness, the rash and censorious spirit, of many
of his audience are pointedly spoken against in this sermon of Jesus. When he
was preaching to some who trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and
despised others, he delivered the parable of the Pharisee and Publican; than
which nothing could be better calculated to humble their pride and
self-conceit. Christ not only gave a general description of the Scribes and
Pharisees, when he preached to them, but expressly and repeatedly said to them,
Ye fools and blind: and woe unto you ye blind guides: and he plainly told them
wherefore he denounced this woe. Having uttered something which his disciples
wished him to explain, he said unto them, Are ye also yet without
understanding? Although he had a tender regard for Martha, yet when she
complained to him of her sister, he utters this sharp rebuke, Martha, Martha,
thou art careful and troubled about many things. Hence, it appears, that the
disciples of Christ, as well as others, must have great plainness used with
them, or he would not in his preaching have dealt so plainly. He perfectly knew
what was necessary and best on all occasions. He knew, that however wise men
might be respecting things of this world, yet in things of a truly religious
nature, they were but mere fools. He therefore called them so. O fools, and
slow of heart, said he to the two disciples, to believe all that the prophets
have spoken.

It is said of Christ as a preacher, that he spoke as one having authority. He
spoke at once to the consciences of them who heard him: accordingly, it is said
of some to whom he spoke, that being convinced by their own conscience, they
went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last. He told his
hearers their wickedness without any reserve, and the punishment it merited. He
described their different characters so justly and particularly, that each
individual must see himself intended in the description, and must know whether
he belonged to the class of saints or to the class of sinners. He addressed all
according to their various conditions. To hardened sinners he was a son of
thunder. His language to these was, -- Fill ye up the measure of your fathers.
Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
To sinners seriously awakened he was a son of consolation. To such he spoke in
loving accents: Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. To his true
followers his speech was graciously kind and condescending, when he found them
walking in the truth: Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice
and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven. In a word; so
particular was Christ to the several sorts of persons that composed his
auditory, that a Thou art the man came home to the bosom of each of them. He
meant to exhibit divine truth so clearly and distinctly, that by the light of
it all should discover their true situation. And in this he has left an
example for all who go out in his name.

A number of INFERENCES, Suggested by the subject, shall now be considered.

1. It is a plain inference from the subject, that ministers ought to be
particular and direct in addressing their hearers, or in applying to them the
truths they deliver. If Nathan did no more than his duty in saying to David,
Thou art the man: thou have transgressed in so many instances, and despised the
commandment of the Lord: thou have killed Uriah, etc. If John the baptist did
not more than his duty in calling some of his hearers, a generation of vipers:
If the Apostle Paul did no more than his duty in his plain speeches to the
Romans, Galatians, and others:

If Christ himself, who could not but do right, is to be imitated in this
respect; then assuredly it is the duty of ministers to be faithful in the
manner stated. They may and ought, as the foundation of their discourses, to
explain and establish some doctrinal truths. This they may do from the example
of Nathan who first delivered a parable to prepare the way for what followed.
But like him, they must in the improvement suitably apply these truths to all
present, that they may find themselves concerned in them, and that they were
designed for their benefit. They should be so explicit and searching in the
application, as to make it amount to the words of the text.

2. From the view just taken, in connection with the subject at large, may be
inferred a good, and, perhaps, the best method of preaching. Nathan did not in
the very beginning of his discourse, as the first salutation, say to David --
Thou art the man. Had he done this, it might have greatly provoked the royal
personage. It is not to be supposed, that the king would have given a favorable
reception to such home-language immediately advanced, before any thing had been
said which might introduce it. The prophet, it seems, was aware of this. He
therefore, like a wise preacher, first aimed in his discourse to prepare the
mind of his hearer for receiving truth. He represented his conduct by a plain
similitude. The flagrant injustice and cruelty of the conduct thus represented,
David could not but at once condemn. Nathan knew he had now only to apply the
similitude, and his point was gained. This he could easily do, for he had only
to let David see, that his own conduct was like that which he had condemned,
and the work was done. So if gospel preachers would be in the way most
effectual for bringing their hearers to feel, acknowledge and embrace the
truth, let them not immediately and directly describe their wickedness with all
its aggravations. This will be likely to irritate rather than profit. Let them
first give such a general and plain description of moral conduct as shall be
suited to convince the consciences of all respecting what is sin and what is
holiness. And when the conscience is thus convinced, and brought to own and
receive general truths, it cannot consistently but own and receive particular
truths contained in, and inferred from them. When ministers so adapt the body
of their discourses, as that the people, while they do not see themselves
intended, are constrained to acknowledge and approve what is morally right, and
censure what is morally wrong; the application becomes forcible and
irresistible. The hearers find themselves condemned of their own consciences,
and are obliged inwardly to confess their guilty deserts.

This view is suited to reprove, on the one hand, those sermons which are
direct and pointed from beginning to end, and which instead of benefiting,
needlessly offend and prejudice the mind against the truth; and on the other
hand, it is suited to reprove those discourses which are general throughout,
and which come not near the hearers, but suffer them to feel and think as if
they were not in the least concerned in what had been said. This is going to
either extreme, while the medium is to be chosen. The parable and the Thou art
the man, make a good composition for a profitable sermon, while either alone
will be found wanting.

3. We infer from what has been said, that if it be the duty of Ministers to be
particular and direct in applying the truths they deliver, then surely it is
the duty of hearers heartily to receive these truths, and not take unreasonable
offense because of their plainness. We are not told that David was offended
because Nathan used with him such great plainness. No: he received it
cordially: he felt its force; and freely confessed the justness of the charge
brought against him. In this he is a pattern for all who hear the word preached
in its power and pungency. They should hear it with meekness, knowing that it
may become the means of saving their souls, if they do not wilfully reject it.
It is a sad mark indeed, when people wish to hear smooth things to be daubed
with untempered mortar: and are opposed to searching gospel truths. This was
the character of most of the Jews in the time of Christ. He was too penetrating
for them: his words pierced like swords. Ye, said he to them, are of your
father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. And because I tell
you the truth, ye believe me not. He that is of God bears God's words: ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Thus closely did Christ
address them. But instead of receiving it calmly, and owning it altogether
just, they replied, say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and bast a
devil? They were ignorant and blind in respect to spiritual things; and were
disposed to cavil at, and reject the most precious and interesting truths.
These Jews were most unreasonable and wicked in this respect. Their conduct was
directly the reverse from what it ought to have been. They opposed the only
Savior, and injured their own souls. And most ardently could it be wished that
none might imitate them at the present day. It is undeniably the duty of
Ministers to be discriminating and searching. This is evident from what has
been said, that they can have no good prospect of success, unless they are. And
that they may be successful, should be the earnest desire of them and of all.
If this, then, be the incumbent and indispensible duty of Ministers, it must of
course be the incumbent and indispensible duty of hearers to receive
bible-truths in the love of them, however much they may expose their
wickedness. Had David been angry with the prophet, and greatly opposed his
plain message, how would he have added sin to sin, and brought tenfold more
guilt upon his own soul. But he was far from this: His conscience smote him,
and he owned the fact. Thus should all do, when they hear truths applicable to
themselves. But as God formerly said to his prophet Ezekiel, so is he now
saying to his Ministers, Thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most rebellious.

4. We infer from the subject, that we have great cause to lament that men are
so blind and insensible in things which pertain to godliness, as to need such
plainness, -- such close application of gospel truths, in order to see their
own picture. It is the character, the moral blindness and weakness of men,
which makes plain and pointed truths so necessary. Had Israel's king taken the
meaning of Nathan, after he had spoken the parable; applied it to himself;
appeared penitent; and acknowledged his several instances of transgression; the
prophet would not have been constained to say to him as in the text: he would
have found no need for this. But when he had told him the story of the poor and
rich man; as David continued still insensible respecting himself, what must the
prophet do? He was sent to him for good, and he wished to be instrumental of
doing this. But how shall he come to the king's heart? for unless he does this,
he is not likely to benefit him. He would gladly use delicacy and tenderness
with a person of such exalted office and rank. He wishes not to be thought too
rash or severe, if mild measures will answer. He seems desirous that he may
take the hint, may see and repent of his error; without being told how bad he
is in the plainest terms possible. But all will not do. Nathan is brought to
see, that he must either leave his mind unimpressed with a sense of his
condition, or declare to him his meaning freely and fully without the least
paliation. This no doubt was a disagreeable dilemma. But he knew he must
perform the mission he had received from God. He chose to be a faithful servant
of his great Master, and submit the event to him. Alas! David, how great must
be thy stupidity at this time, that nothing will bring thee to thy right senses
but a Thou art the man! As the conduct of David, and his insensibility
respecting it, obliged Nathan to preach thus closely, so the conduct and
insensibility of nearers in general now must oblige preachers to do the same.
As David was quick to discern and censure the sinfulness of another, without
considering his own; so most hearers can quickly see the faults of others, and
what truths belong to them, while themselves are clear, and no part of the
discourse suits their own case. This obliges Ministers to say in effect, you
are the persons meant, you are the guilty. Obliges, did I say? Yes; a sense of
duty obliges them to this. For it is no agreeable thing in itself to tell
sinners without reserve what is their character. But this must be done. And it
is truly to be lamented, that it is with such difficulty the mind of man is
brought to look in upon itself, and see its condition: -- that all can so
hastily condemn others for that which they allow in themselves, and discover
the failings of others so much sooner than their own.

5. We may infer from the subject what is the great design of the
Gospel Ministry. It is to awaken sinners to a sense of their iniquities, and
bring them to repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Agreeably we find Paul commissioned to the Gentiles for this important end, To
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me. From this it is
evident, that moral blindness is removed; saving conviction excited; spiritual
freedom effected; and regeneration accomplished, through the instrumentality of
Gospel-preaching. All men by nature, or in their unsanctified condition, are as
insensible to their true character and ill-deserts as transgressors of the
divine law, as David was to his, when the prophet approached him. They discern
not the things of the Spirit of God. And as the Lord sent Nathan to David for
the express design of convincing and converting him; so He raises up,
qualifies, and sends his Ministers to be ambassadors for him, and instrumental
in the conviction and conversion of sinful men. The ministry of the word is
designed in the hand of the Holy Spirit to enlighten the minds of men, that
they may see that they have sinned, and what they deserve as sinners, and in
this way become truly penitent and reformed.

Deeply impressed by this momentous design of their mission, how careful, how
anxiously concerned should Ministers be, that they be found faithful
messengers; that they fulfill the ministry which they have received of the Lord!
What diligent heed ought they to take, that the design of their message may not
fail by their means! Are they sent to warn the wicked of his wicked way, that
he turn from it? let them do it faithfully and plainly, that they may deliver
their own souls; and that the blood of him who dies in his iniquity may not be
required at their hand.

Let them fully describe the state and danger of sinners, and like Nathan,
apply the description to the hearts of their hearers with the greatest
plainness. In thus doing, they have encouragement to hope for success; and in
thus doing, they will finally be clear from the blood of all men, even should
Israel not be gathered.

My Friend and Brother will suffer me a word at this serious moment.

It is presumed, Dear Sir, that you have cordially acquiesced in the leading
sentiments, which have now been advanced. You know, we trust, by experience,
the moral blindness and insensibility of the human heart, until enlightened and
quickened by divine grace. You are accordingly convinced, that great plainness
is necessary in publishing to your hearers the Gospel-report. For although
Ministers may use this plainness, and still not be successful, yet none can
have a well grounded hope of successfulness without it. As you desire,
therefore, to succeed in your Master's work, you will aim plainly and
faithfully to declare his message; directly applying the truths you deliver to
the cases of all who hear them. For doing this, you have the Prophets, the
Apostles, and Christ himself, as examples. And in this way, you will, by clear
manifestation of the truth, commend yourself to every man's conscience in the
sight of God: in this way, you may both save yourself, and them that hear you:
and in this way, we wish you the blessing of the God of Jacob in your person,
and in the people now about to become your charge.

The church and congregation in this place will allow me briefly to address
them on this solemn occasion.

Brethren and Friends,

Accept our sincere congratulations on the re-settlement of the Gospel Ministry
among you. Receive the man of your choice as a prophet sent you from the Lord.
Consider him as having a mission from his divine Master which he is bound to
discharge: And while his wisdom and prudence shall direct him in the faithful
discharge of it, be careful to give his message a cordial reception. If he
shall find it his duty to use great plainness of speech, take not unreasonable
offense; for it is for your good. Even should he use the direct language of the
text in applying his discourses, you have the example of David for receiving it
with meekness, and feeling its force and justness. Think him no more than man,
subject to like passions with others; and ever be ready to cast the mantle of
charity over those human imperfections which are inseparable from men, in their
present lapsed condition. Esteem him highly in love for his work's sake, and
strive together with him in your prayers to God for him. Thus may he be a rich
and lasting blessing to you, and you become his joy and crown of rejoicing in
the day of the Lord.

Permit me to observe here, that your connection with our order is of recent
date. You were received, at your free request, upon the conviction that a sense
of duty and propriety dictated your choice of the presbyterian mode. A strict
and persevering adherence to the form you have adopted will manifest to an
observing world the uprightness of your intentions, and must give unspeakable
satisfaction to the body, with which you are now connected. May you and your
Pastor long walk together in truth and love, and finally be admitted to light,
life, and felicity without end.

The relation of a brief but true story to this assembly at large, will
conclude.

A certain great King had an only son, tenderly beloved. The subjects of this
King had revolted from him, and taken arms against his throne and government;
without any other cause but that of their own free, criminal choice. This was a
crime so great, that the King could pardon them in no other way, but by
delivering his son to death for their redemption. This he did, and the son
freely consented to the will of his Father. The way being thus clear to receive
the rebels again to favor, the King invites them in the most tender manner to
lay aside their rebellious weapons, and return to him; offering them complete
happiness on this return. But they refuse this kind invitation; they continue
still rebellious. Now, must not all say, that they deserve the greatest
conceivable punishment, not only for their revolt, but for their black
ingratitude in refusing a pardon! Let as many, then, as have not yet given
cordial and saving belief to the Gospel-report, make the application to
themselves. They are the persons guilty. They are still in a state of revolt
from God, and neglecters of the great redemption purchased by the death of
Jesus. Let them at once feel and confess their guilt before the Lord, and
humbly implore his pardoning mercy; so that they may yet be found of him in
peace, at the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

AMEN.
THE RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP.
ALTHOUGH the great object of the christian religion, as it respects mankind,
is to rescue them from woe and restore them to God and happiness: and although
all its real friends and especially its ministers, have this object so much in
view and at heart, as to readily deny themselves many innocent gratifications
to accomplish it: yet this divine religion from the first promulgation of it
down through the long succession of eighteen centuries, has met and been
obliged to struggle with incessant and various opposition.

Strange to relate, it is openly neglected, opposed and despised by some whose
greatest good it seeks to promote, and who can enjoy no real good, but by its
aid. And in some instances it is injured and wounded by its professed, if not
its real friends.

Of this opposition to religion, in all its possible forms and attitudes, the
adorable Author was not ignorant. And being the truth and omniscient, and not
capable of deceiving mankind or his followers, gave early and public notice of
it. And having the government of all things in heaven, upon the earth, and
under the earth committed to him, and being wonderful in counsel, he at the
same time provided both for the defense of his religion, and the support of his
servants. Declaring that the gates of hell should never prevail against it.
Bidding his little flock not to fear, for to them it was his Father's good
pleasure to give the kingdom.

All the support, relief and consolation implied in this declaration and
promise, the church and its true ministers may depend upon receiving.

And the giving the Right Hand of Fellowship is in an important sense a pledge
and assurance to the party receiving it, of participating in the
all sufficiency of grace.

But as the wickedness of the human heart, and the devices of the adversary are
many and great, so great that men may think themselves friends to Jesus Christ,
and promoting his cause, while in reality they are inadvertantly or ignorantly
doing things contrary to both; the possibility of this, suggesteth the
propriety of proceeding on such an occasion, and in such an act as the present,
with caution and a degree of fear.

The church and its officers, are not authorized to give the Right Hand of
Fellowship indiscriminately to every one who may desire it. Nor upon any other
principles than those upon which the Apostles gave it. Nor may they forbear
upon an exhibition of such principles.

When James, Cephas, and John who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace
that was given unto Paul, i. e. had suitable evidence of his qualifications to
preach the Gospel, they gave to him and Barnabas the Right Hand of Fellowship,
that they should go to the heathens, while themselves continued with the
circumcision.

It is grace that qualifies the subject to receive, and the exhibition of that
grace, authorizes him to claim, and the ministers of Christ to give the
Right Hand of Fellowship. Nor can it be doubted, but that the Apostles, readily
and with sentiments of the most lively joy, gave the Right Hand of Fellowship
to those their fellow servants, who were partakers of the same grace of God
with themselves.

And now, Sir, we the professed friends and servants of Jesus Christ, convened
on this occasion, having satisfactory evidence, that you have received the gift
of grace, and are qualified to preach the gospel and be a minister of his
church, give you the Right Hand of Fellowship.

Hereby we publicly acknowledge you completely invested with the sacred office
of a minister of Jesus Christ: and equal in all respects with ourselves; as the
pastor of this church, and the teacher of this people. And we engage to support
and defend you in this character, to be tender of and faithful to it. To mourn
when it suffers, and rejoice when it prospers.

These engagements are reciprocal.

We bid you God speed.

We congratulate you, Sir, in being a member, a distinguished member of the
most ancient, useful, and so the most honorable society that ever did or can
exist upon the earth. A society, whose principles, manners, and final object,
as they needed not, so they have not sought to hide themselves in the darkness
of the night, or in the clouds of secrecy; but to expose themselves to the
public eye, inviting the strictest examination, like a fair and magnificent
city upon a hill. A society whose good every event will advance; whose
happiness and glory will be perfected and rendered permanent by that which will
eternally dissolve and obliterate all other societies and combinations of men,
of nations, and of nature.

We congratulate you, Sir, in being a member of the general assembly and church
of the firstborn of God: composed of Prophets, Apostles, and all the excellent
of the earth. All who are to be made kings and Priests to God. And those who
turn many to righteousness, to shine as stars forever. A society to which the
Lord of all has made the affecting promise of "Lo I am with you always."

These are some of the materials which form the broad ground of support and
strong consolation to every true christian and minister. In the view of which,
all the labors, afflictions, and sufferings of which religion can be the
occasion, are not only light, but vanish in a moment.

May you, Sir, ever possess the wisdom which comes down from above, and
conduct yourself among this people, as becomes a minister of the meek and
lowly Jesus. That you may not merit blame, but the honor of being gentle, enjoy
the pleasure of a successful, and reap the reward of a faithful minister of
Jesus Christ.

THE CHARGE, BY REV. WILLIAM MORISON OF LONDONDERRY, (N. H.)
Dear Brother,
THE glorious Head of the church, who walks in the midst of the golden
candlesticks, holding the seven stars in his right hand, having seen fit, in
his all-wise, governing providence, to release you from the particular
obligations you were under in another part of his vineyard; and having inclined
this people to call you, to take the pastoral office over them, and at the same
time disposed your heart to accept their invitation; -- and this Presbytery,
after the most candid attention to this people's request, having received them
under their care, and sustained your Call, as orderly and regular: I now, in
behalf of this Presbytery, and by the authority of Christ, vested in them, do
charge you, as the ordained Minister of the 2d Church and parish in Newbury, in
manner following: --

First, with all solemnity I charge you to preach the Gospel of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and with power; that your people's faith may
stand, not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. In doing this, you
will study plainness of speech and pathetic affection of mind, in all good
fidelity, that your hearers may be fed with knowledge and understanding, and
impressed with the importance of the truths of God.

Shun the declaration of no part of the counsel of God. Particularly hold up to
view the distinguishing doctrines of Christianity; -- the Sovereignty of God
over all things in all worlds; -- his boundless benevolence, with his
inflexible justice; -- his spotless purity, and his tender mercies in Christ,
which are over all his other works. Unfold to your hearers the depravity of the
human heart; the necessity of regeneration, and the only way of justification,
through faith in the imputed righteousness of the glorious Mediator.

Often dwell with delight on the comfortable doctrine of the perseverance of
the saints, as founded on the stability of that covenant which is well ordered
in all things and sure. And while you teach that without faith in the blood of
this covenant, it is impossible to please God; affirm also constantly that they
who believe in God, must be careful to maintain good works; and that a visible
conformity to the law of God is a better evidence of real religion than any
internal pretenses whatever, without it.

I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and kingdom; -- preach the word, be
instant in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and doctrine; -- showing yourself to be a workman, who needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, and giving to every one
their portion of meat in due season.

In doing this complicated and delightful part of your duty, you will suit
yourself to the various capacities and necessities of your hearers. You will
charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God; that they do good, -- be rich
in good works, -- ready to distribute, -- willing to communicate. Enjoin upon
those in the lower stations of life, obedience to their superiors; not
answering again, but endeavoring to please in all things.

Exhort young people to be soberminded, -- to remember their Creator in the
days of their youth. In all things show thyself a pattern of good works; in
doctrine, uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity and sound speech that cannot be
condemned, that they who are of the contrary party may have no evil thing to
say of you.

Under impressions of divine authority, administer the Sacraments of the New
Testament to persons properly or visibly qualified. Know therefore the state of
your flock. -- Visit the sick and afflicted, -- the fatherless and widows; and
imitate your Master, who in the days of his flesh, went about among his people,
doing good. As far as in you lies, be like feet to the lame, strength to the
weak, eyes to the blind, leading them like a good shepherd, in the green
pastures and by the still waters of God's ordinances. Administer the government
of Christ's house with prudence and impartiality, knowing no man after the
flesh, -- not respecting persons in judgment. Avoid foolish questions which
gender strife and alienation of mind. Remember, that the servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle and courteous to all men. It is an important
part of the ministerial character to keep our own passions in due submission,
and to prevent our minds from being unreasonably ruffled, or agitated by the
disagreeable occurences of life.

A Minister's mind is supported by principle and improved by experience.

This is a kind of self-possession which will enable us to bear hardships, to
surmount difficulties, to vanquish temptations; and with steady hands and
undaunted hearts, to persevere in the christian warfare as good soldiers of
Jesus Christ. It is under the influence of this temper of mind, that we are
strengthened to overcome evil with good; to profit them who hate and oppose us,
and peradventure to deliver them out of the snare of the devil who are taken
captive by him at his pleasure. Agreeably to this, the wise man informs us, he
that is slow to wrath, is better than the mighty; and he that rules his Spirit
than he that takes a city.

Neglect not the gift that is in thee by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. Lay hands suddenly on no man. Keep thyself pure. Give thyself to
pray^^, (...) reading, to exhortation and to doctrine. Be an example to the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity. Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear unto all.

In fine, dear, brother, study to glorify God in being wise to win souls, and
have continual recourse to him in whom treasures of wisdom and knowledge are
hid; in whom it has pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell, and in
whom all faithful ministers are complete for work and warfare. Be then faithful
unto death, and he will give you a crown of life, and many we hope, in this
place, as present seals of your ministry, and your crown of rejoicing in the
day of the Lord.

AMEN.

