CASE OF JONATHAN ROBBINS, EXAMINED BY CHARLES PINCKNEY, ESQUIRE SENATOR IN
CONGRESS FOR SOUTH CAROLINA, AND LATE GOVERNOR OF THAT STATE.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES.

Baltimore: -- printed by WARNER and HANNA No.^, N. Gay-street. 1799.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES.
As Congress must by law provide at their next session for any similar cases
which may occur under the British treaty, and as it is of general importance to
the citizens of the United States, the following examination of the case of
Jonathan Robbins, lately decided in the District Court of South Carolina, is
with deference, submitted to their consideration.

Fellow Citizens,
As I believe you have not been much troubled with my remarks on any subject, I
hope you will more readily excuse the favor I now ask, in requesting your
attention to the present. I am induced to make them because the question is of
very great public consequence, and involves the dearest and most valuable
rights of every man in the United States. It reaches all situations, as well
the elevated and opulent, as the most indigent. It affects the knowledge and
independence of our judicials in the most important manner; and as I know it
has excited the sensibility of the people, and must be so far made the subject
of enquiry in congress, as to enable them to provide for similar cases, I have
supposed some examination of it may be necessary, in that spirit of deference
and delicacy in which all such enquiries should be conducted.

I shall not go into a definition of the principles of a free government, and
the blessings its citizens ought to expect; because few of our own, even
amongst the most illiterate, are ignorant of the nature of a representative
government, the right of suffrage, and the inestimable privelege of the trial
by jury in all cases in which their characters, lives, or property are
concerned. To a people so informed, it is scarcely necessary to remark, that to
men of feeling the value of character, of honorable fame, is dearer than life
or property, or even the most tender connections; that to all men, whether of
the nicest honor or otherwise, the love of life is dearer than that of
property, and that they would readily sacrifice the one to preserve the other.
Hence it follows, that those privileges which guard the characters and lives of
our citizens, are viewed with a more jealous eye, and will be asserted with
more firmness and promptitude than even those which protect their properties,
vigilant as they are with respect to these, A number of our citizens therefore,
believing that the inestimable privileges secured to them by the constitution
and laws of the United States, have been affected in the case of Jonathan
Robbins, that it is one which may, if established as a precedent, reach some
valuable inhabitants of this country, and to the intent that these privileges
should be more carefully guarded by a positive law in future, the following
remarks are submitted, with a view to bring this business more fully before the
public than it has hitherto been.

The following is the statement of the case with the accompanying affidavits.

FEDERAL DISTRICT COURT, For the District of South Carolina, 25th July, 1799.
Present his honor Judge BE.
THE question before the court was grounded on a habeas corpus, to bring up
Jonathan Robbins, who was committed to gaol in February last, on suspicion of
having been concerned in a mutiny on board the British frigate Hermione, in
1797, which ended in the murder of the principal officers, and carrying the
frigate into a Spanish port, and on a motion of counsel, in behalf of the
consul of his Britannic majesty, that the prisoner should be delivered up, (to
be sent to Jamaica for trial) in virtue of the 27th article of the treaty
between the United States and Great Britain, which article runs thus:

"Article 27. It is further agreed that his majesty and the United States, on
mutual requisitions, by them respectively, or by their respective ministers or
officers authorized to make the same* will deliver up to justice all persons,
who being charged with murder or forgery, committed within the jurisdiction of
either, shall seek an asylum within any of the countries of the other: provided
that this shall only be done on such evidence of criminality as, according to
the laws of the place where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found,
would justify his apprehension and a commitment for trial, if the offense had
been committed. The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be borne
and defrayed by those who make the requisition and receive the fugitive."

The commitment of the prisoner, and the consequent demand made of him by the
consul of his Britannic majesty here, were grounded on the two following
affidavits:

South Carolina District.
William Pordock, a native of Portsmouth, in the state of Virginia, upwards of
eighteen years old, appeared before me, and being duly sworn and examined,
says that he was one of the crew before the mast, in the schooner Tanner's
Delight, which was commanded by captain White, who arrived here about three
weeks ago; that a person who answered to the name of Nathan Robbins, came also
in the said vessel before the mast, with him; that he said Robbins is a tall
man, middle size, had long black hair, dark complexion, with a scar on one of
his lips; that on or about last Christmas night he was present, and heard the
said Robbins, talking in the harbor of the city of St. Domingo, to some French
privateersmen, who were on board the Tanner's Delight, when and where he
informed them in his hearing, that he the said Robbins was boatswain's mate of
his Britannic majesty's frigate Hermione, when she was carried into the port
Cavilla, and added that they had no occasion to take any notice of that. And
after the above time, sometimes when he was drunk, he the said Robbins would
mention the name of the Hermione, and say, bad luck to her and clinch his fist.

WILLIAM PORTLOCK, His X Mark.
Sworn before me, this 20th Feb. 1799. THOMAS HALL, J.P.Q.U.
United States, of America. S. Carolina District. ss.
PERSONALLY appeared before me lieutenant John Forbes, who being duly sworn on
the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, deposes, that a person confined in the
gaol of this district, who calls himself Nathan Robins, but whose real name
this deponent believes to be Thomas Nash, was a seaman on board the Hermione
British frigate, in which this deponent was a midshipman from the 8th of
February, 1797, until the 30th of August following, during which time the said
Nash was personally known to this deponent: that this deponent was removed from
the said frigate to the sloop of war Diligence, on the said thirtieth day of
August, 1797; this deponent further deposes, that on the 19th of September
following, he was sent on board the said frigate, at which time he saw and left
the said Nash in the same station on board that vessel, as he was at the time
of this deponent's being a midshipman therein -- That on the 22d day of the
said month, the crew mutinied on board the said frigate, killed the principal
officers, piratically possessed themselves of her, carried her into Laguira,
and there disposed of her to certain subjects of his Catholic majesty. That the
said Thomas Nash was one of the principals in the commission of the said acts
of murder and piracy, whose conduct in that transaction has become known to
this deponent by depositions made, and testimony given in courts martial, where
some of the said crew have been tried.

JOHN FORBES.
Sworn before me, this 18th April, 1799. THOMAS BE, District Judge South
Carolina.

His honor the judge had received a letter some days before from the secretary
of state of the United States, mentioning, that application had been made by
the British minister, Mr. Liston, to the president, for the delivery of the
prisoner under the 27th article of the treaty, and containing these words --
The president "Advises and requests" you to deliver him up.

This letter was not read in court, though it was shown to the counsel on both
sides.

The following certificate and affidavit were produced in behalf of the said
prisoner.

United States of America, State of New York.
BY this public instrument, be it known to whom the same does or may concern,
That I, John Kesse, a public notary, in and for the state of New York, by
letters patent under the great seal of the state, duly commissioned and sworn;
And in and by the said letters patent inverted "With full power and authority
to attest deeds, wills, testaments, codocils, agreements and other instruments
in writing, and to administer any oath or oaths, to any person or persons;" Do
hereby certify that Jonathan Robbins, who has subscribed these presents,
personally appeared before me, and being by me duly sworn, according to law,
deposed, That he is a citizen of the United States of America and liable to be
called into the service of his country, is to be respected accordingly at all
times by sea and land.

Whereof an attestation being required, I have granted this under my notarial
firm and seal.

Done at the city of New York, in the said state of New York, the 20th day of
May, in the year 1795.

Quod attestor. JOHN KEESE, Notary public, and one of those for the city of New
York.

JONATHAN ROBBINS.
Jonathan Robbins, mariner, a prisoner now in the custody of the marshal of the
district court of the United States for South Carolina, being duly sworn, says
he is a native of the state of Connecticut, and born in Danbury in that state;
that he has never changed his allegiance to his native country; and that about
two years ago he was pressed from on board the brig Betsy of New York,
commandded by captain White, and bound for St. Nichola Mole, by the crew of the
British frigate Hermione commanded by captain Wilkinson, and was detained there
contrary to his will, into the service of the British nation, until the said
vessel was captured by those of her crew, who took her into a Spanish port by
force; and that he gave no assistance in such capture.

JONATHAN ROBBINS.
Sworn this 25th July, 1799, before me, THOMAS HALL, Federal Clerk, and J. P.
Q. U.

The signature made by the prisoner to this affidavit in court, appeared to be
in the same hand writing as the signature to the one made in 1791, from which
circumstance it is presumable, that Jonathan Robbins is the prisoner's real
name. The body of the affidavit made in New York, in 1796, was printed; the
names, dates, signatures, etc. were filled up in writing; it had the notarial
seal of of John Keese, esquire affixed, and had the appearance of being a genuine
paper deemed at that day by seamen to be a protection.

It appears, however, by the result, that these affidavits, and the question,
whether the prisoner was an American, and an impressed seaman, or not? were, in
the opinion of the court, altogether immaterial; the court would have felt
itself bound to deliver up any respectable citizen of the U. States, if claimed
under the circumstances of the prisoner.

It appears by the preceding statement, that the judge, under the circumstances
of this case, would feel himself obliged to deliver up any "respectable citizen
of the United States." I do not mention this because he used the words
"respectable citizen;" but I do it to show, that this is a question which
seriously concerns every part of the community, and that no citizen, whose
business may oblige him to go to other countries, is hereafter safe from such
demands. It will not depend upon him to say, he is not a marine, or to show
certificates or proofs to the contrary; it will depend upon the force with
which he is attacked, and the temper or violence of the officer who directs it.
Instances, it is said, have lately occurred, where not only the seamen, but the
passengers have been impressed, who, although declaring they were not seamen,
were still impressed as such, and obliged to perform their duties. No
production of papers, no entreaties availed them; they were compelled to
submit. -- Had these men been enterprising, or an opportunity offered, and they
had possessed themselves of their oppressors, and brought them into port, or
had they, in the attempt to regain their freedom, been obliged to destroy them,
while the world would have applauded the act, the judge must, from the
decision, have delivered them to a similar demand, neither influence, friends,
or fortune could save them; however superior in these, in political privileges
they were only equal to the unknown and friendless Robbins; a consistent and
inflexible magistrate must view them with the same impartial eye; he must give
to them the same construction of the law or constitution; he could not vary
them without the immediate, loss of character. An enlightened people therefore
will as attentively, nay, they ought more carefully to guard them in the person
of a poor or unprotected, than a rich or considerable man, The latter will
always find powerful friends to support and protect his privileges; while the
rights of the former may in silence and with impunity be unattended to, merely
because he is unknown, and has not an advocate to assert them. This would
probably have been the case in the present instance, had not some gentlemen
voluntarily offered themselves to examine and discuss its consequences. The
public are obliged to them: it is an excellent example; I hope it will be
followed upon every occasion, and that it will make us infinitely more vigilant
of our rights than ever. We must never forget that in this country the poor and
the rich, the humble and the influential, are all entitled to equal privileges;
that we ought to consider a violation of the rights of the most indigent and
unprotected man, as an injury to the whole; while we have a pen to guide, or a
voice to lift, they should be constantly exerted against the exercise of
tyranny or oppression, by whatever nation committed, or to whomsoever the
violence may be done.

I now proceed to examine the case, and the nature of the evidence, on which
Mr. Be determined to deliver Jonathan Robbins, to the demand of the British
minister.

I believe it is the first instance which has occurred, of a demand under the
British treaty in the United States; certainly, in this state. The law
respecting the delivery of fugitives from justice was silent on the delivery of
fugitives to foreign powers, tend therefore, the judge conceived himself not
only authorized, but bound to interfere. By his own statement it appears to
have been entirely a new case, in which I should suppose he had considerable
discretion, and was not bound by any particular legislative act to deliver on a
mere affidavit, or any "trevial surmise or hearsay evidence." It was his duty
to have maturely considered what were the legal import and meaning of the
words, "Charged with murder and forgery," and how far, according to the laws of
this country, there was such evidence of criminalty as would justify the
sending any man, claiming to be a citizen, and not disproved as such, from his
country, to be tried by a foregn tribunal, and most probably by a court
martial. -- The judge's auditors must have been surprised when they heard him
say, "that no man can be punished by the laws of G. Britain without a trial; if
he is innocent he will be acquitted; if guilty, he must be punished." This
observation was by no means applicable to the present case; the true question
before the court was, whether Jonathan Robbins, producing a notarial
certificate of being a citizen of the United States, and asserting that he was
impressed by violence into the British service, was, from the nature of the
affidavits before him, to be torn from his country and connections, and
deprived of all the rights of citizenship, and sent to be tried by a foreign
tribunal, acting with a jury, in the most summary manner, and by martial law.

I do not pretend to equal legal knowledge with the judge; but, I have
sometimes attended to points of this kind, and as far as I am able to form, am
clearly of opinion that the prisoner, not having been disproved to be a citizen
of the United States, there was not such evidence before the court as justified
the judge in giving so important an order, as to surrender him to the demand of
the British consul. This I will, endeavor to prove from the examination of the
affidavits, and the nature of the testimony required by our laws, as sufficient
even to justify the putting a citizen upon his trial in this country, without
adding to it the inexpressible disgrace and danger of sending him to be tried
by a foreign tribunal.

The first affidavit is William Portlock, on which I suppose the judge could
not have rested at all; he appears from his age, and the statement in the
affidavit, to have been a sailor lad, as little known in this country as
Robbins himself, and to have been so illiterate as not to have been able to
write his name. This lad says, he heard, a person who answered to the name of
Nathan Robbins, declare he was boatswains's mate on board the Hermione, when
the was carried into the port of "Cavilla;" and that sometimes, when he was
drunk, he would mention the Hermione, clench his fist, and say, "bad luck to
her."

From the statement it results, that this Portlock was an illiterate sailor
lad, so ignorant as not to know the name of the port the frigate was carried
into. It does not appear that he was shown the prisoner, or that he could swear
that Jonathan Robbins was the person he knew on board the Tanner's Delight; he
avowedly knew nothing of himself. He does not say the person he spoke of,
confessed to him that he was concerned in the murder or piracy charged on him.
From the youth, ignorance, and situation of Portlock; from the vague and
uncertain account he gave, I must still be of opinion that the judge could not
have rested at all on his testimony; he knew, that even if Portlock had sworn
positively to the identity of Robbins, and the latter had, when sober, made any
confession of guilt to him, that it was the duty of a judge not to have
attended to it. -- Any confession of a criminal must be made in a particular
manner, before magistrates, or in open courts, to operate to conviction. An
elegant writer, treating on this subject, says, "the confession of a criminal,
when taken even before a magistrate, can rarely be turned against him, without
obviating the end for which he must be supposed to have made it. Besides we
have known instances of murders avowed, which never were committed; of things
stolen, which had never quitted the possession of the owner."

The evidence of words alleged to have been spoken by the person accused, and
connected with the criminality of the charge, ought also to be received with
great distrust. Such words are either spoken in the zeal of unsuspicious
confidence, and cannot be repeated without a breach of private faith, which
detracts much from the credibility of the witness, or, in the unguarded hours
of boasting dissipation, in which case they are not unlikely to be false in
themselves, and very likely to be falsely repeated.

If every situation, therefore, in which Portlock can be viewed as witness, or
the testimony he gave examined, it must at once be seen, that it was not such
as a grand jury could have found a bill on, or such as will be considered
sufficient to justify the delivery the judge has ordered. It must therefore
have been altogether on the single testimony of lieutenant Forbes; he ordered
it, and this remains to be examined The whose of lieutenant Forbes's
examination says, that a man confined in the gaot of this district, who calls
himself Robbins, but whose real name he believes to be Thomas Nash, was a
seaman for a certain term on board the Hermione; that after he left the
Hermione, she was seized by the crew and carried into an enemy's port; and that
he has heard, from the depositions of others in courts-martial, that the man
whom he believes to be named Thomas Nash, was a principal in the commission of
the said acts of piracy and murder, etc.

From this account, Mr. Forbes has confessed that he knows nothing of himself
-- that he was not sure what the prisoner's name was, but that he believes it
to be Thomas Nash, and what is extremely important he does not attempt to say
he is an Irishman, and not an American, or that he was not impressed by
violence into the British service. But that from the depositions of others, and
what he has heard, he considers him as one of the principals in the said act.
He does not explain what is the nature of the testimony he has heard on the
subject, as it respects Nash -- by whom given -- whether by respectable, or
unprincipled witnesses; by such as were intimidated and forced into confession
of any thing -- or by ignorant and illiterate men, standing (without a jury to
interpose their lenient and impartial decisions) before a court of strict
military officers, the severity and dispatch of whose decrees they are every
moment fearing to experience themselves.

His testimony therefore, being altogether hearsay, ought, in strictness of
law, to have operated less forcibly upon the mind of the judge, than even
Portlock's, for however more respectable as an officer and a gentleman, Mr.
Forbes is, yet, when he tells you himself he was not on board the frigate when
the murder and piracy was committed, and that he knows nothing but by hearsay,
either from the relations or depositions of others, he at once comes within
that description of testimony which the laws of England, and the decision of
the best judges, and our laws borrowed from them, forbid either a judge or a
jury to receive in any case affecting the life or a limb of a subject of the
one, or a citizen of the other.

This being the state of the evidence before the judge, two important questions
arise.

1st. Whether the judge was strictly authorized; and ff there was a doubt,
whether he ought to have decided alone upon this question? And,

2dly, Whether in deciding, he had any and what discretion, as to the nature of
the evidencee to be required, and whether his decision was such as the security
of the personal privileges of our citizens, or the policy of the United States,
demanded.

To the first question -- It appears that from the law of congress respecting
the delivery of fugitives from justice from one state to another, being silent,
the judge was of opinion, on the application being first made to him, that it
was a matter for executive interference; but that upon reconsideration, as the
law and the treaty were silent, he was under the necessity of deciding. I think
a further view of this subject must have, by this time, convinced him that he
was mistaken, and that no possible construction that he can give to the 3d
article of the constitution, can justify the opinion he formed, of his having a
right to decide on this case. The article respecting the judicial, after
vesting in congress the right to establish superior and inferior tribunals,
defines the important powers they shall exercise, but leaves the boundaries of
each to be ascertained by congress. They have accordingly detailed the duties
and fixed the limits of the supreme circuit and district courts, in a manner so
clear, that it is astonishing a doubt should have for a moment arisen as to the
court really having jurisdiction to decide this question. The district courts
have no right to decide on any crime, where the punishment is to exceed 30
sttripes, 100 dollars fine, and six mouths imprisonment: in any case exceeding
these and particularly for capital offenses, however the judge like any other
magistrate, may on proper testimony commit for trial here, he has no right to
decid: this authority is given to the circuit courts.

Had therefore Robbins been committed for trial in this state, could Mr. Be
have tried him? Certainly not -- he must have remained to be tried by the
circuit court.

With what authority, therefore, could he decide upon a question, which not
only went to divest the prisoner of his right of citizenship, banish him from
his country, and deprive him of the trial by jury; but also to dispossess the
circuit court of a right to decide upon as new, delicate and important a
subject as ever came before them: one which de hoped would have been reserved
for much more ample discussion and consideration, and in which I should have
supposed the public would have been pleased to hear the opinions of all the
most experienced council at the bar, and to have seen decided by the supreme
court.

It is no answer to say, that the 27th article of the treaty speaks of
commitment; because the latter clause qualifies it, and makes this commitment
depend upon the evidence of criminality according to our laws; and there is
surely an astonishing difference between a mere commitment for trial, and a
delivery over to a foreign tribunal. Nor is it more to say that the law of
Congrdss respecting fugitives from justice, in the different states, makes them
deliverable on a bill found, or BY AN AFFIDAFIT, because they are only removed
from one state to another, where the same laws, same right of jury, and same
forms exist; and what is equal to all, THE INVALUABLE RIGHT OF HABEAS CORPUS,
where a prisoner, improperly committed, can, after delivery and removal, demand
to be brought before a judge, and have the reasons of his confinement examined.
But where is the HABEAS CORPUS that can, in this situation, reach an
unfortunate American? However slight or unfounded the accusation against him,
or erroneous the opinion of the SINGLE JUDGE who delivered him may be, when
once dilivered he is for ever deprived of this invaluable privilege. The moment
the order is given, HE IS BURIED IN CHAINS ON BOARD AN ARMED CUTTER, from
whence, on his arrival in a distant and foreign port, he is immediately
transferred, to another vessel, on whose deck, after a summary military trial,
he is doomed to meet his fate.

I will pause here, and ask you, my countrymen, if there is no difference
between this, and an ordinary commitment by a magistrate for TRIAL HERE? --
Your own good sense, and the security you must wish to the rights of your
fellow citizens and yourselves, will best dictate the answer you should give.

There is another important reason why the judge ought not, upon this occasion,
SINGLY to have decided. I think if it had occurred to him he certainly would
have postponed the decision, until the meeting of the circuit court it is this
-- That however all nations may have agreed upon the propriety of delivering up
fugitives from justice, in the case of forgery; yet, that in times of war, and
particularly in revolutions, when different nations hold such opposite opinions
upon what are piracy or murder, and what justifiable resistance to tyranny and
oppression; when it is so extremely difficult, and requires all the acuteness,
and all the knowledge and experience of the ablest judges, to draw the line
between them: most certainly, in this country, our judges ought not to have
decided, in cases that may hereafter be quoted as precedents, without the
utmost caution and deliberation.

They should have reflected, that in all trials where there was a claim of
birth right or citizenship, on the part of the accused, and where there was not
the fullest and most positive proof of his criminality, that it was safest to
try him here The following is taken from the advertisement of the British
government of Antigua, April 14, 1798, describing Thomas Nash, with the other
men that were on board the Hermoine:

Thomas Nash, an Irishman, one of the forecastle men, about 5 feet 10 inches
high, dark complexion, long black hair, remarkably hairy about his breast,
arms, etc. had left the ship in Porto Caballo; had entered on board either an
American or Spanish trading schooner

In this advertisement it is remarkable that Thomas Nash is not called a
warrant officer; he is only advertised as a common seaman, and not charged as
one concerned in the murder of the officers. But the most remarkable thing is
this -- that while Robbin's certificate says he is a man five feet six inches
high, the other, (that is the Antigua advertisement,) says he is five feet ten
inches -- Now, four inches is so conspicuous a difference in the height of a
man, that surely it was of sufficient consequence in fixing the identity to
have deserved attention.


In this instance they ought certainly to have done so. The testimony was
slight and trivial; it was nearly ALL HEARSAY; it was indispensible therefore
to justice, that the prisoner should have had an opportunity of sending to
New York and Connecticut to prove, if he could in the case of such delicate
importance, and of such slight proof, could the British government have
censured the procedure. It was as easy for them to send their witnesses here,
as to have sent an armed cutter to carry him away. Justice would have been done
to all parties; and venerating as their nation is said to do, the trial by
jury, a generous and free people would have applauded the respect that was paid
to it here.

To the second question, it has been already observed, that this was a new
case, in which Congress had not legislated, and the more that if the judge
thought proper to assume the power of deciding be was bound by no particular
act or restriction, but at liberty to declare the nature of the evidence on
which in his opioion so important a decision should have been made. Supposing
him, as the district Judge to have been at all authorized to decide his
discretionary power, certainly it would have extended to this; and the point
then for consideration is, that having the power to determine on what evidence
so important an order should be founded, what ought to have been his conduct,
and what the nature of the proof he should have required? My own opinion
decidedly is, that he should at least have required such proofs as a grand jury
would have thought sufficient to find a bill. Perhaps he ought to have gone
further, and before he consented to his removal into a foreign country and
military tribunal, he should have demanded complete proof of his guilt, such as
would have induced a petit jury to convict him. But that he should at least
have required the proof necessary to find a bill no one I think will contend.
The enquiry then is what is the proof which the English law and the laws of
this country require to enable a grand jury to find a bill? Although I think
there are many defects in the administration of justice -- such for instance as
the dependence of the judges on the crown, from which they receive their
appointment, and to whom they may be looking up for further promotion and
honor, that of being removable by an address from parliament, which a minister
can always command, and whose views and wishes therefore none else but an
inflexible magistrate will dare oppose; and particularly in the sheriffs having
the power to summons whom they please as jurors, and to pack them if they think
proper: yet there is one part of their system which I have always admired --
that is, the institution of a Grand Jury.

Their laws hare wisely and humanely considered, that next to the disgrace of
being convicted of an infamous offense, is the dishonor of being charged with
one; and therefore, before they would submit a subject to the danger and
inconvenience of being publicly arraigned, an impartial jury are on their oaths
to declare the just cause for accusation. We have copied their system, and
improved upon it. Our juries cannot be packed; they are drawn by lot, and in my
judgment criminal trials in this state are as perfect as they can be.

The nature of the evidence which can alone be properly offered to a grand
jury, although not entirely conclusive as to the actual guilt of the prisoner,
must be such as if offered to the petit jury would be legal evidence -- Even
examinations taken agreeably to the 2d and 3d Philip and Mary, chapter 10, (of
force in this state) can only be given in evidence before a jury, when the
court is satisfied the witness is dead, unable to travel, or kept away by the
means or procurement of the prisoner. No other examinations can be given, or
ought to be received in evidence; and a presentment founded upon any other,
would not be that due presentment, without which a citizen's life should not be
put in danger.

The above opinion is founded on the highest law authorities. A learned English
judge, speaking on this subject, says "The evidence to be given ought to arise
to a high degree of probability -- absolute positive proof if not to be
insisted upon before a grand jury; AND SLIGHT TRIVIAL SUSPICION AND HEARSAY
evidence, are not sufficient to ground such presentiments upon; for although
they are only in the nature of a charge, and do not carry a conviction, yet as
many inconveniences, as well as expense and danger attend a charge of this
sort, which no subject ought to undergo, but upon legal and sufficient
evidence."

This is the law of England, on the subject of legal evidence sufficient to
enable a grand jury to find a bill. Our law is taken from, and founded on it;
and the public can now judge whether the testimony submitted in this case, was
such as ought, in one of so much importance and danger to the prisoner, to have
authorized his delivery.

Some distinctions are attempted to be drawn, respecting territory and
jurisdiction, the counsel for the prisoner having contended that the treaty
entirely alluded to the peculiar exclusive jurisdiction of each. I have no
doubt in my own mind, that Mr. Jay meant no other than the exclusive
territorial jurisdiction of each nation. He seems to have carefully omitted the
word piracy, aware of the difficulty I have before mentioned, of distinguishing
between what may be called PIRACY, or what laudable resistance to violence and
oppression. This omission therefore must once convince us, that Mr. Jay could
only have meant private acts of premeditated and deliberative murder, arising
from motives unconnected with any attempts which individuals, coming to ^^e the
citizens of this country might at any time make to free themselves from the
tyranny of imprisonment. It is wonderful however, to me, that Mr. Jay having
seen the necessity of omitting piracy, did not also omit, at least during the
existence of the war murder also: For in attempts to regain vessels or escape
from impressment, it is certainly as difficult to distinguish what is murder,
as what is piracy. Upon an occasion of such importance to the future safety of
his fellow-citizens Mr. Jay certainly ought, and will I suppose explain, what
was his meaning in that article of the treaty. The quotations from Vattel and
Rutherford did not apply at all. They are merely meant to refer to the cases of
children born at sea, to ascertain, as Vattel does very properly, that right as
subject or citizens of the nation to which the vessel they are born in belongs.

To suppose that Vattel designed to extend the doctrine, so far as to mean that
the ships of a nation are, with respect to the space of water they cover on the
ocean, its rerritory as to jurisdiction, as completely as its land or rivers
are, is to prove him not only guilty of an inconsistency unbecoming so
well-informed an author, but to make him flatly contradict doctrines expressed
in other parts of his work. He then contradicts that neutral vessels do not
make free goods; and it is on his authority the British rest more than any
other, their rights to search neutrals.

Among the reasons which should make our judges very cautious in deciding
against the claim of citizenship, by persons assuming to be citizens, there is
one PECULIAR TO THIS COUNTRY, and which should be carefully attended to: it is,
the difficulty of distinguishing between the natives of some of the middle and
southern states and the natives of Ireland, Germany, and in some instances
Scotland. The emigrations from those countries, to America were formerly very
great. Whole countries have been entirely settled by them, with scarce the
intermixture of any other. Their children, hearing nothing but the language of
their parents will as naturally have the German, Irish or Scotch accent, as if
they were born in Europe. Instances of this sort must have occurred to any man,
the least acquainted with these states. Indeed it is well known, that in some
places many native Americans, born of German parents, have been met, who could
not speak the English language. If then any of these men, born of German
parents, have become seamen, will it not be impossible to distinguish between
them and Europeans.

And can there be a more fallacious mode of determining than from the voice or
accent. I know of none more so, than that of the countenance; and to neither
should an acute or experienced judge ever attend.

I now come to the policy of the measure in the United States, More than any
other nation, except Great Britain, ought the privileges of our seamen to be
vigilantly attended to -- they are the instrument of our commerce, and to them
their country must look up as the true means of becoming an important naval
power -- of having the ability to protect and guard their rights, and to insure
to its citizens the blessings of peace: they are more exposed to the attacks
and insolence of powerful and overbearing nations than any other class of our
citizens, and are therefore more entitled to the care and attention of our
public guardians. Possessing as the United States do, bulky products, every day
increasing, and to export which great quantities of shipping and number of
seamen are necessary, to what portion of their citizens can they look with more
anxiety than to them? Numerous as they may become within these ten years, who
knows to what extent the parental and fostering hand of government may increase
them within the late succeeding period? But to effect this, we must value and
cherish them. We must recollect that they are not our men, but citizens -- that
they do not, the moment they become impressed by a superior foreign force, lose
their rights, or become lost to their country. Can it be supposed, because they
are seamen, they have no families, no tender connexions, no comforts to endear
their homes to them? Rough and boisterous as is the element they traverse, and
laborious as are their lives, among none of our citizens are to be found more
true independence and generosity, or more ardent attachment to their country.
If then they have those passions, that impatience of insult, that invincible
thirst for revenge, which indignities like impressment and tyranny never fail
to provoke, are they to be punished for using opportunities to exercise them?
Are they to submit to the manacle and the lash, without a murmur, because they
fear their country, however possessing the means, may not have the inclination
to protect them? If so, adieu to your commerce and your navy! Your seamen will
fly to other governments more sensible of their value, and more disposed to
assert and maintain their rights.

I will here take notice of the letter which the judge was said to receive from
the secretary of state, mentioning, that "THE PRESIDENT ADVISED AND REQUESTED
THE DELIVERY OF THE PRISONER," because it had made some noise, and I do not
view it in the same light with others, I believe that neither of them meant to
influence the opinion of the judge -- that they supposed it was a mere matter
of course -- that there was no doubt as to the indentity or country of the
prisoner^; and they probably never heard of his claim of citizenship: that they
were anxious, on the part of this government, faithfully to execute the treaty,
and that the letter to the judge had no other intent. This I really believe to
be the case; but the noise it has made will show the extreme impropriety of the
higher executive officers of our government ever touching in the most distant
manner on any subject that may come before the judicial. However innocent the
intention, as I think it was in this instance, it is very apt to give rise to
unfavourable opinions; -- and none more dangerous to a community can be
entertained, than that of a wish of the executive to influence the judicial. It
weakens the confidence of the public in both; and lessens the respect it is
their wish to show them. The present instance will probably operate to
advantage; because it is to be supposed, that after this our secretaries will
be careful to avoid over writing to a judge on any subject that may possibly
come before him.

In one thing I perfectly agree with Mr. Be; and that is, in his avoiding to
question the constitutionality of the treaty, although I think it
unconstitutional. On no subject am I more convinced than that it is an unsafe
and dangerous doctrine in a republic, ever to suppose that a Judge ought to
possess the right of questioning or deciding upon the constitutionality of
treaties or laws, or any act of an individual, or of two or three, above that
of both branches of Congress -- a doctrine which is not warranted by the
constitution, and will not I hope long have many advocates in this country.

I shall here conclude my remarks on this ease. They are made in that spirit of
deference and respect, which is intended to avoid giving offense, while it
examines with candor the subject under discussion. My earnest wish is to draw
the attention of Congress to the amendment of the act, and to prove to them the
necessity of providing in future against the delivery of any fugitives, unless
a bill is found against them by a grand jury: so guard them against entering
into any articles on this subject in other treaties, unless they assent to it,
and particularly to warn them against ever (...) any agreements, respecting
fugitives from justice except with nations whose citizens possess the right of
trial by jury, and willing to reciprocate so indispensible a provision.

A SOUTH CAROLINA PLANTER.
Aug. 23d, 1799, Charleston.
FINIS

