A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT MEDFIELD, IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.
JULY 4, 1799.

BY THOMAS PRENTISS, A. M.

PASTOR of the CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH in said TOWN.

PRINTED AT THE MINERVA PRESS IN DEDHAM, BY Herman Mann, 1799.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
IN his fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, at the first verse, the
Apostle Paul, thus addresses those Christians: --

"Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage."

THE words have particular reference to the Jewish ritual, the Law given by
Moses. This our Savior had abolished as a dispensation attended with
difficulty, and inconvenience, by reason of its numerous, its complicated, its
burdensome rites and ceremonies.

CERTAIN judaising teachers, attached to the ancient, the long accustomed
system of their fathers, were desirous to restore it to its former influence
and authority, and accordingly enjoined it, as a matter of essential obligation
and importance.

JEALOUS for their truest interest, the Apostle would have them feel, the
superior worth, and excellence, of the state to which they were brought by the
Gospel, and stand fast in the Liberty wherewith they were made free.

THE obligation is by no means confined, to the religious liberty, which by the
Gospel, Christ has secured to his Disciples; it extends equally to the civil
rights, and advantages, which flow from him, as the constituted governor among
the nations. -- In his exalted state, Jesus the Son of God, has all power, in
heaven, and on earth -- he is made head, over all things, for the Church -- he
conducts, the various events of providence, with a view to the final
establishment, and glory of his kingdom, -- by him kings reign, and princes
decree justice. All the kingdoms of the world are under his cammand, tho many
of them are, as yet, wholly unacquainted with, and others, proudly, refuse to
own and submit to, him, yet the time is coming, when the ^^^^dom, and dominion,
and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given, to the
people, of the saints of the most high, and all nations shall serve, and obey
him. Then he shall reign over a willing, and obedient people. In the mean time,
for that universal prevalence of his kingdom, he is preparing the way, by many,
and surprising revolutions, in human affairs; and in opposition to all the
designs, and combinations of his enemies, he will establish an universal
dominion, of truth, righteousness, and peace in the earth. He will put down all
rule, and authority; break every oppressive yoke; -- the world of mankind, will
be united, as one family, in the most cordial affection; nation, will not lift
up sword, against nation; -- wars and desolations will cease; -- each portion
of the human race, independently free, from the dominion, and control, of all
others, in the full possession, of the most valuable rights, and liberties,
both civil, and religious, will sit under their own vine, and fig tree, and
none, shall make them afraid.

To such a happy state of things, the prophetic pages of divine revelation
assure us, the world is progressing, under the constituted government, of the
Prince of Peace. -- In such quietude, and happiness, the commotions, and
tumults, the disorders and confusion, which have hitherto, so generally
prevailed on earth, will terminate, when Christ shall take to himself his great
power, and reign king of nations, as he is king of saints.

THE wise, observing Christian, cannot but discern, in the mighty events of
providence, the fulfillment of prophecies; and from their conspicuous
accomplishment, in past, and passing scenes, will derive high confirmation to
his faith, and hope, respecting those, which time, has not yet illustrated.

AMONG the great, and interesting events, which have passed under the moral
government of God, the American Revolution, holds a very conspicuous place.

THE Day we celebrate, has formed a new, and important Epoch, in the history of
the world; an Era, memorable, not only in the annals of our own, but, almost
equally, distinguished in the computations of other countries.

THE yoke of bondage, from which, by that happy event we were set at liberty,
together with the subsequent blessings, and advantages, of our interesting
situation, have just claim, on the present occasion, to our grateful
recollection -- Nor will it be unsuitable, to suggest a few thoughts, on the
best adapted means, of securing and perpetuating, the liberty, with which we
were made free.

THE Yoke of Bondage, was a foreign Government, at the distance of three
thousand miles: -- A government in which our country was not represented; in
the councils, and decissions of which, it had no voice; over which it had no
influence. -- The claim of that foreign government was nothing less, than the
absolute and unlimited right, to "enact laws, binding upon us in all cases
whatsoever."

IT was not so much the rigor, with which that claim had hitherto been
exercised, or the actual burdens, which its operation had then produced, as its
principle, which excited alarm, and called forth a determined spirit of
opposition, for the principle, once admitted, and established Would preclude
all complaint of subsequent evils.

SO long as we were dependent on Great Britain, we were, necessarily, subjected
to her feelings, and views, and subservient, to her interest: all our public
measures, must be of such complexion, and tendency, as to suit her convenience,
and accord with her advantage: our laws, must be sanctioned by the royal
assent, before they could operate; our navigation and commerce, were under
restrictions, which regarded her own, rather than our emolument. -- Through her
hands alone, were we allowed, to receive the productions, or manufactures, of
any other nations; and the articles, in any instances, obtained from them must
be carried to some one of her ports, however difficult, and circuitous the
voyage, before they could be brought to ours.

MANUFACTURES, of various, and important kinds, were either totally prohibited,
or carried on under restrictions, by which their advantage was greatly
diminished.

IN addition to these evils, it was a peculiar unhappiness, that our connection
with Britain, rendered us, necessarily, sharers, in all the wars, in which, on
any account, she was engaged, with different nations of the earth. We were not
at liberty to judge of their necessity, expedience, or justice, but, upon her
declaration of hostilities, were immediately involved in all the calamitous
effects, and subjected to the full weight of all the consequences.

SO long as we were an acknowledged part of the empire, to dispute her
authority, or disobey her orders, was denominated treason, and rebellion, and
subjected us, to her indignation, and resentment. If, indeed, she had a right
to command, she must have, an equitable claim, to punish every act, of
disobedience, to her authority.

THIS was a yoke of bondage, from which nothing but the independence of our
country could set us free.

TO dissolve the ties by which the two countries had been held in connection,
was not the original design, of the patriotic leaders in our revolution. An
amicable adjustment, of all matters in dispute, was attempted, by repeated
petitions, and the most solemn assurances of cheerful subjection, to an
equitable, just, and constitutional exercise of authority. Hence, for more than
a year, preceding the declaration of Independence, a defensive war, was carried
on by our country, in hope of accommodation.

BUT when all prospect failed; when unconditional submission became the
evident, the only alternative, with manly firmness, the galling yoke was
disdained, and the edict, of perpetual separation, passed and signed.

ON that interesting occasion, it is said, HANCOCK, then President of Congress,
appeared in their hall, with his pen, in one hand, and a sword in the other.

HEAVEN, by its smiles, appeared to approve the deed, and by remarkable
^^terpositions, gave it full effect: all nations acceded to it; and by a peace,
as honorable, as it was advantageous, all disputes were terminated, and amity
restored, between the now, dismembered branches of the empire.

MANY, and great, are the subsequent advantages, of our independent rank among
the nations.

TO act for ourselves; to say how we will be governed; who shall rule over us;
by what laws and regulations, we will be restricted; to regulate our own
commerce; to establish such manufactures, as we may judge the state of our
country to admit; to form such connexions with other nations, as we think
proper, and useful; to deliberate freely, and without restraint, on all
important national questions; to consult our national interest, and prosperity,
and adopt all such measures, as in our estimation, are conducive to the great
end.

WE are at liberty, if we please, to extend our commerce to every part of the
globe; and in all seas, the flag which displays the sovereignty, of our
confederated republic, has been waved: -- among the nations in the four
quarters of the earth, it has been generally respected. To almost every land
inhabited by human beings, savage or civilized, have been wafted the fruits of
American industry, or the products of American art and ingenuity.

IN the original compact or confederation, was soon found, a want of energy and
authority, ^^^^^cient to, carry into effect the resolutions, which were
conceived important to the national security, and happiness.

WHILE each state in the union, by refusing to comply with the views, and
wishes, of the general government, could obstruct, or defeat the object in
view, nothing could be, certainly, effected -- for that inefficient system; the
federal constitution, became a happy substitute. No sooner was it adopted, than
it gave a new complexion to the union, producing a measure of prosperity
unknown to ourselves, and, almost to any other country. Those who, at first,
had their doubts, respecting the expediency or utility, of some of its
branches, by its operation, and effects, were soon convinced, and heartily
approved it. An higher evidence cannot be given, or desired, of the excellence
of any system of government, than the prosperity of the country, which is under
its administration.

SYSTEMS in theory, may make a pleasing, and promising appearance, but those
systems, are certainly best, which, in their operation, produce the greatest
share of national enjoyment, and happiness. In this respect our nation has not
as yet, and we have reason to believe, will not in future, find occasion, to
regret its adoption. One of its peculiar excellencies, which may justly secure
it the considence of every American, is, that it carries with it provision, for
such amendments, and alterations, as the state of the union, or the wishes and
views of the people, shall at any time require.

FROM a government thus subjected to revision, and an administration liable, by
the suffrages of a free and enlightened people, to be periodically, and
frequently changed, there is nothing to be feared. While its praises are
resounded through the nations of the earth, justly may it be expected from the
citizens of our own country, to receive cheerful, and zealous support. On this
one bottom, Americans are all embarked. However diversified in opinion,
respecting particular measures, the independence, the liberties, and
constitution of our country, it is presumed, all must wish to preserve. The
means most conducive, under providence, to this great and desirable end, let us
now briefly suggest.

THE first, obvious, and interesting idea, which presents to our minds, is, a
firm belief, and devout acknowledgment, of GOD, and Providence, with a
consequent humble regard, to the dictates, and duties of religion.

MODERN philosophists, renouncing the idea of a God, and Providence, have
substituted the names "Nature, Fate, and Fortune." They suggest, that the idea
of a monarch above, as inconsistent, with the preservation of a republic
below, that nature is the only supreme being; and the only providence, the
association of mankind, in liberty, and equality; that man when free, wants no
other divinity than himself: that reason dethrones, both, the kings of the
earth, and the king of heaven; that every other republic, than that of
atheists, is a chimera. It rejects divine revelation; reprobates the
institutions, and ordinances of religion; abolishes the Christian sabbath; sets
men at liberty, from all the obligations of piety, and morality; opens wide the
door to every species of licentiousness, vice and folly; a philosophy "falsely
so called," which teaches the gloomy idea, that "death is an everlasting sleep."

THOSE licentious principles and opinions, which are "subversive of the
foundations of all religious, moral and social obligations, which have a
tendency, to promote profanity, and irreligion; degrade the character of man,
and deprive him of his hopes of felicity in a future, and better life" -- these
are a source of greatest danger to our country. The artful and industrious
dissemination, of such principles, and opinions among our citizens, is believed
to be, a political engine, in high operation at the present crisis, against our
republican constitution.

WOULD we stand fast in our liberty, civil and religious, it concerns us
carefully to watch, and firmly to withstand, those baneful principles: for
should we renounce the God of our fathers; should we give up the system of
religion, the institutions, and worship, for the free enjoyment of which, they
suffered every hardship, in the original settlement of our country, what could
we reasonably expect, but that he will forfake us, and give up this fair
inheritance to reproach?

ATHEISM, infidelity, and vice, may, under the righteous government of God, be
suffered to prosper for a time; but it is the declaration of eternal truth,
which the events of ages have confirmed and illustrated, that "righteousness
exalts a nation, but sin is the reproach of any people." By prevailing
impiety, and irreligion, a holy God may be provoked to withdraw his protection,
and guidance; he may give up our councils, to blindness and delusion, or our
citizens to a spirit of jealousy and disaffection, until the insidious arts, of
secret disguised enemies, involve us in the "incalculable mischief, and misery,
they have brought on other countries." -- Let the breast, then, which is fired
with a patriotic ardor, for the independence, and liberty of our country, for
the preservation of its privileges, civil and religious, be impressed with the
great idea, of a God, and Providence, and be actively engaged, in the cause of
pure religion. -- The truly good man, is the best friend of his country, the
most energetick supporter of its independence and happiness. A wise, virtuous,
and religious people, cannot be miserable, because God will never forsake them
he may visit their "transgressions gressions with stripes, and their iniquities
with the rod, but his loving kindness he will not take from them, nor suffer
his faithfulness to fail."

IN subordination to what has been now remarked, I add --

To the preservation of our Independence, and Liberty, it is of high importance
we should possess, and cherish, a truly independent spirit, and act, with
independent views, and feelings.

THE idea, that a free, and independent people, should be subjected to the
will, or devoted to the political views, and interests, of any other nation, is
preposterous, and absurd.

IN the present state of our country, we hear it often alleged that part of
its citizens, are acting under the influence, and with a view to the interest
of Britain, and part as guided by affection to, and interested in, the measures
of France. The idea, on the one side, and on the other, is probably produced,
rather by the prejudices, and suspicions of party, than by the real views of
either. -- But if any are actuated by such foreign attachments, on the one
hand, or on the other, I scruple not to dissent from both: both are wrong. The
interest of our own country, ought to be the united object of its citizens. We
can be no otherwise interested in the politics, or convulsions of Europe,
than, as men, and Christians, to feel for the miseries, in which misguided
councils, and ambitious views, involve them. Placed at the distance of a
thousand leagues; why should we, be guided by their politics, or embroiled in
their contests?

IT is, indeed, desirable, and important, to have a friendly, commercial,
intercourse with all, but political ties with none: to vindicate, and maintain,
our constitution, government, and liberties, against the interfering claims of
every power on earth; to admit no foreign influence into our councils; to have
no national attachments. This, it is presumed, is characteristick of the great
body of the people through the United States: in principle, as well as in name,
they are Americans, attached to their country, and their country's cause;
engaged in defense of its government, its constitution, and the authorities,
which are sanctioned by the public voice; disposed to render to all, the
honor, respect, and subjection, which their stations justly demand; and, under
the steady administration, of the government they have chosen, to "lead a quiet
and peaceable life."

SUCH an independent spirit, and conduct, must have a happy tendency to secure
our national dignity and happiness; for when the body of the people, are
actuated by such patriotick concern, for the prosperity of their country, it
will have a salutary influence on their election of men to the high and
important stations, in government; it will lead them to fix their attention on
the able and faithful of the land -- on men of known and approved principles --
on men of religion, and integrity -- on men "who fear God, and hate
covetousness;" who will not sacrifice, the cause entrusted to them, to the
intrigues, or menaces of any foreign power.

UNDER the contrivance and management of men, a government, perfect in its
system, or administration, is not to be expected: in point of principle, and
execution, ours has, probably, the fewest imperfections of any now existing.

A CONSTITUTION, formed under all the advantages of cool deliberation, adopted
after the fullest discussion of its principles, its excellences and defects;
and since its adoption, committed, by the very united suffrages of a discerning
people, to the administration of men, highly distinguished for talents, and
integrity.

FROM his chosen retirement, a WASHINGTON, who had successfully led its armies,
was first called to preside over the councils and interests of his country.
When he wished, again to relinquish the cares of public life, ADAMS, was
designated to the high, and important trust. The repeated suffrages of a well
informed people, constitute their highest eulogy. The world has, long since,
known and proclaimed, their worth. Under their steady pilotage, the American
bark, has been hitherto conducted, with such prudent caution, amidst threatening
tempests, and dangers, as to have escaped the convulsions of Europe. Their
tried patriotism, their approved wisdom, and firmness, entitle them to the
confidence of their brethren: and may justly ^^pire the pleasing hope, that by
the guidance of the mighty Councellor, they will yet be enabled, in the high
places they respectively fill, to lead as in paths of peace, and safety.

A good degree of confidence in those, who by the public voice are placed in
any distinguished stations, is of high importance, to the operation, and
continuance, of free republican governments. A spirit of distrust and jealousy,
leads directly to anarchy; while the miseries resulting from popular
commotions, and tumults, tend naturally, to arbitrary government. -- To the
preservation of our independence, and peace, it is then, peculiarly important,
that our civil guides, should possess the confidence of the people.

UNION and harmony may be justly considered as another eminently important
means, of preserving our independence, and liberty. A divided people must be
always unhappy, always in danger. It is a maxim of eternal truth -- "A kingdom
divided against itself, cannot stand." -- There may indeed be diversity of
opinions, and yet the commonwealth receive no detriment; but if opposition of
opinion, be suffered to produce alienation of heart, to issue in rancorous
feelings, to break forth in hard names, severe invectives, in animosity,
strife, and contention, the best cause will be injured.

SHALL I be excused, if, on this occasion, I take the liberty to suggest an
apprehenate, that on both sides of our political disputes, a spirit of party
has been much too warm, and carried too far. On both sides, probably, many
things have been said, and done, more from an opposition of feelings, than of
opinion.

IS it not high time that bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, and evil speaking,
together with all malice be laid aside, and that as imperfect beings, sensible
we are alike subjected, to error, and mistake, we be kindly affectionate, one
toward another, candid and forbearing; that if we differ in opinion, we may at
least agree unitedly to refer the public cause, in which we are equally
interested, to the decision of Providence, under the management of those, who
are providentially entrusted with its guidance and direction. -- The right of
government, we must all agree, is vested in the constituted authorities, in
those who are selected to that particular business, by the voice of the people;
nor can there be reason to suppose, other classes of men are more competent to
judge of our national interests, or more likely to guide them with wisdom, and
fidelity. -- The right to inspect the conduct of rulers, and with decent
freedom, remark on public measures, will not be denied; it is of high
importance to a free government. But if under this idea, men in office are
misrepresented, defamed, and reproached, the principle of liberty is certainly
lost, in an odious, and criminal licentiousness.

THE liberty of the Press, every true American will advocate: but no sober
minded and intelligent person can suppose, that liberty to consist in the right
of publishing, indiscriminately, truth, and falsehood; of casting abroad fire
brands, arrows, and death; or giving vent to turbulent and resentful passions.
As well might we suppose true liberty of action, to consist, in doing to those
whom we dislike, whatever our resentments may dictate; in dealing about our
blows, to the wounding, and injury of their persons.

THE distinction between liberty, and licentiousness, is of the utmost
importance, and ought to be sacredly regarded. -- I add, for the preservation
of our independence, and liberty, it may become necessary, to make occasional
provision, for national defense.

SUCH is the moral state of the world -- such the corruption and depravity of
the human character, that disputes will arise. Misunderstandings, motives of
national interest, honor, ambition, and pride, will foment disputes, and
contentions. The most pacifick, and inoffensive people, will not always have it
in their power, to give satisfaction to surrounding nations; to act a part, so
confessedly impartial, especially in seasons of prevailing contests, and
jealousies, as to secure them from the displeasure, and resentment, of one, or
other, of the contending nations.

IN all subjects of difference, to have recourse to amicable negotiation, is
wise, and virtuous, and eminently becoming Christian nations. But unhappily,
this desirable mode, is not always successful.

WITH regret, we have found, repeated overtures, from our Government, to fail.
Such, however, is the ardor of the Supreme Executive, for peace, that Envoys
are, a third time, appointed for the important purpose. Joyful will it be to
every American, should it issue in the termination of all unpleasant feelings,
and disputes, in cordial reconciliation, and friendship. But what is so likely
to produce successful negotiation, as vigorous preparations to repel hostile
aggressions, and put our country in a respectable state of defense?

ON that divine Being, who has raised us to the rank of an independent nation,
should be our supreme, and ultimate reliance, for the preservation of our most
precious interests. But we are not called, like Israel of old, on an
extraordinary occasion, to "stand still and see the salvation of the Lord." It
is the duty of our civil rulers, to be attentive to the dangers which may
threaten us; to act as faithful guardians of our liberties, civil and
religious. Much easier is it, to put off the harness, to lay aside the means of
defense, when it shall be manifest they are unnecessary, than to provide them
in the exigency of a moment.

THE faithful watchman, standing on the summit of a tower, may espy a cloud, no
larger than a hand, collecting with storm, and tempest, while those who are in
the valleys, and plains below, engaged in the common business, and occupations
of life, may be insensible of the danger, until it is ready to burst upon them.
-- Watchman, what of the night? -- is a question proper to be addressed to
civil, as well as religious guides; the warnings of either, should not be
disregarded.

LET us, especially, hear the voice of God, addressing us by his word, and
providence, as a people who have been highly favored, with penitent hearts,
let us return unto him from whom we have revolted. Let the celebration of this
day, as it has been begun with religious and devout acknowledgment, of the God
of our Fathers, be throughout, observed with decency, sobriety, and temperance;
that while we advocate a Christian obedience, and subjection, to the laws, and
institutions, of our country, none may have occasion to reproach us with any
irregularity, or disorder, in violation of the commands of God. -- Let us
venerate the institutions, and ordinances, of Christ; be deeply impressed with
a sense our obligations to him for our civil, and religious privileges. --
These are closely connected; they will stand, or fall, together. -- As
Christians, therefore, we are deeply interested, in the prosperity of our
country. For our brethren, and companions' sake, we should say, "Peace be
within thee." "Because of the house of the Lord our God, we should seek her
good."


