OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ORIGIN OF THE MALIGNANT BILIOUS, OR YELLOW FEVER IN
PHILADELPHIA, AND UPON THE Means of Preventing it: ADDRESSED TO THE CITIZENS OF
PHILADELPHIA By Benjamin Rush.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BUDD AND BARTRAM, FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE
HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH SECOND STREET. 1799.

OBSERVATIONS, etc. etc.
HAVING labored nearly six years to no purpose, to persuade the citizens of
Philadelphia that the yellow fever is of domestic origin, I had concluded to
desist from all further attempts to produce conviction upon this subject; but a
retrospect of the scenes of distress which I have witnessed from that terrible
disease, and the dread of seeing them speedily renewed, with aggravated
circumstances, have induced me to make one more effort to prevent them, by
pointing out their causes, and remedies. I anticipate from it, a renewal of the
calumnies to which my opinion of the origin of our annual calamity has exposed
me; but these will be less difficult to bear, than the suppression of truths
which involve in their consequences the prosperity of our city, and the lives
of many thousand people, whom poverty and despair will finally compel to become
the unwilling victims of the fever, should it again prevail in our city.

Of the Remote Causes of the Yellow Fever.
This disease is the offspring of putrid vegetable and animal exhalations in
all countries. -- It prevails only in hot climates and seasons. -- The sources
of it in Philadelphia are chiefly the following --

1. The docks; these contain a large quantity of filthy matters in a highly
concentrated state. They are first acted upon, by the heat of the sun, and
hence sailors and the inhabitants of Water street, are generally the first
persons who are affected by the yellow fever every year. It is derived to
frequently from the docks in New York, that it has obtained there, the name of
the dock fever.

2. The foul air of ships.

3. The common sewers. A yellow fever was produced by a large sewer in
Calcutta. It was afterward prevented by closing it up, and removing the filth
of the city in another way.

4. The gutters.

5. Dirty cellars and yards. -- Foul air is sometimes generated in cellars
which produces sporadic cases of fever in all seasons of the year. Swen Warner
died of a yellow fever on the 30th of January 1799, received by breathing the
air of a cellar which had been shut up for several months.

6. Privies. An epidemic fever was once traced to this source in the city of
Frankfort in Germany.

7. The putrefying masses of matter which lie in the neighborhood of the city,
and

8. Impure pump-water.

All the physicians in our city agree in deriving the common bilious fever and
dysentery from these sources; now as these diseases have, we are told, by the
College of Physicians, "lately very much diminished," Facts, and Observations,
p. 24.
and as the putrid exhalations still continue, the presumption is, that they
produce our higher grade of bilious, which is the yellow fever.

Of the Cause of the Yellow Fever not occurring more frequently before the Year
1793.
It has often been asked, "Why did not the yellow fever prevail in Philadelphia
before the year 1793, particularly in the year 1778, when it was left in a more
filthy state by the British army than it has been at any time since?" To this,
I answer, that for the production of our pestilential disease, three things are
necessary, 1. Putrid exhalations, 2. An inflammatory constitution of the
atmosphere, and 3. An exciting cause, such as great heat, cold, fatigue from
riding, walking, swimming, gunning, or unusual labor, intemperance in eating,
or drinking, ice creams, indigestible aliment, or a violent emotion of the
mind. The first cause acts but feebly without the concurrence of the second,
producing mild diseases only, such as common remitting and intermitting fevers.
By the cooperation of an inflammatory constitution of the air, we observe not
only common bilious fevers, have become malignant, but all those diseases which
are occasioned by the sensible qualities of the air, have assumed a more
violent character. This has been remarked by most of the physicians of
Philadelphia for several years past. The pleurisy, rheumatism, gout, hives and
several other diseases, require remedies of twice as much force to subdue them,
as they did ten years ago. On what circumstances this change of the atmosphere
depends is not known. But the fact is certain. It was taken notice of by
Hippocrates two thousand years ago, and is mentioned over and over in the
writings of Dr. Sydenham. The records of medicine prove, that it has continued
from one year, to fifty-two years in different countries. Dr. Sims has given
along and interesting account of these inflammatory constitutions of the
atmosphere from the year 1590 to 1782, in the first volume of the Manchester
memoirs, from which it appears that they were sometimes general over Europe,
and at other times confined to particular countries. The pestilential
constitution of the air in the United States began in 1791. This I infer from
the yellow fever making its appearance that year in New York -- It prevailed in
Charleston in 1792, and it has been epidemic in one or more of the cities and
country towns It has been asserted, that this fever is confined exclusively to
our sea ports. This is an error. It has prevailed since the year 1793 in many
of the villages of New England, and of the southern states. On the Genesee
river in the state of New York, it has become to prevalent as to acquire the
name of the Genesee fever. The bilious fevers which prevailed in all the above
places before the year 1793, were of a mild nature, and seldom mortal. They
have lately disappeared, or are very much "diminished," and have been succeeded
by a fever which frequently terminates in death in five days with a yellow skin
and a black vomiting. These facts have been communicated to me by letters, from
physicians, and by other gentlemen, who have been eye witnesses of them. To
doubt of their truth, would lead to a disbelief in human testimony, upon all
other subjects.
of the United States every year since.

We observe the effects of changes in the qualities of the atmosphere not only
upon diseases, but upon animal and vegetable life. Insects of different kinds
have lately appeared and multiplied in an unusual manner, and the fruits of the
earth have ripened, and decayed in many instances sooner than in common years.
These facts have been noticed by the farmers in every part of the United
States. The uncommon mortality in the summer and autumnal months, among horses,
cattle and the cats, for several years past, is an additional proof of a change
in our atmosphere. It has arisen probably from the same cause which has
increased the mortality of our annual epidemic. As a further answer to the
question under this head, it might be asked, why was not the fever imported
oftener before the year 1791? It is seldom absent from the West India islands.
It raged in most of them during the two wars previous to the present, and yet
but one instance occurred of it in the United States in those two periods of
seven years each, and that was in Philadelphia in the year 1762. The
intercourse between our cities and the islands during that time was extensive
and constant, particularly in the war between the years 1756 and 1763.
(Quarantine laws then existed in but few of our cities, and where they did,
they were feebly executed or eluded every day.

It has been asked,

Why does not the yellow fever prevail every year in cities, where the filth is
always the same in its quantity and quality. To this I answer, that filth may
be in two states in which it will not produce this disease, viz. a dry, and a
liquid state. From excessive heat or from heavy rains, it is often in one of
those conditions in our cities. When this is the case, they escape a visitation
from this disease. It is only when filth is acted upon by a hot sun in a moist
state that it produces fevers. The Neck below Philadelphia which has been
subject to the bilious fever, time immemorial, was uncommonly healthy in the
autumn of 1793; owing to the low grounds there being completely dried by the
hot weather of that season. Fell's Point near Baltimore I have been informed
escaped the yellow fever in 1798 from a similar cause.

I shall illustrate the origin of the yellow fever by a familiar simile. The
foul air of our city may be compared to gunpowder with which the bodies of our
citizens are charged from the beginning of summer. The atmosphere may be
compared to sparks of fire. Heat, cold, fatigue, intemperance and the other
exciting causes which have been mentioned, may be compared to a hand, which
combines these sparks, with the gunpowder accumulated in our bodies. The
concurrence of all these causes is necessary to produce a yellow fever. Putrid
exhalations act but feebly upon the body, unless they are aided by the
inflammatory activity of the atmosphere. This atmosphere in like manner, acts
but feebly upon the body without the concurrence of putrid exhalations. Both of
them for the most part, require the hand of an exciting cause to produce the
disease. An exciting cause without them, is harmless, or induces only a
transient indisposition.

If putrid exhalations produce the yellow fever, it has been asked, why are
those neighbourhoods sometimes healthy that are constantly exposed to their
offensive smell? This question may be answered by resorting to the effects of
habit upon the system, which renders it insensible after a while, of irritating
impressions. The noxious matter which produces the yellow fever exists
independently of smell, and is probably not formed till after that process of
fermentation is ended, which evolves the faetor from putrefying animal and
vegetable substances. This faetor, like the rattle of the snake, seems to have
been intended to give us notice of our danger, and to remove, or fly from the
filth which emits it. It is possible it may in some cases predominate so much
in its action upon the system over that matter which produces the fever, as to
defend the body from its morbid effects. It is thus, the constant stimulus of
spirituous liquors has been found effectual in some instances in preserving
habitual drunkards from the yellow fever.

Is the Yellow Fever a Contagious Disease?
To answer this question, it will be necessary to remark, that contagion is of
two kinds.

1st. It is secreted as in the small pox and measles, in which state it acts
uniformly and without the aid of exciting causes, upon persons of all ages and
constitutions who have not been previously exposed to it, and is not controuled
by the obvious changes in the weather.

2dly. It is derived from certain matters discharged from the body which
afterward by stagnation, or confinement, undergo such a change, as to partake
of the same nature as the putrid exhalations which produce the fever. If the
breath, perspiration, and other excretions of a person in a yellow fever be
confined in a small close room, they may produce a similar disease, especially
when they act upon a body previously debilitated by grief, or fatigue. But they
are generally inoffensive, where the sick are accommodated in open well
ventilated situations. Out of upwards of one thousand persons who have carried
this disease into the country from our cities, there are not more than three or
four instances to be met with, of its having been propagated by contagion. In
the city hospital of Philadelphia, there was no instance of this disease being
contagious in 1793, 1797, and 1798. The fever of which Dr. Cooper died in the
hospital last year, Dr. Physic assures me was derived from the exhalations of
Water-street, which place he visited a few days before he sickened, in order to
examine the state of the air in that unhealthy part of the city. The disease
perished when carried from Fell's Point to Baltimore in 1794. The same fate
attended it, when it was carried from the places in New York and Boston in
which it was generated, to distant parts of those cities. Clothes impregnated
with the effluvia of a person who had died of the yellow fever might produce a
similar disease, but it would be only in consequence of those effluvia
partaking of the nature of putrid matters derived from any other animal source.
In the year 1793 I supposed many cases of the yellow fever to be derived from
contagion, which I now believe were produced by noxious exhalations. I did not
at that time know, the distance to which those exhalations might be conveyed.
From my ignorance of this fact, I was misled by those authors who suppose the
disease to spread in the West Indies by contagion. Many late inquiries have
convinced me, that this is not the case. There is a smell of a peculiar kind
emitted by persons in a yellow fever which sometimes produces disagreeable
sensations in the attendants, but similar effects are produced from a hundred
other smells which do not occasion a fever.
The same thing may be said of the effluvia emitted from a putrefying dead body.

In the first settlement of the West India islands, pains were taken by several
physicians, to prove that the yellow fever was imported from Siam into the West
Indies. I was educated in the belief of this opinion, but the testimony of many
learned, and eminent modern physicians, has convinced me that it is a vulgar
error, and that the disease is generated there as it is here, by putrid
exhalations. To the names of Drs. Huck, Hillary, Hunter, Hector, M'Lean, and
Clark, I shall add those of Doctors Jackson, Borland, Pinkard and Scott,
physicians to the British army in the West Indies, who lately visited this
city. They all denied the contagious nature of the yellow fever in the West
Indies. The following extract from Dr. James Clark's history of the yellow
fever in the island of Dominica, in the years 1793, 4, 5, 6, contains an
epitome of the opinions of all the medical gentlemen whose names are mentioned
with his, upon the origin and noncontagious quality of this disease.

"According to Dr. Lining's account of this fever in Charleston, South
Carolina, communicated in the Essays Physical and Literary, Vol. 2, it appears
to have broken out there in the years 1732, 1739, 1745 and 1748; he thinks it
was always imported from the West Indies; but gives no proof, nor even reason,
in support of this opinion, which does not seem to be well founded.

"At Fort Royal, in Martinique, where there is a great prevalence of mephitic
effluvia, arising from the marshy ground at the back of the town, it generally
broke out in the summer or autumnal season, on the arrival of troops from
France, or of a number of seamen, who had never been in the West Indies before;
and the same thing happened at Point a Petre, in Grand Terre, Gaudaloupe,
almost annually, and from the same cause; but it was never looked upon as an
infectious disease; nor did it ever spread among the natives of the towns nor
among those who were seasoned to the climate; nor was it ever carried from
thence to the other islands. In this island few cases have occurred for these
last twenty years; and these have chiefly been at Prince Rupert's Head, where
from the stagnated water in a large morass near the town and fort, the marsh
miasma prevails in a high degree. Since the swampy places which were in the
town Rouseau have been filled up, this fever has been seldom observed; but
previous to the year 1792, we had generally violent thunder storms -- heavy
rains -- or severe gales of wind, during the autumnal season.

"M. Desportes, in his Histoire des Maladies de St. Domingue, during the
fourteen years that he kept a journal of the diseases at Cape Francois and Fort
Dauphin, sound that this fever broke out constantly in those towns upon the
arrival of new-comers from France, and among these, only such as had not been
formerly in that climate. In and about these towns, during these fourteen
years, viz. from the year 1732 till 1746, there were a great many inlets of the
sea, where the water continued long in a stagnated state, which in so hot a
place produced very offensive exhalations; to these he attributes this fever,
and the bilious and other diseases that prevailed at the same time.

"From a firm belief that this disease is by no means contagious in our island,
the sick are not abandoned by their friends, nor neglected by their attendants,
which contributes much to the recovery of many, who would otherwise have been
lost for want of care." In Dr. Jackson's treatise upon the fevers of Jamaica,
he supposes the bilious and yellow fever to be different diseases. Since his
late return from the West Indies, and this country, he has published the result
of his observations upon the yellow fever, in which he retracts the opinion of
its being a specific disease, and proves it to be a high grade of bilious fever.


-- In those cases where a fever appeared to spread by contagion in vessels at
a distance from the shore, Dr. Scott informed me that there was always reason
to believe it to be the common ship fever which is every where admitted to be
of contagious nature. -- The ship, goal, and hospital fever mean one and the
same disease. It is produced by exhalations from living bodies in a crowded,
filthy, or debilitated state. The fevers which have been imported into
Philadelphia from Holland and Ireland in passenger ships, were of this nature.
It is sometimes confounded with the yellow fever by writers, but it is
materially different from it.

The power which heavy rains, and frost have of destroying our fever, clearly
prove that it does not spread by contagion. We have seen it checked three
times, in three different years by frosty nights. The cold in these cases
cannot act upon the disease in our houses, and of course it does not alter the
quality of the matters discharged from the bodies of the sick. It acts only
upon the putrid exhalations which float in the atmosphere.

The interests of humanity are deeply concerned in the admission of the rare
and feeble contagion of the yellow fever. Hundreds have perished by being
deserted by their friends in situations in which the disease could not have
been taken by contagion, and where there was no danger to the attendants from
putrid exhalations, either from the sick, or the adjacent neighborhood. Many
people have perished likewise in places exposed to putrid exhalations, who have
believed themselves to be safe, because they kept at a distance from the sick.

Can the Yellow Fever be Imported?
I once thought it might, but the foregoing facts authorize me to assert, that
it cannot, so as to become epidemic in any city or country. There are but two
authorities on which the belief of this disease being imported, rests. These
are Dr. Lining's and Dr. Lind's. The former says it was imported into
Charleston in 1732, 1739, 1745 and 1748. The latter says it was conveyed into
Philadelphia where it afterward became epidemic, by means of the clothes of a
young man who died in Barbados. No circumstances of ships, or names are
mentioned with these assertions to entitle them to credit, and from the
facility with which vague reports of the foreign origin of this disease have
been admitted and propagated by physicians in other countries, there is reason
to believe the assertions of those two physicians are altogether without
foundation. -- The College of Physicians of Philadelphia after two weeks
investigation, were unable to discover any ships, clothes, or sick person, that
could have introduced the disease into Philadelphia in the year 1793. The
Academy of Medicine have clearly proved, by many documents, that the disease
was not imported in the years 1797 and 1798. The origin of a few cases,
reported by Dr. Griffitts and other members of the College of Physicians, which
have lately appeared in our city, has in vain been sought for from a prize
sloop of the Ganges. Two affidavits of Messieurs Hill and Ingersol, prove that
she had been healthy in the West Indies, and that no person had been sick on
board of her during her voyage, nor after her arrival in our port. Equally
unsuccessful have been the attempts to derive those cases, from beds, and
blankets infected by the fever of last year. In Boston, Connecticut, New York,
Baltimore, Norfolk and Charleston, both physicians and citizens have long ago
rejected the opinion of the importation of the fever. Some physicians suppose
it possible for the contagion of this fever to adhere to the timbers of ships
that have sailed from West India ports, and that it may be propagated from them
to a whole neighborhood, although houses, and even streets, interpose between
them. This opinion is too absurd to stand in need of refutation. Indeed every
thing that relates to the importation of this fever is contrary to reason and
facts. -- It is an error, substituted in the room of a belief that all
pestilential diseases were derived from the planets. -- The existence of a
health-law founded upon this error, in the close of the eighteenth century, and
in a city abounding with literary institutions, will appear incredible to
posterity. Thinking men alone will discover its possibility, in their knowledge
of the nature of the human mind. It is possible this law may in the course of
many years be the means of preventing the disease being received, in a solitary
instance. -- To enforce it under this circumstance, at the expense of our
commerce, is to imitate the conduct of the man, who in attempting to kill a fly
upon his child's forehead with a hammer, knocked out its brains.

It has been said, if we admit the yellow fever to be of domestic origin, it
will ruin the credit and commerce of our city. The reverse of this opinion is
true; for by admitting that it is generated among ourselves, we shall soon
remove its causes, whereas, by supposing that it may be imported, and acting
accordingly, we shall naturally be led to neglect the removal of the sources of
putrid exhalation, and thus after driving our commerce to other ports, we shall
entail the disease upon future generations. Many of the cities of Europe, and
of the West Indies, that once generated pestilential diseases, now enjoy an
exemption from them by adopting measures for removing their causes. The
hereditary cleanliness of the Hollanders was imposed upon them by the diseases
to which their country was formerly subject from putrid exhalations. -- The
town of Harrisburgh in Pennsylvania, lost more of its inhabitants in proportion
to their number, than the city of Philadelphia by the yellow fever in 1793. The
cause of this great mortality was traced to a mill dam. It was soon afterward
removed, and the town has ever since been healthy. It is of the utmost
consequence for the cities of the middle and northern states of America to
adopt measures of strict and universal cleanliness, inasmuch as the disease may
be taken as often as our inhabitants are exposed to its sources. In the
West Indies, the constant action of the sun and of putrid exhalations upon the
bodies of the natives and old settlers, render them for the most part,
insensible to any morbid impressions from them; hence the disease is never
taken a second time except by persons who have left the islands, and after
spending two or three years in a cold climate, have returned to them. New
comers are the principal victims of the highest grade of their bilious fever.
The winters in North America, by destroying the habit of insensibility to heat,
and putrid exhalation induced by the previous summers, place our citizens every
year in the condition of new comers in the West Indies, or of persons who have
spent two or three years in a cold climate. This circumstance increases the
danger of depopulation to our city from our annual epidemic, and should produce
corresponding exertions to prevent it.

Of the Means of Preventing the Yellow Fever.
1. Let the docks be immediately cleaned, and let the accumulation of filth in
them, be prevented in future, by conveying water into them by a passage under
the wharves, or by paving them with large flag stones inclining in such a
manner toward the channel of the river, as that the filth of the streets shall
descend from them (after it falls into the docks) into the river. This method
of paving docks has been used with success in the city of Breast. The street now
known by the name of Dock-street once exposed a large surface of filth to the
action of the sun. Its neighborhood was more sickly at that time, than any
other part of the city. By means of the present arch over that filth,
Dock-street has been exempted from an unusual number of sick people during the
summer and autumnal months.

2. Let every ship that belongs to our port be compelled by law to carry a
ventilator. Let all such ships as are discovered to contain foul air in their
holds, be compelled to discharge their cargoes before they reach our city, and
let the ships in port, be compelled to pump out their bilge water every day.
Many of the citizens of Philadelphia have deserted the College of Physicians,
by admitting the foul air of a ship to be the cause of a yellow fever. The
College derive it wholly from a specific contagion formed by a peculiar process
in the body similar to that which takes place in the small pox. The foul air
produced by putrefaction, whether generated in the hold of a ship, or in docks,
or common sewers and gutters, is of the same nature, and acts in the same
manner in producing the yellow fever.

A new hypothesis has lately been broached to prove the importation of this
disease. It makes foul air a necessary recipient for the contagion, before it
can act upon the body. The small pox and measles require no such recipients to
enable them to produce a fever. The foul air is sufficient to induce all the
effects that have been ascribed to it, without calling to its aid a mixture
with a supposed specific contagion.




3. Let the common sewers be washed frequently with streams of water from our
pumps. Perhaps an advantage would arise from opening them and removing such
foul matters, as streams of water are unable to wash away.

4. Let the gutters be washed every evening in warm weather. By frequently
washing the streets and pavements the heat of the city would be lessened, and
thereby one of the predisposing causes of the fever would in some measure be
obviated. The use of water for the above purposes, has become more necessary
since the streets and gutters have been so closely paved; for the filth which
formerly soaked into the earth, is now confined, and emits its noxious vapors
into the atmosphere.

5. The utmost care should be taken to remove the filth from the yards and
cellars of every house in the city. Hog-styes should be forbidden in yards, and
the walls of cellars should be white-washed two or three times a year, and
their floors should be constantly covered with a thin layer of lime. I attended
two persons in this city last year in one house with the yellow fever, in the
yard of which, and directly under the window of the back room was a barrel
filled with cucumber and melon rinds, which had been accumulated there in the
summer of 1797. The stench from them after a rain, was perceptible all over the
house.

Some of the best housekeepers in our city, burn all their offal vegetable and
animal matters in their kitchen fires. If this practice were universal, it
would contribute much to the health of our city. Many years ago, housekeepers
in Amsterdam were restrained by law from throwing the offals of their kitchens
into their canals. The late increase of bilious fevers in that city has been
ascribed to that law not being faithfully carried into execution.

Fire wood should never be confined in cellars in the warm months, in a green,
or wet state. It emits when heated, an unwholesome vapor which has been known
to produce a fever. Log huts and cabins, the second year they are inhabited,
often become unhealthy from the decay of the bark of the logs of which they are
composed.


White washing the outside of houses in sickly streets, would probably be
useful.

6. Let the privies be emptied frequently; and let them be constructed in such
a manner as to prevent their contents from oozing through the earth so as to
contaminate the water of the pumps. The famous Ambrose Parey ascribed one of
the plagues of Paris wholly to foul air, and impure water. Mr. Latrobe in a
note, in his proposal for his present important undertaking, has very properly
pointed out the impurity of our water as one of the remote causes of the yellow
fever. -- Happy will it be for the citizens of Philadelphia if by means of that
gentleman's plan for supplying the city with river water, they should be
delivered from the necessity of making use of the water from their pumps for
drinking, and culinary purposes.

7. Let all the filth be removed from the neighborhood of the city, and let
the brick kiln, and other ponds be filled up, from time to time with the earth
which is obtained in digging cellars.

8. In the future improvements of our city, let there be no more dwelling
houses erected in alleys. They are often the secret receptacles of every kind
of filth. The plague always makes its first appearance in the narrow streets,
or in the dirty huts of the suburbs of Constantinople.

9. The predisposition of our citizens to be affected by the remote and
exciting causes of the yellow fever, would be very much lessened by their
living sparingly upon fresh animal food and chiefly upon broths and fresh
vegetables rendered savoury by spices, and a small quantity of salted meat,
during the summer and autumnal months. A constant attention should be paid at
the same time to bodily cleanliness.

The expenses of removing all the sources of putrid exhalations which have been
mentioned, should not be weighed for a moment with the loss of three or four
thousand lives every year, with the diminution of our commerce by the fever,
nor the delays and charges of our present oppressive quarantine law. Let us not
be alarmed, nor discouraged for the fate of our city. To every natural evil,
Heaven has provided an antidote, and it is not more certain, that houses are
preserved from the destructive effects of lightning by metal conductors, than
that our cities might be preserved, under the usual operation of the laws of
nature, from the yellow fever by cleanliness. It would seem as if the neglect
of it, was necessarily connected with suffering. We observe it in the human
body, as well as in our cities. The suspension of sickness from filth, no more
proves it to be inoffensive, than the temporary absence of remorse for wicked
actions, proves them to be innocent. A regard to cleanliness was enjoined upon
the Jews by divine authority. "For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy
camp to deliver thee -- therefore shall he see no unclean thing in thee, and
turn away from thee." Deuteronomy. xxiii. ver. 14, see also the 12th and 13th verses
of the same chapter.

The connection between filth, and pestilence, seems to be pointed out in the
following words in the Old Testament.

"I have sent among you, the pestilence after the manner of Egypt, and I have
made the stink of your camp to come up to your no nostrils, yet have ye not
returned unto me said the Lord." Amos, iv. ver. 10.


To prevent diseases among them, was one of the designs of their frequent
ablutions, and of many other of their ceremonial institutions. The same reasons
exist for removing the filth from large cities, as from a camp, and the same
advantages of health, and order have attended it in all warm countries, in
every age of the world.

Reason was given to man chiefly to promote his physical happiness. We expect a
miracle, in waiting to be delivered from our epidemic, by the wrong application
of the reasoning faculties of our minds. In their proper use, we may humbly
hope for a blessing upon our endeavors, to avert our calamity, from that
Being, who loves truth in every thing, and who afflicts not willingly the
children of men. Citizens of Philadelphia, bear with this attempt to persuade
you to reconsider the facts and reasonings that have from time to time been
laid before you upon this important subject. Think of the unsuccessful issue of
all your efforts for five years past, to guard against the prevalence of our
summer and autumnal pestilence, by adhering to the popular hypothesis of its
origin. The measures that have been recommended are cheap, compared with the
costly apparatus for preventing its supposed importation. The adoption of them
will render our city agreeable to ourselves, and inviting to strangers, at the
same time that it will defend it from the yellow fever.

Philadelphia was once preeminent over all the cities in North America, in
plans of public utility and happiness -- she must admit the unwelcome truth
sooner, or later, that the yellow fever is engendered in her own bowels, or she
must renounce her character for knowledge and policy, and perhaps with it, her
existence as a commercial city.

May Heaven forbid this catastrophe to the present capital of the United
States! and in mercy command the destroying angel of pestilence to sheath his
uplifted sword! in spite of the numerous execrations that have been heaped upon
me for my opinions and conduct upon the subject of this address, by the
citizens of Philadelphia, her prosperity is still the object of my constant
solicitude. -- Yes -- Dear asylum of my ancestors! Beloved nurse and
protectress of my infant and youthful years! May thy health, thy commerce, thy
freedom and thy happiness exist, till time shall be no more!

16th, July 1799.
THE END.

