THE HISTORY OF AMERICA, BOOKS IX. AND X. CONTAINING THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA TO
THE YEAR 1688; AND OF NEW ENGLAND TO THE YEAR 1652.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. Principal of the University of Edinburgh,
Historiographer to His Majesty for Scotland, and Member of the Royal Academy of
History at Madrid.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FROM THE LONDON EDITION BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, And SOLD by
him, No. 59, S. Third-street, opposite the Bank of the U. S. 1799.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE original plan of my Father, the late Dr. Robertson, with respect to the
History of America, comprehended not only an account of the discovery of that
country, and of the conquests and colonies of the Spaniards, but embraced also
the history of the British and Portuguese establishments in the New World, and
of the settlements made by the several nations of Europe in the West India
Islands. It was his intention not to have published any part of the Work until
the whole was completed. In the Preface to his History of America, he has
stated the reasons which induced him to depart from that resolution, and to
publish the Two Volumes which contain an account of the discovery of the New
World, and of the progress of the Spanish arms and colonies in that quarter of
the globe. He says, "he had made some progress in the History of British
America;" and he announces his intention to return to that part of his Work, as
soon as the ferment which at that time prevailed in the British Colonies in
America, should subside, and regular government be re-established. Various
causes concurred in preventing him from fulfilling his intention.

During the course of a tedious illness, which he early foresaw would have a
fatal termination, Dr. Robertson at different times destroyed many of his
papers. But after his death, I found that part of the History of British
America which he had wrote many years before, and which is now offered to the
Public. It is written with his own hand, as all his Works were; it is as
carefully corrected as any part of his Manuscripts which I have ever seen; and
he had thought it worthy of being preserved, as it escaped the flames to which
so many other papers had been committed. I read it with the utmost attention;
but before I came to any resolution about the publication, I put the MS. into
the hands of some of those friends whom my Father used to consult on such
occasions, as it would have been rashness and presumption in me to have trusted
to my own partial decision. It was perused by some other persons also, in whose
taste and judgment I have the greatest confidence; by all of them I was
encouraged to offer it to the public, as a fragment curious and interesting in
itself, and not inferior to any of my Father's Works.

When I determined to follow that advice, it was a circumstance of great weight
with me, that as I never could think myself at liberty to destroy those papers
which my Father had thought worthy of being preserved, and as I could not know
into whose hands they might hereafter fall, I considered it as certain that
they would be published at some future period, when they might meet with an
Editor, who, not being actuated by the same sacred regard for the reputation of
the Author which I feel, might make alterations and additions, and obtrude the
whole on the Public as a genuine and authentic work. The MS. is now published,
such as it was left by the Author; nor have I presumed to make any addition,
alteration, or correction whatever.

WM. ROBERTSON.
QUEEN STREET, EDINBURGH, April 1796.
CONTENTS.
SPIRIT of adventure awakened in England by Columbus's discoveries, Page. 17
Expedition from Bristol under the command of Cabot, Page. 19 Discovery of
Newfoundland, Page. 20 Expedition to South America under the command of
Sebastian Cabot, Page. 26 Unsuccessful attempts to discover north west passage
to the Indies, Page. 27 Attempt in search of a north east passage by Sir Hugh
Willoughby, Page. 28 Sir Hugh perishes -- one of his ships winters at
Archangel, Page. 29 The captain visits Moscow, Page. 30 Trade opened with
Russia, Page. 31 Communication with India by land, Page. 32 Expedition to the
coast of Africa, Page. 32 Three attempts to discover north west passage by
Frobisher, Page. 36 Sir Francis Drake sails round the world, Page. 37 First
project of a colony in North America, Page. 39 First charter granted by the
Crown to a colony, 40 First expedition sails to settle a colony under Sir H.
Gilbert, Page. 42 Sir H. Gilbert perishes without effecting the plan and Sir
Walter Ralegh resumes it, Page. 43 Discovery of Virginia, Page. 44 Colony
established in Virginia by Sir Richard Greenville, Page. 45 The colony in
danger of perishing by famine return to England, Page. 47 Use of tobacco
introduced in England, Page. 48 Ralegh's second attempt to settle a colony in
Virginia, Page. 50 It perishes by famine, Page. 51 First track of a direct
course from England to North America, Page. 55 Consequences of it, Page. 56
Coast of North America divided in two parts, Page. 58 Charters granted to two
companies, Page. 59 Captain Newport with 105 men sails for Virginia, Page. 63
Discovers the Chesapeak Bay and sails up James River, Page. 64 James Town
founded, Page. 65 Colony annoyed by the Indians, and suffers from scarcity,
Page. 66 Capt. Smith called to the command, and restores the prosperity of the
colony, Page. 67 He is taken prisoner by the Indians, and is saved from
execution and released at the intercession of the Princess Pocahuntas, Page. 68
Colonists deceived by the appearance of gold dust, Page. 69 A new charter
granted, Page. 72 Lord Delaware appointed governor, Page. 73 Gates and Summers
dispatched to command till the arrival of Lord Delaware, and cast away on the
island of Bermudas, Page. 74 Anarchy in the colony, and reduced to famine,
Page. 76 Arrival of Lord Delaware, Page. 78 He returns to England, and Sir
Thomas Dale appointed governor, Page. 79 Martial law established, Page. 80 New
Charter, Page. 81 Treaty with the Indians, Page. 82 Mr. Rolfe marries
Pocahuntas, the daughter of an Indian chief, Page. 83 Land in Virginia first
becomes private property, Page. 85 Culture of tobacco introduced, Page. 86 Evil
consequences arising from it, Page. 87 Young women migrate from England to
Virginia, Page. 88 Negroes first introduced, Page. 89 First general assembly,
Page. 89 New constitution, Page. 90 Trade with Holland, Page. 91 General
massacre of the colonists planned by the Indians, and executed with cruelty on
most of the settlements, Page. 93 Bloody war with the Indians, Page. 96
Proprietors in England divided by factions, Page. 98 King James institutes an
enquiry into their conduct, Page. 99 They are required to surrender their
charter and refuse, Page. 101 Their trial and dissolution, Page. 103 Defects in
the first constitution of the colonies, Page. 104 Temporary council appointed
for the government of Virginia, Page. 106 Arbitrary government of Charles I.
Page. 107 Monopoly of tobacco by government, Page. 108 Sir John Harvey, the
governor, seized on by the colonists, and sent prisoner to England, Page. 109
He is reinstated in his government by the King, Page. 110 Sir W. Berkeley
appointed governor, and new privileges granted, Page. 111 Attachment of
Virginia to the royal cause, Page. 114 The Parliament makes war on Virginia,
and it is compelled to acknowledge the Commonwealth, Page. 115 Restraints on
the trade of the colony which dissatisfy the colonists, Page. 116 The
Virginians the first to acknowledge Charles II. Page. 117 Their loyalty ill
rewarded, Page. 118 Navigation act, Page. 119 Effects of the act, Page. 121
Colonists remonstrate against the act, Page. 122 Colony attacked by the
Indians, Page. 123 Insurrection in Virginia, Page. 124 The governor and council
obliged to fly, Page. 127 Death of Bacon the leader of the insurrection, Page.
129 An assembly called, Page. 130 Plymouth company, Page. 133 First attempts to
settle on the northern coast, Page. 134 First called New England, Page. 135
First attempt to settle New England unsuccessful, Page. 135 Religious disputes
give rise to the colony of New England, Page. 136 Consequence of the difference
of sentiment respecting church government at the reformation, Page. 137
Religious persecution, Page. 139 Industry of the Puritans in disseminating
their sentiments, Page. 141 Separation of the Puritans from the church, Page.
143 Origin of the Brownists, Page. 144 They take refuge in Holland, Page. 146
They remove from thence to America, Page. 147 First attempt to settle
Massachusetts, Page. 148 Settlement of New Plymouth, Page. 149 Plan of
government, Page. 150 Community of goods, Page. 151 Grand council of Plymouth
appointed, Page. 152 Project of a new colony, Page. 153 Charter to
Massachusetts, Page. 155 Establishment of the Puritan church at Salem, Page.
158 Intolerance of the Puritan church, Page. 159 Emigrations from England
increased by the intolerance there, Page. 162 Transfer of the charter of
Massachusetts, Page. 164 J. Winthrop appointed governor by the people and the
colony extended, Page. 166 None but members of the Puritan church admitted as
freemen, or eligible to any office, and the consequences thereof, Page. 167
Indian territories depopulated by the small pox, Page. 169 The freemen meet the
general court by representatives, Page. 169 Extent of political liberty assumed
by the assembly, Page. 170 Spirit of fanaticism increases, Page. 171 Antinomian
sect, Page. 173 Their doctrines condemned by a general synod, Page. 174
Settlement of Providence and Rhode Island, Page. 175 Moderation of the Puritans
in Rhode Island, Page. 176 Origin of the colony of Connecticut, Page. 177 Of
New Hampshire and Main, Page. 179 The encroachments of the English resisted by
the Indians, Page. 182 War with the Pequod tribes, Page. 183 Religious
purification of the army, Page. 184 Defeat and massacre of the Indians, Page.
185 Cruelties exercised against the Indians, Page. 186 Emigrations from England
prohibited, and ^iver Cromwell and others prevented sailing, Page. 187 Colony
of Massachusetts sued at law and its rights forfeited, Page. 188 Conduct of the
Long Parliament toward New England, Page. 189 Confederacy of the New England
colonies, Page. 192 The dissenters from the Puritan church remonstrate against
their deprivation of rights as freemen and christians, and are imprisoned, etc.
Page. 193 Rights of coining assumed, Page. 194 Cromwell patronises New England,
and proposes to transport the colonists to Jamaica, which they decline, Page.
195
THE HISTORY OF AMERICA, BOOKS IX. AND X.

THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IX.
THE dominions of Great Britain in America are next in extent to those of
Spain. Its acquisitions there are a recompense due to those enterprising
talents which prompted the English to enter early on the career of discovery,
and to pursue it with persevering ardour. England was the second nation that
ventured to visit the New World. The account of Columbus's successful voyage
filled all Europe with astonishment and admiration. But in England it did
something more; it excited a vehement desire of emulating the glory of Spain,
and of aiming to obtain some share in those advantages which were expected in
this new field opened to national activity. The attention of the English court
had been turned toward the discovery of unknown countries, by its negotiation
with Bartholemew Columbus. Henry VII. having listened to his propositions with
a more favorable ear than could have been expected from a cautious,
distrustful prince, averse by habit as well as by temper to new and hazardous
projects, he was more easily induced to approve of a voyage for discovery,
proposed by some of his own subjects, soon after the return of Christopher
Columbus.

But though the English had spirit to form this scheme, they had not, at that
period, attained to such skill in navigation as qualified them for carrying it
into execution. From the inconsiderate ambition of its monarchs, the nation had
long wasted its genius and activity in pernicious and ineffectual efforts to
conquer France. When this ill directed ardour began to abate, the fatal contest
between the houses of York and Lancaster, turned the arms of one half of the
kingdom against the other, and exhausted the vigor of both. During the course
of two centuries, while industry and commerce were making gradual progress,
both in the south and north of Europe, the English continued so blind to the
advantages of their own situation, that they hardly began to bend their
thoughts toward those objects and pursuits, to which they are indebted for
their present opulence and power. While the trading vessels of Italy, Spain,
and Portugal, as well as those of the Hans Towns, visited the most remote ports
in Europe, and carried on an active intercourse with its various nations, the
English did little more than creep along their own coasts, in small barks,
which conveyed the productions of one country to another. Their commerce was
almost wholly passive. Their wants were supplied by strangers; and whatever
necessary or luxury of life their own country did not yield, was imported in
foreign bottoms. The Cross of St. George was seldom displayed beyond the
precincts of the narrow seas. Hardly any English ship traded with Spain or
Portugal, before the beginning of the fifteenth century; and half a century
more elapsed before the English mariners became so adventurous as to enter the
Mediterranean.

In this infancy of navigation, Henry could not commit the conduct of an
armament, destined to explore unknown regions, to his own subjects. He invested
Giovanni Gaboto, a Venetian adventurer, who had settled in Bristol, with the
chief command; and issued a commission to him and his three sons, empowering
them to sail, under the banner of England, toward the east, north, or west, in
order to discover countries unoccupied by any Christian state; to take
possession of them in his name, and to carry on an exclusive trade with the
inhabitants, under condition of paying a fifth part of the free profit on every
voyage to the crown. This commission was granted on March 5th, 1495, in less
than two years after the return of Columbus from America Hakluyt, iii. 4.
. But Cabot (for that is the name he assumed in England, and by which he is
best known) did not set out on his voyage for two years. He, together with his
second son Sebastian, embarked at Bristol, (May 1497) on board a ship furnished
by the king, and was accompanied by four small barks, fitted out by merchants
of that city.

As in that age the most eminent navigators, formed by the instructions of
Columbus, or animated by his example, were guided by ideas derived from his
superior knowledge and experience, Cabot had adopted the system of that great
man, concerning the probability of opening a new and shorter passage to the
East Indies, by holding a western course. The opinion which Columbus had
formed, with respect to the islands which he had discovered, was universally
received. They were supposed to lie contiguous to the great continent of India,
and to constitute a part of the vast countries comprehended under that general
name. Cabot, accordingly, deemed it probable, that by steering to the
north-west, he might reach India by a shorter course than that which Columbus
had taken, and hoped to fall in with the coast of Cathay, or China, of whose
fertility and opulence the descriptions of Marco Polo had excited high ideas.
After sailing for some weeks due west, and nearly on the parallel of the port
from which he took his departure, he discovered a large island, which he called
Prima Vista, and his sailors, Newfoundland; and in a few days he descried a
smaller isle, to which he gave the name of St. John. (June 24.) He landed on
both these, made some observations on their soil and productions, and brought
off three of the natives. Continuing his course westward, he soon reached the
continent of North America, and sailed along it from the fifty-sixth to the
thirty-eighth degree of latitude, from the coast of Labrador to that of
Virginia. As his chief object was to discover some inlet that might open a
passage to the west, it does not appear that he landed any where during this
extensive run; and he returned to England, without attempting either settlement
or conquest in any part of that continent. Monson's Naval Tracts, in
Churchill's Collect. iii. 211.


If it had been Henry's purpose to prosecute the object of the commission given
by him to Cabot, and to take possession of the countries which he had
discovered, the success of this voyage must have answered his most sanguine
expectations. His subjects were, undoubtedly, the first Europeans who had
visited that part of the American continent, and were entitled to whatever
right of property prior discovery is supposed to confer. Countries which
stretched in an uninterrupted course through such a large portion of the
temperate zone, opened a prospect of settling to advantage under mild climates,
and in a fertile soil. But by the time that Cabot returned to England, he found
both the state of affairs and the king's inclination unfavourable to any
scheme, the execution of which would have required tranquillity and leisure.
Henry was involved in a war with Scotland, and his kingdom was not yet fully
composed, after the commotion excited by a formidable insurrection of his own
subjects in the west. An ambassador from Ferdinand of Arragon was then in
London; and as Henry set a high value upon the friendship of that monarch, for
whose character he professed much admiration, perhaps from its similarity to
his own, and was endeavoring to strengthen their union, by negociating the
marriage which afterward took place between his eldest son and the princess
Catharine, he was cautious of giving any offense to a prince, jealous to excess
of all his rights. From the position of the islands and continent which Cabot
had discovered, it was evident that they lay within the limits of the ample
donative which the bounty of Alexander VI. had conferred upon Ferdinand and
Isabella. No person, in that age, questioned the validity of a Papal grant; and
Ferdinand was not of a temper to relinquish any claim to which he had a shadow
of title. Submission to the authority of the Pope, and deference for an ally
whom he courted, seem to have concurred with Henry's own situation, in
determining him to abandon a scheme, in which he had engaged with some degree
of ardour and expectation. No attempt toward discovery was made in England
during the remainder of his reign; and Sebastian Cabot, finding no
encouragement for his active talents there, entered into the service of Spain
Some schemes of discovery seem to have been formed in England toward the
beginning of the sixteenth century. But as there is no other memorial of them,
than what remains in a patent granted by the king to the adventurers, it is
probable that they were feeble or abortive projects, If any attempt had been
made in consequence of this patent, it would not have escaped the knowledge of
a comp^ler so industrious and inquisitive as Hakluyt. In his patent, Henry
restricts the adventurers from encroaching on the countries discovered by the
kings of Portugal, or any other prince in confederacy with England. Rymer's
Foedera, vol. xiii. p. 37*
.

This is the most probable account of the sudden cessation of Henry's activity,
after such success in his first essay as might have encouraged him to
persevere. The advantages of commerce, as well as its nature, were so little
understood in England about this period, that by an act of parliament in the
year 1488, the taking of interest for the use of money was prohibited under
severe penalties. 3 Hen. VII. c. 5.
And by another law, the profit arising from dealing in bills of exchange was
condemned as favoring of usury. 3 Hen. VII. c. 6.
It is not surprising, then, that no great effort should be made to extend
trade, by a nation whose commercial ideas were still so crude and illiberal.
But it is more difficult to discover what prevented this scheme of Henry VII.
from being resumed during the reigns of his son and grandson; and to give any
reason why no attempt was made, either to explore the northern continent of
America more fully, or to settle in it. Henry VIII. was frequently at open
enmity with Spain; the value of the Spanish acquisitions in America had become
so well known, as might have excited his desire to obtain some footing in those
opulent regions; and during a considerable part of his reign, the prohibitions
in a papal bull would not have restrained him from making encroachment upon the
Spanish dominions. But the reign of Henry was not favorable to the progress of
discovery. During one period of it, the active part which he took in the
affairs of the continent, and the vigor with which he engaged in the contest
between the two mighty rivals, Charles V. and Francis I. gave full occupation
to the enterprising spirit both of the king and of his nobility. During another
period of his administration, his famous controversy with the court of Rome
kept the nation in perpetual agitation and suspense. Engrossed by those
objects, neither the king nor the nobles had inclination or leisure to turn
their attention to new pursuits; and without their patronage and aid, the
commercial part of the nation was too inconsiderable to make any effort of
consequence. Though England, by its total separation from the church of Rome,
soon after the accession of Edward VI. disclaimed that authority, which, by its
presumptuous partition of the globe between two favorite nations,
circumscribed the activity of every other state within very narrow limits, yet
a feeble minority, distracted with faction, was not a juncture for forming
schemes of doubtful success and remote utility. The bigotry of Mary, and her
marriage with Philip, disposed her to pay a sacred regard to that grant of the
Holy See, which vested in a husband, on whom she doated, an exclusive right to
every part of the New World. Thus, through a singular succession of various
causes, sixty-one years elapsed from the time that the English discovered North
America, during which their monarchs gave little attention to that country
which was destined to be annexed to their crown, and to be a chief source of
its opulence and power.

But though the public contributed little toward the progress of discovery,
naval skill, knowledge of commerce, and a spirit of enterprise, began to spread
among the English. During the reign of Henry VIII. several new channels of
trade were opened, and private adventurers visited remote countries with which
England had formerly no intercourse. Some merchants of Bristol having fitted
out two ships for the southern regions of America, committed the conduct of
them to Sebastian Cabot, who had quitted the service of Spain. He visited
(1516) the coasts of Brasil, and touched at the islands of Hispaniola and
Puerto Rico; and though this voyage seems not to have been beneficial to the
adventurers, it extended the sphere of English navigation, and added to the
national stock of nautical science. Hakluyt, iii. 498.
Though disappointed in their expectations of profit in this first essay, the
merchants were not discouraged. They sent, successively, several vessels from
different ports toward the same quarter, and seem to have carried on an
interloping trade in the Portuguese settlements with success. Hakluyt, iii. 700.
Nor was it only toward the west, that the activity of the English was
directed. Other merchants began to extend their commercial views to the east;
and by establishing an intercourse with several islands in the Archipelago, and
with some of the towns on the coast of Syria, they found a new market for
woollen cloths, (the only manufacture which the nation had begun to cultivate,)
and supplied their countrymen with various productions of the east, formerly
unknown, or received from the Venetians at an exorbitant price. Ibid. ii. 96,
etc.


But the discovery of a shorter passage to the East Indies, by the north-west,
was still the favorite project of the nation, which beheld, with envy, the
vast wealth that flowed into Portugal, from its commerce with those regions.
The scheme was accordingly twice resumed (1527 and 1536) under the long
administration of Henry VIII. first with some slender aid from the king, and
then by private merchants. Both voyages were distastrous and unsuccessful. In
the former one of the ships was lost. In the latter, the stock of provisions
was so ill proportioned to the number of the crew, that although they were but
six months at sea, many perished with hunger, and the survivors were
constrained to support life by feeding on the bodies of their dead companions.
Hakluyt, i, 213, etc. iii. 129.130.


The vigor of the commercial spirit did not relax in the reign of Edward VI.
The great fishery on the banks of Newfoundland became an object of attention;
and from some regulations for the encouragement of that branch of trade, it
seems to have been prosecuted with activity and success. Ibid. iii. 131.
But the prospect of opening a communication with China and the Spice Islands,
by some other route than round the Cape of Good Hope, still continued to allure
the English, more than any scheme of adventure. Cabot, whose opinion was
deservedly of high authority in whatever related to naval enterprise, warmly
urged the English to make another attempt to discover this passage. As it had
been thrice searched for in vain, by steering toward the north-west, he
proposed that a trial should now be made by the north-east; and supported this
advice by such plausible reasons and conjectures, as excited sanguine
expectations of success. Several noblemen and persons of rank, together with
some principal merchants, having associated for this purpose were incorporated,
by a charter from the king, under the title of The Company of Merchant
Adventurers for the Discovery of Regions, Dominions, Islands, and Places
unknown. Cabot, who was appointed governor of this company, (1553) soon fitted
out two ships and a bark, furnished with instructions in his own hand, which
discover the great extent both of his naval skill and mercantile sagacity.

Sir Hugh Willoughby, who was entrusted with the command, stood directly (May
10) northwards along the coast of Norway, and doubled the North Cape. But in
that tempestous ocean, his small squadron was separated in a violent storm.
Willoughby's ship and the bark took refuge in an obscure harbor in a desert
part of Russian Lapland, where he and all his companions were frozen to death.
Richard Chancelour, the captain of the other vessel was more fortunate; he
entered the White Sea, and wintered in safety at Archangel. Though no vessel of
any foreign nation had ever visited that quarter of the globe before, the
inhabitants received their new visitors with an hospitality which would have
done honor to a more polished people. The English learned there, that this was
a province of a vast empire, subject to the Great Duke or Czar of Muscovy, who
resided in a great city twelve hundred miles from Archangel. Chancelour, with a
spirit becoming an officer employed in an expedition for discovery, did not
hesitate a moment about the part which he ought to take, and set out for that
distant capital. On his arrival in Moscow, he was admitted to audience, and
delivered a letter which the captain of each ship had received from Edward VI.
for the sovereign of whatever country they should discover, to John Vasilowitz,
who at that time filled the Russian throne. John, though he ruled over his
subjects with the cruelty and caprice of a barbarous despot, was not destitute
of political sagacity. He instantly perceived the happy consequences that might
flow from opening an intercourse between his dominions and the western nations
of Europe; and, delighted with the fortunate event to which he was indebted for
this unexpected benefit, he treated Chancelour with great respect; and, by a
letter to the king of England, (Feb. 1554) invited his subjects to trade in the
Russian dominions, with ample promises of protection and favor. Hakluyt, i.
226, etc.


Chancelour, on his return, found Mary seated on the English throne. The
success of this voyage, the discovery of a new course of navigation, the
establishment of commerce with a vast empire, the name of which was then hardly
known in the west, and the hope of arriving, in this direction, at those
regions which had been so long the object of desire, excited a wonderful ardour
to prosecute the design with greater vigor. Mary, implicitly guided by her
husband in every act of administration, was not unwilling to turn the
commercial activity of her subjects toward a quarter, where it could not
excite the jealousy of Spain, by encroaching on its possessions in the New
World. She wrote to John Vasilowitz in the most respectful terms, courting his
friendship. She confirmed the charter of Edward VI. empowered Chancelour, and
two agents appointed by the Company, to negociate with the Czar in her name;
and according to the spirit of that age, she granted an exclusive right of
trade with Russia to the Corporation of Merchant Adventurers. Hakluyt. i, 358.
etc,
In virtue of this, they not only established an active and gainful commerce
with Russia, but, in hopes of reaching China, they pushed their discoveries
eastwards to the coast of Nova Zembla, the straits of Waigatz, and toward the
mouth of the great river Oby. But in those frozen seas, which Nature seems not
to have destined for navigation, they were exposed to innumerable disasters and
met with successive disappointments.

Nor were their attempts to open a communication with India made only in this
channel. They appointed some of their factors to accompany the Russian
caravans, which traveled into Persia by the way of Astracan and the Caspian
Sea, instructing them to penetrate as far as possible toward the east, and to
endeavor, not only to establish a trade with those countries, but to acquire
every information that might afford any light toward the discovery of a
passage to China by the north-east. Hakluyt. i. 301.
Notwithstanding a variety of dangers to which they were exposed in traveling
through so many provinces, inhabited by fierce and licentious nations, some of
these factors rea^hed Bokara, in the province of Chorasan; and though prevented
from advancing farther by the civil wars which desolated the country, they
returned to Europe with some hopes of extending the commerce of the Company
into Persia, and with much intelligence concerning the state of those remote
regions of the east. Ibid. i. 310, etc.


The successful progress of the Merchant Adventurers in discovery, rouzed the
emulation of their countrymen, and turned their activity into new channels. A
commercial intercourse, hitherto unattempted by the English, having been opened
with the coast of Barbary, the specimens which that afforded of the valuable
productions of Africa, invited some enterprising navigators to visit the more
remote provinces of that quarter of the globe. They sailed along its western
shore, traded in different ports on both sides of the Line, and after acquiring
considerable knowledge of those countries, returned with a cargo of golddust,
ivory, and other rich commodities, little known at that time in England. This
commerce with Africa seems to have been pursued with vigor, and was at that
time no less innocent than lucrative; for as the English had then no demand for
slaves, they carried it on for many years, without violating the rights of
humanity. Thus far did the English advance during a period which may be
considered as the infant state of their navigation and commerce; and feeble as
its steps at that time may appear to us, we trace them with an interesting
curiosity, and look back with satisfaction to the early essays of that spirit,
which we now behold in the full maturity of its strength. Even in those first
efforts of the English, an intelligent observer will discern presages of their
future improvement. As soon as the activity of the nation was put in motion, it
took various directions, and exerted itself in each with that steady,
persevering industry, which is the soul and guide of commerce. Neither
discouraged by the hardships and dangers to which they were exposed in those
northern seas which they first attempted to explore, nor afraid of venturing
into the sultry climates of the torrid zone, the English, during the reigns of
Henry VIII. Edward VI. and Mary opened some of the most considerable sources of
their commercial opulence, and gave a beginning to their trade with Turkey,
with Africa, with Russia, and with Newfoundland.

By the Progress which England had already made in navigation and commerce, it
was now prepared for advancing further; and on the accession of Elizabeth to
the throne, a period commenced, extremely auspicious to this spirit which was
rising in the nation. The domestic tranquillity of the kingdom, maintained,
almost without interruption, during the course of a long and prosperous reign;
the peace with foreign nations, that subsisted more than twenty years after
Elizabeth was seated on the throne; the Queen's attentive economy, which
exempted her subjects from the burden of taxes oppressive to trade; the
popularity of her administration; were all favorable to commercial enterprise,
and called it forth into vigorous exertion. The discerning eye of Elizabeth
having early perceived that the security of a kingdom environed by the sea,
depended on its naval force, she began her government with adding to the number
and strength of the royal navy; which, during a factious minority, and a reign
intent on no object but that of suppressing heresy, had been neglected, and
suffered to decay. She filled her arsenals with naval stores; she built several
ships of great force, according to the ideas of that age, and encouraged her
subjects to imitate her example, that they might no longer depend on foreigners
from whom the English had hitherto purchased all vessels of any considerable
burden. Camd. Annals. p. 70. edit. 1615; fol.
By those efforts, the skill of the English artificers was improved, the number
of sailors increased, and the attention of the public turned to the navy, as
the most important national object. Instead of abandoning any of the new
channels of commerce which had been opened in the three preceding reigns, the
English frequented them with greater assiduity, and the patronage of their
sovereign added vigor to all their efforts. In order to secure to them the
continuance of their exclusive trade with Russia, Elizabeth cultivated the
connection with John Vasilowitz, which had been formed by her predecessor, and,
by successive embassies, gained his confidence so thoroughly, that the English
enjoyed that lucrative privilege during his long reign. She encouraged the
Company of Merchant Adventurers, whose monopoly of the Russian trade was
confirmed by act of parliament, Hakluyt, i. 369.
to resume their design of penetrating into Persia by land. Their second
attempt, (1562,) conducted with greater prudence, or undertaken at a more
favorable juncture than the first, was more successful. Their agents arrived
in the Persian Court, and obtained such protection and immunities from the
Shah, that for a course of years they carried on a gainful commerce in his
kingdom; Ibid. i. 344, etc.
and by frequenting the various provinces of Persia, be ame so well acquainted
with the vast riches of the east, as strengthened their design of opening a
more direct intercourse with those fertile regions by sea.

But as every effort to accomplish this by the north-east had proved abortive,
a scheme was formed, under the patronage of the Earl of Warwich, the head of
the enterprising family of Dudley, to make a new attempt, by holding an
opposite course by the north-west. The conduct of this enterprise was committed
to Martin Frobisher, an officer of experience and reputation. In three
successive voyages (1576, 1577, and 1578) he explored the inhospitable coast of
Labrador, and that of Greenland, (to which Elizabeth gave the name of Meta
Incognita,) without discovering any probable appearance of that passage to
India for which he sought. This new disappointment was sensibly felt, and might
have damped the spirit of naval enterprise among the English, if it had not
resumed fresh vigor, amidst the general exultation of the nation, upon the
successful expedition of Francis Drake. That bold navigator, emulous of the
glory which Magellan had acquired by sailing round the globe, formed a scheme
of attempting a voyage, which all Europe had admired for sixty years, without
venturing to follow the Portuguese discoverer in his adventurous course. Drake
undertook this with a feeble squadron, in which the largest vessel did not
exceed a hundred tons, and he accomplished it, with no less credit to himself,
than honor to his country. Even in this voyage, conducted with other views,
Drake seems not to have been inattentive to the favorite object of his
countrymen, the discovery of a new route to India. Before he quitted the
Pacific Ocean, in order to stretch toward the Philippine islands, he ranged
along the coast of California, as high as the lattitude of forty-two degrees
north, in hopes of discovering, on that side, the communication between the two
seas, which had so often been searched for in vain on the other. But this was
the only unsuccessful attempt of Drake. The excessive cold of the climate,
intolerable to men who had long been accustomed to tropical heat, obliged him
to stop short in his progress toward the north; and whether or not there be
any passage from the Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean in that quarter, is a point
still unascertained. Hakluyt, iii. 440. Camd. Annal. 301, etc.


From this period, the English seem to have confided in their own abilities and
courage, as equal to any naval enterprise. They had now visited every region to
which navigation extended in that age, and had rivalled the nation of highest
repute for naval skill in its most splendid exploit. But notwithstanding the
knowledge which they had acquired of the different quarters of the globe, they
had not hitherto attempted any settlement out of their own country. Their
merchants had not yet acquired such a degree, either of wealth or of political
influence, as were requisite toward carrying a scheme of colonization into
execution. Persons of noble birth were destitute of the ideas and information
which might have disposed them to patronize such a design. The growing power of
Spain, however, and the ascendant over the other nations of Europe to which it
had attained under Charles V. and his son, naturally turned the attention of
mankind toward the importance of those settlements in the New World, to which
they were so much indebted for that pre-eminence. The intercourse between Spain
and England, during the reign of Philip and Mary; the resort of the Spanish
nobility to the English court, while Philip resided there; the study of the
Spanish language, which became fashionable; and the translation of several
histories of America into English, diffused gradually through the nation a more
distinct knowledge of the policy of Spain in planting its colonies, and of the
advantages which it derived from them. When hostilities commenced between
Elizabeth and Philip, the prospect of annoying Spain by sea opened a new career
to the enterprising spirit of the English nobility. Almost every eminent leader
of the age aimed at distinguishing himself by naval exploits. That service, and
the ideas connected with it, the discovery of unknown countries, the
establishment of distant colonies, and the enriching of commerce by new
commodities, became familiar to persons of rank.

In consequence of all those concurring causes, the English began seriously to
form plans of settling colonies in those parts of America, which hitherto they
had only visited. The projectors and patrons of these plans were mostly persons
of rank and influence. Among them, Sir Humphry Gilbert of Compton in
Devonshire, ought to be mentioned with the distinction due to the conductor of
the first English colony to America. He had early rendered himself conspicuous
by his military services both in France and Ireland; and having afterward
turned his attention to naval affairs, he published a discourse concerning the
probability of a north-west passage, which discovered no inconsiderable portion
both of learning and ingenuity, mingled with the enthusiasm, the credulity, and
sanguine expectations which incite men to new and hazardous undertakings.
Hakluyt, iii. 11.
With those talents, he was deemed a proper person to be employed in
establishing a new colony, and easily obtained from the Queen (June 11. 1578)
letters patent, vesting in him sufficient powers for this purpose.

As this is the first charter to a colony, granted by the Crown of England, the
articles in it merit particular attention, as they unfold the ideas of that
age, with respect to the nature of such settlements. Elizabeth authorizes him
to discover and take possession of all remote and barbarous lands, unoccupied
by any Christian prince or people. She vests in him, his heirs and assigns, for
ever, the full right of property in the soil of those countries whereof he
shall take possession. She permits such of her subjects, as were willing to
accompany Gilbert in his voyage, to go and settle in the countries which he
shall plant. She empowers him, his heirs and assigns, to dispose of whatever
portion of those lands he shall judge meet to persons settled there, in
fee-simple, according to the laws of England. She ordains, that all the lands
granted to Gilbert shall hold of the Crown of England by homage, on payment of
the fifth part of the gold or silver ore found there. She confers upon him, his
heirs and assigns, the complete jurisdictions and royalties, as well marine as
other, within the said lands and seas thereunto adjoining; and as their common
safety and interest would render good government necessary in their new
settlements, she gave Gilbert, his heirs and assigns, full power to convict,
punish, pardon, govern, and rule, by their good discretion and policy, as well
in causes capital or criminal as civil, both marine and other, all persons who
shall from time to time settle within the said countries, according to such
statutes, laws, and ordinances as shall be by him, his heirs and assigns,
devised and established for their better government. She declared, that all who
settled there should have and enjoy all the privileges of free denizens and
natives of England, any law, custom, or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
And finally, she prohibited all persons from attempting to settle within two
hundred leagues of any place which Sir Humphrey Gilbert, or his associates,
shall have occupied, during the space of six years. Hakluyt, ii^. 135.


With those extraordinary powers, suited to the high notions of authority and
prerogative prevalent in England during the sixteenth century, but very
repugnant to more recent ideas with respect to the rights of free men, who
voluntarily unite to form a colony, Gilbert began to collect associates, and to
prepare for embarkation. His own character, and the zealous efforts of his
half-brother, Walter Ralegh, who, even in his early youth, displayed those
splendid talents, and that undaunted spirit, which create admiration and
confidence, soon procured him a sufficient number of followers. But his success
was not suited either to the sanguine hopes of his countrymen, or to the
expense of his preparations. Two expeditions, both of which he conducted in
person, ended disastrously. In the last, (1580) he himself perished, without
having effected his intended settlement on the continent of America, or
performing any thing more worthy of notice, than the empty formality of taking
possession of the island of Newfoundland, in the name of his sovereign. The
dissensions among his officers; the licentious and ungovernable spirit of some
of his crew; his total ignorance of the countries which he purposed to occupy;
his misfortune in approaching the continent too far toward the north, where
the inhospitable coast of Cape Breton did not invite them to settle; the
shipwreck of his largest vessel; and above all, the scanty provision which the
funds of a private man could make of what was requisite for establishing a new
colony, were the true causes to which the failure of the enterprise must be
imputed, not to any deficiency of abilities or resolution in its leader
Hakluyt, iii. 143, etc.
.

But the miscarriage of a scheme, in which Gilbert had wasted his fortune, did
not discourage Ralegh. He adopted all his brother's ideas; and applying to the
Queen, in whose favor he stood high at that time, he procured a patent, (1584,
March 26) with. jurisdiction and prerogatives as ample as had been granted unto
Gilbert. Hakluyt, iii. 243.
Ralegh, no less eager to execute than to undertake the scheme, instantly
dispatched (April 27) two small vessels, under the command of Amadas and
Barlow, two officers of trust, to visit the countries which he intended to
settle, and to acquire some previous knowledge of their coasts, their soil, and
productions. In order to avoid Gilbert's error, in holding too far north, they
took their course by the Canaries and the West India islands, and approached
the North American continent by the Gulf of Florida. Unfortunately their chief
researches were made in that part of the country now known by the name of North
Carolina, the province in America most destitute of commodious harbors. They
touched first at an island, which they call Wokocon (probably Ocakoke,)
situated on the inlet into Pamplicoe Sound, and then at Raonoke, near the mouth
of Albemarle Sound. In both, they had some intercourse with the natives, whom
they found to be savages, with all the characteristic qualities of uncivilized
life, bravery, aversion to labor, hospitality, a propensity to admire, and a
willingness to exchange their rude productions for English commodities,
especially for iron, or any of the useful metals of which they were destitute.
After spending a few weeks in this traffic, and in visiting some parts of the
adjacent continent, Amadas and Barlow returned to England, (Sept. 15) with two
of the natives, and gave such splendid descriptions of the beauty of the
country, the fertility of the soil, and the mildness of the climate, that
Elizabeth, delighted with the idea of occupying a territory, superior, so far,
to the barren regions toward the north hitherto visited by her subjects,
bestowed on it the name of Virginia; as a memorial that this happy discovery
had been made under a virgin Queen. Hakluyt, iii. 246.


Their report encouraged Ralegh to hasten his preparations for taking
possession of such an inviting property. He fitted out a squadron of seven
small ships, under the command of Sir Richard Greenville, a man of honorable
birth, and of courage so undaunted as to be conspicuous even in that gallant
age. But the spirit of that predatory war which the English carried on against
Spain, mingled with this scheme of settlement; and on this account, as well as
from unacquaintance with a more direct and shorter course to North America,
Greenville sailed by the West India islands. He spent some time in cruising
among these, and in taking prizes; so that it was toward the close of June
before he arrived on the coast of North America. He touched at both the islands
where Amadas and Barlow had landed, and made some excursions into different
parts of the continent round Pamplicoe and Albemarle Sounds. But as,
unfortunately, he did not advance far enough toward the north, to discover the
noble Bay of Chesapeak, he established the colony (August 25) which he left on
the island of Raonoke, an incommodious station, without any safe harbor, and
almost uninhabited. Hakluyt, iii. 251.


This colony consisted only of one hundred and eighty persons, under the
command of Captain Lane, assisted by some men of note, the most distinguished
of whom was Hariot, an eminent mathematician. Their chief employment, during a
residence of nine months, was to obtain a more extensive knowledge of the
country; and their researches were carried on with greater spirit, and reached
farther than could have been expected from a colony so feeble, and in a station
so disadvantageous. But from the same impatience of indigent adventurers to
acquire sudden wealth, which gave a wrong direction to the industry of the
Spaniards in their settlements, the greater part of the English seem to have
considered nothing as worthy of attention but mines of gold and silver. These
they sought for, wherever they came; these they enquired after with unwearied
eagerness. The savages soon discovered the favorite objects which allured
them, and artfully amused them with so many tales concerning pearl fisheries,
and rich mines of various metals, that Lane and his companions wasted their
time and activity in the chimerical pursuit of these, instead of laboring to
raise provisions for their own subsistence. On discovering the deceit of the
Indians, they were so much exasperated, that from expostulations and
reproaches, they proceeded to open hostility (1586). The supplies of provisions
which they had been accustomed to receive from the natives were of course
withdrawn. Through their own negligence, no other precaution had been taken for
their support. Ralegh, having engaged in a scheme too expensive for his narrow
funds, had not been able to send them that recruit of stores with which
Greenville had promised to furnish them early in the spring. The colony,
reduced to the utmost distress, and on the point of perishing with famine, was
preparing to disperse into different districts of the country in quest of food,
(June 1) when Sir Francis Drake appeared with his fleet, returning from a
successful expedition against the Spaniards in the West Indies. A scheme which
he formed, of furnishing Lane and his associates with such supplies as might
enable them to remain with comfort in their station, was disappointed by a
sudden storm, in which a small vessel that he destined for their service was
dashed to pieces; and as he could not supply them with another, at their joint
request, as they were worn out with fatigue and famine, he carried them home to
England (June 19.) Hakluyt, iii. 255. Camd. Annal. ^87.


Such was the inauspicious beginning of the English settlements in the New
World; and after exciting high expectations, this first attempt produced no
effect but that of affording a more complete knowledge of the country; as it
enabled Hariot, a man of science and observation, to describe its soil,
climate, productions, and the manners of its inhabitants, with a degree of
accuracy which merits no inconsiderable praise, when compared with the childish
and mavelous tales published by several of the early visitants of the New
World. There is another consequence of this abortive colony important enough to
entitle it to a place in history. Lane and his associates, by their constant
intercourse with the Indians, had acquired a relish for their favorite
enjoyment of smoking tobacco; to the use of which, the credulity of that people
not only ascribed a thousand imaginary virtues, but their superstition
considered the plant itself as a gracious gift of the gods, for the solace of
human kind, and the most acceptable offering which man can present to heaven.
Harlot ap. Hakluyt, iii. 271. De Bry. America, Pars i
They brought with them a specimen of this new commodity to England, and taught
their countrymen the method of using it; which Ralegh, and some young men of
fashion, fondly adopted. From imitation of them, from love of novelty, and from
the favorable opinion of its salutary qualities entertained by several
physicians, the practice spread among the English. The Spaniards and Portuguese
had, previous to this, introduced it in other parts of Europe. This habit of
taking tobacco gradually extended from the extremities of the north to those of
the south, and in one form or other seems to be equally grateful to the
inhabitants of every climate; and by a singular caprice of the human species,
no less inexplicable than unexampled, (so bewitching is the acquired taste for
a weed of no manifest utility, and at first not only unpleasant, but nauseous,)
that it has become almost as universal as the demands of those appetites
originally implanted in our nature. Smoking was the first mode of taking
tobacco in England; and we learn from the comic writers toward the close of
the sixteenth century and the beginning of the seventeenth, that this was
deemed one of the accomplishments of a man of fashion and spirit.

A few days after Drake departed from Roanoke, a small bark, dispatched by
Ralegh with a supply of stores for the colony, landed at the place where the
English had settled; but on finding it deserted by their countrymen, they
returned to England. The bark was hardly gone, when Sir Richard Greenville
appeared with three ships. After searching in vain for the colony which he had
planted, without being able to learn what had befallen it, he left fifteen of
his crew to keep possession of the island. This handful of men was soon
overpowered and cut in pieces by the savages. Hakluyt, iii. 265.283.


Though all Ralegh's efforts to establish a colony in Virginia had hitherto
proved abortive, and had been defeated by a succession of disasters and
disappointments, neither his hopes nor resources were exhausted. Early in the
following year, (1587) he fitted out three ships, under the command of Captain
John White, who carried thither a colony more numerous than that which had been
settled under Lane. On their arrival in Virginia, after viewing the face of the
country covered with one continued forest, which to them appeared an
uninhabited wild, as it was occupied only by a few scattered tribes of savages,
they discovered that they were destitute of many things which they deemed
essentially necessary toward their subsistence in such an uncomfortable
situation; and, with one voice, requested White, their commander, to return to
England, as the person among them most likely to solicit, with efficacy, the
supply on which depended the existence of the colony. White landed in his
native country at a most unfavourable season for the negotiation which he had
undertaken. He found the nation in universal alarm at the formidable
preparations of Philip II. to invade England, and collecting all its force to
oppose the fleet to which he had arrogantly given the name of the Invincible
Armada. Ralegh, Greenville, and all the most zealous patrons of the new
settlement, were called to act a distinguished part in the operations of a year
(1588) equally interesting and glorious to England. Amidst danger so imminent,
and during a contest for the honor of their sovereign and the independence of
their country, it was impossible to attend to a less important and remote
object. The unfortunate colony in Roanoke received no supply, and perished
miserably by famine, or by the unrelenting cruelty of those barbarians by whom
they were surrounded.

During the remainder of Elizabeth's reign, the scheme of establishing a colony
in Virginia was not resumed. Ralegh, with a most aspiring mind and
extraordinary talents, enlightened by knowledge no less uncommon, had the
spirit and the defects of a projector. Allured by new objects, and always
giving the preference to such as were most splendid and arduous, he was apt to
engage in undertaking^ so vast and so various, as to be far beyond his power of
accomplishing. He was now intent on peopling and improving a large district of
country in Ireland, of which he had obtained a grant from the Queen. He was a
deep adventurer in the scheme of fitting out a powerful armament against Spain,
in order to establish Don Antonio on the throne of Portugal. He had begun to
form his favorite, but visionary plan, of penetrating into the province of
Guiana, where he fondly dreamed of taking possession of inexhaustible wealth,
flowing from the richest mines in the New World. Amidst this multiplicity of
projects, of such promising appearance, and recommended by novelty, he
naturally became cold toward his ancient and hitherto unprofitable scheme of
settling a colony in Virginia, and was easily induced to assign his right of
property in that country, which he had never visited, together with all the
privileges contained in his patent, to Sir Thomas Smith, and a company of
merchants in London (March, 1596.) This company, satisfied with a paltry
traffic carried on by a few small barks, made no attempt to take possession of
the country. Thus, after a period of a hundred and six years from the time that
Cabot discovered North America, in the name of Henry VII. and of twenty years
from the time that Ralegh planted the first colony, there was not a single
Englishman settled there at the demise of Queen Elizabeth, in the year one
thousand six hundred and three.

I have already explained the causes of this, during the period previous to the
accession of Elizabeth. Other causes produced the same effect under her
administration. Though for one half of her reign England was engaged in no
foreign war, and commerce enjoyed that perfect security which is friendly to
its progress; though the glory of her latter years gave the highest tone of
elevation and vigor to the national spirit; the Queen herself, from her
extreme parsimony, and her aversion to demand extraordinary supplies of her
subjects, was more apt to restrain than to second the ardent genius of her
people. Several of the most splendid enterprises in her reign were concerted
and executed by private adventurers. All the schemes for colonization were
carried on by the funds of individuals, without any public aid. Even the
felicity of her government was adverse to the establishment of remote colonies.
So powerful is the attraction of our native soil, and such our fortunate
partiality to the laws and manners of our own country, that men seldom choose
to abandon it, unless they be driven away by oppression, or allured by vast
prospects of sudden wealth. But the provinces of America in which the English
attempted to settle, did not, like those occupied by Spain, invite them thither
by any appearance of silver or golden mines. All their hopes of gain were
distant; and they saw that nothing could be earned but by persevering exertions
of industry. The maxims of Elizabeth's administration were, in their general
tenor, so popular, as did not force her subjects to emigrate, in order to
escape from the heavy or vexatious hand of power. It seems to have been with
difficulty that these slender bands of planters were collected, on which the
writers of that age bestow the name of the first and second Virginian colonies.
The fullness of time for English colonization was not yet arrived.

But the succession of the Scottish line to the crown of England hastened its
approach. James was hardly seated on the throne before he discovered his
pacific intentions, and he soon terminated the long war which had been carried
on between Spain and England, by an amicable treaty. From that period,
uninterrupted tranquillity continued during his reign. Many persons of high
rank, and of ardent ambition, to whom the war with Spain had afforded constant
employment, and presented alluring prospects, not only of fame but of wealth,
soon became so impatient of languishing at home without occupation or object,
that their invention was on the stretch to find some exercise for their
activity and talents. To both these, North America seemed to open a new field,
and schemes of carrying colonies thither became more general and more popular.

A voyage, undertaken by Bartholemew Gosnold in the last year of the Queen,
facilitated, as well as encouraged, the execution of these schemes. He sailed
from Falmouth in a small bark, with thirty two men. Instead of following former
navigators in their unnecessary circuit by the West India isles and the Gulf of
Florida, Gosnold steered due west, as nearly as the winds would permit, and was
the first English commander who reached America by this shorter and more direct
course. That part of the continent which he first descried was a promontory in
the province now called Massachusetts Bay, to which he gave the name of Cape
Cod. Holding along the coast, as it stretched toward the south-west, he
touched at two islands, one of which he called Martha's Vineyard, the other
Elizabeth's Island; and visited the adjoining continent, and traded with its
inhabitants. He and his companions were so much delighted every where with the
inviting aspect of the country, that notwithstanding the smallness of their
number, a part of them consented to remain there. But when they had leisure to
reflect upon the fate of former settlers in America, they retracted a
resolution formed in the first warmth of their admiration; and Gosnold returned
to England in less than four months from the time of his departure. Purchase,
iv. p. 1647.


This voyage, however inconsiderable it may appear, had important effects. The
English now discovered the aspect of the American continent to be extremely
inviting far to the north of the place where they had formerly attempted to
settle. The coast of a vast country, stretching through the most desirable
climates, lay before them. The richness of its virgin soil promised a certain
recompense to their industry. In its interior provinces unexpected sources of
wealth might open, and unknown objects of commerce might be found. Its distance
from England was diminished almost a third part, by the new course which
Gosnold had pointed out. Plans for establishing colonies began to be formed in
different parts of the kingdom; and before these were ripe for execution, one
small vessel was sent out by the merchants of Bristol, another by the Earl of
Southampton and Lord Arundel of Wardour, in order to learn whether Gosnold's
account of the country was to be considered as a just representation of its
state, or as the exaggerated description of a fond discoverer. Both returned
with a full confirmation of his veracity, and with the addition of so many new
circumstances in favor of the country, acquired by a more extensive view of
it, as greatly increased the desire of planting it.

The most active and efficacious promoter of this was Richard Hakluyt,
prebendary of Westminster, to whom England is more indebted for its American
possessions than to any man of that age. Formed under a kinsman of the same
name, eminent for naval and commercial knowledge, he imbibed a similar taste,
and applied early to the study of geography and navigation. These favorite
sciences engrossed his attention, and to diffuse a relish for them was the
great object of his life. In order to excite his countrymen to naval
enterprise, by flattering their national vanity, he published, in the year one
thousand five hundred and eighty nine, his valuable collection of voyages and
discoveries made by Englishmen. In order to supply them with what information
might be derived from the experience of the most successful foreign navigators,
he translated some of the best accounts of the progress of the Spaniards and
Portuguese in their voyages both to the East and West Indies, into the English
tongue. He was consulted with respect to many of the attempts toward discovery
or colonization during the latter part of Elizabeth's reign. He corresponded
with the officers who conducted them, directed their researches to proper
objects, and published the history of their exploits. By the zealous endeavors
of a person, equally respected by men of rank and men of business, many of both
orders formed an association to establish colonies in America, and petitioned
the king for the sanction of his authority to warrant the execution of their
plans.

James, who prided himself on his profound skill in the science of government,
and who had turned his attention to consider the advantages which might be
derived from colonies, at a time when he patronised a scheme for planting them
in some of the ruder provinces of his ancient kingdom, with a view of
introducing industry and civilization there, Hist. of Scotland, ii. 239.
was now no less fond of directing the active genius of his English subjects,
toward occupations not repugnant to his own pacific maxims, and listened with
a favorable ear to their application. But as the extent as well as value of
the American continent began now to be better known, a grant of the whole of
such a vast region to any one body of men, however respectable, appeared to him
an act of impolitic and profuse liberality. For this reason, he divided that
portion of North America, which stretches from the thirty-fourth to the
forty-fifth degree of latitude, into two districts, nearly equal; the one
called the first or south colony of Virginia, the other, the second or north
colony. He authorized (1606, April 10) Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers,
Richard Hakluyt, and their associates, mostly resident in London, to settle any
part of the former which they should choose, and vested in them a right of
property to the land extending along the coast fifty miles on each side of the
place of their first habitation, and reaching into the interior country a
hundred miles. The latter district he allotted, as the place of settlement, to
sundry knights, gentlemen, and merchants of Bristol, Plymouth, and other parts
in the west of England, with a similar grant of territory. Neither the monarch
who issued this charter, nor his subjects who received it, had any conception
that they were proceeding to lay the foundation of mighty and opulent states.
What James granted was nothing more than a simple charter of corporation to a
trading company, empowering the members of it to have a common seal, and to act
as a body politic. But as the object for which they associated was new, the
plan established for the administration of their affairs was uncommon. Instead
of the power usually granted to corporations, of electing officers and framing
bylaws for the conduct of their own operations, the supreme government of the
colonies to be settled, was vested in a council resident in England, to be
named by the king, according to such laws and ordinances as should be given
under his sign manual; and the subordinate jurisdiction was committed to a
council resident in America, which was likewise to be nominated by the king,
and to act conformably to his instructions. To this important clause, which
regulated the form of their constitution, was added, the concession of several
immunities, to encourage persons to settle in the intended colonies. Some of
these were the same which had been granted to Gilbert and Ralegh; such as the
securing to the emigrants and their descendants all the rights of denizens, in
the same manner as if they had remained or had been born in England; and
granting them the privilege of holding their lands in America by the freest and
least burdensome tenure. Others were more favorable than those granted by
Elizabeth. He permitted whatever was necessary for the sustenance or commerce
of the new colonies to be exported from England, during the space of seven
years, without paying any duty; and as a farther incitement to industry, he
granted them liberty of trade with other nations, and appropriated the duty to
be levied on foreign commodities, for twenty-one years, as a fund for the
benefit of the colony. Stith. Hist. of Virginia, p. 35. Append. p. 1. Purchase,
v. 1683.


In this singular charter, the contents of which have been little attended to
by the historians of America, some articles are as unfavourable to the rights
of the colonists, as others are to the interest of the parent state. By placing
the legislative and executive powers in a council nominated by the crown, and
guided by its instructions, every person settling in America, seems to be
bereaved of the noblest privilege of a free man; by the unlimited permission of
trade with foreigners, the parent state is deprived of that exclusive commerce
which has been deemed the chief advantage resulting from the establishment of
colonies. But in the infancy of colonization, and without the guidance of
observation or experience, the ideas of men with respect to the mode of forming
new settlements, were not fully unfolded, or properly arranged. At a period
when they could not foresee the future grandeur and importance of the
communities which they were about to call into existence, they were ill
qualified to concert the best plan for governing them. Besides, the English of
that age, accustomed to the high prerogative and arbitrary rule of their
monarchs, were not animated with such liberal sentiments, either concerning
their own personal or political rights, as have become familiar in the more
mature and improved state of their constitution.

Without hesitation or reluctance the proprietors of both colonies prepared to
execute their respective plans; and under the authority of a charter, which
would now be rejected with disdain, as a violent invasion of the sacred and
inalienable rights of liberty, the first permanent settlements of the English
in America were established. From this period, the progress of the two
provinces of Virginia and New England form a regular and connected story. The
former in the south, and the latter in the north, may be considered as the
original and parent colonies; in imitation of which, and under whose shelter,
all the others have been successively planted and reared.

The first attempts to occupy Virginia and New England were made by very feeble
bodies of emigrants. As these settled, under great disadvantages, among tribes
of savages, and in an uncultivated desert; as they attained gradually, after
long struggles and many disasters, to that maturity of strength, and order of
policy, which entitles them to be considered as respectable states, the history
of their persevering efforts merits particular attention. It will exhibit a
spectacle no less striking than instructive, and presents an opportunity, which
rarely occurs, of contemplating a society in the first moment of its political
existence, and of observing how its spirit forms in its infant state, ^ow its
principles begin to unfold as it advances, and how those characteristic
qualities, which distinguish its maturer age, are successively acquired. The
account of the establishment of the other English colonies, undertaken at
periods when the importance of such possessions was better understood, and
effected by more direct and vigorous exertions of the parent state, is less
interesting. I shall therefore relate the history of the two original colonies
in detail. With respect to the subsequent settlements, some more general
observations concerning the time, the motives, and circumstances of their
establishment, will be sufficient. I begin with the history of Virginia, the
most ancient and most valuable of the British colonies in North America.

Though many persons of distinction became proprietors in the company which
undertook to plant a colony in Virginia, its funds seem not to have been
considerable, and its first effort was certainly extremely feeble. A small
vessel of a hundred tons, and two barks, under the command of Captain Newport,
sailed (Dec. 19) with a hundred and five men, destined to remain in the
country. Some of these were of respectable families, particularly a brother of
the Earl of Northumberland, and several officers who had served with reputation
in the reign of Elizabeth. Newport, I know not for what reason, followed the
ancient course by the West Indies, and did not reach the coast of North America
for four months (1607, April 26). But he approached it with better fortune than
any former navigator; for having been driven, by the violence of a storm, to
the northward of Roanoke, the place of his destination, the first land he
discovered was a promontory which he called Cape Henry, the southern boundary
of the Bay of Chesapeak. The English stood directly into that spacious inlet,
which seemed to invite them to enter; and as they advanced, contemplated, with
a mixture of delight and admiration, that grand reservoir, into which are
poured the waters of all the vast rivers, which not only diffuse fertility
through that district of America, but open the interior parts of the country to
navigation, and render a commercial intercourse more extensive and commodious
than in any other region of the globe. Newport, keeping along the southern
shore, sailed up a river, which the natives called Powhatan, and to which he
gave the name of James-River. After viewing its banks, during a run of above
forty miles from its mouth, they all concluded that a country, where safe and
convenient harbors seemed to be numerous, would be a more suitable station for
a trading colony, than the shoally and dangerous coast to the south, on which
their countrymen had formerly settled. Here then they determined to abide; and
having chosen a proper spot for their residence, they gave this infant
settlement the name of James-Town, which it still retains; and though it has
never become either populous or opulent, it can boast of being the most ancient
habitation of the English in the New World. But however well-chosen the
situation might be, the members of the colony were far from availing themselves
of its advantages. Violent animosities had broke out among some of their
leaders, during their voyage to Virginia. These did not subside on their
arrival there. The first deed of the council, which assumed the government in
virtue of a commission brought from England under the seal of the company, and
opened on the day after they landed, was an act of injustice. Captain Smith,
who had been appointed a member of the council, was excluded from his seat at
the board, by the mean jealousy of his colleagues, and not only reduced to the
condition of a private man, but of one suspected and watched by his superiors.
This diminution of his influence, and restraint on his activity, was an
essential injury to the colony, which at that juncture stood in need of the aid
of both. For soon after they began to settle, the English were involved in a
war with the natives, partly by their own indiscretion, and partly by the
suspicion and ferocity of those barbarians. And although the Indians, scattered
over the countries adjacent to James-River, were divided into independent
tribes, so extremely feeble that hardly one of them could muster above two
hundred warriors, Purchase, vol. iv. 1692. Smith's Travels, p. 23.
they teazed and annoyed an infant colony by their incessant hostilities. To
this was added a calamity still more dreadful; the stock of provisions left for
their subsistence, on the departure of their ships for England, (June 15) was
so scanty, and of such bad quality, that a scarcity, approaching almost to
absolute famine, soon followed. Such poor unwholesome fare brought on diseases,
the violence of which was so much increased by the sultry heat of the climate,
and the moisture of a country covered with wood, that before the beginning of
September, one half of their number died, and most of the survivors were sickly
and dejected. In such trying extremities, the comparative powers of every
individual are discovered and called forth, and each naturally takes that
station, and assumes that ascendant, to which he is entitled by his talents and
force of mind. Every eye was now turned toward Smith, and all willingly
devolved on him that authority, of which they had formerly deprived him. His
undaunted temper, deeply tinctured with the wild romantic spirit characteristic
of military adventures in that age, was peculiarly suited to such a situation.
The vigor of his constitution continued, fortunately, still unimpaired by
disease, and his mind was never apalled by danger. He instantly adopted the
only plan that could save them from destruction. He began by surrounding
James-Town with such rude fortifications, as were a sufficient defense against
the assaults of savages. He then marched, at the head of a small detachment, in
quest of their enemies. Some tribes he gained by caresses and presents, and
procured from them a supply of provisions. Others he attacked with open force;
and defeating them on every occasion, whatever their superiority in numbers
might be, compelled them to impart to him some portion of their winter stores.
As the recompense of all his toils and dangers, he saw abundance and
contentment re-established in the colony, and hoped that he should be able to
maintain them in that happy state, until the arrival of ships from England in
the spring: but in one of his excursions he was surprised by a numerous body of
Indians, and in making his escape from them, after a gallant defense, he sunk
to the neck in a swamp, and was obliged to surrender. Though he knew well what
a dreadful fate awaits the prisoners of savages, his presence of mind did not
forsake him. He showed those who had taken him captive a mariner's compass, and
amused them with so many wonderful accounts of its virtues, as filled them with
astonishment and veneration, which began to operate very powerfully in his
favor. They led him, however, in triumph through various parts of the country,
and conducted him at last to Powhatan, the most considerable Sachim in that
part of Virginia. There the doom of death being pronounced, he was led to the
place of execution, and his head already bowed down to receive the fatal blow,
when that fond attachment of the American women to their European invaders, the
beneficial effects of which the Spaniards often experienced, interposed in his
behalf. The favorite daughter of Powhatan rushed in between him and the
executioner, and, by her entreaties and tears, prevailed on her father to spare
his life. The beneficence of his deliverer, whom the early English writers
dignify with the title of the Princess Pocahuntas, did not terminate here; she
soon after procured his liberty, and sent him from time to time seasonable
presents of provisions. Smith's Travels, p. 44, etc. Purchase, iv. 1704. Stith.
p. 45, etc.


Smith, on his return to James-Town, found the colony reduced to thirty-eight
persons, who, in despair, were preparing to abandon a country which did not
seem destined to be the habitation of Englishmen. He employed caresses,
threats, and even violence, in order to prevent them from executing this fatal
resolution. With difficulty he prevailed on them to defer it so long, that the
succor anxiously expected from England arrived. Plenty was instantly restored;
a hundred new planters were added to their number, and an ample stock of
whatever was requisite for clearing and sowing the ground was delivered to
them. But an unlucky incident turned their attention from that species of
industry which alone could render their situation comfortable. In a small
stream of water that issued from a bank of sand near James-Town, a sediment of
some shining mineral substance, which had some resemblance of gold, was
discovered. At a time when the precious metals were conceived to be the
peculiar and only valuable productions of the New World, when every mountain
was supposed to contain a treasure, and every rivulet was searched for its
golden sands, this appearance was fondly considered as an infallible indication
of a mine. Every hand was eager to dig; large quantities of this glittering
dust were amassed. From some assay of its nature, made by an artist as
unskilful as his companions were credulous, it was pronounced to be extremely
rich. "There was now," (says Smith) no talk, no hope, no work, but dig gold,
wash gold, refine gold. Smith's Travels, p. 53.
With this imaginary wealth the first vessel returning to England was loaded,
while the culture of the land, and every useful occupation, was totally
neglected.

The effects of this fatal delusion were soon felt. Notwithstanding all the
provident activity of Smith, in procuring corn from the natives by traffic or
by force, the colony began to suffer as much as formerly from scarcity of food,
and was wasted by the same distempers. In hopes of obtaining some relief, Smith
proposed, as they had not hitherto extended their researches beyond the
countries contiguous to James-River, to open an intercourse with the more
remote tribes, and to examine into the state of culture and population among
them. The execution of this arduous design he undertook himself, in a small
open boat, with a feeble crew, and a very scanty stock of provisions. He began
his survey at Cape Charles, and in two different excursions, which continued
above four months, he advanced as far as the river Susquehannah, which flows
into the bottom of the Bay. He visited all the countries both on the east and
west shores; he entered most of the considerable creeks; he sailed up many of
the great rivers as far as their falls. He traded with some tribes; he fought
with others; he observed the nature of the territory which they occupied, their
mode of subsistence, the peculiarities in their manners; and left among all a
wonderful admiration either of the beneficence or valor of the English. After
sailing above three thousand miles in a paltry vessel, ill fitted for such an
extensive navigation, during which the hardships to which he was exposed, as
well as the patience with which he endured, and the fortitude with which he
surmounted them, equal whatever is related of the celebrated Spanish
discoverers in their most daring enterprises; he returned to James-Town; he
brought with him an account of that large portion of the American continent now
comprehended in the two provinces of Virginia and Maryland, Smith's Travels, p.
65, etc.
so full and exact, that after the progress of information and research for a
century and a half, his map exhibits no inaccurate view of both countries, and
is the original upon which all subsequent delineations and descriptions have
been formed. Stith, p. 83.


But, whatever pleasing prospect of future benefit might open upon this
complete discovery of a country, formed by nature to be the feat of an
exclusive commerce, it afforded but little relief for their present wants. The
colony still depended for subsistence chiefly on supplies from the natives; as,
after all the efforts of their own industry, hardly thirty acres of ground were
yet cleared so as to be capable of culture. Stith, p. 97.
By Smith's attention, however, the stores of the English were so regularly
filled, that for some time they felt no considerable distress; and at this
juncture a change was made in the constitution of the company, which seemed to
promise an increase of their security and happiness. That supreme direction of
all the company's operations, which the king by his charter had reserved to
himself, discouraged persons of rank or property from becoming members of a
society so dependant on the arbitrary will of the crown. Upon a representation
of this to James, (1609, May 23) he granted them a new charter, with more ample
privileges. He enlarged the boundaries of the colony; he rendered the powers of
the company, as a corporation, more explicit and complete; he abolished the
jurisdiction of the council resident in Virginia; he vested the government
entirely in a council residing in London; he granted to the proprietors of the
company the right of electing the persons who were to compose this council, by
a majority of voices; he authorized this council to establish such laws,
orders, and forms of government and magistracy, for the colony and plantation,
as they in their discretion should think to be fittest for the good of the
adventurers and inhabitants there; he empowered them to nominate a governor to
have the administration of affairs in the colony, and to carry their orders
into execution. Stith. Append. 8.
In consequence of these concessions, the company having acquired the power of
regulating all its own transactions, the number of proprietors increased, and
among them we find the most respectable names in the nation.

The first deed of the new council was to appoint Lord Delaware governor and
captain general of their colony in Virginia. To a person of his rank, those
high-sounding titles could be no allurement; and by his thorough acquaintance
with the progress and state of the settlement, he knew enough of the labor and
difficulty with which an infant colony is reared, to expect any thing but
anxiety and care in discharging the duties of that delicate office. But from
zeal to promote an establishment which he expected to prove so highly
beneficial to his country, he was willing to relinquish all the comforts of an
honorable station, to undertake a long voyage to settle in an uncultivated
region, destitute of every accommodation to which he had been accustomed, and
where he foresaw that toil and trouble and danger awaited him. But as he could
not immediately leave England, the council dispatched Sir Thomas Gates and Sir
George Summers, the former of whom had been appointed lieutenant general, and
the latter admiral, with nine ships and five hundred planters. They carried
with them commissions, by which they were empowered to supersede the
jurisdiction of the former council, to proclaim Lord Delaware governor, and,
until he should arrive, to take the administration of affairs into their own
hands. A violent hurricane separated the vessel in which Gates and Summers had
embarked, from the rest of the fleet, and stranded it on the coast of Bermudas.
The other ships arrived (August 11) safely at James-Town. But the fate of their
commanders was unknown. Their commission for new-modelling the government, and
all other public papers, were supposed to be lost, together with them. The
present form of government, however, was held to be abolished. No legal warrant
could be produced for establishing any other. Smith was not in a condition at
this juncture to assert his own rights, or to act with his wonted vigor. By an
accidental explosion of gunpowder, he had been so miserably scorched and
mangled, that he was incapable of moving, and under the necessity of committing
himself to the guidance of his friends, who carried him aboard one of the ships
returning to England, in hopes that he might recover by more skilful treatment
than he could meet with in Virginia. Purchase, iv. 1734, etc. Smith's Travels,
p. 89. Stith, p. 102, etc.


After his departure, every thing tended fast to the wildest anarchy. Faction
and discontent had often risen so high among the old settlers, that they could
hardly be kept within bounds. The spirit of the new-comers was too ungovernable
to bear any restraint. Several among them of better rank were such dissipated
hopeless young men, as their friends were glad to send out in quest of whatever
fortune might betide them in a foreign land. Of the lower order, many were so
profligate or desperate, that their country was happy to throw them out as
nuisances in society. Such persons were little capable of the regular
subordination, the strict economy, and persevering industry, which their
situation required. The Indians observing their misconduct, and that every
precaution for sustenance or safety was neglected, not only withheld the
supplies of provisions which they were accustomed to furnish, but harassed them
with continual hostilities. All their subsistence was derived from the stores
which they had brought from England; these were soon consumed; then the
domestic animals sent out to breed in the country were devou^ed; and by this
inconsiderate waste, they were reduced to such extremity of famine, as not only
to eat the most nauseous and unwholesome roots and berries, but to feed on the
bodies of the Indians whom they slew, and even on those of their companions who
sunk under the oppression of such complicated distress. In less than six
months, of five hundred persons whom Smith left in Virginia, only sixty
remained; and these so feeble and dejected, that they could not have survived
for ten days, if succor had not arrived from a quarter whence they did not
expect it. Stith, p. 116. Purchase, iv. 1748.


When Gates and Summers were thrown ashore on Bermudas, fortunately not a
single person on board their ship perished. A considerable part of their
provisions and stores too was saved, and in that delightful spot, Nature, with
spontaneous bounty, presented to them such a variety of her productions, that a
hundred and fifty people subsisted in affluence for ten months on an
uninhabited island. Impatient, however, to escape from a place where they were
cut off from all intercourse with mankind, they set about building two barks
with such tools and materials as they had, and by amazing efforts of
perseverance and ingenuity they finished them. In these they embarked, and
steered directly toward Virginia, in hopes of finding an ample consolation for
all their toils and dangers in the embraces of their companions, and amidst the
comforts of a flourishing colony. After a more prosperous navigation than they
could have expected in their ill-constructed vessels, they landed (May 23) at
James-Town. But instead of that joyful interview for which they fondly looked,
a spectacle presented itself which struck them with horror. They beheld the
miserable remainder of their countrymen emaciated with famine and sickness,
sunk in despair, and in their figure and looks rather resembling specter than
human beings. As Gates and Summers, in full confidence of finding plenty of
provisions in Virginia, had brought with them no larger stock than was deemed
necessary for their own support during the voyage, their inability to afford
relief to their countrymen, added to the anguish with which they viewed this
unexpected scene of distress. Nothing now remained but instantly to abandon a
country, where it was impossible to subsist any longer; and though all that
could be found in the stores of the colony, when added to what remained of the
stock brought from Bermudas, did not amount to more than was sufficient to
support them for sixteen days, at the most scanty allowance, they set sail, in
hopes of being able to reach Newfoundland, where they expected to be relieved
by their countrymen, employed at that season in the fishery there. A minute and
curious account of the shipwreck of Gates and Summers, and of their adventures
in Bermudas, was composed by Strachy, a gentleman who accompanied them, and was
published by Purchase, iv. 1734.


But it was not the will of Heaven that all the labor of the English, in
planting this colony, as well as all their hopes of benefit from its future
posterity, should be forever lost. Before Gates, and the melancholy companions
of his voyage, had reached the mouth of James-River, they were met by Lord
Delaware, with three ships, that brought a large recruit of provisions, a
considerable number of new settlers, and every thing requisite for defense or
cultivation. By persuasion and authority he prevailed on them to return to
James-Town, where they found their fort, their magazines, and houses entire,
which Sir Thomas Gates, by some happy chance, had preserved from being set on
fire at the time of their departure. A society so feeble and disordered in its
frame required a tender and skilful hand to cherish it, and restore its vigor.
This it found in Lord Delaware; he searched into the causes of their
misfortunes, as far as he could discover them, amidst the violence of their
mutual accusations; but instead of exerting his power in punishing crimes that
were past, he employed his prudence in healing their dissensions, and in
guarding against a repetition of the fame fatal errors. By unwearied assiduity,
by the respect due to an amiable and beneficent character, by knowing how to
mingle severity with indulgence, and when to assume the dignity of his office,
as well as when to display the gentleness natural to his own temper, he
gradually reconciled men corrupted by anarchy to subordination and discipline,
he turned the attention of the idle and profligate to industry, and taught the
Indians again to reverence and dread the English name (1611, March 28). Under
such an administration, the colony began once more to assume a promising
appearance; when unhappily for it, a complication of diseases brought on by the
climate obliged Lord Delaware to quit the country; Stith, p. 117. Purchase, iv.
1764.
the government of which he committed to Mr. Percy.

He was soon superseded (May 10) by the arrival of Sir Thomas Dale; in whom the
company had vested more absolute authority than in any of his predecessors,
impowering him to rule by martial law; a short code of which, founded on the
practice of the armies in the Low Countries, the most rigid military school at
that time in Europe, they sent out with him. This system of government is so
violent and arbitrary, that even the Spaniards themselves had not ventured to
introduce it into their settlements; for among them, as soon as a plantation
began, and the arts of peace succeeded to the operations of war, the
jurisdiction of the civil magistrate was uniformly established. But however
unconstitutional or oppressive this may appear, it was adopted by the advice of
Sir Francis Bacon, the most enlightened philosopher, and one of the most
eminent lawyers of the age. Bacon, Essay on Plantations, p. 5*
The company, well acquainted with the inefficacy of every method which they
had hitherto employed for restraining the unruly mutinous spirits which they
had to govern, eagerly adopted a plan that had the sanction of such high
authority to recommend it. Happily for the colony, Sir Thomas Dale, who was
entrusted with this dangerous power, exercised it with prudence and moderation.
By the vigor which the summary mode of military punishment gave to his
administration, he introduced into the colony more perfect order than had ever
been established there; and at the same time he tempered its vigor with so
much discretion, that no alarm seems to have been given by this formidable
innovation. Stith, p. 122.


The regular form which the colony now began to assume, (1612, March 12)
induced the King to issue a new charter for the encouragement of the
adventurers, by which he not only confirmed all their former privileges, and
prolonged the term of exemption from payment of duties on the commodities
exported by them, but granted them more extensive property, as well as more
ample jurisdiction. All the islands lying within three hundred leagues of the
coast were annexed to the Province of Virginia. In consequence of this, the
company took possession of Bermudas, and the other small isles discovered by
Gates and Summers; and at the same time prepared to send out a considerable
reinforcement to the colony at James-Town. The expense of those extraordinary
efforts was defrayed by the profits of a lottery, which amounted nearly to
thirty thousand pounds. This expedient, they were authorized to employ by their
new charter; Stith, p. ^^1. Appendix, 23, etc.
and it is remarkable, as the first instance, in the English history, of any
public countenance given to this pernicious seducing mode of levying money. But
the House of Commons, which toward the close of this reign began to observe
every measure of government with jealous attention, having remonstrated against
the institution as unconstitutional and impolitic, James recalled the license
under the sanction of which it had been established. Chalmers' Annals, ^. 32.


By the severe discipline of martial law, the activity of the colonists was
forced into a proper direction, and exerted itself in useful industry. This,
aided by a fertile soil and favorable climate, soon enabled them to raise such
a large stock of provisions, that they were no longer obliged to trust for
subsistence to the precarious supplies which they obtained or extorted from the
Indians. In proportion as the English became more independent, the natives
courted their friendship upon more equal terms. The happy effects of this were
quickly felt. Sir Thomas Dale concluded a treaty with one of their most
powerful and warlike tribes, situated on the River Chickahominy, in which they
consented to acknowledge themselves subjects of the King of Great Britain, to
assume henceforth the name of Englishmen, to send a body of their warriors to
the assistance of the English, as often as they took the field against an
enemy, and to deposit annually a stipulated quantity of Indian corn in the
storehouses of the colony. Hamer Solida Narratio, ap. de ^ry. Pars x. p. 33.
Stith, p. 130.
An event, which the early historians of Virginia relate with peculiar
satisfaction, prepared the way for this union. Pocahuntas, the favorite
daughter of the great Chief Powhatan, to whose intercession Captain Smith was
indebted for his life, persevered in her partial attachment to the English; and
as she frequently visited their settlements, where she was always received with
respectful hospitality, her admiration of their arts and manners continued to
increase. During this intercourse, her beauty, which is represented as far
superior to that of her countrywomen, made such impression on the heart of Mr.
Rolfe, a young man of rank in the colony, that he warmly solicited her to
accept of him as a husband. Where manners are simple, courtship is not tedious.
Neither artifice prevents, nor ceremony forbids the heart from declaring its
sentiments. Pocahuntas readily gave her consent; Dale encouraged the alliance,
and Powhatan did not disapprove it. The marriage was celebrated with
extraordinary pomp; and from that period a friendly correspondence subsisted
between the colony and all the tribes subject to Powhatan, or that stood in awe
of his power. Rolfe and his Princess, (for by that name the writers of the last
age always distinguished her) set out for England, where she was received by
James and his Queen with the respect suited to her birth. Being carefully
instructed in the principles of the Christian faith, she was publicly baptized,
but died a few years after, on her return to America, leaving one son; from
whom are sprung some of the most respectable families in Virginia, who boast of
their descent from the race of the ancient rulers of their country. Hamer
Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry, Pars x. p. 23. Stith, p. 129. 14^. Smith's
Travels, p. 113. 121.
But notwithstanding the visible good effects of that alliance, none of Rolfe's
countrymen seem to have imitated the example which he set them, of
intermarrying with the natives. Of all the Europeans who have settled in
America, the English have availed themselves least of this obvious method of
conciliating the affection of its original inhabitants; and, either from the
shyness conspicuous in their national character, or from the want of that
pliant facility of manners which accommodates itself to every situation, they
have been more averse than the French and Portuguese, or even the Spaniards,
from incorporating with the native Americans. The Indians, courting such an
union, offered their daughters in marriage to their new guests; and when they
did not accept of the proffered alliance, they naturally imputed it to pride
and to their contempt of them as an inferior order of beings. Beverley's Hist.
of Virg. p. 25.


During the interval of tranquillity procured by the alliance with Powhatan, an
important change was made in the state of the colony. Hitherto no right of
private property in land had been established. The fields that were cleared had
been cultivated by the joint labor of the colonists; their product was carried
to the common storehouses, and distributed weekly to every family, according
to its number and exigencies. A society, destitute of the first advantage
resulting from social union, was not formed to prosper. Industry, when not
excited by the idea of property in what was acquired by its own efforts, made
no vigorous exertion. The head had no inducement to contrive, nor the hand to
labor. The idle and improvident trusted entirely to what was issued from the
common store; the assiduity even of the sober and attentive relaxed, when they
perceived that others were to reap the fruit of their toil; and it was
computed, that the united industry of the colony did not accomplish as much
work in a week as might have been performed in a day, if each individual had
labored on his own account. In order to remedy this, Sir Thomas Dale divided a
considerable portion of the land into small lots, and granted one of these to
each individual in full property. From the moment that industry had the certain
prospect of a recompense, it advanced with rapid progress. The articles of
primary necessity were cultivated with so much attention as secured the means
of subsistence; and such schemes of improvement were formed as prepared the way
for the introduction of opulence into the colony. Smith's Travels, p. 114.
Stith, p. 131.


The industrious spirit, which began to rise among the planters, was soon
directed toward a new object; and they applied to it for some time with such
inconsiderate ardour as was productive of fatal consequences. The culture of
tobacco, which has since become the staple of Virginia, and the source of its
prosperity, was introduced about this time (1616) into the colony. As the taste
for that weed continued to increase in England, notwithstanding the zealous
declamations of James against it, the tobacco imported from Virginia came to a
ready market; and though it was so much inferior in quality or in estimation to
that raised by the Spaniards in the West Indian islands, that a pound of the
latter sold for eighteen shillings, and of the former for no more than three
shillings, it yielded a considerable profit. Allured by the prospect of such a
certain and quick return, every other species of industry was neglected. The
land which ought to have been reserved for raising provisions, and even the
streets of James-Town, were planted with tobacco. Various regulations were
framed to restrain this ill-directed activity. But from eagerness for present
gain, the planters disregarded every admonition. The means of subsistence
became so scanty as forced them to renew their demands upon the Indians, who,
seeing no end of those exactions, their antipathy to the English name revived
with additional rancour, and they began to form schemes of vengeance, with the
secrecy and silence peculiar to Americans. Stith, p. 140. 147. 164. 168. Smith,
p. 140. Purchase, iv. 1787.


Meanwhile the colony, notwithstanding this error in its operations, and the
cloud that was gathering over its head, continued to wear an aspect of
prosperity. Its numbers increased by successive migrations; the quantity of
tobacco exported became every year more considerable, and several of the
planters were not only in an easy situation, but advancing fast to opulence;
Smith, p. 139.
and by two events, which happened nearly at the same time, both population and
industry were greatly promoted. As few women had hitherto ventured to encounter
the hardships which were unavoidable in an unknown and uncultivated country,
most of the colonists, constrained to live single, considered themselves as no
more than sojourners in a land to which they were not attached by the tender
ties of a family and children. In order to induce them to settle there, the
company took advantage of the apparent tranquillity in the country, to send out
a considerable number of young women, of humble birth, indeed, but of
unexceptionable character, and encouraged the planters, by premiums and
immunities, to marry them. Stith, p. 166. 197
These new companions were received with such fondness, and many of them so
comfortably established, as invited others to follow their example, and by
degrees thoughtless adventurers, assuming the sentiments of virtuous citizens
and of provident fathers of families, became solicitous about the prosperity of
a country, which they now considered as their own. As the colonists began to
form more extensive plans of industry, they were unexpectedly furnished with
means of executing them with greater facility. A Dutch ship from the Coast of
Guinea, having sailed up James-River, sold a part of her cargo of negroes to
the planters; Beverley, p. 37.
and as that hardy race was found more capable of enduring fatigue under a
sultry climate than Europeans, their number has been increased by continual
importation; their aid seems now to be essential to the existence of the
colony, and the greater part of field labor in Virginia is performed by
servile hands.

But as the condition of the colony improved, the spirit of its members became
more independent. To Englishmen the summary and severe decisions of martial
law, however tempered by the mildness of their governors, appeared intolerably
oppressive; and they longed to recover the privileges to which they had been
accustomed under the liberal form of government in their native country. In
compliance with this spirit, Sir George Yeardley, in the year 1619, called the
first general assembly that was ever held in Virginia; and the numbers of the
people were now so increased, and their settlements so dispersed, that eleven
corporations appeared by their representatives in this convention, where they
were permitted to assume legislative power, and to exercise the noblest
function of free men. The laws enacted in it seem neither to have been many,
nor of great importance; but the meeting was highly acceptable to the people,
as they now beheld among themselves an image of the English constitution, which
they reverenced as the most perfect model of free government. In order to
render this resemblance more complete, and the rights of the planters more
certain, the company issued a charter (July 24) or ordinance, which gave a
legal and permanent form to the government of the colony. The supreme
legislative authority in Virginia, in imitation of that in Great Britain, was
divided and lodged partly in the governor, who held the place of the sovereign;
partly in a council of state named by the company, which possessed some of the
distinctions, and exercised some of the functions belonging to the peerage;
partly in a general council or assembly composed of the representatives of the
people, in which were vested powers and privileges similar to those of the
House of Commons. be both these councils all questions were to In determined by
the majority of voices, and a negative was reserved to the governor; but no law
or ordinance, though approved of by all the three members of the legislature,
was to be of force, until it was ratified in England by a general court of the
company, and returned under its seal. Stith, Appendix, p. 32, etc.
Thus the constitution of the colony was fixed, and the members of it are
henceforth to be considered, not merely as servants of a commercial company,
dependant on the will and orders of their superior, but as free men and
citizens.

The natural effect of that happy change in their condition was an increase of
their industry. The product of tobacco in Virginia was now equal, not only to
the consumption of it in Great Britain, It is a matter of some curiosity to
trace the progress of the consumption of this unnecessary commodity. The use of
tobacco seems to have been first introduced into England about the year 1586.
Possibly a few seafaring persons may have acquired a relish for it by their
intercourse with the Spaniards previous to that period; but the use of it
cannot be denominated a national habit sooner than the time I have mentioned.
Upon an average of the seven years immediately preceding the year 1622, the
whole import of tobacco into England amounted to a hundred and forty-two
thousand and eighty-five pounds weight. Stith, p. 246. From this it appears,
that the taste had spread with a rapidity which is remarkable. But how
inconsiderable is that quantity to what is now consumed in Great Britain!
but could furnish some quantity for a foreign market. The company opened a
trade for it with Holland, and established warehouses in Middleburgh and
Flushing. James, and his privy council, alarmed at seeing the commerce of a
commodity, for which the demand was daily increasing, turned into a channel
that tended to the diminution of the revenue, by depriving it of a considerable
duty imposed on the importation of tobacco, interposed with vigor to check
this innovation. Some expedient was found, by which the matter was adjusted for
the present; but it is remarkable as the first instance of a difference in
sentiment between the parent state and the colony, concerning their respective
rights. The former concluded, that the trade of the colony should be confined
to England, and all its productions be landed there. The latter claimed, not
only the general privilege of Englishmen, to carry their commodities to the
best market, but pleaded the particular concessions in their charter, by which
an unlimited freedom of commerce seemed to be granted to them. Stith, p. 200,
etc.
The time for a more full discussion of this important question was not yet
arrived.

But while the colony continued to increase so fast, that settlements were
scattered, not only along the banks of James and York Rivers, but began to
extend to the Rapahannock, and even to the Potowmack, the English, relying on
their own numbers and deceived by this appearance of prosperity, lived in full
security. They neither attended to the movements of the Indians, nor suspected
their machinations, and though surrounded by a people whom they might have
known from experience to be both artful and vindictive, they neglected every
precaution for their own safety that was requisite in such a situation. Like
the peaceful inhabitants of a society completely established, they were no
longer soldiers but citizens, and were so intent on what was subservient to the
comfort or embellishment of civil life, that every martial exercise began to be
laid aside as unnecessary. The Indians, whom they commonly employed as hunters,
were furnished with firearms, and taught to use them with dexterity. They were
permitted to frequent the habitations of the English at all hours, and received
as innocent visitants whom there was no reason to dread. This inconsiderate
security enabled the Indians to prepare for the execution of that plan of
vengeance, which they meditated with all the deliberate forethought which is
agreeable to their temper. Nor did they want a leader capable of conducting
their schemes with address. On the death of Powhatan, in the year 1618,
Opechancanough succeeded him, not only as wirowanee or chief of his own tribe,
but in that extensive influence over all the Indian nations of Virginia, which
induced the English writers to distinguish them by the name of Emperor.
According to the Indian tradition, he was not a native of Virginia, but came
from a distant country to the south-west, possibly from some province of the
Mexican Empire. Beverley, p. 51.
But as he was conspicuous for all the qualities of highest estimation among
savages, a fearless courage, great strength and agility of body, and crafty
policy, he quickly rose to eminence and power. Soon after his elevation to the
supreme command, a general massacre of the English seems to have been resolved
upon; and during four years, the means of perpetrating it with the greatest
facility and success were concerted with amazing secrecy. All the tribes
contiguous to the English settlements were successively gained, except those on
the Eastern shore, from whom, on account of their peculiar attachment to their
new neighbors, every circumstance that might discover what they intended was
carefully concealed. To each tribe its station was allotted, and the part it
was to act prescribed. On the morning of the day consecrated to vengeance,
(March 22) each was at the place of rendezvous appointed, while the English
were so little aware of the impending destruction, that they received with
unsuspicious hospitality, several persons sent by Opechancanough, under pretext
of delivering presents of venison and fruits, but in reality to observe their
motions. Finding them perfectly secure, at midday, the moment that was
previously fixed for this deed of horror, the Indians rushed at once upon them
in all their different settlements, and murdered men, women, and children, with
undistinguishing rage, and that rancorous cruelty with which savages treat
their enemies. In one hour, nearly a fourth part of the whole colony was cut
off, almost without knowing by whose hands they fell. The slaughter would have
been universal, if compassion, or a sense of duty, had not moved a converted
Indian, to whom the secret was communicated the night before the massacre, to
reveal it to his master in such time as to save James-Town, and some adjacent
settlements; and if the English, in other districts, had not run to their arms
with resolution prompted by despair, and defended themselves so bravely as to
repulse their assailants, who, in the execution of their plan, did not discover
courage equal to the sagacity and art with which they had concerted it. Stith,
p. 208, etc. Purchase, iv. 1788, etc.


But though the blow was thus prevented from descending with its full effect,
it proved very grievous to an infant colony. In some settlements not a single
Englishman escaped. Many persons of prime note in the colony, and among these
several members of the council, were slain. The survivors, overwhelmed with
grief, astonishment, and terror, abandoned all their remote settlements, and,
crowding together for safety to James-Town, did not occupy a territory of
greater extent than had been planted soon after the arrival of their countrymen
in Virginia. Confined within those narrow boundaries, they were less intent on
schemes of industry than on thoughts of revenge. Every man took arms. A bloody
war against the Indians commenced; and, bent on exterminating the whole race,
neither old nor young were spared. The conduct of the Spaniards in the Southern
regions of America was openly proposed as the most proper model to imitate;
Stith, p. 233.
and, regardless like them of those principles of faith, honor, and humanity,
which regulate hostility among civilized nations, and set bounds to its rage,
the English deemed every thing allowable that tended to accomplish their
designs. They h^ted the Indians like wild beasts, rather than enemies; and as
the pursuit of them to their places of retreat in the woods, which covered
their country, was both difficult and dangerous, they endeavored to allure
them from their inaccessible fastnesses, by offers of peace and promises of
oblivion, made with such an artful appearance of sincerity as deceived their
crafty leader, and induced them (1623) to return to their former settlements,
and resume their usual peaceful occupations. The behavior of the two people
seemed now to be perfectly reversed. The Indians, like men acquainted with the
principles of integrity and good faith, on which the intercourse between
nations is founded, confided in the reconciliation, and lived in absolute
security without suspicion of danger; while the English, with perfidious craft,
were preparing to imitate savages in their revenge and cruelty. On the approach
of harvest, when they knew an hostile attack would be most formidable and
fatal, they fell suddenly upon all the Indian plantations, murdered every
person on whom they could lay hold, and drove the rest to the woods, where so
many perished with hunger, that some of the tribes nearest to the English were
totally extirpated. This atrocious deed, which the perpetrators labored to
represent as a necessary act of retaliation, was followed by some happy
effects. It delivered the colony so entirely from any dread of the Indians,
that its settlements began again to extend, and its industry to revive.

But unfortunately at this juncture the state of the company in England, in
which the property of Virginia and the government of the colony settled there
were vested, prevented it from seconding the efforts of the planters, by such a
reinforcement of men, and such a supply of necessaries, as were requisite to
replace what they had lost. The company was originally composed of many
adventurers, and increased so fast by the junction of new members, allured by
the prospect of gain, or the desire of promoting a scheme of public utility,
that its general courts formed a numerous assembly. Stith, p. 272. 276.
The operation of every political principle and passion, that spread through
the kingdom, was felt in those popular meetings, and influenced their
decisions. As toward the close of James's reign more just and enlarged
sentiments with respect to constitutional liberty were diffused among the
people, they came to understand their rights better, and to assert them with
greater boldness; a distinction formerly little known, but now familiar in
English policy, began to be established between the court and country parties,
and the leaders of each endeavored to derive power and consequence from every
quarter. Both exerted themselves with emulation, in order to obtain the
direction of a body so numerous and respectable as the company of Virginian
adventurers. In consequence of this, business had been conducted in every
general court for some years, not with the temperate spirit of merchants
deliberating concerning their mutual interest, but with the animosity and
violence natural to numerous assemblies, by which rival factions contend for
superiority. Stith, p. 229, etc. Chalmers, p. 59.


As the king did not often assemble the great council of the nation in
parliament, the general courts of the company became a theater, on which
popular orators displayed their talents; the proclamations of the crown, and
acts of the privy council, with respect to the commerce and police of the
colony, were canvassed there with freedom, and censured with severity,
ill-suited to the lofty ideas which James entertained of his own wisdom, and
the extent of his prerogative. In order to check this growing spirit of
discussion, the ministers employed all their address and influence to gain as
many members of the company as might give them the direction of their
deliberations. But so unsuccessful were they in this attempt, that every
measure proposed by them was reprobated by a vast majority, and sometimes
without any reason, but because they were the proposers of it. James, little
favorable to the power of any popular assembly, and weary of contending with
one over which he had labored in vain to obtain an ascendant, began to
entertain thoughts of dissolving the company, and of new-modelling its
constitution. Pretexts, neither unplausible, nor destitute of some foundation,
seemed to justify this measure. The slow progress of the colony, the large sums
of money expended, and great number of men who had perished in attempting to
plant it, the late massacre by the Indians, and every disaster that had
befallen the English from their first migration to America, were imputed solely
to the inability of a numerous company to conduct an enterprise so complex and
arduous. The nation felt sensibly its disappointment in a scheme in which it
had engaged with sanguine expectations of advantage, and wished impatiently for
such an impartial scrutiny into former proceedings, as might suggest more
salutary measures in the future administration of the colony. The present state
of its affairs, as well as the wishes of the people, seemed to call for the
interposition of the crown; and James, eager to display the superiority of his
royal wisdom, in correcting those errors into which the company had been
betrayed by inexperience in the arts of government, boldly undertook the work
of reformation. Without regarding the rights conveyed to the company by their
charter, and without the formality of any judicial proceeding for annulling it,
he, by virtue of his prerogative, issued a commission, (1623, May 9) empowering
some of the judges, and other persons of note, to examine into all the
transactions of the company from its first establishment, and to lay the result
of their inquiries, together with their opinion concerning the most effectual
means of rendering the colony more prosperous, Stith, p. 288.
before the privy council. At the same time, by a strain of authority still
higher, he ordered all the records and papers of the company to be seized, and
two of its principal officers to be arrested. Violent and arbitrary as these
acts of authority may now appear, the commissioners carried on their inquiry
without any obstruction but what arose from some feeble and ineffectual
remonstrances of the company. The commissioners, though they conducted their
scrutiny with much activity and vigor, Smith's Travels, p. 165, etc.
did not communicate any of their proceedings to the company; but their report,
with respect to its operations, seems to have been very unfavourable, as the
king, in consequence of it, (October 8) signified to the company, his intention
of vesting the supreme government of the company in a governor and twelve
assistants, to be resident in England, and the executive power in a council of
twelve, which should reside in Virginia. The governor and assistants were to be
originally appointed by the king. Future vacancies were to be supplied by the
governor and his assistants, but their nomination was not to take effect until
it should be ratified by the privy council. The twelve counselors in Virginia
were to be chosen by the governor and assistants; and this choice was likewise
subjected to the review of the privy council. With an inten^ to quiet the minds
of the colonists, it was declared, that private property should be deemed
sacred; and for the more effectual security o^ it, all grants of lands from the
former company were to be confirmed by the new one. In order to facilitate the
execution of this plan, the king required the company instantly to surrender
its charter into his hands. Stith, p. 25^.


But here James and his ministers encountered a spirit, of which they seem not
to have been aware. They found the members of the company unwilling tamely to
relinquish rights of franchises conveyed to them with such legal formality,
that upon faith in their validity they had expended considerable sums;
Chalmers, p. 6^.
and still more averse to the abolition of a popular form of government, in
which every proprietor had a voice, in order to subject a colony, in which they
were deeply interested, to the dominion of a small junto absolutely dependent
on the crown. Neither promises nor threats could induce them to depart from
these sentiments; and in a general court (October 20) the king's proposal was
almost unanimously rejected, and a resolution taken to defend to the utmost
their chartered rights, if these should be called in question in any court of
justice. James, highly offended at their presumption in daring to oppose his
will, directed a writ (Nov. 10) of quo warranto to be issued against the
company, that the validity of its charter might be tried in the Court of King's
Bench; and in order to aggravate the charge by collecting additional proofs of
mal-administration, he appointed some persons, in whom he could confide, to
repair to Virginia to inspect the state of the colony, and inquire into the
conduct of the company, and of its officers there.

The lawsuit in the King's Bench did not hang long in suspense. It terminated,
as was usual in that reign, in a decision perfectly consonant to the wishes of
the monarch. The charter was forfeited, the company was dissolved, and all the
rights and privileges conferred upon it returned to the king, from whom they
flowed (June, 1624.) Rymer, vol. xvii. p. 618, etc. Chalmers, p. 62.


Some writers, particularly Stith, the most intelligent and best informed
historian of Virginia, mention the dissolution of the company as a most
disastrous event to the colony. Animated with liberal sentiments, imbibed in an
age when the principles of liberty were more fully unfolded than under the
reign of James, they viewed his violent and arbitrary proceedings on this
occasion with such indignation, that their abhorrence of the means which he
employed to accomplish his design, seems to have rendered them incapable of
contemplating its effects with discernment and candor. There is not perhaps
any mode of governing an infant colony less friendly to its liberty, than the
dominion of an exclusive corporation, possessed of all the powers which James
had conferred upon the company of adventurers in Virginia. During several years
the colonists can hardly be considered in any other light than as servants to
the company, nourished out of its stores, bound implicitly to obey its orders,
and subjected to the most rigorous of all forms of government, that of martial
law. Even after the native spirit of Englishmen began to rouse under
oppression, and had extorted from their superiors the right of enacting laws
for the government of that community of which they were members, as no act,
though approved of by all the branches of the provincial legislature, was held
to be of legal force, until it was ratified by a general court in England, the
company still retained the paramount authority in its own hands. Nor was the
power of the company more favorable to the prosperity of the colony, than to
its freedom. A numerous body of merchants, as long as its operations are purely
commercial, may carry them on with discernment and success. But the mercantile
spirit seems ill adapted to conduct an enlarged and liberal plan of civil
policy, and colonies have seldom grown up to maturity and vigor under its
narrow and interested regulations. To the unavoidable defects in administration
which this occasioned, were added errors arising from inexperience. The English
merchants of that age had not those extensive views which a general commerce
opens to such as have the direction of it. When they first began to venture out
of the beaten track, they groped their way with timidity and hesitation.
Unacquainted with the climate and soil of America, and ignorant of the
productions best suited to them, they seem to have had no settled plan of
improvement, and their schemes were continually varying. Their system of
government was equally fluctuating. In the course of eighteen years ten
different persons presided over the province as chief governors. No wonder that
under such administration all the efforts to give vigor and stability to the
colony should prove abortive, or produce only slender effects. These efforts,
however, when estimated according to the ideas of that age, either with respect
to commerce or to policy, were very considerable, and conducted with
astonishing perseverance.

Above an hundred and fifty thousand pounds were expended in this first attempt
to plant an English colony in America; Smith's Travels, p. 42. 167.
and more than nine thousand persons were sent out from the mother country to
people this new settlement. At the dissolution of the company, the nation, in
return for this waste of treasure and of people, did not receive from Virginia
an annual importation of commodities exceeding twenty thousand pounds in value;
and the colony was so far from having added strength to the state by an
increase of population, that, in the year one thousand six hundred and
twenty-four, scarcely two thousand persons survived, Chalmers' Annals, p. 69.
a wretched remnant of the numerous emigrants who had flocked thither, with
sanguine expectations of a very different fate.

The company, like all unprosperous societies, fell unpitied. The violent hand
with which prerogative had invaded its rights was forgotten, and new prospects
of success opened, under a form of government exempt from all the defects to
which past disasters were imputed. The king and the nation concurred with equal
ardour in resolving to encourage the colony. Soon after the final judgment in
the Court of King's Bench against the company, James appointed a council of
twelve persons to take the temporary direction of affairs in Virginia, (August
26) that he might have leisure to frame with deliberate consideration proper
regulations for the permanent government of the colony. Rymer, xvii. 618, etc.
Pleased with such an opportunity of exercising his talents as a legislator, he
began to turn his attention toward the subject; but death prevented him from
completing his plan.

Charles I. on his accession to the throne, (1625, March 27) adopted all his
father's maxims with respect to the colony in Virginia. He declared it to be a
part of the empire annexed to the crown, and immediately subordinate to its
jurisdiction; he conferred the title of Governor on Sir George Yardely, and
appointed him, in conjunction with a council of twelve, and a secretary, to
exercise supreme authority there, and enjoined them to conform in every point
to such instructions as from time to time they might receive from him. Ibid.
xviii. 72.311.
From the tenor of the king's commission, as well as from the known spirit of
his policy, it is apparent, that he intended to vest every power of government,
both legislative and executive, in the governor and council, without recourse
to the representatives of the people, as possessing a right to enact laws for
the community, or to impose taxes upon it. Yardely and his council, who seem to
have been fit instruments for carrying this system of arbitrary rule into
execution, did not fail to put such a construction on the words of their
commission as was most favorable to their own jurisdiction. During a great
part of Charles's reign, Virginia knew no other law than the will of the
sovereign. Statutes were published, and taxes imposed, without once calling the
representatives of the people to authorize them by their sanction. At the same
time that the colonists were bereaved of political rights which they deemed
essential to freemen and citizens, their private property was violently
invaded. A proclamation was issued, by which, under pretexts equally absurd and
frivolous, they were prohibited from selling tobacco to any person but certain
commissioners appointed by the king to purchase it on his account; Rymer,
xviii. 19.
and they had the cruel mortification to behold the sovereign, who should have
afforded them protection, engross all the profits of their industry, by seizing
the only valuable commodity which they had to vend, and retaining the monopoly
of it in his own hands. While the staple of the colony in Virginia sunk in
value under the oppression and restraints of a monopoly, property in land was
rendered insecure by various grants of it, which Charles inconsiderately
bestowed upon his favorites. These were not only of such exorbitant extent as
to be unfavourable to the progress of cultivation; but from inattention, or
imperfect acquaintance with the geography of the country, their boundaries were
so inaccurately defined, that large tracts already occupied and planted were
often included in them.

The murmurs and complaints which such a system of administration excited, were
augmented by the rigor with which Sir John Harvey, who succeeded Yardely in
the government of the colony, Rymer, xviii. 980.
enforced every ^act of power. Rapacious, unfeeling, and haughty, he added
insolence to oppression, and neither regarded the sentiments, nor listened to
the remonstrances of the people under his command. The colonists, far from the
seat of government, and overawed by authority derived from a royal commission,
submitted long to his tyranny and exactions. Their patience was at last
exhausted, and in a transport of popular rage and indignation, they seized
their governor, and sent him a prisoner to England, accompanied by two of their
number, whom they deputed to prefer their accusations against him to the king.
But this attempt to redress their own wrongs, by a proceeding so summary and
violent as is hardly consistent with any idea of regular government, and can be
justified only in cases of such urgent necessity as rarely occur in civil
society, was altogether repugnant to every notion which Charles entertained
with respect to the obedience due by subjects to their sovereign. To him the
conduct of the colonists appeared to be not only an usurpation of his right to
judge and to punish one of his own officers, but an open and audacious act of
rebellion against his authority. Without deigning to admit their deputies into
his presence, or to hear one article of their charge against Harvey, the king
instantly sent him back to his former station, with an ample renewal of all the
powers belonging to it. But though Charles deemed this vigorous step necessary
in order to assert his own authority, and to testify his displeasure with those
who had presumed to offer such an insult to it, he seems to have been so
sensible of the grievances under which the colonists groaned, and of the chief
source from which they flowed, that soon after, he not only removed a governor
so justly odious to them, but named as a successor Sir William Berkeley, a
person far superior to Harvey in rank and abilities, and still more
distinguished by possessing all the popular virtues to which the other was a
stranger. Beverley's H^. of Virginia, p. ^0. Chalmers' Annals* ^18, etc.


Under his government the colony in Virginia remained, with some short
intervals of interruption, almost forty years, and to his mild and prudent
administration its increase and prosperity is in a great measure to be
ascribed. It was indebted, however, to the king himself for such a reform of
its constitution and policy, as gave a different aspect to the colony, and
animated all its operations with new spirit. Though the tenor of Sir William
Berkeley's commission was the same with that of his predecessor, he received
instructions under the great seal, by which he was empowered to declare, that
in all its concerns, civil as well as ecclesiastical, the colony was to be
governed according to the laws of England; he was directed to issue writs for
electing representatives of the people, who, in conjunction with the governor
and council, were to form a general assembly, and to possess supreme
legislative authority in the community; he was ordered to establish courts of
justice, in which all questions, whether civil or criminal, were to be decided
agreeably to the forms of judicial procedure in the mother country. It is not
easy to discover what were the motives which induced a monarch tenacious in
adhering to any opinion or system which he had once adopted, jealous to excess
of his own rights, and adverse on every occasion to any extension of the
privileges claimed by his people, to relinquish his original plan of
administration in the colony, and to grant such immunities to his subjects
settled there. From the historians of Virginia, no less superficial than
ill-informed, no light can be derived with respect to this point. It is most
probable, that dread of the spirit then rising in Great Britain extorted from
Charles concessions so favorable to Virginia. After an intermission of almost
twelve years, the state of his affairs compelled him to have recourse to the
great council of the nation. There his subjects would find a jurisdiction
independent of the crown, and able to control its authority. There they hoped
for legal redress of all their grievances. As the colonists in Virginia had
applied for relief to a former parliament, it might be expected with certainty,
that they would lay their case before the first meeting of an assembly, in
which they were secure of a favorable audience. Charles knew, that if the
spirit of his administration in Virginia were to be tried by the maxims of the
English constitution, it must be severely reprehended. He was aware that many
measures of greater moment in his government would be brought under a strict
review in parliament; and unwilling to give mal-contents the advantage of
adding a charge of oppression in the remote parts of his dominions to a
catalogue of domestic grievances, he artfully endeavored to take the merit of
having granted voluntarily to his people in Virginia such privileges as he
foresaw would be extorted from him.

But though Charles established the internal government of Virginia on a model
similar to that of the English constitution, and conferred on his subjects
there all the rights of freemen and citizens, he was extremely solicitous to
maintain its connection with the parent state. With this view he instructed Sir
William Berkeley strictly to prohibit any commerce of the colony with foreign
nations; and in order more certainly to secure exclusive possession of all the
advantages arising from the sale of its productions, he was required to take a
bond from the master of each vessel that sailed from Virginia, to land his
cargo in some part of the king's dominions in Europe. Chalmers' Annals, p ^19.
232.
Even under this restraint, such is the kindly influence of free government on
society, the colony advanced so rapidly in industry and population, that at the
beginning of the civil war, the English settled in it exceeded twenty thousand.
Ibid. p. 125^


Gratitude toward a monarch, from whose hands they had received immunities
which they had long wished, but hardly expected to enjoy, the influence and
example of a popular governor, passionately devoted to the interests of his
master, concurred in preserving inviolated loyalty among the colonists. Even
after monarchy was abolished, after one king had been beheaded, and another
driven into exile, the authority of the crown continued to be acknowledged
(1650) and revered in Virginia. Irritated at this open defiance of its power,
the parliament issued an ordinance, declaring, that as the settlement in
Virginia had been made at the cost and by the people of England, it ought to be
subordinate to and dependant upon the English commonwealth, and subject to such
laws and regulations as are or shall be made in parliament; that, instead of
this dutiful submission, the colonists had disclaimed the authority of the
state, and audaciously rebelled against it; that on this account they were
denounced notorious traitors, and not only all vessels belonging to natives of
England, but those of foreign nations, were prohibited to enter their ports, or
to carry on any commerce with them.

It was not the mode of that age to wage a war of words alone. The efforts of
an high spirited government in ass^rting its own dignity were prompt and
vigorous. A powerful squadron, with a considerable body of land forces, was
dispatched to reduce the Virginians to obedience. After compelling the colonies
in Barbados and the other islands to submit to the commonwealth, the squadron
entered the Bay of Chesapeak (1651). Berkeley, with more co^rage than prudence,
took arms to oppose this formidable armament; but he could not long maintain
such an unequal contest. His gallant resistance, however, procured favorable
terms to the people under his government. A general indemnity for all part
offenses was granted; they acknowledged the authority of the commonwealth, and
were admitted to a participation of all the rights enjoyed by citizens.
Thurlow's State Papers. i. 197. Chalmers' Annals, p. 122. Beverley's Hist. p.
53.
Berkeley, firm to his principles of loyalty, disdained to make any stipulation
for himself; and choosing to pass his days far removed from the seat of a
government which he detested, continued to reside in Virginia as a private man,
beloved and respected by all over whom he had formerly presided.

Not satisfied with taking measures to subject the colonies, the commonwealth
turned its attention toward the most effectual mode of retaining them in
dependence on the parent state, and of securing to it the benefit of their
increasing commerce. With this view the parliament framed two laws (1651) one
of which expressly prohibited all mercantile intercourse between the colonies
and foreign states, and the other ordained, that no production of Asia, Africa,
or America, should be imported into the dominions of the commonwealth, but in
vessels belonging to English owners, or to the people of the colonies settled
there, and navigated by an English commander, Scobel's Acts, p. 132. 176.
and by crews of which the greater part must be Englishmen. But while the
wisdom of the commonwealth prescribed the channel in which the trade of the
colonies was to be carried on, it was solicitous to encourage the cultivation
of the staple commodity of Virginia by an act of parliament (1652) which gave
legal force to all the injunctions of James and Charles against planting
tobacco in England. Ibid. p. 187.


Under governors appointed by the commonwealth, or by Cromwell, when he usurped
the supreme power, Virginia remained almost nine years in perfect tranquillity.
During that period, many adherents to the royal party, and among these some
gentlemen of good families, in order to avoid danger and oppression, to which
they were exposed in England, or in hopes of repairing their ruined fortunes,
resorted thither. Warmly attached to the cause for which they had fought and
suffered, and animated with all the passions natural to men recently engaged in
a fierce and long protracted civil war, they, by their intercourse with the
colonists, confirmed them in principles of loyalty, and added to their
impatience and indignation under the restraints imposed on their commerce by
their new masters. On the death of Mathews, the last governor named by
Cromwell, the sentiments and inclination of the people, no longer under the
control of authority, burst out with violence. They forced Sir William Berkeley
to quit his retirement; they unanimously elected him governor of the colony;
and as he refused to act under an usurped authority, they boldly erected the
royal standard, and, acknowledging Charles II. to be their lawful sovereign,
proclaimed him with all his titles; and the Virginians long boasted, that as
they were the last of the king's subjects who renounced their allegiance, they
were the first who returned to their duty. Beverley, p. 55. Chalmers. p. 124.


Happily for the people of Virginia, a revolution in England, no less sudden
and unexpected, seated Charles on the throne of his ancestors, and saved them
from the severe chastisement, to which their premature declaration in his
favor must have exposed them. On receiving the first account of this event,
the joy and exultation of the colony were universal and unbounded. These,
however, were not of long continuance. Gracious, but unproductive professions
of esteem and good will were the only return made by Charles to loyalty and
services, which in their own estimation were so distinguished that no
recompense was beyond what they might claim. If the king's neglect and
ingratitude disappointed all the sanguine hopes which their vanity had founded
on the merit of their past conduct, the spirit which influenced parliament in
its commercial deliberations, opened a prospect that alarmed them with respect
to their future situation. In framing regulations for the encouragement of
trade, which, during the convulsions of civil war, and amidst continual
fluctuations in government, had met with such obstruction that it declined in
every quarter; the House of Commons, instead of granting the colonies that
relief which they expected from the restraints in their commerce imposed by the
commonwealth and Cromwell, not only adopted all their ideas concerning this
branch of legislation, but extended them farther. This produced the act of
navigation, the most important and memorable of any in the statute book with
respect to the history of English commerce. By it, besides several momentous
articles foreign to the subject of this work, it was enacted, that no
commodities should be imported into any settlement in Asia, Africa, or America,
or exported from them, but in vessels of English or plantation built, whereof
the master and three-fourths of the mariners shall be English subjects, under
pain of forfeiting ship and goods; that none but natural born subjects, or such
as have been naturalized, shall exercise the occupation of merchant or factor
in any English settlement, under pain of forfeiting their goods and chattels;
that no sugar, tobacco, cotton, wool, indigo, ginger, or woods used in dying,
of the growth or manufacture of the colonies, shall be shipped from them to any
other country but England; and in order to secure the performance of this, a
sufficient bond, with one surety, shall be given, before sailing, by the
owners, for a specific sum proportional to the rate of the vessel employed by
them. 1^ C^r. II. c. 18.
The productions subjected to this restriction are distinguished, in the
language of commerce and finance, by the name of enumerated commodities; and as
industry in its progress furnished new articles of value, these have been
successively added to the roll, and subjected to the same restraint. Soon after
(1663) the act of navigation was extended, and additional restraints were
imposed, by a new law, which prohibited the importation of any European
commodity into the colonies, but what was laden in England in vessels navigated
and manned as the act of navigation required. More effectual provision was made
by this law for exacting the penalties to which the transgressors of the act of
navigation were subjected; and the principles of policy, on which the various
regulations contained in both statutes are founded, were openly avowed in a
declaration, that as the plantations beyond seas are inhabited and peopled by
subjects of England, they may be kept in a firmer dependence upon it, and
rendered yet more beneficial and advantageous unto it, in the further
employment and increase of English shipping and seamen, as well as in the vent
of English woollen and other manufactures and commodities; and in making
England a staple, not only of the commodities of those plantations, but also of
the commodities of other countries and places, for the supplying of them; and
it being the usage of other nations to keep the trade of their plantations to
themselves. 1^ (...). II. ^
In prosecution of those favorite maxims, the English legislature proceeded a
step farther. As the act of navigation had left the people of the colonies at
liberty to export the enumerated commodities from one plantation to another
without paying any duty (1672) it subjected them to a tax equivalent to what
was paid by the consumers of these commodities in England. 25 Ca^. II. c. ^


By these successive regulations, the plan of securing to England a monopoly of
the commerce with its colonies, and of shutting up every other channel into
which it might be diverted, was perfected and reduced into complete system. On
one side of the Atlantic, these regulations have been extolled as an
extraordinary effort of political sagacity, and have been considered as the
great charter of national commerce, to which the present state is indebted for
all its opulence and power. On the other, they have been execrated as a code of
oppression, more suited to the illiberality of mercantile ideas, than to
extensive views of legislative wisdom. Which of these opinions is best founded,
I shall examine at large in another part of this work. But in writing the
history of the English settlements in America, it was necessary to trace the
progress of those restraining laws with accuracy, as in every subsequent
transaction we may observe a perpetual exertion, on the part of the
mother country, to enforce and extend them; and on the part of the colonies,
endeavors no less unremitting, to elude or to obstruct their operation.

Hardly was the act of navigation known in Virginia, and its effects begun to
be felt, when the colony remonstrated against it as a grievance, and petitioned
earnestly for relief. But the commercial ideas of Charles and his ministers
coincided so perfectly with those of parliament, that, instead of listening
with a favorable ear to their applications, they labored assiduously to carry
the act into strict execution. For this purpose, instructions were issued to
the governor, forts were built on the banks of the principal rivers, and small
vessels appointed to cruize on the coast. The Virginians, seeing no prospect of
obtaining exemption from the act, set themselves to evade it, and found means,
notwithstanding the vigilance with which they were watched, of carrying on a
considerable clandestine trade with foreigners, particularly with the Dutch
settled on Hudson's River. Emboldened by observing disaffection spread through
the colony, some veteran soldiers who had served under Cromwell, and had been
banished to Virginia, (1663) formed a design of rendering themselves masters of
the country, and of asserting its independence on England. This rash project
was discovered by one of their associates, and disconcerted by the vigorous
exertions of Sir William Berkeley. But the spirit of discontent, though
repressed was not extinguished. Every day something occurred to revive and to
nourish it. As it is with extreme difficulty that commerce can be turned into a
new channel, tobacco, the staple of the colony, sunk prodigiously in value,
when they were compelled to send it all to one market. It was some time before
England could furnish them regularly full assortments of those necessary
articles, without which the industry of the colony could not be carried on, or
its prosperity secured. Encouraged by the symptoms of general languor and
despondency, which this declining state of the colony occasioned, the Indians
seated toward the heads of the rivers ventured first to attack the remote
settlements, and then to make incursions into the interior parts of the
country. Unexpected as these hostilities were, from a people who during a long
period had lived in friendship with the English, a measure taken by the king
seems to have excited still greater terror among the most opulent people in the
colony. Charles had imprudently imitated the example of his father, by granting
such large tracts of land in Virginia to several of his courtiers, as tended to
unsettle the distribution of property in the country, and to render the title
of the most ancient planters to their estates precarious and questionable
(1676). From those various causes, which in a greater or lesser degree affect^
very individual in the colony, the indignation of the ^ple became general, and
was worked up to such a pitch, that nothing was wanting to precipitate them
into the most desperate acts, but some leader, qualified to unite and to direct
their operations. Chalmers' Annal^ ^. 10. 13, 14. passim. Beverley, p. 58, etc.


Such a leader they found in Nathaniel Bacon, a colonel of militia, who, though
he had been settled in Virginia only three years, had acquired, by popular
manners, an insinuating address, and the consideration derived from having been
regularly trained in England to the profession of law, such general esteem,
that he had been admitted into the council, and was regarded as one of the most
respectable persons in the colony. Bacon was ambitious, eloquent, daring, and
prompted either by honest zeal to redress the public wrongs, or allured by
hopes of raising himself to distinction and power, he mingled with the
mal-contents, and by his bold harangues and confident promises of removing all
their grievances, he inflamed them almost to madness. As the devastations
committed by the Indians was the calamity most sensibly felt by the people, he
accused the governor of having neglected the proper measures for repelling the
invasions of the savages, and exhorted them to take arms in their own defense,
and to exterminate that odious race. Great numbers assembled, and chose Bacon
to be their general. He applied to the governor for a commission, confirming
this election of the people, and offered to march instantly against the common
enemy. Berkeley, accustomed by long possession of supreme command to high ideas
of the respect due to his station, considered this tumultuary armament as an
open insult to his authority, and suspected that, under specious appearances,
Bacon concealed most dangerous designs. Unwilling, however, to give farther
provocation to an incensed multitude, by a direct refusal of what they
demanded, he thought it prudent to negociate, in order to gain time; and it was
not until he found all endeavors to sooth them ineffectual, that he issued a
proclamation, requiring them, in the king's name, under the pain of being
denounced rebels, to disperse.

But Bacon, sensible that he had now advanced so far as rendered it impossible
to recede with honor or safety, instantly took the only resolution that
remained in his situation. At the head of a chosen body of his followers he
marched rapidly to James-Town, and surrounding the house where the governor and
council were assembled, demanded the commission for which he had formerly
applied. Berkeley, with the proud indignant spirit of a cavalier, disdaining
the requisitions of a rebel, peremptorily refused to comply, and calmly
presented his naked breast to the weapons which were pointed against it. The
council, however, foreseeing the fatal consequences of driving an enraged
multitude, in whose power they were, to the last extremities of violence,
prepared a commission, constituting Bacon general of all the forces in
Virginia, and by their entreaties prevailed on the governor to sign it. Bacon
with his troops retired in triumph. Hardly was the council delivered by his
departure from the dread of present danger, when, by a transition not unusual
in feeble minds, presumptuous boldness succeeded to excessive fear. The
commission granted to Bacon was declared to be null, having been extorted by
force; he was proclaimed a rebel, his followers were required to abandon his
standard, and the militia ordered to arm and to join the governor.

Enraged at conduct which he branded with the name of base and treacherous,
Bacon, instead of continuing his march toward the In^ country, instantly
wheeled about, and advanced with all his forces to James-Town. The governor,
unable to resist such a numerous body, made his escape, and fled across the bay
to Acomack on the Eastern shore. Some of the counselors accompanied him
thither, others retired to their own plantations. Upon the flight of Sir
William Berkeley, and dispersion of the council, the frame of civil government
in the colony seemed to be dissolved, and Bacon became possessed of supreme and
uncontrolled power. But as he was sensible that his countrymen would not long
submit with patience to authority acquired and held merely by force of arms, he
endeavored to found it on a more constitutional basis, by obtaining the
sanction of the people's approbation. With this view he called together the
most considerable gentlemen in the colony, and having prevailed on them to bind
themselves by oath to maintain his authority, and to resist every enemy that
should oppose it, he from that time considered his jurisdiction as legally
established.

Berkeley, meanwhile, having collected some forces, made inroads into different
parts of the colony, where Bacon's authority was recognized. Several sharp
conflicts happened with various success. James-Town was reduced to ashes, and
the best cultivated districts in the province were laid waste* sometimes by one
party, and sometimes by the other. But it was not by his own exertions that the
governor hoped to terminate the contest. He had early transmitted an account of
the transactions in Virginia to the king, and demanded such a body of soldiers
as would enable him to quell the insurgents, whom he represented as so
exasperated by the restraints imposed on their trade, that they were impatient
to shake of all dependence on the parent state. Charles, alarmed at a commotion
no less dangerous than unexpected, and solicitous to maintain his authority
over a colony, the value of which was daily increasing, and more fully
understood, speedily dispatched a small squadron, with such a number of regular
troops as Berkeley had required. Bacon and his followers received information
of this armament, but were not intimidated at its approach. They boldly
determined to oppose it with open force, and declared it to be consistent with
their duty and allegiance, to treat all who should aid Sir William Berkeley as
enemies, until they should have an opportunity of laying their grievances
before their sovereign. Beverley's Hist. p. 75, 76.


But while both parties prepared, (1677) with equal animosity, to involve their
country in the horrors of civil war, an event happened, which quieted the
commotion almost as suddenly as it had been excited. Bacon, when ready to take
the field, sickened and died. None of his followers possessed such talents, or
were so much objects of the people's confidence, as entitled them to aspire to
the supreme command. Destitute of a leader to conduct and animate them, their
sanguine hopes of success subsided; mutual distrust accompanied this universal
despondency; all began to wish for an accommodation; and after a short
negotiation with Sir William Berkeley, they laid down their arms, and submitted
to his government, on obtaining a promise of general pardon.

Thus terminated an insurrection, which, in the annals of Virginia, is
distinguished by the name of Bacon's rebellion. During seven months this daring
leader was master of the colony, while the royal governor was shut up in a
remote and ill-peopled corner of it. What were the real motives that prompted
him to take arms, and to what length he intended to carry his plans of
reformation, either in commerce or government, it is not easy to discover, in
the scanty materials from which we derive our information with respect to this
transaction. It is probable, that his conduct, like that of other adventurers
in faction, would have been regulated chiefly by events; and accordingly as
these proved favorable or adverse, his views and requisitions would have been
extended or circumscribed.

Sir William Berkeley, as soon as he was reinstated in his office, called
together the representatives of the people, that by their advice and authority
public tranquillity and order might be perfectly established. Though this
assembly met a few weeks after the death of Bacon, while the memory of
reciprocal injuries was still recent, and when the passions excited by such a
fierce contest had but little time to subside, its proceedings were conducted
with a moderation seldom exercised by the successful party in a civil war. No
man suffered capitally; a small number were subjected to fines; others were
declared incapable of holding any office of trust; and with those exceptions,
the promise of general indemnity was confirmed by law. Soon after, Berkeley was
recalled, and Colonel Jefferys was appointed his successor.

From that period, to the Revolution in 1688, there is scarcely any memorable
occurrence in the history of Virginia. A peace was concluded with the Indians.
Under several successive governors, administration was carried on in the colony
with the same arbitrary spirit that distinguished the latter years of Charles
II. and the precipitate counsels of James II. The Virginians, with a
constitution which, in form, resembled that of England, enjoyed hardly any
portion of the liberty which that admirable system of policy is framed to
secure. They were deprived even of the last consolation of the oppressed, the
power of complaining, by a law which, under severe penalties, prohibited them
from speaking disrespectfully of the governor, or defaming, either by words or
writing, the administration of the colony. Beverley, p. 81. Chalmers, p. 341.
Still, however, the laws restraining their commerce were felt as an
intolerable grievance, and nourished in secret a spirit of discontent, which,
from the necessity of concealing it, acquired a greater degree of acrimony. But
notwithstanding those unfavourable circumstances, the colony continued to
increase. The use of tobacco was now become general in Europe; and though it
had fallen considerably in price, the extent of demand compensated that
diminution, and by giving constant employment to the industry of the planters
diffused wealth among them. At the Revolution the number of inhabitants in the
colony exceeded sixty thousand, (...) Annals* p. ^56
and in the course of twenty-eight years its population had been more than
doubled. Ibid. p. ^25.


THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK X.
WHEN James I. in the year one thousand six-hundred and six, made that
magnificent partition, which has been mentioned, of a vast region in North
America, extending from the thirty-fourth to the forty-fifth degree of
latitude, between two trading companies of his subjects, he established the
residence of the one in London, and of the other in Plymouth. The former was
authorized to settle in the southern, and the latter in the northern part of
this territory, then distinguished by the general name of Virginia. This
arrangement seems to have been formed upon the idea of some speculative
refiner, who aimed at diffusing the spirit of industry, by fixing the seat of
one branch of the trade that was now to be opened, on the east coast of the
island, and the other on the west. But London possesses such advantages of
situation, that the commercial wealth and activity of England have always
centered in the capital. At the beginning of the last century, the superiority
of the metropolis in both these respects was so great, that though the powers
and privileges conferred by the king on the two trading companies were
precisely the same, the adventurers settled in Plymouth sell far short of those
in London, in the vigor and success of their efforts toward accomplishing the
purpose of their institution. Though the operations of the Plymouth company
were animated by the public-spirited zeal of Sir John Popham, chief justice of
England, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and some other gentlemen of the west, all its
exertions were feeble and unfortunate.

The first vessel fitted out by the company (1606) was taken by the Spaniards.
In the year one thousand six hundred and seven, a feeble settlement was made at
Sagahadoc; but, on account of the rigor of the climate, was soon relinquished,
and for some time nothing farther was attempted than a few fishing voyages to
Cape Cod, or a pitiful traffic with the natives for skins and oil. One of the
vessels equipped for this purpose was commanded by Captain Smith, whose name
has been so often mentioned with distinction in the history of Virginia. The
adventure was prosperous and lucrative (1614.) But his ardent enterprising mind
could not confine its attention to objects so unequal to it as the petty
details of a trading voyage. He employed a part of his time in exploring the
coast, and in delineating its bays and harbors. On his return, he laid a map
of it before Prince Charles, and, with the usual exaggeration of discoverers,
painted the beauty and excellence of the country in such glowing colors, that
the young Prince, in the warmth of admiration, declared, that it should be
called New England; Smith's Travels, Book vi. p. ^0^, etc. Purchase* iv. p. 8^
a name which effaced that of Virginia, and by which it is still distinguished.

The favorable accounts of the country by Smith, as well as the success of his
voyage, seem to have encouraged private adventurers to prosecute the trade on
the coast of New England with greater briskness; but did not inspire the
languishing company of Plymouth with such vigor, as to make any new attempt
toward establishing a permanent colony there. Something more than the prospect
of distant gain to themselves, or of future advantages to their country, was
requisite, in order to induce men to abandon the place of their nativity, to
migrate to another quarter of the globe, and endure innumerable hardships under
an untried climate, and in an uncultivated land, covered with woods, or
occupied by fierce and hostile tribes of savages. But what mere attention to
private emolument or to national utility could not effect, was accomplished by
the operation of an higher principle. Religion had gradually excited among a
great body of the people, a spirit that fitted them remarkably for encountering
the dangers, and surmounting the obstacles, which had hitherto rendered
abortive the schemes of colonization in that part of America allotted to the
company of Plymouth. As the various settlements in New England are indebted for
their origin to this spirit, as in the course of our narrative we shall discern
its influence mingling in all their transactions, and giving a peculiar
tincture to the character of the people, as well as to their institutions, both
civil and ecclesiastical, it becomes necessary to trace its rise and progress
with attention and accuracy.

When the superstitions and corruptions of the Romish church prompted different
nations of Europe to throw off its yoke, and to withdraw from its communion,
the mode as well as degree of their separation was various. Wherever
reformation was sudden, and carried on by the people without authority from
their rulers, or in opposition to it, the rupture was violent and total. Every
part of the ancient fabric was overturned, and a different system, not only
with respect to doctrine, but to church government, and the external rites of
worship, was established. Calvin, who, by his abilities, learning, and
austerity of manners, had acquired high reputation and authority in the
Protestant churches, was a zealous advocate for this plan of thorough
reformation. He exhibited a model of that pure form of ecclesiastical policy,
which he approved in the constitution of the church of Geneva. The simplicity
of its institutions, and still more their repugnancy to those of the Popish
church, were so much admired by all the stricter reformers, that it was copied,
with some small variations, in Scotland, in the Republic of the United
Provinces, in the dominions of the House of Brandenburgh, in those of the
Elector Palatine, and in the churches of the Hugonots in France.

But in those countries where the steps of departure from the church of Rome
were taken with greater deliberation, and regulated by the wisdom or policy of
the supreme magistrate, the separation was not so wide. Of all the reformed
churches, that of England has deviated least from the ancient institutions. The
violent but capricious spirit of Henry VIII. who, though he disclaimed the
supremacy, revered the tenets of the Papal see, checked innovations in doctrine
or worship during his reign. When his son ascended the throne, and the
Protestant religion was established by law, the cautious prudence of Archbishop
Cranmer moderated the zeal of those who had espoused the new opinions. Though
the articles to be recognized as the system of national faith, were framed
conformably to the doctrines of Calvin, his notions with respect to church
government and the mode of worship were not adopted. As the hierarchy in
England was incorporated with the civil policy of the kingdom, and constituted
a member of the legislature, archbishops and bishops, with all the subordinate
ranks of ecclesiastics subject to them, were continued according to ancient
form, and with the same dignity and jurisdiction. The peculiar vestments in
which the clergy performed their sacred functions, bowing at the name of Jesus,
kneeling at receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the sign of the Cross
in baptism, the use of the Ring in marriage, with several other rites to which
long usage had accustomed the people, and which time had rendered venerable,
were still retained. But though Parliament enjoined the observance of these
ceremonies under very severe penalties, 2 and 3 Edw. VI. c. 1.
several of the more zealous clergy entertained scruples with respect to the
lawfulness of complying with this injunction; and the vigilance and authority
of Cranmer and Ridley, with difficulty, saved their infant church from the
disgrace of a schism on this account.

On the accession of Mary, the furious zeal with which she persecuted all who
had adopted the tenets of the Reformers forced many eminent Protestants, laymen
as well as ecclesiastics, to seek an asylum on the continent. Francfort,
Geneva, Basil, and Strasburgh, received them with affectionate hospitality as
sufferers in the cause of truth, and the magistrates permitted them to assemble
by themselves for religious worship. The exiles who took up their residence in
the two former cities modelled their little congregations according to the
ideas of Calvin, and, with a spirit natural to men in their situation, eagerly
adopted institutions which appeared to be farther removed from the
superstitions of Popery than those of their own church. They returned to
England as soon as Elizabeth re-established the Protestant religion, not only
with more violent antipathy to the opinions and practices of that church by
which they had been oppressed, but with a strong attachment to that mode of
worship to which they had been for some years accustomed. As they were received
by their countrymen with the veneration due to confessors, they exerted all the
influence derived from that opinion, in order to obtain such a reformation in
the English ritual, as might bring it nearer to the standard of purity in
foreign churches. Some of the queen's most confidential ministers were warmly
disposed to cooperate with them in this measure. But Elizabeth paid little
regard to the inclinations of the one, or the sentiments of the other. Fond of
pomp and ceremony, accustomed according to the mode of that age, to study
religious controversy, and possessing, like her father, such confidence in her
own understanding, that she never doubted her capacity to judge and decide with
respect to every point in dispute between contending sects, Of the high idea
which Elizabeth entertained with respect to her own superior skill in theology,
as well as the haughty tone in which she dictated to her subjects what they
ought to believe, we have a striking picture in her speech at the close of the
parliament, A. D. 1585. -- "One thing I may not overskip. Religion, the ground
on which all other matters ought to take root, and being corrupted, may mar all
the tree. And that there be some fault^ders with the order of the clergy, which
so may make a slander to myself, and to the church, whose over-ruler God has
made me, whose negligence cannot be excused, if any schisms or errors heretical
were suffered. Thus much, I must say, that some faults and negligences must
grow and be, as in all other great charges it happens; and what vocation
without? All which, if you my lords of the clergy do not amend, I mean to
depose you. Look ye, therefore, well to your charges. This may be amended
without needless or open exclamations. I am supposed to have many studies, but
most philosophical. I must yield this to be true, that I suppose few (that be
not professors) have read more. And I need not tell you, that I am not so
simple that I understand not, nor so forgetful that I remember not; and yet,
amidst my many volumes, I hope God's book has not been my seldomest lectures,
in which we find that which by reason all ought to believe. I see many overbold
with God Almighty, making too many subtle scannings of his blessed will. The
presumption is so great that I may not suffer it," etc. D'Ewes's Journal, p.
328.
she chose to act according to her own ideas, which led her rather to approach
nearer to the church of Rome, in the parade of external worship, than to widen
the breach by abolishing any rite already established. Neal's Hist. of the
Puritans, i. 1^8.176.
An act of parliament, in the first year of her reign, not only required an
exact conformity to the mode of worship prescribed in the service book, under
most rigorous penalties, but empowered the Queen to enjoin the observance of
such additional ceremonies as might tend, in her opinion, to render the public
exercises of devotion more decent and edifying. ^ Eliz. c. 2.


The advocates for a farther reformation, notwithstanding this cruel
disappointment of the sanguine hopes with which they returned to their native
country, did not relinquish their design. They disseminated their opinions with
great industry among the people. They extolled the purity of foreign churches,
and inveighed against the superstitious practices with which religion was
defiled in their own church. In vain did the defenders of the established
system represent that these forms and ceremonies were, in themselves, things
perfectly indifferent, which, from long usage, were viewed with reverence; and,
by their impression upon the senses and imagination, tended not only to fix the
attention, but to affect the heart, and to warm it with devout and worthy
sentiments. The Puritans (for by that name such as scrupled to comply with what
was enjoined by the act of uniformity were distinguished) maintained, that the
rites in question were inventions of men, superadded to the simple and
reasonable service required in the word of God; that from the excessive
solicitude with which conformity to them was exacted, the multitude must
conceive such an high opinion of their value and importance, as might induce
them to rest satisfied with the mere form and shadow of religion, and to
imagine that external observances may compensate for the want of inward
sanctity; that ceremonies which had been long employed by a society manifestly
corrupt, to veil its own defects, and to seduce and fascinate mankind, ought
now to be rejected as relics of superstition unworthy of a place in a church
which gloried in the name of Reformed.

The people, to whom in every religious controversy the final appeal is made,
listened to the arguments of the contending parties; and it is obvious to which
of them, men who had lately beheld the superstitious spirit of Popery, and felt
its persecuting rage, would lend the most favorable ear. The desire of a
farther separation from the church of Rome spread wide through the nation. The
preachers who contended for this, and who refused to wear the surplice, and
other vestments peculiar to their order, or to observe the ceremonies enjoined
by law, were followed and admired, while the ministry of the zealous advocates
for conformity was deserted, and their persons often exposed to insult. For
some time the non-conformists were connived at; but as their number and
boldness increased, the interposition both of spiritual and civil authority was
deemed necessary in order to check their progress. To the disgrace of
Christians, the sacred rights of conscience and private judgment, as well as
the charity and mutual forbearance suitable to the mild spirit of the religion
which they professed, were in that age little understood. Not only the idea of
toleration, but even the word itself in the sense now affixed to it, was then
unknown. Every church claimed a right to employ the hand of power for the
protection of truth and the extirpation of error. The laws of her kingdom armed
Elizabeth with ample authority for this purpose, and she was abundantly
disposed to exercise it with full vigor. Many of the most eminent among the
Puritan clergy were deprived of their benefices, others were imprisoned,
several were fined, and some put to death. But persecution, as usually happens,
instead of extinguishing, inflamed their zeal to such a height, that the
jurisdiction of the ordinary courts of law was deemed insufficient to suppress
it, and a new tribunal was established under the title of the high commission
for ecclesiastical affairs, whose powers and mode of procedure were hardly less
odious or less hostile to the principles of justice, than those of the Spanish
inquisition. Several attempts were made in the House of Commons to check these
arbitrary proceedings, and to moderate the rage of persecution; but the Queen
always imposed silence upon those who presumed to deliver any opinion with
respect to a matter appertaining solely to her prerogative, in a tone as
imperious and arrogant as was ever used by Henry VIII. in addressing his
Parliaments; and so tamely obsequious were the guardians of the people's
rights, that they not only obeyed those unconstitutional commands, but
consented to an act, by which every person who should absent himself from
church during a month was subjected to punishment by fine and imprisonment; and
if after conviction he did not, within three months, renounce his erroneous
opinions, and conform to the laws, he was then obliged to abjure the realm; but
if he either refused to comply with this condition, or returned from
banishment, he should be put to death as a felon without benefit of clergy. 35
Eliz. c. 1.


By this iniquitous statute, equally repugnant to ideas of civil and of
religious liberty, the Puritans were cut off from any hope of obtaining either
reformation in the church or indulgence to themselves. Exasperated by this
rigorous treatment, their antipathy to the established religion increased, and,
with the progress natural to violent passions, carried them far beyond what was
their original aim. The first Puritans did not entertain any scruples with
respect to the lawfulness of Episcopal government, and seem to have been very
unwilling to withdraw from communion with the church of which they were
members. But when they were thrown out of her bosom, and constrained to hold
separate assemblies for the worship of God, their followers no longer viewed a
society by which they were oppressed with reverence or affection. Her
government, her discipline, her ritual, were examined with minute attention.
Every error was pointed out, and every defect magnified. The more boldly any
teacher inveighed against the corruptions of the church, he was listened to
with greater approbation; and the farther he urged his disciples to depart from
such an impure community, the more eagerly did they follow him. By degrees,
ideas of ecclesiastical policy, altogether repugnant to those of the
established church, gained footing in the nation. The more sober and learned
Puritans inclined to that form which is known by the name of Presbyterian. Such
as were more thoroughly possessed with the spirit of innovation, however much
they might approve the equality of pastors which that system establishes,
reprobated the authority which it vests in various judicatories, descending
from one to another in regular subordination, as inconsistent with Christian
liberty.

These wild notions floated for some time in the minds of the people, and
amused them with many ideal schemes of ecclesiastical policy. At length Robert
Brown, (1580) a popular declaimer in high estimation, reduced them to a system,
on which he modelled his own congregation. He taught, that the church of
England was corrupt and antichristian, its ministers not lawfully ordained, its
ordinances and sacraments invalid; and therefore he prohibited his people to
hold communion with it in any religious function. He maintained, that a society
of Christians, uniting together to worship God, constituted a church, possessed
of complete jurisdiction in the conduct of its own affairs, independent of any
other society, and unaccountable to any superior; that the priesthood was
neither a distinct order in the church, nor conferred an indelible character;
but that every man qualified to teach might be set apart for that office by the
election of the brethren, and by imposition of their hands; in like manner, by
their authority, he might be discharged from that function, and reduced to the
rank of a private Christian; that every person when admitted a member of a
church ought to make a public confession of his faith, and give evidence of his
being in a state of favor with God; and that all the affairs of a church were
to be regulated by the decision of the majority of its members.

This democratical form of government, which abolished all distinction of ranks
in the church, and conferred an equal portion of power on every individual,
accorded so perfectly with the levelling genius of fanaticism, that it was
fondly adopted by many as a complete model of Christian policy. From their
founder, they were denominated Brownists; and as their tenets were more hostile
to the established religion than those of other separatists, the fiercest storm
of persecution fell upon their heads. Many of them were fined or imprisoned,
and some put to death; and though Brown, with a levity of which there are few
examples among enthusiasts whose vanity has been soothed by being recognized as
heads of a party, abandoned his disciples, conformed to the established
religion, and accepted of a benefice in the church, the sect not only
subsisted, but continued to spread, especially among persons in the middle and
lower ranks of life. But as all their motions were carefully watched, both by
the ecclesiastical and civil courts, which, as often as they were detected,
punished them with the utmost rigor, a body of them, weary of living in a
state of continual danger and alarm, fled to Holland, and settled in Leyden,
under the care of Mr. John Robinson, their pastor. There they resided for
several years unmolested and obscure. But many of their aged members dying, and
some of the younger marrying into Dutch families, while their church received
no increase, either by recruits from England, or by proselytes gained in the
country, they began to be afraid, that all their high seize in spiritual
knowledge would be lost, and that perfect fabric of policy, which they had
erected, would be dissolved and consigned to oblivion, if they remained longer
in a strange land.

Deeply affected with the prospect of an event, which to them appeared fatal to
the interests of truth, they thought themselves called, in order to prevent it,
to remove to some other place, where they might profess and propagate their
opinions with greater success. America, in which their countrymen were at that
time intent on planting colonies, presented itself to their thoughts. They
flattered themselves with hopes of being permitted, in that remote region, to
follow their own ideas in religion without disturbance. The dangers and
hardships to which all former emigrants to America had deen exposed, did not
deter them. "They were well weaned, (according to their own description) from
the delicate milk of their mother country, and enured to the difficulties of a
strange land. They were knit together in a strict and sacred band, by virtue of
which they held themselves obliged to take care of the good of each other, and
of the whole. It was not with them, as with other men, whom small things could
discourage, or small discontents cause to wish themselves at home again."
Hutchinson's Hist. of Massach. p. 4.
The first object of their solicitude (1618) was to secure the free exercise of
their religion. For this purpose they applied to the king; and though James
refused to give them any explicit assurance of toleration, they seem to have
obtained from him some promise of his connivance, as long as they continued to
demean themselves quietly. So eager were they to accomplish their favorite
scheme, that, relying on this precarious security, they began to negociate with
the Virginian company for a tract of land within the limits of their patent.
This they easily procured from a society desirous of encouraging migration to a
vast country, of which they had hitherto occupied only a few spots.

After the utmost efforts, their preparations fell far short of what was
requisite for beginning the settlement of a new colony. A hundred and twenty
persons sailed (1620, Sept. 6.) from England in a single ship on this arduous
undertaking. The place of their destination was Hudson's River, where they
intended to settle; but their captain having been bribed, as is said, by the
Dutch, who had then formed a scheme which they afterward accomplished, of
planting a colony there, carried them so far toward the north, that the first
land in America which they made was Cape-Cod. They were now, (Nov. 11) not only
beyond the precincts of the territory which had been granted to them, but
beyond those of the company from which they derived their right. The season,
however, was so far advanced, and sickness raged so violently among men
unaccustomed to the hardships of a long voyage, that it became necessary to
take up their abode there. After exploring the coast, they chose for their
station, a place now belonging to the province of Massachusetts Bay, to which
they gave the name of New Plymouth, probably out of respect to that company,
within whose jurisdiction they now found themselves situated. Hubard's Pres.
State, p. ^. Cotton's Magnalla, p. 7. Hutchinson's Hist. p. 3. etc.


No season could be more unfavourable to settlement than that in which the
colony landed. The winter, which, from the predominance of cold in America, is
rigorous to a degree unknown in parallel latitudes of our hemisphere, was
already set in; and they were slenderly provided with what was requisite for
comfortable subsistence, under a climate considerably more severe than that for
which they had made preparation. Above one half of them was cut off before the
return of spring, by diseases, or by famine; the survivors, instead of having
leisure to attend to the supply of their own wants, were compelled to take arms
against the savages in their neighborhood. Happily for the English, a
pestilence, which raged in America the year before they landed, had swept off
so great a number of the natives, that they were quickly repulsed and humbled.
The privilege of professing their own opinions, and of being governed by laws
of their own framing, afforded consolation to the colonists amidst all their
dangers and hardships. The constitution of their church was the same with that
which they had established in Holland. Their system of civil government was
founded on those ideas of the natural equality among men, to which their
ecclesiastical policy had accustomed them. Every free man, who was a member of
the church, was admitted into the supreme legislative body. The laws of England
were adopted as the basis of their jurisprudence, though with some diversity in
the punishments inflicted upon crimes, borrowed from the Mosaic institutions.
The executive power was vested in a governor and some assistants, who were
elected annually by the members of the legislative assembly. Chalmers' Annals,
p. 87.
So far their institutions appear to be founded on the ordinary maxims of human
prudence. But it was a favorite opinion with all the enthusiasts of that age,
that the scriptures contained a complete system, not only of spiritual
instruction, but of civil wisdom and polity; and without attending to the
peculiar circumstances or situation of the people whose history is there
recorded, they often deduced general rules for their own conduct, from what
happened among men in a very different state. Under the influence of this wild
notion, the colonists of New Plymouth, in imitation of the primitive
Christians, threw all their property into a common stock, and, like members of
one family, carried on every work of industry by their joint labor for public
behoof. Chalmers' Annals, p. 89. Douglas's Summary, i. p. ^70
But, however this resolution might evidence the sincerity of their faith, it
retarded the progress of their colony. The same fatal effects flowed from this
community of goods, and of labor, which had formerly been experienced in
Virginia; and it soon became necessary to relinquish what was too refined to be
capable of being accommodated to the affairs of men. But though they built a
small town, and surrounded it with such a fence as afforded sufficient security
against the assaults of Indians, the soil around it was so poor, their
religious principles were so unsocial, and the supply sent them by their
friends so scanty, that at the end of ten years, the number of people belonging
to the settlement did not exceed three hundred. Ibid. p. 97.
During some years they appear not to have acquired right by any legal
conveyance to the territory which they had occupied. At length (1630) they
obtained a grant of property from the council of the New Plymouth company, but
were never incorporated as a body politic by royal charter. Ibid. p. 97. 10^.
Unlike all the other settlements in America, this colony must be considered
merely as a voluntary association, held together by the tacit consent of its
members to recognize the authority of laws, and submit to the jurisdiction of
magistrates framed and chosen by themselves. In this state it remained an
independent, but feeble community, until it was united to its more powerful
neighbor, the colony of Massachusetts Bay, the origin and progress of which I
now proceed to relate.

The original company of Plymouth having done nothing effectual toward
establishing any permanent settlement in America, James I. in the year one
thousand six hundred and twenty, issued a new charter to the Duke of Lenox, the
Marquis of Buckingham, and several other persons of distinction in his court,
by which he conveyed to them a right to a territory in America, still more
extensive than what had been granted to the former patentees, incorporating
them as a body politic, in order to plant colonies there, with powers and
jurisdiction similar to those contained in his charters to the companies of
South and North Virginia. This society was distinguished by the name of the
Grand Council of Plymouth for planting and governing New England. What
considerations of public utility could induce the king to commit such an
undertaking to persons apparently so ill qualified for conducting it, or what
prospect of private advantage prompted them to engage in it, the information we
receive from contemporary writers does not enable us to determine. Certain it
is, that the expectations of both were disappointed, and after many schemes and
arrangements, all the attempts of the new associates toward colonization
proved unsuccessful.

New England must have remained unoccupied, if the same causes which occasioned
the emigration of the Brownists had not continued to operate. Notwithstanding
the violent persecution to which Puritans of every denomination were still
exposed, their number and zeal daily increased. As they now despaired of
obtaining in their own country any relaxation of the penal statutes enacted
against their sect, many began to turn their eyes toward some other place of
retreat, where they might profess their own opinions with impunity. From the
tranquillity which their brethren had hitherto enjoyed in New Plymouth, they
hoped to find this desired asylum in New England; and by the activity of Mr.
White, a nonconformist minister at Dorchester, an association was formed by
several gentlemen who had imbibed Puritanical notions, in order to conduct a
colony thither. They purchased from the council of Plymouth all the territory,
extending in length from three miles north of the River Merrimack, to three
miles south of Charles River, and in breadth from the Atlantic to the Southern
Ocean (1627, March 19). Zealous as these proprietors were to accomplish their
favorite purpose, they quickly perceived their own inability to attempt the
population of such an immense region, and deemed it necessary to call in the
aid of more opulent copartners. Neal's Hist. of New England, ^. p. ^


Of these they found, without difficulty, a sufficient number, chiefly in the
capital, and among persons in the commercial and other industrious walks of
life, who had openly joined the sect of the Puritans, or secretly favored
their opinions. These new adventurers, with the caution natural to men
conversant in business, entertained doubts concerning the propriety of founding
a colony on the basis of a grant from a private company of patentees, who might
convey a right of property in the soil, but could not confer jurisdiction, or
the privilege of governing that society which they had in contemplation to
establish. As it was only from royal authority that such powers could be
derived, they applied for these; and Charles granted their request, with a
facility which appears astonishing, when we consider the principles and views
of the men who were suitors for the favor.

Time has been considered as the parent of political wisdom, but its
instructions are communicated slowly. Although the experience of above twenty
years might have taught the English the impropriety of committing the
government of settlements in America, to exclusive corporations resident in
Europe, neither the king nor his subjects had profited so much by what passed
before their eyes, as to have extended their ideas beyond those adopted by
James, in his first attempts toward colonization. The charter of Charles I. to
the adventurers associated for planting the province of Massachusetts Bay, was
perfectly similar to those granted by his father to the two Virginian companies
and to the council of Plymouth. The new adventurers were incorporated as a body
politic, and their right to the territory, which they had purchased from the
council of Plymouth, being confirmed by the king, they were empowered to
dispose of the lands, and to govern the people who should settle upon them. The
first governor of the company, and his assistants, were named by the crown; the
right of electing their successors was vested in the members of the
corporation. The executive power was committed to the governor and assistants;
that of legislation to the body of proprietors, who might make statutes and
orders for the good of the community, not inconsistent with the laws of
England, and enforce the observance of them, according to the course of other
corporations within the realm. Their lands were to be held by the same liberal
tenure with those granted to the Virginian company. They obtained the same
temporary exemption from internal taxes, and from duties on goods exported or
imported; and notwithstanding their migration to America, they and their
descendants were declared to be entitled to all the rights of natural-born
subjects. Hutchinson's Collect. of Original Papers, p. 1. etc.


The manifest object of this charter was to confer on the adventurers who
undertook to people the territory on Massachusetts Bay, all the corporate
rights possessed by the council of Plymouth, from which they had purchased it,
and to form them into a public body, resembling other great trading companies,
which the spirit of monarchy had at that time multiplied in the kingdom. The
king seems not to have foreseen, or to have suspected, the secret intentions of
those who projected the measure; for so far was he from alluring emigrants, by
any hopes of indulgence with respect to their religious scruples, or from
promising any relaxation from the rigor of the penal statutes against
non-conformists, that he expressly provides for having the oath of supremacy
administered to every person who shall pass to the colony, or inhabit there.
Hutchinson's Collect. of Original Papers, p. 18. -- It is surprising, that Mr.
Neal, an industrious, and generally a well-informed writer, should affirm, that
"free liberty of conscience was granted by this charter to all who should
settle in those parts, to worship God in their own way." Hist. of N. Engl. i.
124. This he repeats in his History of the Puritans, ii. 210; and subsequent
historians have copied him implicitly. No permission of that kind, however, is
contained in the charter; and such an indulgence would have been inconsistent
with all the maxims of Charles and his ministers during the course of his
reign. At the time when Charles issued the charter, the influence of Laud over
his councils was at its height, the Puritans were prosecuted with the greatest
severity, and the kingdom was ruled entirely by prerogative. This is not an
era in which one can expect to meet with concessions in favor of
non-conformists from a prince of Charles's character and principles.


But whatever were the intentions of the king (1629) the adventurers kept their
own object steadily in view. Soon after their powers to establish a colony were
rendered complete by the royal charter, they fitted out five ships for New
England; on board of which embarked upwards of three hundred passengers, with a
view of settling there. These were mostly zealous Puritans, whose chief
inducement to relinquish their native land was the hope of enjoying religious
liberty, in a country far removed from the seat of government and the
oppression of ecclesiastical courts. Some eminent nonconformist ministers
accompanied them as their spiritual instructors. On their arrival in New
England (June 29) they found the wretched remainder of a small body of
emigrants, who had left England the preceding year, under the conduct of
Endicott, a deep enthusiast, whom, prior to their incorporation by the royal
charter, the associates had appointed deputy governor. They were settled at a
place called by the Indians Naunekeag, and to which Endicott, with the fond
affectation of fanatics of that age to employ the language and appellations of
scripture in the affairs of common life, had given the name of Salem.

The emigrants under Endicott, and such as now joined them, coincided perfectly
in religious principles. They were Puritans of the strictest form; and to men
of this character the institution of a church was naturally of such interesting
concern as to take place of every other object. In this first transaction, they
displayed, at once, the extent of the reformation at which they aimed. Without
regard to the sentiments of that monarch under the sanction of whose authority
they settled in America, and from whom they derived right to act as a body
politic, and in contempt of the laws of England, with which the charter
required that none of their acts or ordinances should be inconsistent, they
adopted in their infant church that form of policy which has since been
distinguished by the name of Independent. They united together (August 6) in
religious society, by a solemn covenant with God, and with one another, and in
strict conformity, as they imagined, to the rules of scripture. They elected a
pastor, a teacher, and an elder, whom they set apart for their respective
offices, by imposition of the hands of the brethren. All who were that day
admitted members of the church, signified their assent to a confession of faith
drawn up by their teacher, and gave an account of the foundation of their own
hopes as Christians; and it was declared, that no person should hereafter be
received into communion until he gave satisfaction to the church with respect
to his faith and sanctity. The form of public worship which they instituted was
without a liturgy, disincumbered of every superfluous ceremony, and reduced to
the lowest standard of Calvinistic simplicity. Math. Ma^nal. p. 18. Neal's
Hist. of N. Engl. i. 126 Chalmers, p. 14^.


It was with the utmost complacence that men, passionately attached to their
own notions, and who had long been restrained from avowing them, employed
themselves in framing this model of a pure church. But, in the first moment
that they began to taste of Christian liberty themselves, they forgot that
other men had an equal title to enjoy it. Some of their number, retaining an
high veneration for the ritual of the English church, were so much offended at
the total abolition of it, that they withdrew from communion with the
newly-instituted church, and assembled separately for the worship of God. With
an inconsistency, of which there are such flagrant instances among Christians
of every denomination, that it cannot be imputed as a reproach peculiar to any
sect, the very men who had themselves fled from persecution became persecutors;
and had recourse, in order to enforce their own opinions, to the same
unhallowed weapons, against the employment of which they had lately
remonstrated with so much violence. Endicott called the two chief malcontents
before him; and though they were men of note, and among the number of original
patentees, he expelled them from the society, and sent them home in the ships
which were returning to England. Mather, p. 19. Neal, p. 129.
The colonists were now united in sentiments; but on the approach of winter,
they suffered so much from diseases, which carried off almost one half of their
number, that they made little progress in occupying the country.

Meanwhile the directors of the company in England exerted their utmost
endeavors in order to reinforce the colony with a numerous body of new
settlers; and as the intolerant spirit of Laud exacted conformity to all the
injunctions of the church with greater rigor than ever, the condition of such
as had any scruples with respect to this, became so intolerable, that many
accepted of their invitation to a secure retreat in New England. Several of
these were persons of greater opulence and of better condition than any who had
hitherto migrated to that country. But as they intended to employ their
fortunes, as well as to hazard their persons, in establishing a permanent
colony there, and foresaw many inconveniences from their subjection to laws
made without their own consent, and framed by a society which must always be
imperfectly acquainted with their situation, they insisted that the corporate
powers of the company should be transferred from England to America, and the
government of the colony be vested entirely in those who, by settling in the
latter country, became members of it. Hutchinson's Coll. of Papers, p. 25.
The company had already expended considerable sums in prosecuting the design
of their institution, without having received almost any return, and had no
prospect of gain, or even of reimbursement, but what was too remote and
uncertain to be suitable to the ideas of merchants, the most numerous class of
its members. They hesitated, however, with respect to the legality of granting
the demand of the intended emigrants. But such was their eagerness to be
disengaged from an unpromising adventure, that, "by general consent, it was
determined, that the charter should be transferred, and the government be
settled in New England." Mather, p. 20. Hutchinson's Hist. p. 12. Chalmers, p.
150.
To the members of the corporation who chose to remain at home was reserved a
share in the trading stock and profits of the company during seven years.

In this singular transaction, to which there is nothing similar in the history
of English colonization, two circumstances merit particular attention; one is
the power of the company to make this transference; the other is the silent
acquiescence with which the king permitted it to take place. If the validity of
this determination of the company be tried by the charter which constituted it
a body politic, and conveyed to it all the corporate powers with which it was
invested, it is evident that it could neither exercise those powers in any mode
different from what the charter prescribed, nor alienate them in such a manner,
as to convert the jurisdiction of a trading corporation in England into a
provincial government in America. But from the first institution of the company
of Massachusetts Bay, its members seem to have been animated with a spirit of
innovation in civil policy, as well as in religion; and by the habit of
rejecting established usages in the one, they were prepared for deviating from
them in the other. They had applied for a royal charter, in order to give legal
effect to the operations in England, as acts of a body politic; but the persons
whom they sent out to America, as soon as they landed there, considered
themselves as individuals, united together by voluntary association, possessing
the natural right of men who form a society, to adopt what mode of government,
and to exact what laws they deemed most conducive to general felicity. Upon
this principle of being entitled to judge and to decide for themselves, they
established their church in Salem, without regard to the institutions of the
church of England, of which the charter supposed them to be members, and bound
of consequence to conformity with its ritual. Suitably to the same ideas, we
shall observe them framing all their future plans of civil and ecclesiastical
policy. The king, though abundantly vigilant in observing and checking slighter
encroachments on his prerogative, was either so much occupied at that time with
other cares occasioned by his fatal breach with his parliament, that he could
not attend to the proceedings of the company; or he was so much pleased with
the prospect of removing a body of turbulent subjects to a distant country,
where they might be useful, and could not prove dangerous, that he was disposed
to connive at the irregularity of a measure which facilitated their departure.

Without interruption from the crown, the adventurers proceeded to carry their
scheme into execution. In a general court, John Winthrop was appointed
governor, and Thomas Dudley deputy governor, and eighteen assistants were
chosen; in whom, together with the body of freemen who should settle in New
England (1630) were vested all the corporate rights of the company. With such
zeal and activity did they prepare for emigration, that in the course of the
ensuing year seventeen ships sailed for New England, and aboard of these above
fifteen hundred persons, among whom were several of respectable families, and
in easy circumstances. On their arrival in New England, many were so ill
satisfied with the situation of Salem, that they explored the country in quest
of some better station; and settling in different places around the Bay,
according to their various fancies, laid the foundations of Boston,
Charlestown, Dorchester, Roxborough, and other towns, which have since become
considerable in the province. In each of these a church was established on the
same model with that of Salem. This, together with the care of making provision
for their subsistence during winter, occupied them entirely during some months.
But in the first general court (October 19) their disposition to consider
themselves as members of an independent society, unconfined by the regulations
in their charter, began to appear. The election of the governor and deputy
governor, the appointment of all other officers, and even the power of making
laws, all which were granted by the charter to the freemen, were taken from
them, and vested in the council of assistants. But the aristocratical spirit of
this resolution did not accord with the ideas of equality prevalent among the
people, who had been surprised into an approbation of it. Next year (1631) the
freemen, whose numbers had been greatly augmented by the admission of new
members, resumed their former rights.

But, at the same time, they ventured to deviate from the charter in a matter
of greater moment, which deeply affected all the future operations of the
colony, and contributed greatly to form that peculiar character by which the
people of New England have been distinguished. A law was passed, declaring that
none shall hereafter be admitted freemen, or be entitled to any share in the
government, or be capable of being chosen magistrates, or even of serving as
jurymen, but such as have been received into the church as members. Hutchinson,
p. ^. Chalmers, p. 153.
By this resolution, every person who did not hold the favorite opinions
concerning the doctrines of religion, the discipline of the church, or the
rites of worship, was at once cast out of the society, and stripped of all the
privileges of a citizen. An uncontrolled power of approving or rejecting the
claims of those who applied for admission into communion with the church being
vested in the ministers and leading men of each congregation, the most valuable
of all civil rights was made to depend on their decision, with respect to
qualifications purely ecclesiastical. As in examining into these, they
proceeded not by any known or established rules, but exercised a discretionary
judgment, the clergy rose gradually to a degree of influence and authority,
from which the levelling spirit of the independent church policy was calculated
to exclude them. As by their determination the political condition of every
citizen was fixed, all paid court to men possessed of such an important power,
by assuming those austere and sanctimonious manners which were known to be the
most certain recommendation to their favor. In consequence of this ascendant,
which was acquired chiefly by the wildest enthusiasts among the clergy, their
notions became a standard to which all studied to conform, and the
singularities characteristic of the Puritans in that age increased, of which
many remarkable instances will occur in the course of our narrative.

Though a considerable number of planters was cut off by the diseases prevalent
in a country so imperfectly cultivated by its original inhabitants, as to be
still almost one continued forest, and several, discouraged by the hardships to
which they were exposed, returned to England (1632) recruits sufficient to
replace them arrived. At the same time the smallpox, a distemper fatal to the
people of the New World, swept away such multitudes of the natives that some
whole tribes disappeared; and Heaven, by thus evacuating a country in which the
English might settle without molestation, was supposed to declare its intention
that they should occupy it.

As several of the vacant Indian stations were well chosen, such was the
eagerness of the English to take possession of them, that their settlements
became more numerous and more widely dispersed than suited the condition of an
infant colony. This led to an innovation which totally altered the nature and
constitution of the government. When a general court was to be held in the year
one thousand six hundred and thirty-four, the freemen, instead of attending it
in person as the charter prescribed, elected representatives in their different
districts, authorizing them to appear in their name, with full power to
deliberate and decide concerning every point that fell under the cognizance of
the general court. Whether this measure was suggested by some designing
leaders, or whether they found it prudent to sooth the people by complying with
their inclination, is uncertain. The representatives were admitted; and
considered themselves, in conjunction with the governor and assistants, as the
supreme legislative assembly of the colony. In assertion of their own rights
they enacted, that no law should be passed, no tax should be imposed, and no
public officer should be appointed, but in the general assembly. The pretexts
for making this new arrangement were plausible. The number of freemen was
greatly increased; many resided at a distance from the places where the supreme
courts were held; personal attendance became inconvenient; the form of
government in their own country had rendered familiar the idea of delegating
their rights, and committing the guardianship of their liberties, to
representatives of their own choice, and the experience of ages had taught them
that this important trust might with safety be lodged in their hands. Thus did
the company of Massachusetts Bay, in less than six years from its incorporation
by the king, mature and perfect a scheme which, I have already observed, some
of its more artful and aspiring leaders seem to have had in view when the
association for peopling New England was first formed. The colony must
henceforward be considered, not as a corporation whose powers were defined, and
its mode of procedure regulated by its charter, but as a society, which, having
acquired or assumed political liberty, had, by its own voluntary deed, adopted
a constitution or government framed on the model of that in England.

But however liberal their system of civil policy might be, as their religious
opinions were no longer under any restraint of authority, the spirit of
fanaticism continued to spread, and became every day wilder and more
extravagant. Williams, a minister of Salem, in high estimation, having
conceived an antipathy to the Cross of St. George in the standard of England,
declaimed against it with so much vehemence as a relic of superstition and
idolatry, which ought not to be retained among a people so pure and sanctified,
that Endicot, one of the members of the court of assistants, in a transport of
zeal, publicly cut out the Cross from the ensign displayed before the
governor's gate. This frivolous matter interested and divided the colony. Some
of the militia scrupled to follow colors in which there was a Cross, lest they
should do honor to an idol; others refused to serve under a mutilated banner,
lest they should be suspected of having renounced their allegiance to the crown
of England. After a long controversy, carried on by both parties with that heat
and zeal which in trivial disputes supply the want of argument, the contest was
terminated by a compromise. The Cross was retained in the ensigns of forts and
ships, but erased from the colors of the militia. Williams, on account of
this, as well as of some other doctrines deemed unsound, was banished out of
the colony. Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. p. 1^0, etc. Hutchinson, p. 3^. Chalmers,
p. 15^.


The prosperous state of New England was now so highly extolled, and the simple
frame of its ecclesiastic policy was so much admired by all whose affections
were estranged from the church of England, that crowds of new setlers flocked
thither (1635). Among these were two persons, whose names have been rendered
memorable by the appearance which they afterward made on a more conspicuous
theater; one was Hugh Peter's, the enthusiastic and intriguing chaplain of
Oliver Cromwell; the other Mr. Henry Vane, son of Sir Henry Vane, a privy
counselor, high in office, and of great credit with the king; a young man of a
noble family, animated with such zeal for pure religion and such love of
liberty as induced him to relinquish all his hopes in England, and to settle in
a colony hitherto no farther advanced in improvement than barely to afford
subsistence to its members, was received with the fondest admiration. His
mortified appearance, his demure look, and rigid manners, carried even beyond
the standard of preciseness in that society which he joined, seemed to indicate
a man of high spiritual seize, while his abilities and address in
business pointed him out as worthy of the highest station in the community.
With universal consent, and high expectations of advantage from his
administration, he was elected governor in the year (1636) subsequent to his
arrival. But as the affairs of an infant colony afforded not objects adequate
to the talents of Vane, his busy pragmatical spirit occupied itself with
theological subtilties and speculations unworthy of his attention. These were
excited by a woman, whose reveries produced such effects, both within the
colony and beyond its precincts, that, frivolous as they may now appear, they
must be mentioned as an occurrence of importance in its history.

It was the custom at that time in New England, among the chief men in every
congregation, to meet once a week, in order to repeat the sermons which they
had heard, and to hold religious conference with respect to the doctrine
contained in them. Mrs. Hutchinson, whose husband was among the most
respectable members of the colony, regretting that persons of her sex were
excluded from the benefit of those meetings, assembled statedly in her house a
number of women, who employed themselves in pious exercises similar to those of
the men. At first she satisfied herself with repeating what she could recollect
of the discourses delivered by their teachers. She began afterward to add
illustrations, and at length proceeded to censure some of the clergy as
unsound, and to vent opinions and fancies of her own. These were all founded on
the system which is denominated Antinomian by divines, and tinged with the
deepest enthusiasm. She taught, that sanctity of life is no evidence of
justification, or of a state of favor with God; and that such as inculcated
the necessity of manifesting the reality of our faith by obedience, preached
only a covenant of works; she contended that the spirit of God dwelt personally
in good men, and by inward revelations and impressions they received the
fullest discoveries of the divine will. The fluency and confidence with which
she delivered these notions gained her many admirers and proselytes, not only
among the vulgar, but among the principal inhabitants. The whole colony was
interested and agitated. Vane, whose sagacity and acuteness seemed to forsake
him whenever they were turned toward religion, espoused and defended her
wildest tenets. Many conferences were held (1637) days of fasting and
humiliation were appointed, a general synod was called, and, after dissentions
so violent as threatened the dissolution of the colony, Mrs. Hutchinson's
opinions were condemned as erroneous, and she herself banished. Several of her
disciples withdrew from the province of their own accord. Vane quitted America
in disgust, unlamented even by those who had lately admired him; some of whom
regarded him now as a mere visionary, and others as one of those dark turbulent
spirits doomed to embroil every society into which they enter. Mather, book
vii. c. 3. Hutchinson, p. 53. 74. Neal, p. 1. 144. 165, etc. Chalmers, p. 163.


However much these theological contests might disquiet the colony of
Massachusetts Bay, they contributed to the more speedy population of America.
When Williams was banished from Salem in the year one thousand six hundred and
thirty-four, such was the attachment of his hearers to a pastor whose piety
they revered, that a good number of them voluntarily accompanied him in his
exile. They directed their march toward the south; and having purchased from
the natives a considerable tract of land, to which Williams gave the name of
Providence, they settled there. They were joined soon after by some of those to
whom the proceedings against Mrs. Hutchinson gave disgust; and by a transaction
with the Indians they obtained a right to a fertile island in Naraganset Bay,
which acquired the name of Rhode Island. Williams remained among them upwards
of forty years, respected as the father and the guide of the colony which he
had planted. His spirit differed from that of the Puritans in Massachusetts; it
was mild and tolerating; and having ventured himself to reject established
opinions, he endeavored to secure the same liberty to other men, by
maintaining, that the exercise of private judgment was a natural and sacred
right; that the civil magistrate has no compulsive jurisdiction in the concerns
of religion; that the punishment of any person on account of his opinions, was
an encroachment on conscience, and an act of persecution. Neal's Hist. of N.
Eng. p. 141.
These humane principles he instilled into his followers; and all who felt or
dreaded oppression in other settlements, resorted to a community in which
universal toleration was known to be a fundamental maxim. In the plantations of
Providence and Rhode Island, political union was established by voluntary
association, and the equality of condition among the members, as well as their
religious opinions; their form of government was purely democratical, the
supreme power being lodged in the freemen personally assembled. In this state
they remained until they were incorporated by charter. Hutchinson, p. 38. N^al
^. 14^. ^oug^. S^. ^. p. 76, S^ Chalmers, (...)


To similar causes the colony of Connecticut is indebted for its origin. The
rivalship between Mr. Cotton and Mr. Hooker, two favorite ministers in the
settlement of Massachusetts Bay, disposed the latter, who was least successful
in this contest for fame and power, to wish for some settlement at a distance
from a competitor by whom his reputation was eclipsed. A good number of those
who had imbibed Mrs. Hutchinson's notions, and were offended at such as
combated them, offered to accompany him. Having employed proper persons to
explore the country, they pitched upon the west side of the great river
Connecticut as the most inviting station; and in the year one thousand six
hundred and thirty-six, about an hundred persons, with their wives and
families, after a fatiguing march of many days through woods and swamps,
arrived there, and laid the foundation of the towns of Hartford, Springfield,
and Weatherfield. This settlement was attended with peculiar irregularities.
Part of the district now occupied lay beyond the limits of the territory
granted to the colony of Massachusetts Bay, and yet the emigrants took a
commission from the governor and court of assistants, empowering them to
exercise jurisdiction in that country. The Dutch from Manhados or New York,
having discovered the river Connecticut, and established some trading houses
upon it, had acquired all the right that prior possession confers. Lord Say and
Sele, and Lord Brook, the heads of two illustrious families, were so much
alarmed at the arbitrary measures of Charles I. both in his civil and
ecclesiastical administration, that they took a resolution, not unbecoming
young men of noble birth and liberal sentiments, of retiring to the New World,
in order to enjoy such a form of religion as they approved of, and those
liberties which they deemed essential to the well-being of society. They, too,
fixed on the banks of the Connecticut as their place of settlement, and had
taken possession, by building a fort at the mouth of the river, which, from
their united names, was called Say Brook. The emigrants from Massachusetts,
without regarding either the defects in their own right or the pretensions of
other claimants, kept possession, and proceeded with vigor to clear and
cultivate the country. By degrees they got rid of every competitor. The Dutch,
recently settled in America, and too feeble to engage in a war, peaceably
withdrew from Connecticut. Lord Say and Sele, and Lord Brook, made over to the
colony whatever title they might have to any lands in that region. Society was
established by a voluntary compact of the freemen* and though they soon
disclaimed all dependence on the colony of Massachusetts Bay, they retained such
veneration for its legislative wisdom, as to adopt a form of government nearly
resembling its institutions, with respect both to civil and ecclesiastical
policy. At a subsequent period, the colony of Connecticut was likewise
incorporated by royal charter. Hutchinson, p. 44, etc. Neal, i. 147. Douglas,
ii. 158, and^. ^ Chalmers' Annals, chapter 12.


The history of the first attempts to people the provinces of New Hampshire and
Main, which form the fourth and most extensive division in New England, is
obscure and perplexed, by the interfering claims of various proprietors. The
company of Plymouth had inconsiderately parcelled out the northern part of the
territory contained in its grant among different persons: Of these only Sir
Ferdinando Gorges and Captain Mason seem to have had any serious intention to
occupy the lands allotted to them. Their efforts to accomplish this were
meritorious and persevering, but unsuccessful. The expense of settling colonies
in an uncultivated country must necessarily be great and immediate; the
prospect of a return is often uncertain and always remote. The funds of two
private adventurers were not adequate to such an undertaking. Nor did the
planters whom they sent out possess that principle of enthusiasm, which
animated their neighbors of Massachusetts with vigor, to struggle through all
the hardships and dangers to which society, in its infancy, is exposed in a
savage land. Gorges and Mason, it is probable, must have abandoned their
design, if, from the same motives that settlements had been made in Rhode
Island and Connecticut, colonists had not unexpectedly migrated into New
Hampshire and Main. Mr. Wheelright, a minister of some note, nearly related to
Mrs. Hutchinson, and one of her most fervent admirers and partisans, had, on
this account, been banished from the province of Massachusetts Bay. Hutchinson,
p. 70.
In quest of a new station, he took a course opposite to the other exiles; and
advancing toward the north, founded the town of Exeter, on a small river
flowing into Piskataqua Bay. His followers, few in number, but firmly united,
were of such rigid principles, that even the churches of Massachusetts did not
appear to them sufficiently pure. From time to time they received some
recruits, whom love of novelty, or dissatisfaction with the ecclesiastical
institutions of the other colonies, prompted to join them. Their plantations
were widely dispersed, but the country was thinly peopled, and its political
state extremely unsettled. The colony of Massachusetts Bay claimed jurisdiction
over them, as occupying lands situated within the limits of their grant. Gorges
and Mason asserted the rights conveyed to them as proprietors by their charter.
In several districts, the planters, without regarding the pretensions of either
party, governed themselves by maxims and laws copied from those of their
brethren in the adjacent colonies. Hutchinson, p. 103, etc. 176. Douglas's Sum.
ii. 22, etc. Chalmers' Annals, chapter 17.
The first reduction of the political constitution in the provinces of New
Hampshire and Main into a regular and permanent form, was subsequent to the
revolution.

By extending their settlements, the English became exposed to new danger. The
tribes of Indians around Massachusetts Bay were feeble and unwarlike; yet from
regard to justice, as well as motives of prudence, the first colonists were
studious to obtain the consent of the natives before they ventured to occupy
any of their lands; and though in such transactions the consideration given was
often very inadequate to the value of the territory acquired, it was sufficient
to satisfy the demands of the proprietors. The English took quiet possession of
the lands thus conveyed to them, and no open hostility broke out between them
and the ancient possessors. But the colonies of Providence and Connecticut soon
found that they were surrounded by more powerful and martial nations. Among
these the most considerable were the Naragansets and Pequods; the former seated
on the Bay which bears their name, and the latter occupying the territory which
stretches from the river Pequod along the banks of the Connecticut. The Pequods
were a formidable people, who could bring into the field a thousand warriors,
not inferior in courage to any in the New World. They foresaw, not only that
the extermination of the Indian race must be the consequence of permitting the
English to spread over the continent of America, but that if measures were not
speedily concerted to prevent it, the calamity would be unavoidable. With this
view they applied to the Narragansets, requesting them to forget ancient
animosities for a moment, and to cooperate with them in expeling a common
enemy who threatened both with destruction. They represented that, when those
strangers first landed, the object of their visit was not suspected, and no
proper precautions were taken to check their progress; that now, by sending out
colonies in one year toward three different quarters, their intentions were
manifest, and the people of America must abandon their native seats to make way
for unjust intruders.

But the N^ (...) Pequods, like most (...) America, w^ rivals, and there
subsisted between them an hereditary and implacable enmity. Revenge is the
darling passion of savages; in order to secure the indulgence of which there is
no present advantage that they will not sacrifice, and no future consequence
which they do not totally disregard. The Naragansets, instead of closing with
the prudent proposal of their neighbors, discovered their hostile intentions
to the governor of Massachusetts Bay; and, eager to lay hold on such a
favorable opportunity of wreaking their vengeance on their ancient foes,
entered into an alliance with the English against them. The Pequods, more
exasperated than discouraged by the imprudence and treachery of their
countrymen, took the field, and carried on the war in the usual mode of
Americans. They surprised stragg]ers, and scalped them; they plundered and
burnt remote settlements; they attacked Fort Say Brook without success, though
garrisoned only by twenty men; and when the English began to act offensively,
they retired to fastnesses which they deemed inaccessible. The different
colonies had agreed to unite against the common enemy, each furnishing a quota
of men in proportion to its numbers. The troops of Connecticut which lay most
exposed to danger were soon assembled. The march of those from Massachusetts,
which formed the most considerable body, was retarded by the most singular
cause that ever influenced the operations of a military force. When they were
mustered previous to their departure, it was found that some of the officers,
as well as of the private soldiers, were still under a covenant of works; and
that the blessing of God could not be implored or expected to crown the arms of
such unhallowed men with success. The alarm was general, and many arrangements
necessary in order to cast out the unclean, and to render this little band
sufficiently pure to fight the battles of a people who entertained high ideas
of their own sanctity. Neal, i. 168


Meanwhile the Connecticut troops, reinforced by a small detachment from Say
Brook, found it necessary to advance toward the enemy. They were posted on a
rising ground, in the middle of a swamp toward the head of the river Mistick,
which they had surrounded with palisadoes, the best defense that their slender
skill in the art of fortification had discovered. Though they knew that the
English were in motion, yet, with the usual improvidence and security of
savages, they took no measures either to observe their progress, or to guard
against being surprised themselves. The enemy (May 20) unperceived, reached the
palisadoes, and if a dog had not given the alarm by barking, the Indians must
have been massacred without resistance. In a moment, however they started to
arms, and raising the war-cry, prepared to repel the assailants. But at that
early period of their intercourse with the Europeans, the Americans were little
acquainted with the use of gunpowder, and dreaded its effects extremely. While
some of the English galled them with an incessant fire through the intervals
between the palisadoes, others forced their way by the entries into the fort,
filled only with branches of trees; and setting fire to the huts which were
covered with reeds, the confusion and terror quickly became general. Many of
the women and children perished in the flames; and the warriors, in
endeavoring to escape, were either slain by the English, or falling into the
hands of their Indian allies, who surrounded the fort at a distance, were
reserved for a more cruel fate. After the junction of the troops from
Massachusetts, the English resolved to pursue their victory; and hunting the
Indians from one place of retreat to another, some subsequent encounters were
hardly less fatal to them than the action on the Mistick. In less than three
months the tribe of Pequods was extirpated: A few miserable fugitives who took
refuge among the neighboring Indians, being incorporated by them, lost their
name as a distinct people. In this first essay of their arms, the colonists of
New England seem to have been conducted by skilful and enterprising officers,
and displayed both courage and perseverance as soldiers. But they stained their
laurels by the use which they made of victory. Instead of treating the Pequods
as an independent people, who made a gallant effort to defend the property, the
rights, and the freedom of their nation, they retaliated upon them all the
barbarities of American war. Some they massacred in cold blood, others they
gave up to be tortured by their Indian allies, a considerable number they sold
as slaves in Bermudas, the rest were reduced to servitude among themselves.
Hutchinson, p. 58, 76, etc. Mather. Magnalia, b. vii. chapter 6. Hubbard's State of
N. Eng. p. 5 116* etc


But reprehensible as this conduct of the English must be deemed, their
vigorous efforts in this decisive campaign filled all the surrounding tribes of
Indians with such an high opinion of their valor, as secured a long
tranquillity to all their settlements. At the same time the violence of
administration in England continued to increase their population and strength,
by forcing many respectable subjects to tear themselves from all the tender
connections that bind men to their native country, and to fly for refuge to a
region of the New World, which hitherto presented to them nothing that could
allure them thither but exemption from oppression. The number of those
emigrants drew the attention of government, and appeared so formidable, that a
proclamation was issued, prohibiting masters of ships from carrying passengers
to New England without special permission. On many occasions this injunction
was eluded or disregarded. Fatally for the king, it operated with full effect
in one instance. Sir Arthur Haslerig, John Hampden, Oliver Cromwell, and some
other persons whose principles and views coincided with theirs, impatient to
enjoy those civil and religious liberties which they struggled in vain to
obtain in Great Britain, hired some ships to carry them and their attendants to
New England. By order of council, an embargo was laid on these when on the
point of sailing; and Charles, far from suspecting that the future revolutions
in his kingdoms were to be excited and directed by persons in such an humble
sphere of life, forcibly detained the men destined to overturn his throne, and
to terminate his days by a violent death. Mather, Magnalia, b. i. chapter 5. p. 23.
Neal's Hist. of N Eng. i. 1^1. Chalmers' Annals, i. 155.160, etc.


But in spite of all the efforts of government to check this spirit of
migration, the measures of the king and his ministers were considered by a
great body of the people as so hostile to those rights which they deemed most
valuable, that in the course of the year one thousand six hundred and
thirty-eight, above three thousand persons embarked for New England, choosing
rather to expose themselves to all the consequences of disregarding the royal
proclamation, than to remain longer under oppression. Exasperated at this
contempt of his authority, Charles had recourse to a violent but effectual mode
of accomplishing what he had in view. A writ of quo warranto was issued against
the corporation of Massachusetts Bay. The colonists had conformed so little to
the terms of their charter, that judgment was given against them without
difficulty. They were found to have forfeited all their rights as a
corporation, which of course returned to the crown, and Charles began to take
measures for new modelling the political frame of the colony, and vesting the
administration of its affairs in other hands. But his plans were never carried
into execution. In every corner of his dominions, the storm now began to
gather, which soon burst out with such fatal violence, that Charles, during the
remainder of his unfortunate reign, occupied with domestic and more interesting
cares, had not leisure to bestow any attention upon a remote and inconsiderable
province. Hutchinson, p. 86, 502, etc. Chalmers' Annals, (...).


On the meeting of the Long Parliament, such a revolution took place in
England, that all the motives for migrating to the New World ceased. The maxims
of the Puritans with respect to the government both of church and state, became
predominant in the nation, and were enforced by the hand of power. Their
oppressors were humbled; that perfect system of reformed polity, which had long
been the object of their admiration and desire, was established by law; and
amidst the intrigues and conflicts of an obstinate civil war, turbulent and
aspiring spirits found such full occupation, that they had no inducement to
quit a busy theater, on which they had risen to act a most conspicuous part.
From the year one thousand six hundred and twenty, when the first feeble colony
was conducted to New England by the Brownists, to the year one thousand six
hundred and forty, it has been computed, that twenty-one thousand two hundred
British subjects had settled there. The money expended by various adventurers
during that period in fitting out ships, in purchasing stock, and transporting
settlers, amounted, on a moderate calculation, nearly to two hundred thousand
pounds; Mather, b. i. chapter 4. p. 17. chapter 5. p. 23. Hutchinson, p. 193. Chalmers'
Annals, p. 165.
a vast sum in that age, and which no principles, inferior in force to those
wherewith the Puritans were animated, could have persuaded men to lay out, on
the uncertain prospect of obtaining an establishment in a remote uncultivated
region, which, from its situation and climate, could allure them with no hope
but that of finding subsistence and enjoying freedom. For some years, even
subsistence was procured with difficulty; and it was toward the close of the
period to which our narrative is arrived, before the product of the settlement
yielded the planters any return for their stock. About that time they began to
export corn in small quantities to the West Indies, and made some feeble
attempts to extend the fishery, and to open the trade in lumber, which have
since proved the staple articles of commerce in the colony.* Since the year one
thousand six hundred and forty, the number of people with which New England has
recruited the population of the parent state, is supposed at least to equal
what may have been drained from it by occasional migrations thither.

But though the sudden change of system in Great Britain stopped entirely the
influx of settlers into New England, the principles of the colonists coincided
so perfectly with those of the popular leaders in parliament, that they were
soon distinguished by peculiar marks of their brotherly affection. By a vote of
the House of Commons in the year one thousand six hundred and forty-two, the
people in all the different plantations of New England were exempted from
payment of any duties, either upon goods exported thither, or upon those which
they imported into the mother country, until the House shall take farther order
to the contrary. This was afterward confirmed by the authority of both Houses.
Encouraged by such an extraordinary privilege, industry made rapid progress in
all the districts of New England (1646) and population increased along with it.
In return for those favors, the colonists applauded the measures of
parliament, celebrated its generous efforts to vindicate the rights and
liberties of the nation, prayed for the success of its arms, and framed
regulations in order to prevent any exertion in favor of the king on the other
side of the Atlantic. Hutchinson* p. 114. App. ^1^. Chalmers' Annals, i. 174.^6


Relying on the indulgent partiality with which all their proceedings were
viewed by men thus closely united with them in sentiments and wishes, the
people of New England ventured on a measure, which not only increased their
security and power, but may be regarded as a considerable step toward
independence. Under the impression or pretext of the danger to which they were
exposed from the surrounding tribes of Indians, the four colonies of
Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut, and Newhaven, (1643, May 19) entered into
a league of perpetual confederacy, offensive and defensive; an idea familiar to
several leading men in the colonies, as it was framed in imitation of the
famous bond of union among the Dutch provinces, in whose dominions the
Brownists had long resided. It was stipulated, that the confederates should
henceforth be distinguished by the name of the United Colonies of New England;
that each colony shall remain separate and distinct, and have exclusive
jurisdiction within its own territory; that in every war, offensive or
defensive, each of the confederates shall furnish its quota of men, provisions,
and money, at a rate to be fixed from time to time, in proportion to the number
of people in each settlement; that an assembly composed of two commissioners
from each colony shall be held annually, with power to deliberate and decide in
all points of common concern to the confederacy; and every determination, in
which six of their number concur, shall be binding on the whole. Neal's Hist.
of N. Eng. i. 202, etc. Hutchinson, p. 124. Chalmers' Ann. p. 177.
In this transaction the colonies of New England seem to have considered
themselves as independent societies, possessing all the rights of sovereignty,
and free from the control of any superior power. The governing party in
England, occupied with affairs of more urgent concern, and no wise disposed to
observe the conduct of their brethren in America with any jealous attention,
suffered the measure to pass without animadversion.

Emboldened by this connivance the spirit of independence gathered strength,
and soon displayed itself more openly: Some persons of note in the colony of
Massachusetts, averse to the system of ecclesiastical polity established there,
and preferring it to the government and discipline of the churches of England
or Scotland, having remonstrated to the general court against the injustice of
depriving them of their rights as freemen, and of their privileges as
Christians, because they could not join as members with any of the
congregational churches petitioned (1646) that they might no longer be bo^nd to
obey laws to which they had not assented, nor be subject to taxes imposed by an
assembly in which they were not represented. Their demands were not only
rejected, but they were imprisoned and fined as disturbers of the public peace;
and when they appointed some of their number to lay their grievances before
parliament, the annual court, in order to prevent this appeal to the supreme
power, attempted first to seize their papers, and then to obstruct their
embarkation for England* But though neither of these could be accomplished,
such was the address and influence of the colonies' agents in England, that no
inquiry seems to have been made into this transaction. Neal's Hist. N. Eng. i.
213. Hutchinson's Hist. 145, etc. Collect. 188, etc. Chalm. Ann. 179. Mather,
Magnal. B. iii. chapter i. p. 30.
This was followed by an indication, still less ambiguous, of the aspiring
spirit prevalent among the people of Massachusetts. Under every form of
government the right of coining money has been considered as a prerogative
peculiar to sovereignty, and which no subordinate member in any state is
entitled to claim. Regardless of this established maxim, the general court
ordered a coinage of silver money at Boston (1652) stamped with the name of the
colony, and a tree as an apt symbol of its progressive vigor. Hutchinson, 177,
178. Chalmers' Annals, p. 181.
Even this usurpation escaped without notice. The Independents, having now
humbled all rival sects, engrossed the whole direction of affairs in Great
Britain; and long accustomed to admire the government of New England, framed
agreeably to those principles which they had adopted as the most perfect model
of civil and ecclesiastical polity, they were unwilling to stain its
reputation, by censuring any part of its conduct.

When Cromwell usurped the supreme power, the colonies of New England continued
to stand as high in his estimation. As he had deeply imbibed all the fanatical
notions of the Independents, and was perpetually surrounded by the most eminent
and artful teachers of that sect, he kept a constant correspondence with the
leading men in the American settlements, who seem to have looked up to him as a
zealous patron. Hutchinson, App. 520, etc Collect. p. 233.
He in return considered them as his most devoted adherents, attached to him no
less by affection than by principle. He soon gave a striking proof of this. On
the conquest of Jamaica, he formed a scheme for the security and improvement of
the acquisition made by his victorious arms, suited to the ardour of an
impetuous spirit that delighted in accomplishing its ends by extraordinary
means. He proposed to transport the people of New England to that island, and
employed every argument calculated to make impression upon them, in order to
obtain their consent. He endeavored to rouse their religious zeal by
representing what a fatal blow it would be to the man of sin, if a colony of
the faithful were settled in the midst of his territories in the new world. He
allured them with prospects of immense wealth in a fertile region, which would
reward the industry of those who cultivated it, with all the precious
productions of the torrid zone, and expressed his fervent wish that they might
take possession of it, in order to fulfill God's promise of making his people
the head and not the tail. He assured them of being supported by the whole
force of his authority, and of vesting all the powers of government entirely in
their hands. But by this time the colonists were attached to a country in which
they had resided for many years, and where, though they did not attain
opulence, they enjoyed the comforts of life in great abundance; and they
dreaded so much the noxious climate of the West Indies, which had proved fatal
to a great number of the English who first settled in Jamaica, that they
declined, though in the most respectful terms, closing with the Protector's
proposition. Hutchinson, p. 190, etc. Chalmers, p. 18^.


THE END.
LATELY PUBLISHED. AND TO BE SOLD BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, At No. 59, south
Third-street, opposite the United States Bank. [Price One Dollar neatly bound
and lettered] An ENQUIRY into the DUTIES of the Female Sex.
BY THOMAS GISBORNE, M. A.
The following among others are the principal Subjects of this useful Work.

Female Education. Of the mode of introducing Young Women into general Society.
Female conversation and Epistolary Correspondence. Dress. Amusements. Excess in
the Pursuits of Amusements. Employment of Time. Considerations antecedent to
Marriage. Duties of Matrimonial Life, with a view to different Situations and
Circumstances. Parental Duties. Duties of the middle Period of Life. Duties of
the Decline of Life.

From the Title of the foregoing Work it may perhaps be imagined, that the
Enquiry it altogether and exclusively directed to the Duties of the Female Sex:
It therefore, may not be unnecessary, or unuseful, to remark, that many of the
Chapters contain Matter relative to the Conduct of both Sexes, and particularly
th^se which relate to the -- Duties of matrimonial Life -- Parental Duties --
Duties of the Middle Period -- and of the Decline of Life. And the Reader of
either Sex, that peruses this Work with a View of gaining Information leading
to substantial Pleasure, will assuredly not be disappointed. In Fact, it is a
Work interesting to the Happiness of Society, and must be useful wherever read;
tending not only to point out in easy and engaging Language, the Paths that ^ad
the youthful Mind to Happiness and Comfort, but those also, in the Walk of
which, the Parent and the Middle Period of Life shall find sincere D^ and (...)
Y^ ^ender themselves comfortable and happy with all (...).

The following BOOKS with many others may be had of JAMES HUMPHREYS, AT No. 59,
south Third-street, opposite the United States Bank.
The BOTANIC GARDEN, a Poem, in two Parts. Part I. containing the Economy of
Vegetation Part II. the Loves of the Plants. With Philosophical Notes. By
Erasmus Darwin. M. D. F. R. S. ZOONOMIA; or the Laws of Organic Life. By
Erasmus Darwin, M. D. F. R. S. A PLAN for the Conduct of Female Education. By
E. Darwin. M. D. F. R. S. BUCHAN'S DOMESTIC MEDICINE. DISSERTATIONS on the
PROPHECIES which have been remarkably fulfilled; and at this time are
fulfilling in the world. By Thomas Newton, D. D. late Bishop of Bristol. A
PRACTICAL View of the prevailing Religious system of Professed Christians in
the higher and middle Classes contrasted with Real Christianity. By William
Wilberfor^e, Esquire Member of Parliament. NATURAL PRINCIPLES of RECTITUDE for the
Conduct of Man in all States and Situations of Life. By Johan. D. Gross. D. D.
and Minister of the German reformed Church in the City of New York, and
Professor of Moral Philosophy, Geography and Chronology in Columbia College.
The CALVINISTIC and SOCINIAN Systems examined and compared. ENFIEL^S Exercises
in Elocution. LETTERS from a Father to his Son. By J. Aikin. M. D. The JUVENILE
FRIEND. VISIT for a Week. The AMERICAN BE. A Collection of entertaining
Histories. The INQUISITOR, or invisible Rambler. FLOWERS of Modern Travels.
MILTON'S Paradise lost. RODERIC RANDOM. HOWARD'S LIFE. ESSAYS on the following
interesting subjects. Government. Revolutions. The British Constitution. Kingly
Government. Parliamentary Representation and Reform. Liberty and Equality.
Taxation. The present War and the Stagnation of Credit as connected with it. By
John Young, Minister of the Gospel, at Hawick, in Scotland. The SECRET
TRIBUNAL; A new Play, lately published. By Mr. Beaden, Author of Fontainville
Forest. BIBLES, Testaments. I^ (...), Fables, A^, ^ng Bank* and

