PLAIN SENSE: OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY VILLARS AND ELLEN MORDAUNT. A NOVEL. IN
TWO VOLUMES.

'REASON STILL USE, TO REASON STILL ATTEND.' POPE. VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY. NO. 118, MARKET-STREET. October 1,
1799.

CHARACTER OF THIS WORK, FROM THE BRITISH CRITIC.
Though we are not accustomed to recommend, with much warmth, the reading of
Novels, yet our caution arises chiefly from the fear of their being too much,
or too indiscriminately perused. A few select books of this kind may be read
with advantage, provided that such reading be not made a daily or serious
occupation. With this restriction we recommend very cordially such volumes as
these we are considering. A STORY more interesting and affecting, or better
told than this, has seldom come under our examination. Austere as critics are
imagined to be, they are not insensible to the charms of such a heroine as
Ellen Mordaunt. Perhaps the principal incident in her story, upon which all the
rest turns, is not managed as we could wish; what is commonly called first
love, that is the fancy of a boy and girl for each other, founded upon seeing,
rather than knowing one another, is not indeed what we insist upon being
adhered to. But a first attachment like Ellen's, sounded upon solid merit, and
long acquaintance, and sanctioned by parents on both sides, should not have
been renounced so speedily. At least, if duty and honor forbade her union with
Henry, there was no necessity -- But we will not diminish the painfully
pleasing suspense in which this Novel must hold its readers; we shall only
remark, that the title of it appears to us not happily chosen. The character of
Ellen is actually distinguished not so much by Plain Sense, as by highly
cultivated judgment, exquisite feeling, and invincible integrity. Parents may
not only with safety put these volumes into the hands of their children, but
may even peruse them with advantage themselves.

Vol. viii. page 673. ELLEN MORDAUNT AND HENRY VILLARS.
CHAP. I.
'Piange^de 'quel, che gia sia forto servo
'Di due vaghi occhi, e d'una bella trecia,
'Totto cui si nascende un Cor protervo,
'Che poco pura abbia con molto feccia.'
ARIOSTO.
MARIA VILLARS was born a beauty. Her first smile was enchantment, her first
movement grace: nor had fortune been less favorable to her than nature -- she
and one son were the only offspring born to lord Villars by his first wife: On
his marriage, 20,000l. the fortune that his wife brought him, had been by
marriage settlements allotted to younger children, and there having been no
limitation, as to number, the whole sum became the property of Maria. Lady
Villars died in a few months after the birth of her daughter; and many more had
not elapsed before ^d Villars exchanged the sober garb of affliction, for the
gay trappings of a bridegroom.

On this second marriage, Maria was placed under the care of a sister of her
father's, a woman, who, to an unbounded love for dissipation, joined so much
natural good humor, as made her desirous that all with whom she had to do,
should share in pleasures, which she thought so necessary to happiness.
Although married, she had no children; she had talked herself into the belief,
that she was miserable from the want of them: Maria therefore became her
passion; -- the most unlimited indulgence soon taught her to know no rule for
action but her own will. Naturally violent, craving, and vain, she soon became
tyrannical, selfish, and overbearing. Nature had bestowed upon her a quickness
of apprehension, which, had it been properly directed, might have assisted her
in procuring such useful knowledge as would in time have formed her judgment,
and corrected her temper; but this quickness being mistaken by her aunt for
wit, it became rather a subject of praise for itself, than cultivated as a
means by which to acquire things worthy of praise.

Of the many accomplishments, therefore, that Maria made a parade of acquiring,
she knew no one tolerably, music and dancing excepted. She was born with an
accurate ear and a sweet voice, and she so early felt the advantage to be
derived from the cultivation of such enchanting talents, that she had acquired
a very competent knowledge in the science of music, and, in the little less
difficult one of dancing, she excelled. In her earliest years she had been her
aunt's plaything; as time began more to unfold her charms, she became her boast
and her exhibition.

Where rank, youth, beauty, talents and fortune, were united, it is not
wonderful that the useful acquirements of the understanding were unsought, or
that the unobtrusive virtues of the heart were forgotten. In the circle wherein
Maria Villars moved, there was but one opinion, "that miss Villars was
perfection." She heard it every hour of the day, she saw it in the deference
that was paid to her opinions, and in the eagerness that was manifested even to
prevent her wishes; she repeated it to herself continually, and there was
certainly no article of her faith to which her mind yielded half so perfect an
assent.

Amidst the general admiration that followed her wherever she appeared, there
was not wanting, even from her earliest youth, several individuals, who,
allured by her beauty, or induced by her fortune, seriously sought her for a
wife; but her aunt was in no haste to induce her to fix her choice; she thought
no rank, however high, or fortune however splendid, above what might be
challenged by the merits of her niece: And Maria (whose greatest delight was in
multiplying her conquests, and in the infliction of pain) encouraged and
disdained all her lovers alike.

She was now in her eighteenth year, when one night on her return from a ball,
she declared to her aunt in the most peremptory terms, that her choice was
made, that she was in love with mr. Mordaunt, and that mr. Mordaunt she would
marry. The shock of an earthquake could not have been more tremendous to the
feelings of mrs. Fortescue, than was this declaration of her niece; She knew
mr. Mordaunt for a young man of fashion and good family, elegant in his person
and insinuating in his manners, but he was without rank, and almost without
fortune; as to his understanding or his moral character, she ^d never heard
either of them mentioned, nor would they have made any part of her inquiries:
She attempted to remonstrate; but she soon sound that she had neither the power
that authority bestows, nor the influence that is derived from affection. Maria
had taken her resolution, and she scrupled not to say, "that although she
should be best pleased if her marriage were sanctioned by her aunt's
approbation, yet, the want of such approbation should not prevent it."

The fact was, that mr. Mordaunt, from the first time in which he beheld Maria,
had became violently and truly in love with her. There was something in the
humility and verity of his passion, that had been peculiarly pleasing to her
vanity; his address and his person had charmed her; she saw his attentions were
sought for by the most distinguished of her companions; it became, therefore, a
point of honor to attach him to herself: But, when she learnt that he was the
object of the tenderest love to her most intimate friend, she was resolved to
make him her husband.

Mrs. Fortescue, despairing of the effect of her own influence with her niece,
saw no other means to prevent a marriage which she so much disapproved, except
by the force of parental authority; she applied to lord Villars, representing
to him the entire destruction of those ambitious hopes, the uncommon beauty and
attractions of Maria had given birth to, if she were thus permitted to dispose
of herself: But lord Villars, however he might wish that the inclinations of
his daughter had taken another bent, was too much engaged in the cares and
interests that had arisen from a second marriage, to bestow much thought (...)
trouble on the affairs of a child, estranged from him since her birth, and whom
he considered as being totally spoiled by the weak indulgence of her aunt; he
therefore told his sister, that she must abide by the consequences of her own
misconduct; that ten thousand pounds was the whole of what he could spare to
his daughter on her marriage, but that the rest of the settlement would be
here is at his death, and that she must endeavor to make the best bargain she
could.

Mrs. Fortescue thus finding that all opposition would be vain, no longer
troubled herself to oppose what she could not prevent. Mr. Mordaunt was made
the happiest of men, by being told Maria Villars was to be his wife; and Maria
herself took the air of sacrificing ambition and avarice at the shrine of love.
She became, in truth, during the time of the courtship, as much in love with
mr. Mordaunt, as she could be with any man. As to mr. Mordaunt, he was not more
enchanted with her beauty, nor captivated by the graces of her manner, than he
was impressed with gratitude, for the preference she gave him; he considered
such a preference as a proof of the most disinterested affection, and
entertained not a doubt but that in the lovely mistress he was about to
possess, he should find the good humoured companion, the affectionate friend,
and the faithful wife; he knew not, nor would it have been in the power of an
angel from heaven to have (...) him believe that Maria Villars was to be (...)
of his happiness, and the scourge of his c^ (...) Maria, it is true, had
suffered herself, equa^ with mr. Mordaunt, to be determined in (...) choice of
a companion for life, by the charms (...) an ex^s, and by motives that could
have (...) influence on the happiness of that life; but she had not, like him,
added, even in imagination, the qualities either of the head or heart; she had
not thought about them. The man who was in love with her, was, of course, at
her disposal; she did not so ^ar mistrust her charms, as to suspect that this
might not always be the case, and while she could preserve an unlimited power
over the actions of mr. Mordaunt, she sought for no other quality on which to
ground happiness; there was no one excellence of the head or heart, nor all the
possible excellencies of both united, that she would not have exchanged for the
single virtue of unlimited compliance with her wishes: But mr. Mordaunt was
formed by nature to have bestowed happiness of a very different kind from that
which Maria required -- with perfectly good and clear sense, of a calm and
gentle mind, with kind affections, and the most disinterested dispositions, had
he met with a heart and temper congenial to his own, there was no degree of
domestic felicity that he was not capable of giving and receiving.

It would have been mr. Mordaunt's wish upon his marriage, to have withdrawn
from scenes of dissipation and expense, (at once so adverse to his inclination,
and so inimical to his fortune), to his paternal estate in Northumberland. But
to this plan mrs. Fortescue and Maria were equally averse, and mr. Mordaunt
easily found in the gaiety of youth, and the inveteracy of habit, a sufficient
excuse for this opposition to his wishes; -- he hoped time, and the cares of a
mother, which he saw with pleasure would soon belong to Maria, would produce
dispositions more suited to his own, and in the mean while he made his
happiness by contributing to here is. He was, however, somewhat more alarmed when
he found, that even after the birth of a daughter, her rage for amusement
seemed greater than ever; and long before his tenderness thought she ought to
have quitted her house, he found her eager again to emerge into the world, to
form new engagements and to seek new pleasures: She had absolutely refused to
suckle her child, and he had been made to believe that her health was too
delicate to admit of her performing such an office; but when he saw it
sufficiently robust to encounter the vigils of balls and assemblies, and the
harrassing exertions of morning amusements, he first uttered his surprise and
then ventured to remonstrate.

It was the first moment in which he had appeared to have a will distinct from
that of Maria. The vehemence which she betrayed upon this occasion astonished
and alarmed him; but the veil was now fallen, and from this hour she appeared
in her natural form. The imperfections of temper in a wife, although sufficient
to destroy happiness, are, however, seldom powerful enough to pluck from the
breast of a tender hearted man a deep rooted love. Mr. Mordaunt was compelled
to be miserable, but he could not cease to love. It was not so with Maria, she
had never loved -- she never could love any one but herself: While mr. Mordaunt
contributed to her convenience, or her pleasure, she smiled upon him with a
complacency that made him believe himself the happiest of men; when he thwarted
her most extravagant wishes, she armed her brow with defiance, and his hours
were passed in wrangling and ill humor.

For some of the first years of their marriage, the dread of interrupting those
moments of sunshine from which he drew his precarious and li^ enjoyed
happiness, made him give up, undisputed, almost every point to his wife. Her
habit of control became by this means the more confirmed; and afterward, when
this reason ceased (for there were no longer moments of sunshine), the
embarrassment of his affairs, and the dread that all minds, not strong, feel of
probing the bottom of an evil, occasioned him to go on in the same way. Thus at
the end of ten years, he found himself disappointed in his hopes of happiness,
involved in debt, the father of three miserable neglected girls, and the
husband of a decayed beauty, whose health had been ruined by dissipation, and
whose temper, not naturally good, had been irritated by the distresses of
poverty: Her heart and her understanding offered no resources in the hour of
disappointment, and her continual self reproaches for having so foolishly
thrown herself away, awakened mr. Mordaunt to a wandering sense, how the most
beautiful features, or the most perfect form, could ever have been a veil
sufficiently thick, to have concealed from his observation the deformity of her
temper, and the selfishness of her heart.

As to what was now to be done, there remained no option: mrs. Fortescue had so
often relieved the distresses of her niece that she had no longer the power of
doing so -- The ten thousand pounds paid at her marriage, were dissipated -- of
the ten that were to be received on the death of lord Villars, the interest
only could be of any use, as the principal was settled upon children. Creditors
were numerous and pressing; there was no alternative but a jail, or the family
mansion in Northumberland.

Mr. Mordaunt, with a degree of resolution which might have been the
preventative ten years before, of the evils, for which it was now scarcely an
alleviation, sold all his property, in or near town, and packing up his wife,
himself, their three daughters, and one woman servant, in the only carriage
they had left, this ruined family began their journey into Northumberland.

Maria, although she had nothing to oppose to a measure so necessary and
unavoidable, yet had not fortitude enough to submit to it without the bitterest
lamentations, and the deepest grief: She parted from mrs. Fortescue as if she
had been going into a Siberian exile, and mrs. Fortescue herself would, with
less grief, have followed her to her grave, than thus have seen her, at eight
and twenty, banished from all that she held valuable in life, and buried in the
frightful glooms of a Northern solitude. But grief, however violent and
tempestuous, brings no balm to irremed^ble evils. After some days of vehemence,
complaints, and tears -- after others of a sullen silence and ill humoured
discontent, mrs. Mordaunt found herself, in spite of all her grief and
reluctance, settled at Groby Manor, compelled to attend to the common affairs
of life, and her influence confined to the circle of a small country family,
three hundred miles distant from London.

CHAP. II.
'Yonder mansion, --
-- 'To the morning sun
'Turns his warm aspect --
-- 'On a hill
'Half way between the summit and a brook,
'That idly wanders at the foot, it stands,
'And looks into a valley, wood-bespread,
'That winds along below.'
HURDIS.
GROBY MANOR was situate about thirty miles from the sea coast, at the head of
a narrow valley, the opposite sides of which were formed by a variety of high
and differently shaped hills, well wooded, with here and there a green meadow
or a corn field i^terspersed. Through the valley ran a clear stream, and there
were a variety of pleasant and romantic walks on every side.

The house had, for many generations, been the residence of a respectable and
well beloved family: It contained large and convenient rooms, and though the
furniture was old, it was sufficiently plentiful. The house was sheltered from
every cutting wind, and open only to a southern exposure; it was warm and
comfortable, provisions and coals were cheap and abundant, there was a good
library, and the air, clear and wholesome, gave color to the cheek, and vigor
to the limbs.

Here, then, were sources enough of enjoyment, were the mind capable of
relishing them; but mrs. Mordaunt seemed resolved that as she was to be less
happy than she wished to be, she would be as miserable as she could. She passed
her days in sullen discontent and unavailing repining, refusing all society,
and rendering those who were obliged to approach her as miserable as herself.

With mr. Mordaunt it was otherwise. -- Having once broken the chains that tied
him to a life he disapproved, his natural temper began to manifest itself in
beneficial effects to himself and all around him. He was delighted to be
returned to the seat of his forefathers; joy sprang in his heart at the sight
of the scenes of his infancy; he rejoiced to renew the social connections of
his former neighborhood, and to busy himself in the cares and occupations of a
country life. He saw, with a satisfaction, that tranquilized his sleeping, and
gladdened his waking hours, that ten years of prudent retirement would clear
his estate. In these ten years he hoped to recompense to his daughters, the
evil they had hitherto received from neglect and ill education; and he
considered the end as being scarcely more desirable than the means.

He endeavored, by gentleness and the kindest affection, to soften the mind of
Mari^, and to open it to a capability of enjoyment: He still loved her: he
therefore easily persuaded himself, that time and the easy undisturbed life she
was henceforth to lead, might work this miracle; he was willing ^ay all her
faults on the mistakes of her educatio^ and the folly of her former life.

Here, my dear Maria (would he sometimes say), ^e it depends only upon
ourselves to be happy, and after the experience we have had of the
insufficiency of every other source of happiness, shall we neglect the only
pure one, and which is now in our power? He had not, indeed, the satisfaction
to see she was sensible either to his kindness, or his reasoning; but he
considered, that time only could overcome habits so deeply rooted as here is, and
he was willing to wait patiently and good humouredly for its effects.

Twelve months were now elapsed since mr. Mordaunt's removal into the country,
and Maria began to be somewhat more reconciled to her situation. She was not
the less reconciled from observing the effect that the change in her manner of
living had upon her beauty: -- The regularity of her life, and the purity of
the air, had ^lushed her faded cheek with health, and had restored the luster
to her eye, her limbs had recovered their roundness, and her complexion its
transparency; she heard the rustic praises of the peasants whenever she walked
out, and her own maid had not so far forgotten her old trade, as not carefully
to repeat, sometimes with, and sometimes without, exaggeration, the
commendations that were retailed by servants from the dining parlours of their
masters.

She was conscious of the disgust she had given to all their neighbors on her
first coming into the country; she had then scarce thought it worth her while
to remember the existence of beings whom she considered as little above the
brute creation: but to the pleasure of admiration it was not possible, while
she continued to breathe, that she should long be insensible. She endeavored
to apologize for her former conduct, by imputing it to ill health, and she gave
an appearance of truth to her apology, by now showing a willingness to enter
into society, and to partake of such pleasure as the country afforded.

Her insinuating manners, the superiority of her breeding, and her uncommon
beauty, adorned as it now was by graciousness, soon made her the idol, or the
envy, of all who approached her. Mr. Mordaunt could not but be pleased with
this improvement in his wife's temper: but he soon found it was confined wholly
to those hours when she was engaged with company, either from home, or in her
own house; he saw, with the most sensible mortification, that this amendment,
however, arose only from the gratification of her vanity: to him she was always
alike cold and insensible, always equally neglectful of her children, and
intolerable to her domestics. Her grumblings and discontent when they were
alone, were rather increased than abated: she sullenly refused to take pleasure
in any of his plans or amusements, and coldly withdrew her attention when he
wished to converse, complained that his eagerness in his country pursuits,
distracted her nerves; and would shut herself up in her room for a day
together, altering an old bonnet, or new-modelling some of the ancient
furniture.

Such a conduct, in spite of himself, gave mr. Mordaunt a bad opinion of her
heart; and gradually wore away all attachment or partiality but that which a
confirmed habit, and the intimacy of their connection, preserved in spite of
his reason and his feelings.

CHAP. III.
'She bore a mind that envy could not but call fair.'
SHAKESPEARE.
HAD Maria been more amiable, they might now have been happy. They were now
settled with a small but comfortable establishment, upon an equal footing with
their neighbors, sufficiently busied to feel no want of employment, and
sufficiently idle to be in no danger of fatigue. They had no particular cares
to molest them. They enjoyed health and a competency: and if they had not much
to hope they had also not much to fear.

But, in a life where happiness must arise from a discharge of duty alone,
Maria found no charms. She was sensible only to weariness. As some relief from
this eternal sameness, she was not displeased to find herself with child. To
give herself more consequence, and the circumstance more interest, she took it
into her head to imagine that she longed passionately for a boy. By talking
perpetually on the subject, and expatiating on the maternal raptures she was
about to feel, and the maternal cares in which she was henceforth to be
engaged, she had converted what was at first merely a whim, into a serious
passion. She counted the months, the weeks as they passed. Every day might now
complete her wishes. The hour came, and -- she was delivered of a daughter!

From the moment she beheld her, the poor child's destiny, as far as it
depended upon the affection of its mother, was decided. 'It was hideous. She
saw every bad passion in its countenance. It looked like an owl, like an ape,
like aunt Nelly.' -- Invective could go no farther.

This aunt Nelly, the ne plus ultra of abhorrence, had been the sister of mr.
Mordaunt. Her breast was the mansion of every female virtue. She had been the
being in the world, next to Maria, that mr. Mordaunt had most fondly loved.
Being by many years his senior, she had been the nurse of his childhood, the
gentle monitor of his youthful days, the warm and steady friend of his manly
years. On his marriage, he had eagerly sent for her to town, that she might
know and ^e known to one, whom he thought her only superior. He told his Maria,
'that in the friendship of his sister, she would find all the advantage of
superior wisdom and perfect goodness. He did not bid her love her: he knew it
was impossible she should do otherwise; and as to his sister, she would dote
upon Maria as her child.'

All this might have been, and would have been, had Maria been the person mr.
Mordaunt believed her to be. But, with her sarcastic spirit, and self
consequence, virtue and wisdom, in the form of a plain, though intelligent
looking woman of five and forty, were likely only to produce contempt and
satire. She quarrelled with every feature in her face in the first half hour of
their acquaintance; ridiculed her to her companions; scoffed at her to her
woman* and in the constrained civility that she thought proper to show her
before mr. Mordaunt evinced, to a woman of miss Mordaunt's penetration, the
aversion she had taken to her. Nor was it less difficult to discover the
mistake that mr. Mordaunt had made in his choice: and Maria's aversion to her
sister-in-law was increased by a consciousness that it could not be hid from
her.

This aversion, however, might have worn off, could mrs. Mordaunt have found
real cause for the contempt she expressed toward miss Mordaunt: but she soon
was compelled to feel for this hated sister, a respect, which her virtue
inspired, and a dread which her understanding imposed. This respect, this
dread, converted dislike into hatred. She was sensible, her conduct would
justify animadversion* and she had no doubt but she received it from miss
Mordaunt. She looked upon he^ as a s^y; and hated her accordingly.

During mr. Mordaunt's residence in London, miss Mordaunt had visited town from
time to time, for the purpose of seeing her brother. She had very early
discovered that he was unhappy: and although he did not complain, she perceived
her company was a relief to him. She therefore never suffered twelve months to
pass without spending a few weeks in lodgings in town, contributing, by this
means, all in her power toward his happiness, and indulging herself in the
pleasure she received from the company of his children. She endeavored all
she* could to counteract the evil they imbibed at home, and she sought, by
every method, to inspire them with love toward herself. In this latter
particular, she so completely succeeded, that the poor girls loved nothing half
so well as aunt Nelly.

All these circumstances confirmed Maria's hatred: and almost the only act of
maternity she ever exercised was, the giving her eldest girl a whipping, on her
saying, as her mother was putting on her morning bonnet, 'Now, mamma looks like
aunt Nelly.'

Two years before mr. Mordaunt's removal into the country, miss Mordaunt had
been seized with a disorder which prevented her stirring from home; and having
languished under every painful circumstances for eighteen months, she had at
length been released from, and rewarded for her sufferings. Her death had been
a severe affliction to mr. Mordaunt: and he cherished her memory with the
highest degree of tenderness and veneration. It was not, therefore, with mr.
Mordaunt, that the supposed likeness of his newborn child to aunt Nelly, was
likely to operate to her disadvantage; nor was the unreasonable aversion that
mrs. Mordaunt had taken to the poor infa^ one whit more prejudicial to her with
her father; for when he beheld the inveteracy with which his wife persisted in
her detestation of so excellent a creature as his sister had been, and when he
compared the parade she now made of her feelings, as a mother, with the
absolute neglect she had hitherto shown to her offspring, all partiality was
for the moment at an end; and he viewed her with a degree of disapprobation,
that seemed to prohibit the possibility of its ever again being renewed.

There was one point, however, even on this subject, in which mr. and mrs.
Mordaunt agreed: this was, in giving the name of Ellen to the poor little girl.
Maria chose it, that she might gratify her spite in calling the child, "aunt
Nelly;" and mr. Mordaunt was fond of perpetuating a name that had belonged to a
sister, whose memory (perhaps by comparing her character with that of his wife)
grew every day dearer to him.

CHAP. IV.
'Colei,
'Non so se d^ora dir matrigna o madre
'Ma se pur madre, a lei poco piu piu,
'Che M^dea ^i figlie Progne stata sia.'
ARIOSTO.
IT was not merely in the airy nothing of a name that mrs. Mordaunt exercised
her dislike to her unhappy infant. The inextinguishable desire that she had of
being ever the object of attention and observation, made her seek for means to
perpetuate her consequence, when youth and beauty (however distant she might at
present consider that period) should be no more.

To be the principal object wherever she appeared, had been the first wish to
which she had been conscious, and it was likely to be the last of which she
would be sensible. The fashionable furor for education presented her the means
she sought. She could no longer eclipse rival beauties at a ball: she could no
longer strike the fangs of envy into a heart similar to her own, by the
superior elegance of her head dress, or the splendour of her equipage. All her
triumphs were confined within the circle of a small neighborhood, far remote
from the scene of all her former distinctions, and where the inquiries of the
curious were more directed to the domestic economy of their neighbors, than to
the form of their clothes, or the fashion of their carriages. To this
neighborhood she resolved to be known as the most educating mother in it. Her
elder daughters were too old, and too much under the wiser care of their
father, to be proper objects on which to display her abilities in this new road
to distinction: but the new born infant was her undisputed property, and she
resolved to pour all the terrors of education on poor Ellen's head.

In this design, so wisely and so benevolently formed, she succeeded so
perfectly, that at the early age of twelve months, when other children know
their mothers only as their surest source of indulgence, Maria was become so
completely an object of terror to her child, that she scarce looked upon her
without trembling, or appeared before her without tears. It seemed too, as if
every circumstance was to conspire to render the infancy of Ellen wretched. In
less than fifteen months after her birth, the eagerly desired boy was borne,
and, as if this unnatural mother posse^ but a certain degree of affection, the
little tenderness that she had hitherto manifested toward Ellen, was all
withdrawn, to be added to that which she profusely lavished on the boy. Besides
which, Ellen was always wrong in every thing she did, or every thing she did
not do, for her brother. If she caressed him, she would smother the child -- If
she stood aloof, she was a little insensible, without affections; and then she
had a flap or a push, or her play things were taken from her, or she was
sometimes whipped, she did not know for why, or for what.

The age of teaching now came on, and mrs. Mordaunt was resolved to teach. But
the truth was, that she had never learn. Her own ideas of what she meant to
convey were too indistinct, to enable her to communicate them to another. Her
method was unintelligible, and her impatience extreme. Ellen could learn
nothing -- it was stupidity -- it was obstinacy. She had always foretold that
she had the worst dispositions of human nature -- punishment followed
punishment, 'till by a succession of such teaching and such correction, that
very stupidity and obstinacy were nearly produced, which they were designed to
correct.

Mr. Mordaunt was not an inattentive spectator of all this; but he was far from
understanding the real truth of the case. The early terror that had been
impressed on the mind of Ellen, had made her appear, even to mr. Mordaunt, as a
child of a slow capacity, and somewhat of a sullen disposition. He was often
witness to what were represented to him as fits of obstinacy, and sometimes to
moments of violence. He feared Ellen might resemble her mother, and thought a
little correction might be necessary. With the degree and frequency of the
punishment he was wholly unacquainted: and as it is easy to put a child in the
wrong, mrs. Mordaunt took care that Ellen should always appear so to her
father. But however mr. Mordaunt might, for a certain time, have been
persuaded, that his wife's mode of treating his daughter was salutary, or
necessary, experience convinced him it was inefficacious. At six years old,
Ellen could scarcely read: and he observed, with inexpressible pain, a sullen
indifference to all instruction or reproof pervading her mind.

Maria had never been her husband's friend* for many years she had ceased to be
his confidant: and the ingenuous mind of mr. Mordaunt had suffered the severest
mortification when he had found it necessary to sacrifice the pleasure of
communication to the dictates of prudence. Since his residence in
Northumberland, he had and, however, both a friend and a confidant, to w^ he
opened his heart whenever he was oppressed with dissatisfaction or perplexed
with doubt. This friend and this confidant was the clergyman of the parish,
whose benevolence had never sailed to sooth his sorrows, or his judgment to
enlighten his understanding.

To mr. Thornton he revealed the fears and grief that the character of Ellen
excited in his breast.

"Give me leave to invite my wife to make one of our party," said mr. Thornton.
"I am mistaken if she will not give you comfort."

Mrs Thornton was only in the next room. She obeyed her husband's summons; she
sat down, and heard mr. Mordaunt's distress.

"Your child, my dear sir," said she, "is neither stupid nor ill disposed.
Wrong methods have been taken with her. Terror has overwhelmed the powers of
her mind, and deadened her affec^ion. Convince her she is beloved, and she will
be and do every thing you can desire."

"How is it possible, madam," said mr. Mordaunt, "that you should have formed
so contrary, and so much more favorable an opinion of Ellen, than I, with all
my partiality, have been able to entertain?"

"She loves me, sir," returned mrs. Thornton; "and she loves me, because she
believes I love her. If she can love one person, she can love another. She is
willing to learn of me: and only the last ^e I was with her, I taught her a
lesson in ten minutes, that she told me she had been the three preceding days
in vain attempting to learn. Do you ask other proofs?"

"No," cried mr. Mordaunt: "but I have farther favors to ask of you. You must
take this poor child under your care, my dear mrs. Thornton. You must take her
and make her all you say she is capable of being made."

After a little more conversation, all the particulars of this plan were
settled.

Mrs. Thornton had long seen Ellen's sufferings with pity; and was happy to
contribute all in her power to put an end to them. Mrs. Mordaunt, convinced
that Ellen would do no credit to her mode of education, and tired of the
trouble she gave her, easily consented to part with her.

The parsonage, to which Ellen was now removed, was scarcely half a mile
distant from Groby Manor: and it was situated at the other end of the valley.
So near a neighborhood enabled mr. Mordaunt to see his daughter every day; and
he saw her every day with increased satisfaction. Her pallid cheeks, hitherto
robbed of their color, by the continual washing of tears, began to be tinged
with a faint red. Her sullen eye, formerly fixed gloomily on the ground, was
often now raised timidly to the person who spoke to her, and sometimes cast
forth beams of intelligence and gaiety. If she did not run to meet her father
when he approached her, she ventured to press the hand that held here is: and
sometimes would she rest her head upon his shoulder: and he could perceive, as
she raised it, a tear tremble in her eye, which he could attribute only to the
tenderness of her heart, responsive to its care^* Mr. Mordaunt left no method
untried to secure her affections: and every day now gave him a more perfect
assurance that he was not unsuccessful.

Ellen had been about six months in her new situation, when the illness of lord
Villars called mr. and mrs. Mordaunt into Hampshire. His indisposition was
long, and terminated in his death.

Mrs. Mordaunt, very well pleased to find herself once again in her old world,
caught at every possible reason for prolonging her stay. Her brother, now lord
Villars, had been married some years. She had seen little of him during this
period. He pressed her so much to continue in Hampshire the remainder of the
summer, that mr. Mordaunt consented she should do so. But he consented upon
condition that their three elder daughters should join them there. He thought
it desirable to have them known to their nearest connexions: and he was willing
to give them such assistances, in some exterior accomplishments, as the distant
situation of Northumberland had not hitherto allowed them. The boy had never
been separated from his mother.

Mr. Mordaunt's condition was joyfully accepted. The summer passed pleasantly
with them all: and when the time for repairing to London approached, mrs.
Fortescue (now a widow) so vehemently urged the melancholy of returning into
Northumberland at that season, and so kindly offered the whole family
apartments in her house, that mr. Mordaunt again consented to prolong his
absence from home.

The family had not been settled more than a month in town, when mrs. Fortescue
was seized with a fever, of which she died in about a fortnight. On her death
is was found she had bequeathed to m^ Mordaunt all she had in her power to
dispose of. This all consisted in a small country mansion, with an estate of
about 200l. a year about it. It was situated within ten miles of lord Villars's
house, in the country; and was furnished and fitted up with all the elegance of
modern taste.

Whatever tears mrs. Mordaunt might shed for the loss of a partial, though
mistaken, friend -- for one, who had not only been her steady advocate through
life, but who had proved her benefactress at her death, were soon dried up by
the thoughts of the independence that friend had secured to her, and still more
by reflections on the place where the property which gave her that independence
was situated. She immediately declared her intentions of going to Hadley Lodge
directly upon leaving town. But she also protested, that she meant not to leave
London 'till the middle of June. The house she was at present in was to
continue here is for six months, and she therefore saw no reason why the event of
mrs. Fortescue's death should abridge the scheme of pleasure that she had laid
down for theensuing spring.

Mr. Mordaunt felt it harsh to oppose any of these resolutions, since they were
not (in consequence of their new acquisitions) liable to the censure of
imprudence in a pecuniary light. He therefore acquiesced, reserving however to
himself the power of visiting Ellen and Northumberland: and this he proposed to
do when mrs. Mordaunt and her family removed to Hadley Lodge.

In the execution of this plan, he was, however, prevented. The death of a
distant relation, who had for many years resided in the West Indies, made it
necessary he should himself cross the Atlantic. Property of some value had
devolved to him; but the succession of it was disputed: and it was attended
with some circumstances that made it necessary, if he meant to prosecute his
claim to it, to visit the island where it lay.

He would willingly have persuaded mrs. Mordaunt to have re^ed into
Northumberland, there to have remained during his absence; but to persuade her
was impossible, and to compel her to a measure so disagreeable to herself, on
the eve of a separation that might be for a considerable length of time, was
what the softness of mr. Mordaunt's feelings would not permit; it was therefore
agreed that she should reside at her own house while he was absent, and he
flattered himself that the neighborhood of her brother might be some restraint
upon her indiscretion, and afford protection and counsel to his girls, ^f any
circumstance should arise, during his absence, in which they wanted either.

The time was short in which he was to arrange all this; he recommended his
family to lord Villars, and sailed for Jamaica.

By unforeseen circumstances and unavoidable delays, his absence was prolonged
to the beginning of the fifth year, and he returned something poorer than he
sat out.

Immediately on his arrival in England mr. Mordaunt hastened to Hadley Lodge,
but no comfort awaited him there -- He found his eldest daughter married to a
man of libertine character and dissipated fortune, whose recommendation, in the
eyes of mrs. Mordaunt, had been his fashionable manners, and his connexions
with people of rank.

The boy, now ten years old, had continued, in spite of mrs. Mordaunt's
repeated injunctions to the contrary, in his mother's house, where he had
remained ignorant of every thing he ought to have learnt, and became acquainted
with almost every thing he ought not to have known.

Mrs. Mordaunt herself was embarrassed with debts, and of the independence, of
which she had made so ill a use, but little remained.

Mr. Mordaunt could scarcely forbear reproaching lord Villars for the little
attention he appeared to have given to his sister and her children; but when he
considered that he had himself the cares of a large family upon him, and a
numerous train of half brothers and sisters, whose interest he was compelled to
attend to, and reflected upon his character, in which selfishness was the
predominant feature, he thought it best to forbear reproaches, which would now
be made in vain, and which might tend to interrupt the friendly intercourse
there had hitherto subsisted between himself and lord Villars. In reproaches to
himself, however, he was not sparing: he felt too bitterly, the consequences of
his ill choice in a wife, not to call him severely to an account for having
suffered his eyes to mislead his judgment.

Northumberland was again the resource: and as mrs. Mordaunt had now no power
to remain in Hampshire without the permission of her husband, she knew it was
in vain to oppose her wishes to his, she therefore prepared, however
reluctantly, for her departure; but the delays which she artfully threw in the
way, having exhausted mr. Mordaunt's patience, he left her to follow him at her
leisure, and set out for Northumberland, accompanied only by the second son of
lord Villars, a youth of fifteen.

CHAP. V.
'May this great truth by all be understood,
'That all the pious duties which we owe,
'The seeds of every virtue here below,
'From discipline alone and early culture grow.'
WEST.
AS mr. Mordaunt approached Groby Manor, his impatience to behold the effects
that more than five years must have wrought in Ellen, became extreme.

He was sometimes willing to hope, that having been removed from mrs.
Mordaunt's baneful influence, she might compensate to him for all the other
domestic disappointments that influence had produced; at others, the
remembrance of those faults which he had been accustomed to call natural to her
disposition, recurred to his mind, and overclouded it with the dispiriting fear
that no difference of treatment could have been powerful enough to correct
them; yet mrs. Thornton, though she had said nothing of her mental abilities,
had spoken much of her docility. If I find her, said mr. Mordaunt to himself,
gentle and affectionate, I will compound for a moderate capacity, and give up
willingly all pretensions to talents or accomplishments.

These thoughts occupied him so much, that not all the comicality and sprightly
understanding of his companion could always awake him from his reverie: and
Henry, who had as much feeling as gaiety, imposed silence upon himself, that he
might not prove troublesome to his uncle.

Mr. Mordaunt rested not a moment at Groby Manor; but with a long step, and
hasty movement, that made Henry laugh, proceeded down the valley to the
parsonage.

As he approached the house he heard the sound of a fiddle; and immediately
after saw assembled on the green before the door, ten or twelve girls of
different ages, who were dancing gaily to the music. Mr. Mordaunt stopped
short. He sought, if possible, to discover Ellen before she was pointed out to
him; and Henry rushed forward that he might join in the amusement.

"Might that be her," said mr. Mordaunt, "might that spright', good-humoured
looking blooming girl be her, my wishes would be more than answered."

His wishes were more than answered. It was Ellen herself. The music ceased.
The whole group was in confusion: and the next moment Ellen, with an emotion
that charmed him, was in the arms of her father.

"My dear child, my beloved Ellen, can I ever part with you again?"

"Yes, yes, this very moment, my dear uncle," cried Henry. "What! am I not to
have a dozen kisses at least of my cousin?"

"And are you my cousin, too?" said Ellen, with one arm round her father's
neck, and the other hand held out to Henry. "O, I did not know I was ever to
have been so happy!"

The pathos of the scene was now over: but the delight remained: and Henry,
having taken something more than his dozen kisses, ran away with Ellen to join
her companions, and recommence the dance.

"You never told me," said mr. Mordaunt to mr. Thornton, "of the good humor
and intelligence that beam in Ellen's countenance, nor of the lightness of her
movements, the delicacy of her limbs, and the ease of her shape."

"Ellen is not a beauty," said mrs. Thornton, smiling.

"She is in her father's eyes," returned mr. Mordaunt: "and will be so in those
of her lover."

"But you do not ask, what I have attempted to teach her. You do not inquire,
whether she was capable of learning."

"I am almost indifferent what she has learnt. With the dispositions that I see
she possesses, she will gratify my fondest wishes."

"But Ellen has not only dispositions," said mr. Thornton, "she has powers. She
is an excellent arithmetician: she is a good geographer: she is mistress of all
the rules of drawing: she writes and speaks French well; and has a very
competent knowledge of Latin."

"To which let me add," said mrs. Thornton, "that she is mistress of her
needle; understands music tolerably; plays at chess; and dances, walks, and
plays at shuttlecock to admiration."

"Impossible!" said mr. Mordaunt. "You flatter me."

"Nothing can be more true; and yet Ellen is no prodigy. She is what every girl
of common sense and common application may be at her age."

"But how did you conquer her obstinacy? how did you subdue her violence?"

"I neither found her obstinate nor violent. I did not propose to her to do any
thing but what she saw my own daughter, something younger than herself, do.
Each day has its allotted business, and its allotted pleasure. The slowest
capacity could comprehend, that the more hours were consumed in business, the
fewer there would be for pleasure. It is is only necessary to lay down the
premises, and to abide by them. The conclusion every child can draw for itself.
If that conclusion be as infallible as it is unpleasant, in a little time it
will be carefully avoided. To the reason of its instructors a child will not
perhaps readily submit. It is against reason that it should. But to the reason
of facts children will always yield, provided it be made clear to them."

"Can it really be so easy to give the best possible education to a child?"

"I do not say, that mine is the best possible education; nor is it so easy as
it appears. To guard against the faults of the child is not half the business.
The weakness of the tutor is much more inimical to the success of his efforts
-- to be unyielding in matters (simply considered) of little import -- to bear
a cold countenance with a warm heart -- to be insensible to the blandishments
of childhood, where the good of the future man requires it -- are not easy
tasks to a feeling and affectionate mind; and no other is fitted for the task
of education. Then will not the tutor have to combat with his own indolence,
his own unevenness of disposition, his caprice, and his partialities? No, the
task of education is not easy; but it is the greatest in which man or woman can
be engaged; and ought therefore to be attended to by all who undertake it, with
every energy of the mind. What I have chiefly wished to avoid, was the doing
too much. Not to do mischief, and to let the causes that produce good have
their full operation, are two material points. I was aware, that the greatest
difficulty, in this important matter, arose from the weaknesses of the
instructors, and the indiscreet interference of others. Mr. Thornton and ^e
absolute here, and as perfectly steady, though sometimes at the expense of a
heart ache. Hence Ellen and Mary have learnt to consider our laws as immutable
as the decrees of fate, and to accommodate themselves to them, as they would do
to any physical necessity. Constant application has made the task of learning
easy: and where something new, however little, is acquired every day, the sum
total, at the end of five years, will be surprising."

"But do you allow nothing to natural disposition, and to the natural powers of
the mind?"

"Oh, yes, a great deal: And here, I acknowledge that Ellen has met my cares
more than half way. She has a very good, but not an uncommon capacity. Her
quickness of apprehension, however, is something more than common. She has a
warm heart and a generous mind. I have been able to move her with the touch of
a finger. Had she had duller feelings, I must have put my whole strength to
her."

"Your method of teaching seems not only calculated to produce the immediate
end, that of communicating the thing to be taught, but also to give an
anticipated experience of life. Will there not be learnt by it, that yielding
to the necessity of things, which is the best secret for happiness, and which
enables us to repress useless repinings, and, when we cannot be happy one way,
to be happy another?"

"It is what I hope from it: and without some such end, all the teachings in
the world are only calculated to destroy the pleasures of childhood, without
having a tendency to promote the virtue or the happiness of the man. I know not
what may be Ellen's destiny: but I think I can dare to foretell, that if her
present habits are allowed to strengthen, and her present principles to take
root, she will never in any circumstance, be the victim of ungoverned fancy, or
the martyr to a selfish sensibility."

"But is there not some danger in thus guarding her from a too great influence
of the feelings, that she should become less amiable by the want of them?"

"I do not guard her from feeling. I guard her from selfishness. For others she
will feel acutely -- for herself moderately: and where self is out of the
question, there is no fear but that reason will always be near enough to ward
off any danger from too lively a sensibility."

"What is the leading feature of her mind? What is it that she is extremely?"
--

"Ellen knows no extremes."

"Except," interrupted mr. Thornton, "the extreme of good humor."

"Were I to have made the exception," said mrs. Thornton, "it would have been
that of disinterestedness. But let us recollect that we are speaking of a girl
of twelve years old. She is yet really nothing. All the intimations that she
gives of character, are favorable. But, alas! how much six years of weak
indulgence, or cold neglect, may make the woman of eighteen, differ from the
girl of twelve!"

"She has neither the one nor the other to fear," said mr. Mordaunt warmly, "if
you will continue your cares."

"If I will! -- "

"My obligations," interrupted mr. Mordaunt, "will then be such as can never be
discharged. And -- "

"Talk not of obligations," said mr. Thornton. "be assured they are reciprocal:
and if you trust your Ellen with us another six years, they will all be on our
side. Hitherto she has only acquired the means of self improvement; from this
time, every day will add something to the real improvement of her mind, and the
formation of her heart: And do you not think, that those who are to accompany
the traveller in so flowery a way, will be more than repaid for the fatigue of
the journey?"

The conversation was here interrupted by the breaking up of the ball: and
Ellen sideling toward her father, found herself a seat upon half his chair.

It is not to be doubted, that from this evening mr. Mordaunt spent many of his
hours at the parsonage: Henry spent still more. With Ellen he studied, and with
Ellen he idled. She was the better scholar of the two; and would laugh at the
careless manner in which he had been taught, would scoff at his want of
application, and pique him to greater exertion by her ridicule. When books gave
way to sports, they walked, danced, or played at shuttlecock together; or Henry
would assist Ellen and Mary in the labors of their garden; or they would
compel him to listen to some of their botanical discussions, botany being a new
study which mr. Thornton had just given them. But as to chess, which equally
excluded conversation and locomotion, Henry had never patience to hear it
mentioned. For music he had little more toleration, except Ellen would sing a
ballad or play a country dance.

Six weeks were thus passed away: and mrs. Mordaunt had not yet fulfilled her
promise of following her husband: he, therefore, thought it most prudent to
return into Hampshire, and not to quit it, 'till he brought her away with him.
Henry's vacation was more than expired. He must depart with his uncle; and
Ellen declared, with as much naivete as truth, that she knew not which she was
most sorry to part with. She bade them farewell with a degree of pain which she
never before remembered to have felt. But she had no leisure for artificial
grief. It was rather the recollections that were forced upon her, than any she
indulged in, that saddened, for some days after their departure, both her
lessons and her amusements. But a much more serious grief awaited her.

CHAP. VI.
"Oh, mother! -- yet no mother! -- "
SAVAGE.
ELLEN retained only an indistinct idea of the severity and ill will of her
mother toward her during her infancy. All remembrance of it had been, by the
cares of mrs. Thornton, as much obliterated as possible. Thus, though she did
not look forward to the arrival of mrs. Mordaunt with the same delight and
desire which she had felt when she expected her father, she nevertheless
thought of it with pleasure: and the expectation of seeing her sisters, filled
her with hopes still more satisfactory to her feelings.

The first evening spent in their company repressed this pleasure, and chilled
her hopes.

The immediate impulse, on the sight of her mother, had been to fly into her
arms: but she had stopped short, checked by the frigidity of her air, and the
scowling discontent of her brow. She waited for invitation, -- but she received
it not: and she stood silent and depressed, with her eyes cast upon the ground,
unconscious what could have been her fault, yet feeling that she must have
committed one.

"Maria," said mr. Mordaunt, "Ellen longs to embrace you."

"There, child," said Maria, coldly kissing her forehead, "I hope you are grown
good. But you used to be the naughtiest little brat I was ever acquainted with.
Many are the twigs of birch I have worn out in your service."

Tears started into poor Ellen's eyes. She had nothing to say; nor did she know
clearly at that moment what she thought. But she felt that she wished herself
away.

Her sisters had no ill will toward her; but she was not an object of any
interest in their eyes. Vitiated by their mother's precepts and example, they
considered the having quitted the South of England, as having left every thing
that was desirable in life -- as the forfeiture of all their hopes of
establishment in the world -- and, indeed, as the consummation of misfortune.
Their journey, therefore, had been spent in tears and regret. Groby Manor
appeared to them as a prison, in which, for the future, their only happiness
must arise from enumerating delights that were gone for ever, and in talking of
persons who were to be seen no more. To all, of which Ellen could speak, they
were perfectly indifferent. They were too indolent to enter into her exercises,
and too ignorant to care about her studies.

Ellen sensibly felt her disappointment, a disappointment that every future day
confirmed.

Her mother added ill humor and disapprobation to her coldness: and though it
was no longer in her power to punish, or to control her, it was more than
sufficiently so to mortify and to thwart her. There was no opportunity that
occurred of doing either, that she ever suffered to escape. Her dislike to
Ellen was, indeed, little, if at all, short of hatred. She could not conceal
from herself how false had been the character which, in her early years, she
had sought to stamp her with. Her understanding and temper, however, now
appeared both to be indubitably excellent: and mrs. Mordaunt was fully aware of
the conclusion that must be drawn by every body, that if such soil had not from
the first produced fruit, it must have been wholly owing to the unskilfulness
of the cultivator. She therefore considered Ellen's merits and acquirements, as
reproaches to herself, and as a most severe mortification to her vanity; and as
she could not, with all her depreciation of them, lessen their real value; she
hated Ellen as the cause of her daily and hourly mortification.

It was more by the self indulgence of railing at Ellen, than from any fixed
design, that mrs. Mordaunt communicated her prejudices to the hearts of her
daughters. These prejudices were aided by the discovery that they soon made,
that Ellen, though so far short of them in years, was their superior in every
kind of useful knowledge. They found she every day grew into more
consideration: and the just preference that mr. Mordaunt gave her in his
affections, though they did not by any effort toward imitating her
excellencies endeavor to lessen, filled them with the most rancorous jealousy.
They shrunk from all Ellen's playful and affectionate attempts toward being
upon a familiar footing with them: and she was soon painfully convinced, that
she was to look for no friendship from her sisters.

All mr. Mordaunt's efforts to establish harmony and mutual love among the
individuals of his family were in vain. It soon came to be considered as
composed of two parties, of which mrs. Mordaunt and her two eldest daughters
formed one, and mr. Mordaunt and Ellen the other. The boy he had resolutely
divided from his mother, and placed under the care of a friend of his own, from
whose assiduity he hoped he might derive advantages, that would, in some
measure, make up for the years that had been misspent.

"If," said he to mrs. Thornton, with a sigh of the bitterest self-reproach,
"if I am to do justice to the understandings of my children, or to preserve
their hearts from selfishness and vanity, it must be by removing them from the
influence of a woman whom I once imagined possessed of every virtue that adorns
humanity."

"Ah, my dear friend," said mr. Thornton, "your mistake is not an uncommon one.
The fascination of beauty always has prevailed, and always will prevail. We can
only render it harmless, by giving to our females such educations as will place
all the useful energies of the understanding, and all the virtuous propensities
of the heart, in conjunction with personal charms. If this can be done, the
whole of human kind will benefit."

Ellen disappointed in the reciprocation of affection and pleasure which she
had hoped for from her own family, applied herself closer than ever to her
lessons: and the kindness of mr. and mrs. Thornton, with the friendship of
their daughter, she found no inadequate compensation for the contrary
sentiments that filled the bosoms of her mother and sisters.

The following summer again brought Henry into Northumberland. He and Ellen met
with mutual delight: and this delight increased with every hour they passed
together.

If Henry had been the companion and play-fellow of Ellen, when first they knew
each other, he now became her friend. Ellen had already sorrows to disburden.
The invincible silence and apparent unconsciousness of both mr. and mrs.
Thornton, as to the conduct of her mother and sisters toward her, left Ellen
at a loss to know whether it was perceived by them or no. But such reserve on
their part made appear the propriety of her continuing equally silent, and
seemingly unconscious. From a feeling of delicacy, she was not more
communicative to Mary.

But with Henry she had no concealments. His quick sense had instantly revealed
to him the unkindness of his aunt and cousins: and the warmth of his heart and
temper led him to speak of it to Ellen, in terms of honest indignation. Ellen
was not angry; but she was grieved. She lamented her own inability to
conciliate the affections of those by whom she most wished to be beloved, and
to love: and Henry being made still more angry by seeing her grief, declared
them, in express terms, to be unworthy of her solicitude or regret.

Henry's partiality for Ellen, was an additional motive to her mother's hatred,
and her sisters' jealousy. Mrs. Mordaunt had hitherto boasted of her nephew as
the ornament and pride of her own family: and she could not but look upon it as
a degradation to the dignity of that family, to see him give the most
unequivocal manifestations of preferable attachment to that child of hers,
whose birth, she scrupled not to declare, she considered as her greatest
misfortune.

Henry, with something of a malicious archness, was so far from concealing his
partiality in compliment to his aunt, that he took every opportunity of
displaying it before her, and of magnifying the merits and acquirements of
Ellen, beyond all other merits and acquirements. He needed not this method for
the confirmation of a passion that had taken deep root in his heart.

CHAP. VII.
'He says he loves my daughter;
'I do think so too; for never gazed the moon
'Upon the water, as he will stand, and read,
'As 'twere my daughter's eyes.'
SHAKESPEARE.
EVERY vacation, while Henry continued at school, and many days that were not
vacation, when by his removal to college he became more his own master, were
spent by him, upon some pretense or other, at Groby Manor. Each time he saw
Ellen his attachment increased, for each time she appeared more amiable and
charming in his eyes.

Perhaps the most unsuspicious proof of a good education is, that the progress
of time is marked by the progress of improvement in the pupil. Ellen gave this
proof of the goodness of her education. Every six months she had made some
acquisition in knowledge, or gave some proof that her reason strengthened, and
that her passions were more under control. Good habits were converted into
virtues; and warm affections ripened into benevolence.

Those who bestow the name of education on a desultory form of instruction,
often suspended through idleness, or broken in upon by frivolous and pernicious
amusements, whose efforts, weak as they are, are directed wholly to filling the
head, rather than to forming the heart, or cultivating the reason, cannot
guess, and will not be made to believe, how much useful knowledge, how much
vigor of mind, how much strength of principle, may be produced by eleven years
of wisely directed and unremitted attention to those objects.

Ellen at seventeen, with all the gaiety that belongs to that age, possessed
great acuteness of discernment, much power of reason, an invincible integrity,
and a command over her passions, which is not often met with in the most
advanced years. Her mind was stored with useful and ornamental learning. Her
person was light and agile. She had the prettiest hands and feet in the world.
Her countenance was frank and intelligent: and her complexion clear and
blooming. No one would have fallen in love with Ellen for her beauty; but,
being in love with her, every one must have thought her beautiful.

Henry could now sit whole hours with her at chess, or hanging over the back of
her chair. Any sound that she drew from her harpsichord had power to rivet him
to the spot. Ellen could remark on the difference of his taste now and in
former times: but she was not conscious of the change that had taken place in
the nature of his attachment. Here Is toward him, was lively and animated, as it
had always been. But being accustomed to love him only as her cousin, she
thought she loved him as her cousin still.

Henry, however, now twenty, was no stranger to the nature of the passion which
wholly occupied his mind; and being challenged upon it by his uncle, frankly
declared that his hope and design were to gain the heart of Ellen, and that,
having gained it, no earthly consideration should make him forego the
possession of her person.

"But your father?" --

"My father has no claims upon me but those of nature. I am no eldest son,
thank heaven. To me cannot be pleaded either the pride or the avarice of my
family. I am destined to work out my own support; and by that destiny my
independence is secured. Oh! my uncle, give me leave to try to gain the
affections of Ellen. Do you ratify the gift, and my father neither will or can
have any objection to our union."

"It is at least fit you consult him before you attempt to gain a heart, which,
even if gained, ought not, without his concurrence, and, I flatter myself,
would not remain yours."

Oh! thought Henry, if I were once assured of Ellen's heart, the way would be
easy.

"Will you, sir, explain my hopes and my wishes to my father? You know I have
never attempted concealment. I have always thought I had a right, as one born
to independence -- the independence that industry gives -- to indulge in a love
which has possessed my heart from the first weeks of my knowledge of Ellen, and
which will never depart from it but with my latest sigh."

"I love your frankness, and I love your ardour: but I must tell you, you are
mistaken in your idea of independence. What are you, what can you be for many
years to come, unsupported by your father? It is for him to say how you shall
exert your industry, what assistances he will give to it, and what returns he
may expect from the success of it, before you can consider yourself as being,
or pretend to act as, an independent person."

"But you, sir," said Henry lowering his tone, "but you, sir, could be
favorable to my wishes."

"I shall be, I must be, ruled by your father. All I can give Ellen will be
little; and I shall never consent to her becoming the wife of any man against
the consent of his parent."

Henry's hopes seemed to ^otter to the foundation. "What would you have me to
do, sir?" said he faintly. "I will put myself under your direction. I wish to
consider you as my father."

"What I require from you is to quit Groby Manor. I would guard Ellen from all
unnecessary pain; and therefore if you are not to be united, I would spare her
the pang of a disappointed hope. At present, with all your insinuating
qualities, young man, I believe your heart is free."

"This is what you require of me," said Henry impatiently: "what is it that you
advise?"

"That you open your mind fully to your father, and that you act implicitly as
he shall direct."

"And suppose he forbids me to think any more of Ellen, do you suppose I can
obey him?"

"Indeed I do; because you ought."

"And could you, sir, at my age?"

"Ask me no questions. If you hope for my interest, you must do what I require
and advise."

"With such a bribe, what is it I would not do? I will be gone this very
evening, nay, within this hour. If I were to see Ellen again, who knows but I
might whisper a secret in her ear, that might make her not uninterested in the
success of my journey."

"Go; and my good wishes go with you. If you can add perseverance to your
activity, you may in time have the independence you talk of; and I may have the
pleasure to receive you as my son."

Henry pressed his uncle's hand between both his in speechless agitation, and
ran off to conceal his falling tears.

Henry's journey was speedy, and not wholly unsuccessful. Marriage, according
to the decision of lord Villars, was to be put wholly out of the question for
some years: but Henry was allowed, upon those terms, to endeavor to attach
Ellen to himself: and lord Villars promised, when his son could prove to him
that he was master of the annual sum of five hundred pounds, as the fruits of
his own industry, that he should then be allowed to make her his wife. His
profession was to be the law. Three hundred pounds a year lord Villars proposed
to allow him; and he engaged to continue this sum 'till Henry by his own
efforts made the five hundred pounds per annum eight.

Henry already thought himself the husband of Ellen; but lord Villars's views
were very different. By removing the possibility of a connection, which it was
not his desire should ever take place, to so distant and uncertain a period, he
depended upon the vicissitude of human events, and the instability of human
affections. He knew, much better than Henry, how long it must of necessity be
before he could perform his part of the engagement: and in the lapse of so many
years, he made sure of his calculation, that either the power to do so, or the
will, would be lost. He might indeed have refused his consent altogether, but
he had many reasons for not doing this. Although steady and unbending as to the
end he had in ^iew, the means he always chose should be the gentlest possible.
Experience had long confirmed him in the policy of such proceeding. If they
succeeded at all, their success was more complete than any which violence could
produce: and if violence must be resorted to, it ever operated with double
force for having been for some time withheld.

In this case he particularly attended to the character of Henry; the energy of
whose mind he knew would be up in arms against manifest injustice or manifest
unreasonableness. It suited neither his family views, nor his interest to be at
variance with a son, whose superiority of character he was willing to make the
instrument of family aggrandizement. He was not inattentive either to the
advantage to be derived from curbing the passions and indiscretions of a young
man, or of the spur that might be given to his industry, by the bait of a
promised marriage with the woman of his choice, as a reward for his virtue and
his exertions. But in thus holding forth the sugarplumb for good behavior, he
by no means yielded the power of the rod which was still to be exercised, if
after circumstances made it necessary.

Henry comprehended nothing of all this. He relied equally on the good faith of
his father and his own constancy; and thanking lord Villars for his indulgence
with the most enraptured gratitude, measured back his steps to Northumberland.

Mr. Mordaunt thought lord Villars's decision both wise and kind; and most
willingly gave Henry permission to gain the heart of Ellen, if he could.

In the character of Henry mr. Mordaunt saw the seeds of all those qualities
that he could wish for in a husband for his daughter. But, had he been
independent, and his wishes sanctioned by the approbation of lord Villars, mr.
Mordaunt would not willingly have trusted, at the early and tempestuous age of
twenty, the happiness of Ellen to his care. His disposition was too ardent, and
his taste for pleasure too eager, to have given a reasonable hope, that having
thus early attained the summit of his wishes, the rest of his life would be
regulated by the dictates of reason, or even that the object which had so
easily been obtained, however now highly prized, would be able to maintain its
value in his estimation. But in the discipline of a seven or eight years' study
of the law, with Ellen for his reward, mr. Mordaunt saw a course of education
for Henry, that would, he doubted not, give stability to all his virtues, and
train him to that power of mind, and rectitude of feeling, which would secure
both her happiness and his own.

All these arrangements were received by mrs. Mordaunt with a sullen
discontent. She smiled scornfully at the idea of an engagement between a boy
and a girl, the accomplishment of which was not to take place until so distant
a period of time: and she expressed a wonder that her brother would ever
consent to so foolish a contract. However as the completion of it opened no
views of splendor or greatness to Ellen, she took no trouble to oppose it, and
contented herself with prophesying that it would all end ill.

Ellen, from the simplicity of her life, and the full occupation of her time,
had perhaps thought less of love and matrimony than any girl of her age: but
Henry was not the less dear to her for this. It is true, he made neither her
sleeping or her waking dreams. She slept each night sound ^d undisturbed: and
she arose each morning gay and active. The day was not more tedious when Henry
was away; but it was infinitely more delightful when he was there. His
conversation had more charms for her than that of any other of her companions,
but she had no desire to enjoy his conversation apart. If things went on in
their usual course, Henry occurred seldom to her mind: but if she were more
than ordinarily pleased, or more than ordinarily chagrined, "Oh, that my cousin
were here!" was the first wish of her heart: Ellen heard the commendations of
Henry with no sensation but that of a simple acquiescence in their truth. But
where he was blamed, she was struck with surprise, and thought not so much of
vindicating him, as correcting a mistake. Of his merits, as equivocal, she
herself never spoke, no more than of the light of the sun: they appeared
equally uncontrovertible. Neither thought she of denying or affirming that she
loved him. To love Henry seemed to her as natural as loving herself. But had he
never been allowed to return to Northumberland, when he left it on his last
visit to his father, however Ellen might have sensibly lamented the loss of her
earliest friend and most loved companion, her peace would have remained secure,
and her heart unwounded.

Henry had hitherto been satisfied with the kind of love Ellen had felt for
him. But he now sought to render it more decided and appropriate.

The change in his attentions had not before escaped her: and the change in his
language was still more striking. This change did not, however, displease her;
nor did it alarm her, till she began to find something like it in herself.
Ellen had been accustomed to think, nor could she proceed long heedlessly in
any path. Little reflection upon circumstances made her believe, that it was
her duty to repress the too fervent expressions and intimations of Henry's
regard, and to lead herself and him back to that calm state of friendship,
when, however delighted to be together, they were indifferent whether it were
with others or alone.

In consequence of this little plan, she avoided all tete-a-tete walks, all
withdrawings from society* to pursue their studies or amusements together.
Sometimes she assumed an air of reserve, when his heart was running over at his
lips; and at others appeared not to understand what was spoken in the most
express terms.

Henry was in despair; for he did not find out that all these were symptoms the
most decided in his favor.

Mr. Mordaunt amused himself sometimes with those cares. As he had no objection
to the hook striking deep into the heart of Ellen, he suffered her thus to play
with the line 'till she was completely entangled in it.

Having heard her one day resolutely deaf to the earnest solicitation of Henry
for a walk in the wood, and having seen him in consequence walk off in a huff,
while she remained thoughtful and silent at her work,

"How comes this, Ellen?" said he, "It seems as if Henry and you were not upon
such good terms as formerly."

Ellen blushed.

"Or are you upon better?" said mr. Mordaunt archly. Ellen blushed a deeper
die: and almost hiding her face in her handkerchief, she replied faintly, "It
might be possible I might see too much of my cousin."

"And do you think if there were danger that you might see too much of your
cousin, I should have suffered you to have seen so much?"

Ellen raised her eyes hastily to her father; and as hastily let them fall
again.

"Come, my dear Ellen, if I were your lover, I might perhaps enjoy your
confusion: but as your father I must relieve you from it. You may follow Henry
into the wood; and whatever he may say to you there, be assured he has mine and
his father's sanction for."

The inexpressible joy that filled the heart of Ellen at these words, first
told her how much such a sanction was necessary to her happiness.

Whether Ellen followed Henry into the wood, or whether she waited for the
explanation, till he followed her there, may be left to the decision of every
female who reads their story. But certain it is, that from this evening he had
an allowed interest in her heart.

Like him, she had a perfect reliance on his constancy, and his industry. But
he did not so fully agree with her, that their happiness was likely to be more
permanent from being established on the grounds of prudence and forbearance,
than if they were, maugre all such considerations, to begin it from that moment.

It mattered not, however, as to the effect, what was the opinion of either of
them in this point. From the decree which had declared their marriage should
not take place till Henry's application produced him five hundred pounds a
year, there lay no appeal.

Henry took chambers in Lincoln's Inn, and began his legal career with equal
diligence and acuteness. Every vacation he spent at Groby Manor: and he was
earnest in displaying, both to Ellen and her father, his habits of application
and economy. Ellen relying upon his affection, and pleased with her prospects
in life, had no jealousies to alarm, or anxieties to disturb her. She pursued,
uninterruptedly, her accustomed course of studies and amusements: and as she
grew more her own mistress, and more independent, they were improved into
pleasures of the purest kind, by being enabled to render her benevolence more
active, and by suffering her attentions to take a wider range.

She had now nearly attained her nineteenth year; and she had resided wholly at
Groby Manor for the last twelve months. She continued, however, to live much
with mr. and mrs. Thornton, under whose dearly-beloved roof many hours of every
day were passed. Nor could any thing increase that affection which subsisted
between her, and its highly-valued inhabitants. The gratifications of taste,
and the feelings of the heart, formed the ties which bound them to each other:
and the force of obligation, received and communicated, rendered them
indissoluble.

CHAP. VIII.
'I'll no say, men are villains a':
'The real hardened wicked,
'Who hae nae check but human law,
'Are to a few restricted.
'But oh, mankind are unco weak,
'An' little to be trusted:
'If self the wavering balance shake,
'Its rarely right adjusted.
BURNS.
IT was at this time that lord Villars invited his sister and her whole family
to his house in Hampshire. He had formed for his eldest son a matrimonial
connection, with lady Almeria Western, an heiress of a large fortune, to whom
he was guardian. To bring this matter to the desired issue, had cost him much
artifice and trouble: and the success of his plans filled him with not less
pride than pleasure. The lady was still very young: and as his son had no
attractions either of person or manner, he was eager to complete the marriage
before her comparative powers would lead her to make such distinctions as might
probably break it off for ever. As she added a very competent share of beauty
to the attractions of her thousands, it was not to be doubted, but that, if she
appeared in the world, mr. Villars would meet with many competitors: and lord
Villars had none of that blind parental partiality that could conceal from him,
in any degree, the danger of such a competition. The marriage, it was therefore
determined, should take place immediately. It was to be celebrated in the
country; and lord Villars wished, by making every circumstance relative to it
as splendid and dazzling as possible, to persuade the young bride that she was
an enviable and a happy woman.

Mr. Mordaunt willingly accepted the invitation, both as an indulgence to his
wife and his elder daughters, and from a desire to introduce Ellen to a more
intimate knowledge than any she had yet attained, of a family of which she was
some time to make one. Henry also was to leave the dust and dullness of his
chambers, upon this festive occasion: nor was there to be any one circumstance
omitted that could contribute to the satisfaction of any of the individuals who
were to form the party to be assembled. Joy and happiness were to pervade the
whole. -- But how vain are the plans of human wisdom! The triteness of the
observation is the proof of its truth.

Three days before the intended nuptials, the destined bridegroom was thrown
from his horse; and received a hurt, that in thrice as many hours deprived him
of life.

It would be impossible to describe the degrees and variety of sorrow this
event gave occasion for. Lady Villars wept as a tender mother. Her children
were affected in a greater or less degree, according to their age and
sensibility. Lady Almeria was more stunned than afflicted. Mrs. Mordaunt saw,
with grief, the path that this event opened to the exaltation of Ellen. Henry's
unfeigned sorrow for the death of his brother was not unmixed with a tumultuous
sensation, arising from the change that had thereby arisen in his own
situation, and the uncertainty how that change might operate on the dearest
wishes of his heart.

These various emotions, however, were all within the bounds of moderation:
but, to the grief and disappointment of lord Villars there were no bounds. The
sorrows of a parent on the death of a child appeared to be sacred and
unquestionable; all hearts of common humanity sympathized with lord Villars:
but few, if any, suspected the source from whence the extremity of his
affliction proceeded. -- He had lost his son: this loss might be supplied. But
with his son he had lost the heiress -- that heiress, by the fortunes of whom
every branch of his family were to be benefited, on whose property he had
formed, in idea, a superstructure of greatness and power, which could be
realized by no other means, and the demolition of which filled him with the
cruelest pangs. There was indeed one way; but it was nearly hopeless.

On Henry had devolved the rights and the titles of his brother, could he be
prevailed upon to fulfill his engagements. Lord Villars had often wished him in
his brother's place. The superiority of his character fitted him for the head
of his family: but the decrees of nature could not be reversed: and lord
Villars had endeavored to persuade himself, that wealth and rank might bestow,
even upon his eldest son, the consequence that character had denied. They might
however now be united -- they must -- they should be united. Lord Villars had
taken his resolution* and it remained only to think of the means that might put
it into force.

The first step was to break Henry's engagement with Ellen. But it was an act
of so violent and irritating a nature as to make almost hopeless every
consequence that lord Villars wished to follow from it. It was, however, a
necessary step, and that without which nothing could be done. Lord Villars well
knew the tender feelings of Henry: and though he was aware he should in vain
attempt to overcome his spirit, he was not without hopes that he might work
upon his heart.

For this purpose, the genuine sorrow that the first sense of his
disappointment inflicted, was succeeded in lord Villars by a counterfeit
affliction, in appearance as deep, as heartbreaking, and as incapable of
consolation as was ever felt by a parent for the loss of an only and highly
beloved offspring.

Henry soon lost every other thought in commiseration for his father, and in
anxious endeavors to console him. But lord Villars was not to be consoled. He
could no longer endure to remain at a place, where he had been deprived of the
hopes of his future life. He wished to remove to a smaller house that he had on
the borders of the county: and he wished only to have for his companions lady
Villars, lady Almeria, mrs. Mordaunt, and Henry. Of lady Almeria indeed he had
become so fond, that he could not bear her from his sight. "She was the beloved
of his lost son: how could she be otherwise than inexpressibly dear to him?"

For the desire of retaining mrs. Mordaunt he gave more genuine reasons. He
knew there were no schemes for the aggrandizement of her own family, (as she
always took care to denominate that of the Villars's) and for the mortification
of Ellen, that she would not with equal avidity seek to promote. He therefore
said, with the most perfect sincerity, "that from her company he hoped more,
than from any other, toward soothing his mind:" and he earnestly entreated mr.
Mordaunt to leave her with him for a few weeks, promising, at the end of that
period, to bring her himself into Northumberland, where, with mr. Mordaunt's
permission, he would stay some time, as he hoped from the quiet and seclusion
in which he might there live, to regain more composure and happiness, than he
could expect to derive from more busy and public scenes."

It was not possible for mr. Mordaunt to refuse his consent to any part of what
lord Villars proposed. But in spite of his wish to repel all suspicion from his
mind, there was something in lord Villars's conduct that excited very uneasy
sensations, as to the rectitude of his future intentions.

Without his being able to fix on any one circumstance that could justify his
fears, mr. Mordaunt was strongly possessed by the apprehension, that lord
Villars's grief was a cover to designs inimical to the happiness of Henry and
Ellen. There appeared too much plan and arrangement in all he did, to proceed
from a mind wholly immersed in grief, as he pretended his to be. The
extravagant attachment that he professed to lady Almeria, the almost total
neglect that he manifested to Ellen, with the perfect silence he maintained as
to the engagements subsisting between her and Henry, and the excluding her from
a party where she would so properly have made one, all contributed to
strengthen this apprehension.

Lady Villars, who had become extremely fond of Ellen, had expressed a wish
that she might continue with her: but this had been mentioned only once, and
seemed to be no more thought of. Henry, who had not supposed it possible it
should be intended she should leave him, expressed the utmost astonishment and
reluctance when he found it was so designed: and he was told by mrs. Mordaunt,
that it was at the particular request of mr. Mordaunt that Ellen was to go away.

All these circumstances conspired to oppress mr. Mordaunt's mind with very
serious fears. But he was withheld by delicacy and respect to the sorrow lord
Villars displayed, from coming to any explanation upon the subject with him at
this time. He knew the delay of a few weeks could be of no importance; and he
was willing to hope, that by giving lord Villars more time for reflection, he
might be led to see the injustice of any hasty design, which the poignancy of
his present disappointment might have suggested, of separating Henry and Ellen.
He was also cautious not to betray any suspicion that might seem to suggest the
possibility of such a measure being adopted, and still more so to avoid giving
a sanction to such breach of faith, by seeming to expect it. He contented
himself therefore with saying to lord Villars, that he should be truly glad to
afford him every consolation that he could derive from the retirement of Groby
Manor, and the unwearied attentions of his family to every thing likely to
contribute to his satisfaction; and that Ellen, he was assured, would think it
as much her pleasure as her duty to do all in her power to supply the loss he
had sustained.

"We will talk farther of such things," said lord Villars hastily, "when I
rejoin you in Northumberland: and it shall not be long before I shall do so."

Divided between hope and fear, as to what were lord Villars's future plans,
mr. Mordaunt returned, with his daughters, to Groby Manor. But to Ellen he
communicated neither the one nor the other: and happily for the ease of her
mind, no suspicion similar to her father's, had found admittance there. Since
the death of mr. Villars, she had been wholly occupied with the feelings of
others; and all thoughts of self had been lost in her solicitude to administer
to the comfort of those around her. The change that had taken place in the
situation of Henry had been brought about by so disastrous an event, that it
never presented itself to her mind under the form of pleasure: but neither did
it ever occur to her that a circumstance that secured him an immediate
situation in life, more affluent than that which he was to have attained by the
flow progress of his personal efforts, could be the means of placing a barrier
between them, who were so certainly to have been united when those efforts were
crowned with success.

She returned, however, saddened by the scenes she had witnessed, by her
separation from Henry, and by something of an unsettled notion, that though
lady Villars was all kindness and affection, toward her, lord Villars had
shown her more marks of neglect than regard.

CHAP. IX.
'With a father's frown at last,
He sternly disapproved,
OLD BALLA^
LORD VILLARS and his family were now removed to the Grove; and Henry appeared
so assidious in his efforts to administer comfort to his father, and so
sincerely touched with the continuance of his grief, that lord Villars was led
to believe he might safely begin his operations.

One day, therefore, as they were alone together, lord Villars, as usual,
apparently immersed in sorrow, and Henry, as usual, exerting all his faculties
to rouse and amuse him. "My dear father," said he, with emotion, "it goes to my
heart to see you thus overcome with a fruitless affliction. For my sake, for
the sake of your family, endeavor to recover more power of mind."

"I am indeed overcome with affliction. But it is for the sake of my family
that I am thus overwhelmed."

"My dear sir, we all know your paternal feelings. We all know the loss that --
"

"No, Henry, it is not that: it is not any selfish sorrow that overwhelms me. I
could bear my own loss: but it is the ruin of my family, involved in that loss,
which I deplore."

Henry started. Thoughts rushed into his mind, which if they had ever found
entrance there before he had repel^ed, as too affrontive to the honor of his
father, to be entertained for a moment.

"The eldest son of a noble and not opulent family," continued lord Villars,
"stands in so many relative situations, that his death, when his place cannot
be fully supplied by a succeeding brother, is no single misfortune. It inflicts
no single wound. Every branch of that family, however widely diverged, must
sustain an incurable evil." --

Henry was silent. He felt no inclination in himself to take his brother's
place -- to heal these wounds. Lord Villars went on.

"You know the princely fortunes that lady Almeria was to have brought to your
brother: but you are mistaken if you suppose the advantages would all have been
his. You, your brothers, your sisters, the whole innumerable tribe of you,
would have felt the beneficial effects of her property through your lives, and
perhaps beyond the latest period of them."

"My brother's death," said Henry coolly, "was very unfortunate both in its
circumstances and effects."

"In its circumstances it certainly was. But it depends upon you to say whether
it shall be so in its effects."

"Upon me, my lord," said Henry, affecting more surprise than he felt.

"My dear son, I have no reason to doubt the rectitude of your principles, or
the tenderness of your heart. I can therefore have no doubt how you will act.
But it is painful to me, that your duty and inclination should be, however
little, divided."

"Divided, my lord! no, thank heaven, they are united, and united in such bonds
as no power whatever can dissolve."

"How you charm me, my dearest son! and how true it is that a wise son makes a
glad father!"

Lord Villars was not accustomed to quote scripture. Henry's heart was not the
lighter for his doing so upon this occasion.

"It is necessary, my lord, that we should understand each other. I presume,
that we both mean, that it is my duty to maintain engagements entered into
voluntarily, and authorized by your sanction?"

"Undoubtedly, all such engagements as can be kept. But when a change of
circumstances has changed not only the nature of duties, but of possibilities,
engagements that cannot be fulfilled dissolve themselves. I am assured that
your own natural sense tells you that you cannot now marry Ellen."

"Not marry Ellen! What power shall hinder me."

"The power of your own mind, sir -- the sense of right -- the dread of my
never-ceasing abhorrence."

Henry writhed with agony.

"It is to your understanding, it is to your justice I appeal. Where is now
that independence on which alone you grounded your right to choose for
yourself? Is it your own interest, or the interest of others, that in pursuing
that choice you would sacrifice? Had you, from the first, been placed in the
circumstances you are now in, should you have dared to propose such a choice to
me? Do you believe me sufficiently weak, or wicked, to have sanctioned such a
choice? You are no longer the person you were when I did sanction it. You have
no longer the same rights, the same duties. You must no longer have the same
conduct."

"Let me then," said Henry, with a newborn hope springing up in his soul, and
brightening his eye, "let me then resume that station, where only can my
happiness and my duty be reconciled. Let me again become a younger brother. To
Frederic, with all my heart and soul, will I make over all my rights of
primogenitureship."

"It is not in your power, sir. You cannot give him your title, unworthy as you
are to retain it."

"And what is title without honor? You require me to give up the one, and yet
are tenacious of the other."

"I am jealous of both alike, sir; and will not see either prostituted to the
romantic fancy of a boy."

"You wrong my affection, my lord; indeed you wrong it. It is founded on reason
and on virtue."

"I should be less surprised at the warmth with which you pursue it," returned
lord Villars, with a sarcastic smile, "if it were founded upon beauty. Your
passion, Henry, wants the stamp that will alone make it pass current in the
world."

"Beauty! Ellen is an angel."

"Yet this angel of yours will have no objection to becoming your wife, though
she bring you for her dowry ruin and a father's detestation."

"Oh! no, no, she would reject, she would renounce me for ever, rather -- "

"And can you admire that rectitude of mind in her, which you refuse to
imitate? But I talk not of your ruin, sir. After the degeneracy of mind that
you have betrayed in this conversation, were you alone concerned, I would not
trouble myself to withold you from it. But I must not so far forget my
duties, whatever you do yours, as to suffer you to involve in your destruction
the destruction of a family. My hopes for the establishment of you all, were
placed on your brother's match with lady Almeria. You have succeeded to your
brother's rights, and to his engagements: and, however unworthy of it, you have
also succeeded to his place in lady Almeria's heart. She views you, ungrateful
boy as you are, with but too favorable an eye. Upon you it depends to give
wealth and happiness, or poverty and wretchedness, to your parents and to your
family. We shall see the kind of heart you have, by the election you make."

"The happiness that derives wholly from wealth, and the wretchedness that is
dependent alone upon poverty, are both, in my eyes too unsubstantial to deserve
any sacrifices -- my lord, do with me as you will -- but I will never be the
husband of lady Almeria."

"And remember, peremptory sir, that but under my heaviest malediction shall
you ever become the husband of Ellen."

The father and son here parted: and from this day the farce of affliction,
except in public, was over.

CHAP. X.
'Alas! how often does goodness wound itself,
'And sweet affection prove the source of woe!"
^OME.
BUT if the bosom of lord Villars seemed lightened from a load of woe, that of
Henry became insupportably oppressed.

However he might be roused by the thought of ill treatment to a resolute
assertion of his own rights, or however firmly his heart might be attached to
Ellen, or his determination be unchangeably fixed, never to abandon her, he
could not be unmoved by the displeasure of his father, or by the thought, that
in a parent's eye he was the cause of unhappiness to himself, or family.
Neither could he be insensible of the truth of many of lord Villars's
arguments, or unconscious that a marriage with Ellen, in the present
circumstances, would be attended with many inconveniences. But the thought
that dwelt most upon his mind, and the grief that pressed the heaviest upon his
heart, arose from the probability that now this marriage would never take
place. He believed he knew her too well to flatter himself that she would
become his wife against the express prohibition of his father: and perhaps he
prized her integrity too highly to wish that she should do so. But the sense of
this integrity, the certainty of the virtues from which it arose, made the
supposition that he should never call her his, an agony that he knew not how to
endure. He distracted himself with endeavoring to find out some middle way,
that might reconcile his father's expectations and his own ideas of happiness:
but, wherever he turned, his detested title, like Dejanira's fatal gift, stuck
close, and filled him with torment and despair.

His father often returned to the attack, sometimes with an appeal to his
generosity and his reason; and then was his resolution most in danger of
yielding, and his heart torn with the extremest anguish: sometimes with the
high tone of authority, and the most severe denunciations of everlasting
displeasure. Here Henry was invulnerable. When he was threatened, he became as
the rock, which seems but the more firmly fixed by the storm that beats against
it.

He knew, however, that if he did not yield, neither would his father; and that
in any case his happiness, and in the former both his happiness and filial duty
must go to wreck. Of lady Almeria he thought little. Yet it was some addition
to his unhappiness, to see evident marks of that partiality, with which his
father had told him she distinguished him.

This was in part the work of mrs. Mordaunt; and it was the business in which
lord Villars had from the first engaged her.

Lady Almeria, even before the death of mr. Villars, had not been wholly
insensible to the difference which nature had made between the brothers. She
had not been entirely without some wandering thoughts, that if Henry had been
the elder brother, her destiny would have been the happier. But she was too
young and too giddy to suffer those thoughts to sink deep in her mind, had it
not been for the artifices and management of mrs. Mordaunt, who insinuated how
generous it would be in lady Mary to turn her affections to Henry. She formed
the hope, that he might return those affections: and it was by her skill and
care, that the strength of his engagements with Ellen were concealed from lady
Almeria. All those were, however, unnecessary cares, and founded wholly upon
the imperfect knowledge that had yet been attained of the disposition of lady
Mary.

Scarcely escaped from the nursery, she was little known; and she had credit
given her for infinitely more feeling and delicacy than she possessed. Of love
she was incapable: but having quick perceptions, and a tolerable power of
discriminating characters, she was well formed for taking strong though
transient likings. And while such prepossessions lasted, it would not have been
any consideration, for the peace or honor of another, that would have
withheld her from the gratification of them. Stimulated by the arts of mrs.
Mordaunt, and moved by her own taste, she had taken this kind of fancy to
Henry; and provided she could inspire him with the like, she troubled her head
little with the nature of those engagements that had once subsisted between him
and Ellen. It was not in Henry's nature to be rude or careless, especially
where a woman, and a young and pretty woman, was concerned. His address,
therefore, to lady Almeria, was gentle and obliging: and though she would
rather it had been impassioned or gay, yet she hoped both these modes were to
come, when he had got over the odd fancy, as she called it, of grieving for the
death of a brother, which had made him heir to a title and an estate of seven
thousand pounds a year.

In the mean time, Henry, alike unable wholly to explain his distress, or
wholly to conceal it from Ellen, wrote her letters that filled her with the
cruellest disquietude. She knew not how to shape her fears; but every added
line told her that some misfortune awaited her. Whether she were to suffer with
or apart from Henry she knew not. Whether she were to be the sport of his
inconstancy, or the victim of his prudence, she was unable, from the tenor of
his letters, to resolve. Had she been to have chosen her fate, the decision was
easy. The resignation of Henry she thought herself equal to: but under his
depravity or unkindness she believed she must sink.

In this state of her mind, she was as little able to express her wishes and
her fears with clearness, as was Henry himself. She called upon him again and
again, to explain himself; while he, sometimes, thinking he saw a flexibility
in his father that revived his hope, and sometimes, from his increased
severity, relapsing into despair, alternately awakened the hopes and the fears
of Ellen, without explaining to her his grounds for either.

Mr. Mordaunt saw the uneasiness of Ellen, and but too truly divined the cause.
He forebore, however, to press her upon the subject, and thought she would
frankly have opened her heart to him, ha^ she had any thing certain to tell.
She shrunk from conversing with him on a mystery that might involve the
condemnation of Henry.

Mr. Mordaunt wrote repeatedly both to lord Villars and mrs. Mordaunt, to
remind them of their promise, of joining him in Northumberland, but hitherto
without receiving any satisfactory answers. Lord Villars, however, beginning
now to be convinced he had nothing to hope either from the ambition, the
reason, or the obedience of Henry, resolved to try his influence with Ellen,
and by making her renounce his son, render it a matter of indifference, as far
as their engagements, whether his son would renounce her or no. He determined
therefore to set out for Northumberland. He wished to conceal his intention
from his son: but Henry had too much at stake, to be easily thrown off his
guard, or lulled into a false security.

He had considered, that while his father continued in Hampshire, the contest
lay wholly between them; and that there was at least a chance, that his
obstinacy might out-tire that of his father's. While this was possible, he
forebore to explain himself to Ellen, unwilling to impress her mind with the
painful sense of his father's injustice, or to make a parade of his own
constancy: but he was aware, that lord Villars's removal into Northumberland
was with the design of bringing the dispute before another tribunal, and a
tribunal where he knew the voice of love would plead in vain, were it once
imagined to be opposed by that of reason or of rectitude.

Not a moment, therefore, was to be lost, lest Ellen might be interested in the
decision, by an undue application to her generosity, or by a belief, though but
a momentary one, that he could hesitate in his. He was therefore no sooner
convinced that lord Villars meant to begin his journey to Northumberland in a
few days, than he dispatched a messenger with the following letter*

"The moment that any longer concealment would be unavailing and dangerous, is
now come. Imagine, my dearest Ellen, the greatest sacrifice that can be made to
avarice and ambition; and then know that such a sacrifice is required of me.
While there remained a hope that the ear of reason and of justice would be open
to my arguments, and my rights, I forebore to shock you with an instance of
depravity, that, I blush to think, proceeds from one I am bound to reverence
and to love. It having been found, however, that I am invincible, I know that
the attack is about to be transferred from me to you. It is meant, that you
should be subdued by your virtues. But remember, dearest creature, that they
are not your own rights you will be called upon to resign; they are mine -- my
just, my sanctioned, my inalienable rights. Remember, that I never will resign
them while I breathe. -- Beware of a false generosity, a mistaken virtue --
disinterestedness, in this case, would be injustice. You are mine, my chosen
love, my betrothed wife. -- I have had my father's word that you should be my
wife. -- Circumstances may be changed; but I am the same; be you so too, my
Ellen; and we shall weather this storm, which now seems to threaten the wreck
of our happiness: but our happiness cannot be lost while we preserve our
virtues. It is by virtue, by the most solemn engagements we are bound to each
other. Let us ever keep our principles in view, lest we be misled by the ignis
fatuus of sophistry. That cannot be generous which is unjust. Be just to me, my
Ellen, and I fear not your generosity to others.

"I must remain where I am, while my father continues here: but no sooner does
he set out for Groby Manor, than I do so too: and you may trust that speed will
be swiftest, that is winged by love."

CHAP. XI.
'Tra si e no la Giovane sospesa
' -- Dubita un poc^,
'Quinci l' onore il debito le pesa,
'Quindi l' incalza l' amoroso soco.'
ARIOST^.
THIS letter was received by Ellen with a variety of emotions. She read in it a
certainty of her misfortune; but she read in it also an assurance of the
constancy and generosity of Henry. -- She acknowledged no right that could
divide her from him; but she trembled at the power, that, in adhering to him,
she knew she must oppose. -- Her heart told her, there was no happiness without
Henry: and the source of rectitude showed her, that there was no escape from
misery in becoming his wife, under the prohibition of a parent.

She had now no reason for any reserve to her father. She showed him Henry's
letter, which, however, told him nothing but what his penetration had before
discovered.

"Is it possible," said he, "that lord Villars can be thus cruel and unjust!"

"If he design to appeal to me," said Ellen, "he must mean to abide by my
decision."

"And your decision, my Ellen. -- What would be your decision?"

"Alas! I know not. It is no broad path that lies before me: Intricate and
scarcely to be made out by such a one as I, is the line of duty, that, if I
could be sure of, I hope I should pursue."

Mr. Mordaunt pressed Ellen to his heart.

"Henry pleads his rights strongly, they are indubitable, they cannot be
cancelled by the mandate of ambition or avarice, though issued by a parent. But
to be the author of his ruin, and his filial disobedience! Oh! my father, such
decisions are beyond my reasoning faculties, they must be decided by the
impulse of my heart, not, I hope, more firmly attached to Henry, than to
virtue."

"Excellent creature!" said mr. Mordaunt: and Ellen felt herself encouraged by
the praise.

"It may be generous and right, that Henry should refuse to abandon me. It may
be virtuous and necessary that I should resign him."

Thus did poor Ellen endeavor to balance the reasons that made for and against
her wishes. But she bewildered her understanding without relieving her heart.

"I will see lord Villars. I will hear, (dangerous as it may be) I will hear
Henry. If I must lose him, he shall not be torn from me: I will give him up.
Oh! my father, if the sacrifice must be made, allow me to make it."

"No other can make it. I abjure lord Villars's sophistry. Having once
authorized your engagements with Henry, I cannot recall my sanction. You are
mistress of your fate. I am willing to assist your judgment: but I must not
control your will."

"My will?" said Ellen, sighing, "alas! how little must that be consulted in
this debate."

Ellen passed three days in what might be called a labyrinth of thought, rather
than a chain of reasoning. When, from what she regarded as an evident principle
of duty, "the strict adherence to her engagements," she had drawn conclusions
the most favorable to her happiness, her deductions were crossed by a
principle as evident, as that of the obedience of children to their parents,
and all her reasoning thrown into confusion. Again she began; and again she
found herself conducted to a certain point; and, again confused and bewildered,
she found she had lost her way.

From such a maze of contrary obligations, she knew not how to extricate
herself. Yet she lost not hope, while she perceived that which ever way she
turned, wherever she directed her view, the wish to do right still appeared, as
a beacon on a distant hill, pointing out the coast to which she meant to direct
her course.

It was impossible, except where the mind was wholly given up to selfishness,
or resentment, to live with Ellen without loving her. The evenness of her
temper, her promptitude in obliging, must subdue all lesser prejudices. This
had been the case with her sisters; though their early estrangement from her,
and the difference that subsisted in their manner of thinking, forbade any of
that tender interest and interchangement of sentiments in which true friendship
consists; they now loved her full as well as most reputed friends love each
other: and now that pity was added to their affection, they felt and showed for
her a solicitude, that neither they nor herself had before thought them capable
of.

Charlotte, in particular, was much moved by the evident distress of Ellen's
mind, and the calmness with which she endured it. She thought there was
something heroic in such composure, under such circumstances; and she exerted
all her abilities to console and support her. But, however Ellen was soothed by
her sympathy, she could not be assisted by her counsel. Charlotte could see the
matter only in one light. She expatiated on the injustice of lord Villars, on
the merit of constancy, and the obligation of maintaining an engagement: and
when Ellen pressed her with the question, "Would you, Charlotte, be the wife of
any man, who, in forming his ties with you, must break all those that bind him
to his family, and incur the everlasting resentment of his parent?" Charlotte
could only reply, lord Villars had no right to be displeased; and that the
peace of Henry ought to be dearer to her than that of all his family beside.

"But the peace of Henry," said Ellen, "is involved in the religious
performance of his duty as a son."

"No," Charlotte would reply, "such conduct as lord Villars holds, dissolves
the bonds of filial duty. You ought to set him at defiance, and be happy in the
love of each other."

Ellen would have been glad to have thought so too: but in a mind as free from
the prejudices of selfishness as here is was, things are not seen as they are
wished to be, but as they are.

On the evening of the third day, Charlotte and Ellen were walking in the wood,
wholly engrossed with this one subject, when, as they were returning to the
house, they were suddenly met by Henry.

"We are once more together, my Ellen," cried he, snatching her to his heart:
"and no power on earth shall part us."

Ellen, who had been engaged rather in debating whether she should choose
misfortune, than in deploring it as already felt, had, since the receipt of
Henry's last letter, been more depressed, than agitated. But his sudden
appearance, and the vehemence of his address, communicated in a moment to her
bosom all the emotion with which his own was convulsed. Sinking from his arms,
rather than being able to try to disengage herself from them, "We are indeed
together," said she: "but, alas! upon what terms?"

"Upon terms that heaven and earth must approve -- Upon terms that give me a
right to say I will never resign you."

"Oh! be less vehement!" cried she, and resting wholly upon Charlotte, her
convulsive sobs gave Henry the most lively alarm. Never had he seen distress in
this form. Never had he before seen the countenance of Ellen disfigured by the
violence of any passion.

"Why not rest in my arms? Why not weep in my bosom?" cried he mildly, "am not
I your husband? Oh Ellen, is it possible you can have decided against me?"

"No! no! no!" said she. Charlotte unable to support her, yielded her to the
impassioned Henry, who, holding her in his arms, sat down with her on the
grass. Tears relieved the almost bursting heart of Ellen. She suffered them for
some time to flow as she hid her face on Henry's shoulder: then rousing
herself, "I am better," said she; "let us return to the house: and, my dear
Henry, if you would have me able to act as you wish, you must not thus distress
me."

"Dearest Ellen, forgive me. I will be all calmness, all reason."

Ellen with difficulty moved along: but growing every moment more composed, the
emotion that the sudden appearance of Henry had given her, taught her the more
to fear the power of her feelings, and to arm herself with double resolution
against being governed by them.

As they approached the house, they were met hastily by mr. Mordaunt.

"Do you know who is arrived?" said he.

"My father," cried Henry: "how nearly has he eluded my vigilance!"

Now, said Ellen to herself, is the moment of trial come. Lord Villars
appeared. Henry saw the pallid cheek of Ellen and the whiteness of her lips.

"My Ellen," cried he, "do not desert yourself; do not desert me."

"Oh, heaven direct me," said Ellen.

"Heaven does direct you. Heaven dictates what you ought to do. Heaven cannot
approve of violated vows."

"Nor of disobedience!" said lord Villars sternly.

"Forbear," said Ellen to Henry, ("my lord.")

"Forgive my interruption, madam. To you I mean no harshness. To the rectitude
of your mind I know I may appeal, from the ungoverned passion of that
intemperate young man."

"Temperance were treachery in this case. My lord, I see your design. You mean
to tamper with the virtues of Ellen. You mean to subdue her constancy by her
generosity -- but -- "

"I am above disguise, sir. I do mean to prove the virtue you have so vaunted.
It is you who have said, that Ellen would renounce you for ever, rather than
accept you at the price of your disobedience."

"Heavens and earth!" exclaimed Henry.

"And most truly have you said, my Henry," interrupted Ellen; "and most
sincerely do I thank you for it."

"I never said so; or, if I did -- Oh! Ellen, do not undo both yourself and me."

"My lord," said mr. Mordaunt, "you are too precipitate. Ellen ought not to be,
she shall not be so persecuted. You have nothing to fear, nothing that you
ought to fear from her coolest deliberation; and it is only the coolest
deliberation that ought to decide in such a case as this."

And yet, thought Ellen to herself, the decision is made. What but one thing
can I do?

"I meant not to be thus precipitate. I meant not now to enter upon the
subject: but the daring impatience of that unworthy boy -- My dear madam,"
turning to Ellen, "I know and revere your virtues. It is from them I hope the
salvation of my family. Pray take my arm: let me support you."

"My lord, I want no support."

"Yes, my Ellen, you do. You want the support of a parent," said mr. Mordaunt:
"take my arm."

"Thank you, sir," said Ellen faintly, and almost overcome: and resting on her
father's arm, she reached the house.

Here she found mrs. Mordaunt, who greeted her with her usual coldness: but
seeing her agitation said: "Yes, yes, I knew it would come to this. I always
foretold this. I always said that the interests of a whole family were not to
be sacrificed to the foolish fancy of a boy and girl, who knew not what was
good for them."

"Dear mamma!" said Charlotte.

"No harm, ma'am," said Ellen mildly, "shall happen to any body, through my
means, if I can prevent it."

"Retire, my dear," said mr. Mordaunt. "I am sure you wish to be in your own
room."

Ellen moved toward the door. But Henry, who had hitherto kept a gloomy
silence, now rushed forward, "You do not go, Ellen, you do not go, without
suffering me to speak to you, without hearing what I have to say?"

"She knows you have nothing to say," interrupted lord Villars, "that she ought
to hear. Ellen is indeed the excellent person you have always described her,
the exemplar of her sex."

"Henry has a right to be heard, my lord; and I mean to hear him. Nor have I
more inclination than I have power to refuse him."

"My kind, my beloved Ellen!"

Ellen held out her hand to him, "Oh!" said she, in a low voice, "that I could
be as much the one as I believe I am the other!" Then speaking aloud, "At eight
tomorrow morning I will see you alone: at present I beg I may be allowed to
retire."

Lord Villars who believed he saw the destruction of his hopes in the severity
of her air toward him, and her kind indulgence to his son, stood thunderstruck
and confounded; while the wretched Henry, who argued the contrary but too
justly, even from her very kindness, sunk spiritless into a chair, while the
warm blood forsook his cheek, and every limb quivered with agitation. Lord
Villars endeavored by a long detail of the circumstances of his family, to
convince mr. Mordaunt's reason of the necessity of the conduct he held, and by
artful praises of Ellen to sooth the indignity offered to her.

Mr. Mordaunt disdained to reply to his reasonings, or to thank him for his
commendations. He assured him, that it was neither the wish of his daughter, or
himself, that she should enter into his family without his approbation.

"But, my lord," said he, "you have in my opinion, by your former sanction to
the affections of your son, put it out of your power now to withold your
consent to his marriage. All you have a right to do, is to endeavor to
convince both him and my daughter, of the inconvenience that now attends it,
and to induce them, if possible, by the weight of your reasons, to resign
rights, which nothing but the most apparent injustice can withold."

Lord Villars was stung to the quick by the cold contempt of mr. Mordaunt.

"I am then to undo my whole family for a punctilio? Mine was only a
conditional consent. It could only be a conditional consent. It was my second
son that I would have allowed to have married your daughter. No one would have
dared to have asked me for my first."

"Nor do I ask you now, my lord. But if you have made a bad bargain, common
honesty requires you should stand to it, except those with whom you have made
it, will generously release you."

"Would you then," said mrs. Mordaunt (passionately) "would you have an ancient
and noble family fall into ruin, rather than thwart the momentary fancy of a
foolish girl and an obstinate boy? Rather be all the engagements that have been
made since the days of Adam broken, than that such a consequence should be
incurred."

"Ellen would bring ruin into no family. I have, however, said, that I think
she and Henry are the only proper umpires in this dispute: and I could wish a
subject to be dropped, upon which if I speak at all, I must speak very harsh
truths."

"I would endeavor," said lord Villars, with an air as if he were to be a
sufferer for conscience sake, "I would endeavor to get over the scruples of my
mind, in allowing one unworthy child to take his own way to ruin, which it
seems with some people would much exalt my character. But when the interests of
my other dear and innocent children are involved in his folly, however my name
may be branded, I will adhere to what I know to be right: and though I may be
unable to prevent this act of madness, I will never have to reproach myself
with having consented to it."

"Your lordship may rest perfectly at ease both as to your conscience, and the
part Ellen will take. However either she or myself may wish her the wife of
your son, we can have no desire that she should become your daughter."

"I see, however," said lord Villars in a passion, "I see that she designs it;
but at her peril let her pursue the design. Poverty while I live, and my
eternal curse when I come to die, shall sadden her days and torment her mind."

Mr. Mordaunt arose, "I leave you, my lord: and I would leave you under the
mistake that so unworthily afflicts you: but when you find yourself master of
your wishes, you shall not have cause to think that you owe the completion of
them either to the duplicity or the vehemence of your conduct. I know Ellen
perfectly well; and I will stake my life, that in the present circumstances she
will never marry your son."

Lord Villars, on an assurance so agreeable to him, felt all his anger subside
in a moment. He did not wish to quarrel with mr. Mordaunt; so, catching his
hand, he cried, "My dear brother, forgive me; forgive the effusions of a
father's solicitude for a large family, whose well being in the world depends
upon the issue of the present contest. How willingly would I make any sacrifice
short of the interest of this family, for the happiness of being still more
closely united with you!"

Mr. Mordaunt withdrew his hand.

"You will give me leave to retire, my lord. It is not possible to form any
judgment but one on the events that have passed: and the consequences of that
judgment must be, that all intercourse between us henceforward must cease."

Mr. Mordaunt withdrew; and left lord Villars and his sister to rail and to
rejoice; for after what mr. Mordaunt had said, they neither of them entertained
any apprehension but that Ellen would break her engagement with Henry.

CHAP. XII.
'No idly-feigned poetic pains,
'Their sad love-lorn lamentings claim:
'No shepherd's pipe -- Arcadian strains,
'No fabled tortures, quaint and tame:
'The plighted faith, the mutual flame,
'The often attested powers above,
'These were the pledges of their love.'
BURNS.
HENRY had not been present at the conversation that had passed between his
father and mr. Mordaunt. As soon as he had recovered from the emotion into
which the last words of Ellen had thrown him, he had withdrawn to the
parsonage, there to pour out his griefs to the commiserating mr. and mrs.
Thornton. They, while they endeavored, by the softest arts of pity, to
administer some balm to his wounds, sought to inspire him with fortitude to
support the consummation of his misfortune, which, in the present circumstances
they considered as inevitable.

Ellen passed the night in endeavoring to strengthen herself in the
resolution, which she saw was the only one she could now adopt without
incurring the reproaches of her own heart, and involving Henry in disobedience
and ruin. But she dreaded his vehemence: and though she persuaded herself, that
that alone would not be able to overpower her judgment, grounded, as it was,
upon the best reasoning she was able to command; yet she shrunk from the
contest: and had she not had more compassion for him than for herself, she
would have explained herself in writing, and spared them both the pangs of a
fruitless altercation. But to comply with his wishes in every thing that
militated not against his duty, she thought the most sacred of her own: and she
kept the appointment made the preceding night.

The moment she cast her eyes upon him, she saw, that the trial that awaited
her was of a different kind from the one for which she had been preparing
herself. All animation was fled from his countenance. A settled despair had
taken possession of his features: and as he approached her, the tears fell in
large drops from his eyes.

"Dear Henry!" said she, holding out her hand to him. He took it; and pressed
it closely to his lips.

"So kind, and yet so determined! I do not complain, Ellen. But surely I ought
not to have been condemned unheard."

"Unheard! am I not here for the purpose of listening to all you have to say?"

"Yet my father tells me, I have nothing to hope."

"Do not believe lord Villars rather than me. -- You have every thing to hope
that, in your unprejudiced reason, you would wish to hope. I think I may
venture to promise you shall decide for me."

"Oh! that I might! then should I never quit this dear hand till you had
promised to pledge your faith with it at the altar."

"Would you then brave your father's displeasure? Would you be content to live
in perpetual enmity with him? Would you entail distres^ and poverty on your
family?"

"Oh! no, no. -- My father would withdraw his objections. Justice, reason,
would compel him to withdraw them. My family shall never receive injury from
me. I have offered to divest myself of my birthright, to resume the station
which Ellen's love might be allowed to bless. I have been told I cannot divest
myself of my title, and that that title must be supported by riches; that the
fortune I may obtain by marriage, must be such as will provide for my numerous
brothers and sisters, whose necessary provision will otherwise reduce the
family estate below the decorous appendage of a title. I am reminded, that such
have ever been the known family views; and that I acknowledged the force of
them, when I pleaded my being a second son, as an unanswerable reason why I
might be allowed to choose for myself. However my heart or my understanding may
revolt from such reasonings, I mean not to combat them; I mean to act, as if
convinced of their truth, and their rectitude: and had I not had reason to
believe the cause already prejudged, I had a proposal to have made to you,
that, I persuaded myself, might have reconciled duty and inclination, have
satisfied my father, and made us happy."

Ellen's heart fluttered with revived hope.

"And what is your proposal? Be assured there is no prejudgment. Only show me
how I can be yours, without violating the immutable obligation of obedience to
a parent, and you will not be more ready to propose, than I shall be to comply."

"My proposal." said ^e* still speaking faintly, "is grounded on the knowledge
I believed I had of your heart, on its total freedom from any wish for
splendour, for show, -- "

"Name them not. Reconcile my duty and my love; and your task is over."

"Dearest creature, how could I for a moment suspect that love? How could I for
a moment believe it less pure than my own."

"And did you? Could you?"

"You are calumniated, my Ellen. I have been taught to fear, that, awed by my
father's threats of everlasting displeasure, you shrunk from a marriage, which,
under that displeasure, would be a source only of poverty and distress to you."

"How am I beset on all sides! How allured by inclination, how stimulated by
resentment to quit the rugged path of duty. Support my rectitude, my dear
Henry, by your own: and make me no proposal that is not warranted by the
sanction of virtue.

"What I propose is this: that I shall pursue the line of life marked out for
me before the unfortunate death of my brother; that the annual difference there
will be between the allowance my father will make me as an inmate of
Lincoln's End, and that which I ought to have as his eldest son, shall
accumulate, and be considered as a fund upon which I shall draw for your
fortune; that I shall not claim your hand but upon the condition that it was
first promised me. While my father lives, the splendour of the family will be
supported by him. When he dies, though it must suffer a temporary eclipse, it
will be in no danger of being annihilated. -- No wonder," said Henry,
interrupting himself, "that you smile. I almost disdain to dwell upon such
considerations. But if there is no preaching people into reason, it is well,
for the sake of peace, to accommodate ourselves as well as we can to their
folly. As I have no hope, that the savings I have proposed to be made from my
annual allowance will be considered as satisfactory to the wants and the wishes
of the family, I further propose, that in the event of my coming to the estate,
such a part of it shall be appropriated to the use of my brothers and sisters,
as, in some given number of years, may make up the sum that my father has fixed
in his own mind as a proper fortune to be brought into the family by his eldest
son's wife. At the end of this time, I shall resume the whole of the estate,
and the name of Villars recover its luster. Thus no injury will be done to the
younger branches of the family; you, my Ellen, will, after all, be a fortune:
the family splendour will be untarnished: and all this will be purchased on our
part, by a few years of obscurity and happiness."

Though Ellen had a rectitude of principle and understanding, that made her
perfectly comprehend, and resolutely adhere to that plainest of nature's
dictates, the obedience due to a parent, she was too young and too
noble-hearted to calculate the inconveniences of a narrow income, or to have
suffered them to have influenced her decision, if she had calculated them,
while they could reach only herself and him, who, she doubted not, would have
considered the possession of her hand as a full compensation. Her heart beat
quick at this proposal of Henry's. Her eyes sparkled with pleasure. "And what
says your father to this plan?" cried she, trembling with the eagerness of hope.

"What says he! What can he say? Has he any right to object?"

"But does he object?" said Ellen, with a voice scarcely articulate.

"Dearest Ellen, will you hazard nothing for me? When every claim of justice is
satisfied, are we to be undone for a punctilio?"

"Your father does not then approve your plan?"

"But he will approve it. He will be compelled to approve it. All the world
will unite in his condemnation, if he does not."

"When he does approve, be assured of my most cheerful, my most delighted
concurrence."

"And without that approbation, you will do nothing for me?"

"Alas! what can I do? Had it been only justice that was to have been
satisfied, should we ever have been in any danger of being separated? Will this
plan of yours at all avert your father's displeasure? Will it save you from
disobedience, or from the effects of it? Will you not have a parent's enmity to
deprecate? And without the concurrence of lord Villars how can your plan itself
take place? How can its beneficial effects be felt? How can the claims of
justice, which you seem yourself to allow, be satisfied?"

"Time will do all for us. My father will forgive, when he sees that the
consequences he so dreads, have not followed the step he forbids. We shall have
injured no one, and be happy in each other. -- "

"Oh! Henry, Henry! how should we be happy? There can be no happiness for a
child in disobedience to a parent. No sophistry, no hope of selfish joy can
obscure so evident a truth, can allure me to dare its violation. We have no
choice; if lord Villars persists in his opposition, we must submit, and -- "

Part -- she would have said; but her tongue faltered, and she stopped.

"Oh! Ellen, you have not the heart to utter the word, and can you persist in
the act?"

"Cruel necessity forces it upon us. We cannot do otherwise."

"Well then be it so," said he, after a pause: "but let not the parting be for
ever. Let us yield in appearance to the present storm. Let us preserve our
hearts for each other, and refer our happiness to a time when no imagined duty,
no real injustice can step in between us."

"Dear Henry, do not so tempt me. See you not the fallacy of this? See you not,
that we should live on falsehood; and that the hypocrisy that affects the air
of a difficult virtue, is, in itself, the worst vice?"

"All your conclusions, Ellen, tend to one point. Would you then have me make
obedience perfect? Do you advise me to marry lady Almeria?"

"I am but a bad casuist," replied the weeping but unrelenting Ellen: "but I do
not see that the duty which requires you to give up your own choice to the will
of your father, exacts that you should adopt his in opposition to your own."

"What then does he gain by the obedience you so unfeelingly enforce?"

"At present the satisfaction that must result to a parent from even the
partial compliance of a child with his wishes; and, in future, the more
complete gratification of seeing your choice and his the same."

"And can you bear to point out such a futurity? Can you desire it?"

"Let us not," said Ellen, trembling, "let us not deceive ourselves. It is with
this hope the present sacrifice is required. Our renunciation of each other
must be complete -- it must be for ever."

"For ever be it then," said Henry, rushing toward the door, "for now I see
that you desire it."

"Stay, dear Henry."

"Dear! do you say I am dear?"

" Most dear! do not inflict upon me the only trial to which I feel myself
unequal. I can bear to give you up: but I cannot bear that you should believe
me fickle or interested."

"Oh would to God, I could believe you so. But while I think of you as you are,
how shall I imitate you in the virtue that so exalts you in my eyes?"

"It is from sad necessity that I act. You too must feel its irresistible
power: and all the merit that either of us can have, is in the manner in which
we support that necessity."

"I do not yet admit the necessity. If you refuse to resign the rights you have
over me, my father must yield to them."

"Let us not go over the same ground," said the almost exhausted Ellen.
"Nothing but lord Villars's consent to our marriage will ever justify me to
myself in becoming your wife, or you in my eyes for accepting me as such. Lord
Villars has declared, and who can doubt his firmness, that his consent never
shall be obtained. The consequence is obvious. Dear Henry, receive my last
farewell!"

"Never, never will I give you up -- I will never relinquish you, -- nay, you
must not, shall not leave me."

"I must; for wherefore should I stay?"

"Go then: but be assured I shall haunt you wherever you go. My father shall
gain nothing but my misery by his injustice. If I cannot be yours, I will not
be another's."

"You will think better of it," said Ellen, as she opened the door; "farewell."
She closed it; and, her task over, her powers forsook her, and she sunk into a
chair motionless, and nearly without recollection. There was nobody to observe
her: and she had time to return to herself. Suddenly she heard a movement in
the room she had quitted. She arose hastily, and passing up a pair of back
stairs, took refuge in her own chamber.

Henry, given up to his emotions, had remained where Ellen had left him. The
sudden entrance of lord Villars roused him from his grief. He started at the
sight of him, as at something noxious; and passing furiously by him, quitted
the house on the instant.

Lord Villars required no other proof of the part Ellen had taken; and exulting
in the success of his schemes, sent a respectful message to her, desiring he
might have the honor of returning his thanks in person. This was, however, a
mark of complaisance that Ellen thought she might well be allowed to refuse
him. She therefore excused herself by writing these words on a scrap of paper.

"As lord Villars will learn from his son the submission that has been paid to
his will, there is no doubt but he will willingly excuse himself the sight of a
person whose presence must be a reproach to him. Ellen therefore begs leave to
decline the honor of appearing before him."

Lord Villars, even in the midst of his triumph, could not help feeling the
superiority both of mr. Mordaunt and Ellen: and he withdrew from Groby Manor
successful it is true, but mortified; and his pride severely hurt, that though
he had overcome by the force of his power, he had not been able to deceive by
his duplicity.

CHAP. XIII.
'Cancel all our vows;
'And when we meet at any time again,
'Be it not seen in either of our brows,
'That we one jot of former love retain."
DRAYTON.
HENRY had found shelter at the parsonage; and it required all mr. Thornton's
influence to bring his mind to any degree of moderation. Displeased yet
enraptured with Ellen -- indignant against his father, yet feeling the
principle of filial love and filial duty strong in his heart -- his passions
were wrought up to a pitch of intemperance that allowed his reason no weight,
and urged him to resolutions that could only perpetuate and justify his misery.
Mr. Thornton at length succeeded in calming him: but he could not prevail with
him to relinquish the idea of endeavoring to extort from Ellen a promise that
she would preserve her heart for him, and wait in the hope that he might by
some means induce his father to withdraw his objections. Mr. Thornton in vain
represented that he had no reason to doubt Ellen's joyful acquiescence in any
measure that tended to unite them, and which had lord Villars's sanction; nor
had he any thing to fear from the lightness of her mind, or the variableness of
her inclination. But to seek any concession on her part at this time, and much
more any promise, would be to make all the resolution she had hitherto shown,
appear as a mean subterfuge; and would, in fact, in its effect, entirely
destroy what she most intended to establish, his obedience to his father.

Henry felt as if there were still something to be done, and it was intolerable
to him, to sit down in inactive hopelessness. It was some relief to him to seek
Ellen in the wood, though sure not to find her there. He acknowledged every
evening, that the pursuit was vain, yet went out every morning with revived
expectation* He wrote and his letter was returned. But again he wrote; because
to write was to do something; and while he made the effort, he for so many
minutes suspended despair.

Ellen, not a whit less afflicted, though more patient than Henry, had indulged
herself in one day's seclusion from her family. The happiness she had given up,
was too dear to her heart, not to demand from her a sincere tribute of grief to
its memory. And indeed the agitation that her mind had undergone for the last
twenty-four hours, made it necessary that in private she should calm and
regulate her feelings. She saw, however, her father; and found in his caresses
and approbation the best reward for what she had done, and her best stimulative
to perseverance.

On the morrow she appeared again in the breakfast room; resumed her accustomed
employments; and endeavored, by something like cheerfulness, to do her part
toward dispelling the gloom which seemed to have settled over Groby Manor. By
this conduct she rendered innoxious the unkindness of her mother. All her
taunts and sarcasms rather lacerated her own than Ellen's heart; while Ellen
appeared unconscious of her design to hurt her. She forbore to reproach others;
and felt she could herself he no just object of reproach to any one. With the
thoughts of the future she did not disturb herself. Perhaps she believed that
the image of Henry would never depart from her mind: but she neither told
herself that it would be so, or encouraged the idea when it occurred. Having
resolutely entered the path of duty, she was resolved to tread it, lead where
it would: and if, in the present depressed state of her mind, she formed a
wish, it was to hear that Henry was equally reasonable with herself.

But however this temper of mind was the certain road to happiness in time to
come, for the present she was more than sufficiently wretched to have gratified
the wish of the most malignant. It was not possible to obliterate with a wish
all remembrances of past delight, or promised felicity. It was not possible to
forget, that Henry had been alike the choice of her fancy and of her reason;
that his love had been her best treasure; and that in relinquishing it, she
made him as wretched as she made herself. The thought indeed of his misery was
often more than she could bear. The work was suspended, and the book dropped
from her hand, when her too faithful memory represented his transports and his
despair. His idea was, in fact, so closely united with every thing she did, or
thought, with every object around her, and with every occupation she attempted,
that to forget him was impossible: and she sometimes doubted if she should ever
be able to remember him with less anguish than at the present moment.

It is true, he gave her very little time for making the experiment. He was
every day at Groby Manor: and though she constantly refused to see him, this
did not make him forbear attempting to throw himself in her way, in all their
formerly most frequented walks. He wrote to her continually. His letters were
unsealed: but she returned them unread. Again he wrote to her, and he employed
her sisters to inform her, that he could not believe she did him the injustice
to refuse to look into his letters.

Mr. Mordaunt frequently saw him; and as he was touched with the most sincere
compassion for his sufferings, was willing to tolerate this unreasonableness
for some little time, hoping that such indulgence would lead him to resume more
command over himself. But, in the mean time, his heart bled for Ellen, on whom,
in spite of her self-command and fortitude, this persecution had the most
sensible effect.

At length, mr. Mordaunt found himself obliged to tell the unfortunate Henry,
that he could no longer suffer him to haunt the environs of Groby Manor; and
that if he wished to preserve his friendship, he must quit Northumberland.
Henry's spirit took this ill, and he declared that nothing but an order under
Ellen's hand should induce him to quit the country.

Ellen's heart bled for his distress. She forgot her own.

"I would see him once more," said she, "whatever it might cost me; but in
seeing him what relief shall I afford him? He knows my heart. He knows how I
suffer with him. If we meet, we shall enfeeble each other."

Mr. Mordaunt encouraged her to write to him. This was not an easy task. But
she hoped some good might arise from her letter; and she resolved to write.
After many less successful efforts, as she thought, she sent him the following:

"It is a cruel persecution that you subject me to, my dear cousin. Why do you
force me to appear severe and unkind, when I aim only at being just and true?
The relief that you require from me, I have it not in my power to grant. But in
the example of obedience that I seek to set you, I offer you all the
consolation that our unhappy circumstances allow. Assure yourself I have not
read your letters. How harsh it sounds to say, that while affairs remain as
they now are, I never will. This is the last of my writing that I can address
to you. Of all the power that once we might be supposed to have over each
other, that which good will and friendship give, alone remains, if you would
not have me believe that with you I have forfeited even this, you will
endeavor to make that task easy, which I must perform, however difficult. I
entreat you to leave Northumberland: and if we are ever to meet again, let it
be without self-reproach on either side.

"Adieu! and every blessing be yours, that attends on virtue. If there were a
happiness apart from rectitude, such is the honesty of my affection, that I
could not wish it you."

After all, this was a bad letter -- but Ellen was not in circumstances to
write a good one. It was received by Henry with tears of delight and anguish.
To see Ellen's handwriting addressed to him, filled his mind with joy. But
there were some touches in the letter, and more especially the purport or the
whole, that stung him almost to madness. -- He observed, that she no longer
called him her dear Henry, but her dear cousin, as if the affection she bore
him was no longer appropriate to himself, but belonged only to the relation he
held toward her. The relinquishing for ever all power over him but what arose
from friendship and good will, showed him, that she did not wish to owe even
his compliance with her request, to any more ardent or particular feeling. Her
earnestness, that if ever they met again, they should meet without
self-reproach, convinced him of her adherence to her principle, that their
present separation ought to be considered as the termination of their
engagement, and that if they were again to meet, it must be only as friends.
The intimation, that she wished him no happiness independent of rectitude, he
thought pointed out a desire, that he should fully comply with his father's
wishes. All these observations filled him with the most poignant grief, and the
last (in which, however, he was mistaken) with the most lively resentment.
Nothing, he now found, was to be hoped for, from a longer continuance in
Northumberland: and he therefore determined to be gone.

He committed to mrs. Thornton a few lines, which, as he assured her they were
his last farewell, she did not scruple to receive, and to engage that Ellen
should read. -- Thus he wrote:

"I go. -- You request it: and I comply. But it is not the cool principle of
friendship that gives such absolute power over the mind. It is not a sense of
your good will, that throws me a vagabond on the world, without an object,
without a motive for action, and delivers me to all its dangers, robbed of the
polar star, hope, to direct my course. You have withdrawn your beneficial
influence: but it is not in your power to withdraw that which may impel me --
perhaps to my ruin. They tell me you act nobly. It may be so; for you were all
excellence. But my faculties are too much clouded to distinguish between right
and wrong; and I can feel only your unkindness. Heaven shield you from
self-reproach, but for myself! --

"Adieu! adieu! my beloved, my own Ellen, appropriated to me by vows, by love!
-- No, I will not throw you back into the common herd of relations, you who
have so long been worn near my inmost soul, the dearest treasure I possessed.
-- Adieu! and may you soon forget your cousin."

CHAP. XIV.
'Each substance of a grief has twenty shadows.'
SHAKESPEARE.
THIS letter was the severest stroke Ellen had received. Its incoherence, the
despair it manifested, gave her an image of Henry's mind, that filled her with
horror. It made her call in question the rectitude of all she had done. She
felt herself accountable for any excess that Henry might commit: and she knew
not, that she was exculpated by any motive, from the guilt of having broken an
engagement which had always acted like a charm upon Henry, and preserved him
hitherto in the paths of virtue and prudence. While she believed herself right,
whatever she suffered in being so, she retained a source of comfort in her own
breast that calmed her most tumultuous passions, and lulled her loudest griefs.
But the supposition, that she was wrong, destroyed this calm, and gave her up
to the most unmitigated affliction.

She was at one moment inclined to annul all she had done; to declare her
adherence to her engagements with Henry, and her design to wait till lord
Villars either withdrew his objections, or was no longer able to enforce them.
But the conviction that she was influenced to such designs, rather by the
complainings of Henry, than by any reasonings of her own, made her first
hesitate as to the rectitude of such a step, and then abandon the idea
altogether. Sometimes she thought to write to Henry, openly to acknowledge all
she suffered, and unequivocally to declare that her regards toward him were
the same as ever. But she considered that this was, in fact, to tell him only
that, of which he could not doubt; and that as it could not be followed by any
yielding of resolution on her part, it would only serve to revive a hope that
must again be lost in still bitterer disappointment. She considered further,
that as she had declared her renunciation of him to be final, whatever
affection she might in such early days of their separation still be allowed to
entertain for him, yet that it ought by every passing hour to become less and
less; and that therefore she was bound to avoid any professions that might seem
to promise a continuance of this love, or which might encourage him to keep
alive in his breast a passion which she had exhorted him to sacrifice.

On the whole, she was convinced that her streng^ was to fit still; that she
had nothing farther to do, but to bear her own burden with all the patience she
could; and by obtruding herself as little as possible on the memory of Henry,
to accelerate that period, when she would be able to look back on the present
painful transactions, as on the impressions made by a painful dream.

This was what the plain sense and the true virtue of Ellen suggested to her,
as the best line of conduct she could pursue; and in pursuing it she hoped in
time to reap the reward she so well deserved, peace of mind to herself. But
such quiet forbearance, when exertion would have been so flattering to the
feelings of her heart, was not without efforts so painful, that in the
struggle, the color forsook her cheek; she lost her appetite and rest; and, in
spite of all her attempts to the contrary, Ellen was but the ghost of what she
had once been.

In quitting Northumberland, Henry knew not where to go. To go to his father he
felt was impossible. He had no motive for returning to his chambers: and
neither duty nor inclination called him elsewhere. He was indeed the very
vagabond he had described himself to Ellen: and he felt careless as to what he
did, or what became of him.

Lord Villars had carefully watched him from the time that he had himself
quitted Groby Manor: and he was hence convinced that from the present state of
Henry's mind, nothing favorable to his future hopes was now to be attempted.
He saw it was necessary to regain his influence over him by kindness; and to
refer to some distant time the completion of those views that he by no means
gave up. He was, however, aware, that even tenderness from him at this time
would be suspected: and he therefore employed lady Villars to sooth the
passions of her son, and to soften his resentment.

Lady Villars was a person of a good heart, but of very little understanding.
She had always been accustomed to the most perfect submission to the will of
her husband. By him she had been taught the impossibility of allowing their
eldest son, to connect himself with a woman of no fortune, and the consequent
ruin of their family if he did so. This idea was by habit become so strong,
that she could as easily have changed her nature, as have abandoned it. She
therefore looked upon the separation of Ellen and Henry as unavoidable: but she
did not therefore look upon it with less pity* and she thought that every thing
ought to be done, that could make their sacrifice easy to them. That in time
they would each be happy asunder, she had no doubt: but she wished time to be
given them. Lord Villars from less kind motives, was of the same opinion. He
engaged lady Villars to write to her son, assuring him of the tender concern
that both she and his father took in his happiness, praising him for the
compliance he had shown to their wishes, and promising him that no other woman
should be offered to his acceptance, 'till the remembrance of past connexions
was obliterated. From herself she invited him to join her instantly at the
park, from whence his father was absent, expressing an anxious desire to see
him, and assuring him, he should see nobody there that he did not wish to see.
This conclusion was meant to point to lady Almeria; and it was so understood by
Henry.

On the receipt of this letter, he felt himself irresistibly drawn toward his
mother. Her tenderness he had always experienced: and it was peculiarly
tempting at this instant, when he felt abandoned by the whole world. He hoped,
too, from the facility of her understanding, to be able to persuade her of the
injustice there was in his giving up Ellen: and he knew, from the purity of her
principles, that what she believed to be unjust, she would never think eligible.

He repaired, therefore, immediately to the park; and found, from the
tenderness of lady Villars, all the consolation that he had hoped. But he was
disappointed in his expectation of drawing her over to his side. Of the justice
or injustice of the matter, she declared herself incompetent to judge: but she
knew it was impossible he should marry a woman without fortune: and what it was
impossible to avoid, however grievous, it was necessary to endure.

Thus, from the shortness of capacity in his mother, and the obdurate ambition
of his father, Henry found he must give up all hopes of redress to his wrongs,
or relief from his miseries.

From this dreadful derelection of him self, the policy, though not the
kindness, of his father relieved him.

Lord Villars had conducted lady Almeria to an estate she had in Devonshire;
and had left her under the care of an aunt, who was left joint guardian with
himself. He had left her with an assurance, that a few months would obliterate
all traces of Ellen from the breast of Henry; and that twelve months would not
pass before they saw the full completion of her wishes. He expected, by thus
keeping up her hopes, that he could preserve her constancy; and that, though
the period might be stretched much beyond that he predicted, she would be in no
haste to form any other connection. To lessen the danger of her doing so, he
recommended to her aunt, that she should pass the coming winter in Devonshire:
and he engaged that lady Villars, himself, and son, should visit her there.

Having thus provided as much as circumstances admitted, for the security of
his prize, he purposely moved from place to place, avoiding the meeting with
his son 'till he learnt from lady Villars, that, though he seemed to have sunk
into a deep melancholy, his resentment appeared to have subsided; and that she
thought they might now meet with advantage to both sides.

Lord Villars, on this intimation, went immediately to the park; and by the
most winning address, and the kindest manners, strove to regain the confidence,
and awaken the dormant affection of his son. He spoke to him of Ellen, and
always in the most flattering terms; scarcely seemed less hurt than Henry, that
so much merit should be lost to them; and deplored the necessity (upon the
strength of which he always took care to dwell) that separated them: of any
farther choice he gave no hint, saving that he sometimes said, that with the
single qualification of fortune provided for, the whole female sex lay before
him.

To the kindness of a parent, however suspicious, Henry could not be long
insensible. He felt it as a balm to his wounds; and was sometimes so far
seduced by it, as to hope that in time his father might relent. He wished,
therefore, for every reason, to preserve the good understanding between them:
and Ellen had soon the consolation of hearing, that they appeared on the best
terms together. The inference, indeed, that it was natural to draw from such
information, would not perhaps have been very consoling to any mind less true
and disinterested than Ellen's. But in having given up Henry to a sense of
duty, she had made no reservation whatever. She meant wholly and for ever to
give him up: and in this circumstance she found no comfort so soothing to her
heart, as to know that he began to recover his peace of mind, and to resume the
path of duty and obedience. It would lead him ultimately, she doubted not, to
marriage with some woman of his father's choice: and she offered up no other
prayer, when this idea occurred, but that she might also be so much the choice
of Henry, as to secure his happiness.

It was not, indeed, before she wanted it, that this comfort reached her. The
impression which his letter had made upon her feelings, she had found it
impossible to efface. Her mind was equal to any exertion: but her constitution
sunk under that which she made to appear easy and cheerful, while her heart was
torn by the most excruciating fears for the happiness and good conduct of Henry.

Mr. Mordaunt saw, with extreme anxiety, her increasing thinness, her loss of
color, and a kind of feebleness that seemed creeping over all her faculties:
and he felt, with something like disappointment, that he thought he saw even
Ellen unequal to the task of rising superior to an unfortunately placed
passion. Ellen had felt, that there was so much to condemn in Henry's letter,
that she had carefully concealed its contents from every creature. Mr. Mordaunt
knew not, therefore, the real spring from whence her bitterest sorrow flowed:
and imputing her sorrows wholly to disappointed love, he saw, with surprise, an
improvement take place both in her looks and spirits, from the moment she knew
Henry was living in his father's house, and that they were friends together.

He ventured distantly to try her on this subject, and to probe her feelings,
to see how far she could endure Henry's marriage with another. She understood
him, and replied with the most perfect openness.

"My heart is lightened of its only intolerable weight, now I am assured that
Henry is in the road of duty. All the sorrows that belong to myself, I know I
can bear, and, in time, subdue. I look for Henry's marriage! I acknowledge that
my anxiety on the subject will be great: but when I released him from his
engagements with me, it was for the express purpose of his forming new ones
with another."

Mr. Mordaunt could only clasp Ellen to his heart, and call her, what he
thought her, the most rational of her sex.

From this time, mr. Mordaunt saw a visible improvement take place daily in
Ellen. But to suppose that a perfect cure could be wrought while she continued
at Groby Manor, where every object reminded her of Henry, seemed as
unreasonable as to expect that ease could be restored to a person while still
bound to the rack. Mr. Mordaunt felt that she called for every assistance
possible for her to receive: and however inconvenient it might be, with regard
to pecuniary considerations, he determined, with his family, to spend part of
the ensuing winter at Bath.

Ellen received the proposal with the gratitude it called for. She knew, the
reluctance that she felt to quit Groby Manor, was an unfavourable symptom: and
she hoped change of place might indeed contribute toward making her more the
person she wished to be, than she felt she was at present.

Lord Villars observed, that on the part of Henry there appeared nothing like a
return to cheerfulness: and he began to suspect, that so far from intending to
get the better of his passion for Ellen, he secretly nourished it, and that
having resolved to keep himself free from every other engagement, he looked
forward to the time when his father's death would set him at liberty to follow
his own inclination. The no-marriage of Henry was nearly as detrimental to lord
Villars's family views, as his marriage with a woman of no fortune. And he
dreaded seeing his son confirmed in sentiments he knew it would be beyond any
stretch of his power to overthrow. He had, indeed, guessed pretty nearly the
state of Henry's mind: something, much resembling the above plan, was forming
itself strongly into a resolution, except that not daring to date his happiness
from his father's death, he had substituted in idea the vague term of some
distant period, though well his reason assured him, that no period, however
distant, during his father's life, could unite him, with his consent, to Ellen.

Having in some measure fixed his own plan, the thought that most tormented him
arose from the apprehension that Ellen might be induced to connect herself with
another. It was this fear that had made him so strenuous to draw from her a
promise, that she would preserve her heart for him. Her refusal had nearly
distracted him: and the dread that her yielding might make all his constancy
vain, still continued to overwhelm his mind, with the deepest gloom.

Lord Villars knew that though by his power he had separated Henry and Ellen,
he could proceed no farther. To oblige Henry to take another wife, was what he
could not do: and he now saw, that it was only from the change which time might
make in the inclinations of Henry, that he could hope the complete success of
his designs. To keep him in the country, brooding over his disappointment, and
indulging in romantic plans of everlasting constancy, was not the way to
accelerate this change. He therefore caught eagerly at a wish, slightly
expressed by Henry, that he might be allowed to go for some time to his
chambers in town. To town therefore he went: and lord Villars employed every
art to draw him from the gloom of Lincoln's End to the haunts of gaiety and
amusement. He had the satisfaction to hear, that his schemes were not wholly
unsuccessful.

After some time spent sullenly alone, Henry began to regain his cheerfulness;
to associate with the young and dissipated; and to be once again the delight of
his companions. He now stood on a precipice, and, in the wreck of his love and
happiness, his principles and his virtue were well nigh involved.

But from the mischiefs to which the mercenary views of a parent exposed him,
he was preserved by his passion for a virtuous woman, from whom that parent
wished to sever him for ever. The misery of his mind, when alone, drove him
into company; nor was it the still voice of rational converse, or the quiet
complacence of domestic scenes, that could overcome the louder tone of grief,
which spoke within, or control the contending passions that were boiling in his
breast. Passion must be opposed to passion. The festive roar of laughter* the
dissonant bray of Bacchus, were alone sufficiently powerful to overcome the
sense he retained of his disappointment; no wonder if in such company, with a
mind so disordered, his 'Pulse's maddening play,
'Wild sent him pleasure's devious way,
'Misled by fancy's meteor ray,
'By passion driven.' --


Who does not tremble for Henry? One step beyond where now he stood, and he had
fallen, not to rise again but through the rugged paths of penitence and remorse.

But the words in Ellen's letter, "if ever we meet again, let us meet free from
self reproach," had never departed from his memory. To meet again, to meet
again as allowably dear to each other, as they had once been, was a hope so
interwoven with his very existence, that he felt, life and it must expire
together. But to meet her unworthy of her, was a misery beyond any he had yet
known. To lose her by his own fault, he knew would be distraction: and starting
from the idea with horror, he resolved to quit a life where every moment teemed
with temptations which he could not yield to without entailing on himself the
severest self reproach.

However resolute he might be to avoid vice, he yet found that dissipation of
some kind was necessary to a mind, so cruelly thwarted in its favorite views
as his was, and all its plans for the happiness of every louring hour thus
deranged.

He determined to seek this dissipation abroad, where, even from amusement, he
might draw instruction, and where, while he diverted his melancholy, he might
cultivate his understanding.

He applied to lord Villars for permission to leave England; and received a
ready compliance with his wishes. Lord Villars, however, earnestly desired to
see him first: and Henry hastened down into Hampshire. Lord Villars had
artfully sent off lady Villars into Devonshire before his arrival: and, when
Henry asked for his mother, he was told where she was, and that she was so much
indisposed, that she could not travel into Hampshire to see him, and still less
could she suffer him to quit England without bidding him adieu.

Henry saw the trap: but, firm in his own constancy, he did not fear any
consequence, that could be drawn from visiting a sick parent in lady Almeria's
house. He therefore readily accompanied his father into Devonshire: and when
there, he sought, by a studied coldness toward lady Almeria, to evince to
every body, that it was only a parent that he did visit.

Lady Almeria was, however, young and handsome: and she showed him so
flattering a preference, that Henry, who was no anchoret, found it impossible
to maintain his reserve.

Lady Almeria was a little giddy-brain, who either felt or cared for no
consequence, let her say or do what she would. She laughed and romped with
Henry; rallied his grave airs; talked of her own passion; boasted the constancy
with which she would wait his return; and seemed so sure of her passion being
answered, that it was impossible to tell her she was mistaken. Henry was
amused, and perhaps flattered by all this: but his heart was only the more
immovably attached to Ellen; for who could thought of exchanging her for lady
Almeria? His spirits received great improvement from his sojourn in Levonshire:
but he quitted England without having wavered for a moment in his resolution,
of having no other wife but Ellen.

Lord Villars saw enough, during Henry's visit into Devonshire, to raise his
hopes; but he also saw that while Ellen remained unmarried, they probably would
never be fulfilled; her marriage, therefore, became a point with him, and he
employed his sister to bring this about if possible.

Ellen soon learnt, from her mother, the visit Henry had made in Devonshire,
and she learnt it under all the exaggerated forms that malicious
misrepresentation can give. In the pain that Ellen felt, at this information,
she acknowledged the little progress she had made in driving Henry from her
heart: but even here her pain was not wholly selfish; in the character of lady
Almeria she saw nothing that could make Henry happy: and again she felt herself
accountable for his loss of happiness, as she had before done for his probable
loss of rectitude.

CHAP. XV.
'I suppose him virtuous,
'In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant;
'And in dimension, and the shape of nature,
'A gracious person.'
SHAKESPEARE.
THE whole Mordaunt family had now been some months at Bath. Ellen had imposed
upon herself to partake of all the amusements of the place: she therefore
refused no amusement that was offered her. The mornings were spent at
breakfasts, and the evenings in balls. But a way of life, so little suited
either to her present inclinations, or to her habits, exhausted both her mind
and body, and she was often compelled, from weariness and indisposition, to
remain at home.

At home, indeed she never failed of passing the hours extremely to her
satisfaction. Her mother and sisters were constantly engaged, and her father as
constantly at leisure: but he was seldom alone: and his society and that of his
friends, was much more suited to Ellen's disposition, than any, that, in the
present state of her heart and spirits, she met with in public

Sir William Ackland was among the most constant of her father's visitors: and
it soon became evident, that he was not the less so from his being now, from
her increased indisposition, almost sure to meet Ellen in her father's
drawing room.

Sir William Ackland was one and forty: but he united to an uncommonly elegant
and youthful looking person, the polished manners of a man who had lived much
in the world. He had passed many years of his life abroad, was a man of sense
and observation, and particularly excelled in the art of conversation. When
silent there was something austere in his countenance and manner: but when he
spoke, the gloom dispersed, and he appeared all gaiety and good humor. His
fortune was ample: and it was understood among his acquaintance, that he was
resolved to settle in England, and marry.

It was apparent, from sir William's first knowledge of Ellen, that he watched
her attentively; but he seemed rather to study her character, than to be in
love with her person. Ellen saw, in sir William Ackland, nothing but an
agreeable friend of her father's; his conversation pleased her, and unconscious
of his designs, and without any herself, she conversed with him with a freedom
and unreserve which soon displayed the stores of her understanding and the
goodness of her heart.

This freedom was not checked on the part of sir William, by any attentions
that could obtrude the idea of a lover upon her fancy. She saw him every day
the same, polite, obliging, and friendly: but though Henry, Ellen's prototype
of love, was all there, he was so much more, that it was impossible that Ellen
should believe effects so different should spring from the same cause. It never
once occured to her that sir William sought her for a wife: and had she been
consulted on the subject, she would have thought her eldest sister more suited
to the station.

But this was not the opinion either of sir William, or of mr. Mordaunt. The
latter thought he saw, in an union with sir William Ackland, an asylum for
Ellen from all the ill humor of her mother. In the opulence of sir William's
fortune, he believed, was secured to Ellen a never failing source of the
indulgence of her benevolence* and he thought her situation, as his wife, would
call into action all the powers of her understanding, and all the virtues of
her heart. All the enquiries he could make into the character of sir William
were answered favorably: and though through his long absence from England, he
was not intimately known to any body, he was uniformly spoken of as a man of a
liberal mind, integrity and virtuous dispositions. It soon, therefore, became
the favorite wish of mr. Mordaunt, to see Ellen united with sir William
Ackland: but as he was aware the more time elapsed before the proposal was
made, the more likely it was to succeed; all the efforts that he made, were
rather to retard than to bring it on.

Ellen had, however, an open and professed lover. He also was a baronet, a
stout hale man of fifty, who, with a good constitution, and two thousand pounds
a year, declared he wanted nothing but a young wife, and an heir to his estate.
Ellen laughed both at his wants and his wishes; nor did she conceive it
possible that any body should treat his pretensions more seriously.

But if mr. Mordaunt desired sir William Ackland for his son-in-law, mrs.
Mordaunt had not less earnestly fixed her mind upon sir John Sinclair. By
marrying Ellen to him, she would fulfill the task lord Villars had given her to
performs and by giving such a husband to Ellen, she would gratify the never
ceasing dislike she entertained toward her. For a girl with fifteen hundred
pounds to her fortune, to refuse such an establishment, appeared to her
madness: and poor Ellen was obliged to be very serious in a matter that
appeared highly ridiculous to her.

Her steady refusal of such honors drew upon her from her mother, so much
reproach and obloquy, as made her life completely wretched. Sir William Ackland
carefully observed all the family proceedings in this matter: and he was not
more pleased to remark that pecuniary advantages alone would not dispose of
Ellen, than he was with the mildness with which she endured all the ill
treatment her opposition to her mother's unreasonable desires occasioned her.
He wished, indeed, to see how she would conduct herself to a younger lover; for
there was something in the ridicule with which, while the affair continued a
laughing matter in the family, she had treated the notion of sir John
Sinclair's thinking himself a suitable husband for her, that had pressed rather
unpleasantly upon some of sir William's feelings; nor were his wishes long
ungratified.

Among the numerous partners whom the fortune of the dance had consigned to
Ellen, there was one young man, who, being just come to his estate, and master
of himself, imagined that the first woman he liked to flirt with, was the one
with whom he could be happy for life. He made love with the same ease he would
have made tea; and received Ellen's refusal with the same nonchalance, as he
had made his proposal. As he wanted neither sense nor money, was handsome and
full as well bred as most of the young men of the age, there was no very
oftensible reason for the peremptoriness of Ellen's negative.

It had been sufficient with her, that he did not raise one emotion of any kind
in her mind, and that marriage was the thing least in her thoughts, and her
wishes. But the talkers around her sought for some less simple cause, to
account for a young woman of small fortune, refusing to settle herself
advantageously in the world. With many it was imputed to her design of becoming
lady Sinclair. But sir William knew that this was not the case. Others averred
that she had fixed her hopes and designs upon sir William himself: and this sir
William felt not at all disposed to question. He was complimented by so many
upon his conquest, that he began to persuade himself, (what cannot love and
vanity persuade a man to?) that if she refused the rich and the young, it was
because his merit had penetrated her heart. The complaisance and attention with
which she always listened to him, and the superiority that his personal
attractions and outward manners gave him over all the other men who approached
her, made this no very extraordinary or unpardonable mistake. On this mistake
he grounded his resolution of explaining himself to mr. Mordaunt.

The spring was now far advanced: and the family were to quit Bath in less than
a fortnight. Sir William therefore wished, before he lost sight of them, to
leave no doubt of his future intentions. He accordingly opened his heart to mr.
Mordaunt: but he represented to him that being only a few weeks returned to
England, he had much business to adjust before he could enter into matrimony.
He therefore proposed to arrange his affairs, to visit his country residence,
and afterward, if mr. Mordaunt encouraged him to hope, he flattered himself he
might be allowed to pay his devoirs to Ellen, in Northumberland.

Mr. Mordaunt received sir William's declaration with manifest pleasure; and
with the frankness that distinguished his character, immediately informed him
of the attachment that had subsisted between Ellen and Henry. He represented
the case exactly as it was; and assured sir William, that he had no doubt but
that Ellen's mind grew every day more free from every remains of predilection
in her cousin's favor. But he gave it as his opinion, that as sir William must
of necessity be some weeks before he could openly declare himself, it might be
productive of good effects, if he deferred his intended visit into
Northumberland 'till the autumn. In the mean time, mr. Mordaunt promised to
observe the inclinations of his daughter, and to deal with perfect fairness in
the representations he should make of them, from time to time, to sir William.

Mr. Mordaunt, who could not conceive that a man, who had passed his fortieth
year, could expect a young woman, not yet twenty, to have fallen in love with
him, or that it was probable that she should not have had some attachment or
prepossession more suited to her years, had no suspicion that by the frankness
of his dealing he pierced sir William's heart with the most sensible
disappointment, and opened it in future to all the tortures of rage and
jealousy.

This prior love of Ellen's explained in a way not at all flattering to sir
William's vanity, her indifference to the riches of sir John Sinclair, and the
youth of mr. Bowden: and if he were to hope it were to be overcome in his
favor, he found he was to owe his better fortune rather to time, and perhaps
to the recommendation of a parent, interested in his behalf, than to his own
merit.

The chagrin that he felt on this discovery made him readily come into mr.
Mordaunt's proposal, that any farther declaration should be delayed: and he
designed to quit Bath without again seeing Ellen. Accident however prevented
this. Going to visit mr. Mordaunt one evening, when he had understood she was
to be at the ball, he found her in the drawing room: and she appeared, from the
accidental mode of her dress, or from some other cause, more attractive in her
manner and appearance, than he had ever before thought her.

"I feared," said he, the moment he saw her, "that you were to have been at the
ball."

"Then I am not to flatter myself," said she gaily, "that this visit is to me?"

"Should you think it flattering if it were so?"

"I am not sure I should call it flattering; but I am sure I should call it
very pleasant."

There was a naivete and truth in these words, that went to sir William's heart.

"If I am not to be the first man she has loved," said he to himself, "I may be
the second. And if from this moment I might be the only one, I should be happy."

In this night's conversation, mr. Mordaunt was wholly forgotten: and sir
William's attentions and admiration were so apparent, that Ellen could not help
seeing him in a light he had never appeared to her in before. When he was gone,
mr. Mordaunt ventured to rally Ellen on her conquest: and she replied with so
much praise of sir William, that mr. Mordaunt thought himself in possession of
his wishes.

The effect this evening had upon sir William, was such, that instead of
leaving Bath at the time he designed, he continued there till the last moment
of mr. Mordaunt's stay; and spent so many hours in his house, and with Ellen,
that she could not doubt, but that, at least for the present, she had found the
way to his heart. This was a discovery that certainly gave her no pleasure; but
neither did it excite much pain, nor give her any very lively alarm. There was
something so guarded even in the admiration that sir William expressed, as
easily persuaded Ellen, who had no vanity to counteract her wishes, that he
thought not of her as a wife, and that when once out of sight, she should be
thought of no more. It was, however, with great satisfaction, that she saw
herself removed from Bath: and the sight of Groby Manor made her heart throb
with delight. "Here," said she to herself, "I shall find an asylum from all
gallantry. In those shades there will be no concert but the concert of the
birds, no dancing but the quivering of the leaves."

She flew to the parsonage.

"My friends," said she, as she embraced first one and then the other, "I have
not known so happy a moment as this, since we parted."

Her return to Groby Manor seemed to give her new life: and, unknown to
herself, the escape she thought she had had from sir William Ackland, diffused
peace and cheerfulness over her mind.

She resumed all her occupations with a spirit which she had not experienced
since her loss of Henry: and mr. Mordaunt thought himself authorized in giving
sir William the most flattering accounts of her dispositions.

Ellen had, however, one continual cause of unhappiness, which neither her
reason nor her patience could preserve her from feeling. This was the increased
ill humor of her mother. Baffled in her scheme of marrying her, persuaded that
Ellen in secret meant to preserve herself for Henry, her resentment and malice
toward her knew no bounds. There was no one moment of the day when she did not
make her feel the fangs of her malevolence. All mr. Mordaunt's authority could
not shield Ellen from the storm. The tongue is an instrument of evil that
cannot be restrained. Bitter taunts, and severe reproaches, may be resented;
but cannot, when we are compelled to live with the tormentor, be avoided.
Ellen's duplicity and presumption were the continual topics of her mother's
discourse: and with these she took care to mingle the most confident assurances
that all would prove vain, and that Henry would return to England only to marry
lady Almeria.

From such attacks, Ellen took refuge, whenever she could, at the parsonage:
but they made mr. Mordaunt more and more impatient to see her under the
protection of a man of worth, and to have her prove, by her marriage, the
falseness of mrs. Mordaunt's calumnies.

Sir William grew impatient to visit Northumberland: and mr. Mordaunt
determined to delay his consent no longer than till he had opened the matter
fully to Ellen.

CHAP. XIII.
'My once dear love! hopeless that I no more
'Must call thee so -- the rich affection's store
'That fed on hopes, lies now exhaust and spent,
'Like sums of treasure unto bankrupts lent:
'We that did nothing study, but the way
'To love each other, with which thoughts the day
'Rose with delight to us, and with them set,
'Must learn the hateful art how to forget.
'Yet
'Witness the chaste desires that never broke
'Into unruly heats,
''Tis no default in thee. I dare acquit
'Thy maiden faith, thy purpose fair and white
'As thy pure self.'
KING.
ONE day, when mrs. Mordaunt had been more than commonly injurious, Ellen had
withdrawn herself to her favorite wood, and had just eased her swelling heart,
by a flood of tears, when her father, who had purposely followed her from the
house, joined her. She would have concealed her emotion.

"My dear Ellen," said he, "your mother deserves no delicacy from you. Do not,
for her sake, deprive me of your full confidence: the sympathy of one parent is
but a due compensation for the cruelty of another."

"Your kindness, my father," said the weeping Ellen, "is a compensation for
every evil: and I ought to bear injuries that I have not deserved, with more
fortitude."

"I ought to remove you from the pressure of such injuries: and I would do so
too, even at the hazard of never seeing my wife again, did I not hope a more
amicable end to all your oppressions, and such a one as will give the lie
direct to all your mother's unjust imputations."

Ellen regarded her father with a look of timid surprise.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Your marriage with a man of worth will secure your own happiness; and prove,
beyond all dispute, the sincerity and good faith of that renunciation, the
motives for which are now so daily called in question.

"My marriage!" repeated Ellen, faintly.

"I want no further proof," cried mr. Mordaunt warmly, "of the strength of your
mind, and the purity of your principles. I know, that the sacrifice you
appeared to make, was sincere, that you never looked to futurity for an
indemnification for present losses: and I see, with equal pleasure and
admiration, that you are capable of receiving happiness from another source
than that which is dried up to you for ever. It is not, my love, that I am
putting your honesty to the test: but it is that I think I am offering a reward
to your virtues, when I talk to you of other connexions, when I name marriage."

"Marriage?" again repeated Ellen.

"Were your home as happy as I could wish to make it, yet marriage would be
desirable. Half the female virtues fade, or are useless, except in marriage.
You are formed to adorn them all: and having suffered as a daughter, it is
proper you should be rewarded as a wife."

"As a wife?" said Ellen.

"As a wife, my love; nor can I believe that with a man whom you could love,
there is any thing very dreadful in the name of wife. Sir William Ackland seeks
and deserves your love. In giving you to him, I believe I secure your
happiness: and have I not observed that he is not disagreeable to you?"

"Disagreeable! no, certainly."

"His person, his conversation pleases you. You think him worthy, amiable?"

"Yes."

"You are not unconscious that he admires you?"

"No."

"It would not be ungrateful to you that he should love you?"

Ellen was silent.

"Dear Ellen, why these monosyllables? Why this silence?"

Ellen gasped for breath. Mr. Mordaunt took her hand. It was cold.

"You are ill?"

"No, I am better." And throwing herself into her father's arms, she burst into
tears.

"Dear sir, forgive me. I will not be less all you wish me, notwithstanding
these foolish tears."

"They are not tears of reluctance, Ellen? I mean not to distress you. You are
and shall be mistress of yourself."

"It must come to this. I knew it would come to this! I will not abuse your
indulgence. But leave me, dear sir, leave me: In two hours I will tell you what
I think I can do, what I believe I ought to do."

"I will leave you, my love: but do nothing merely because you think I wish it.
Let the reasons why I wish it, have their weight, but not the wish itself."

"Impossible! your wish must be a motive with me."

Mr. Mordaunt retired: and Ellen hastened, as fast as her trembling limbs would
carry her, to the parsonage. She found the little family assembled in that
woodbine bower, where so many happy hours of her childhood had been passed,
where she had so often studied and so often idled with Henry, where she had a
hundred times received his vows of everlasting love, and where she had as often
promised never to forsake him. The recollection was too painful: she stopped
short. Her limbs failed her. Mr. Thornton caught her in his arms; and then
giving her a glass of water, she rested her head on mr. Thornton's shoulder,
and was saved by tears from fainting.

Mr. and mrs. Thornton hung over her with true parental affection, terrified
with an emotion they had never witnessed in her before, yet afraid to increase
her distress by inquiring into the cause.

Mary, as much alarmed, and less considerate, cried, "Dear, dear Ellen, what is
the matter? Who now has done you wrong?"

"No one; myself I think. I did not think I should have been so overcome. I
meant to have been quite calm."

"But what, what is the matter?"

"Oh! my friends, you must advise me. Yet, already I know what I ought to do."

"Sir William Ackland would marry you?" interrupted Mary.

"My poor Ellen," said mr. Thornton.

"My dear sir, my second father," said Ellen, looking up to mr. Thornton. "You
shall be my casuist. You shall decide for me. What you determine, will be right
aad good."

"Dear Ellen, you have decided yourself. What is eligible, what tends to your
happiness nobody can doubt. The question is, what can you do?"

"I can do that which you advise me to do."

"Sir William is pleasant to your fancy, and approved of by your understanding.
He is amiable, he is kind: plain sense requires no other qualifications in the
object of affection."

"But if the heart is not free?" said Mary.

"Will Ellen make that plea?" said mr. Thornton.

"No. If my heart is not yet sir William Ackland's, I mean not to reserve it
for another."

"What is the heart but the power of bestowing affections where there is merit
enough to deserve them? Does not sir William Ackland possess that merit? And
where can you look for married happiness with better hopes of success than with
him?"

"No where I believe."

"You are above the romantic notion of living single all your life, from having
experienced one disappointment; a notion, to say nothing of the false and
selfish principles upon which it is grounded, that is usually attended by a
much severer sense of disappointment than any occasioned by the events that
gave birth to it."

"I hope I am. I have always disdained such a notion."

"Have you one objection, which you would wish to act from, to an union with
sir William?"

"No."

"Then, my dear Ellen," said mr. Thornton, embracing her, "the question is
decided. And if sir William is the man you and mr. Mordaunt describe him to be,
your happiness is also decided. No retrospect will ever disturb it."

"I am willing to think so: but I mistrust myself. The emotion I have now
betrayed -- "

"If I saw you insensible I should be less sure of your happiness. But the same
sentiments that formed your first attachment, will form your second. It is upon
sir William's merits and your power of appreciating those merits, that I ground
my assurance of your happiness. Your affection for him will fill the present
void in your heart, will give a motive for action, and an interest to duty. If
you have thought it possible for those who have lost you to be happy in a
second choice, you will not be able to suppose you cannot be so, without making
yourself too much, or too little of a compliment."

Ellen had nothing to reply to this; but turning to mrs. Thornton, said, "And
you, my dear mother, do you ratify this sentence?"

"Indeed I do. It is the dictate of good sense and good principles; high
treason, I allow, against the laws of romance* but when did you ever refer your
actions to that fantastical code?"

"Never, thanks to you, my best friends* and now I think I may engage I never
shall."

"I long to know sir William," said mr. Thornton.

"He will meet with your approbation, I have no doubt."

"Then must he have more than common merit: less will not satisfy me, when I am
looking for a husband for you."

Ellen faintly smiled; and asking Mary, whose silence had marked her
dissatisfaction, to accompany her home, said she had promised, on parting with
her father, to see him again in two hours.

"Heaven bless you, my dear child," said mr. and mrs. Thornton, both in a
breath: and mr. Thornton added, "if moderation and rationality were to be
personified, they would take no other form than Ellen's."

Ellen's heart was full. She pressed their hands between here is; and scarcely
uttering 'adieu,' walked along with Mary.

Mary had much in her mind: but of all that was there, she was not able to
utter a syllable. Ellen talked of the softness of the evening, the fragrance of
the woodbines, and the melody of the birds. Mary could neither smell nor hear.
Ellen changed the subject; and inquired concerning the last new book she had
read, and whether the colors in her flower-piece stood. Mary could bear no
more.

"Oh! Ellen," cried she, throwing her arms around her, "I could not do as you
do."

"You could if you would. What your father said was unanswerable. My judgment
is thoroughly with him."

"And is it a matter of judgment?"

"Assuredly. What but our judgment shall correct the mistakes of our hearts?"

"I can easily excuse my judgment that office. I hope it will never be called
to it."

"You will be the happier. But, educated as you and I have been, in the same
school, in the same circumstances, I have no doubt, but our conduct would be
the same."

"It is easier to admire than to imitate you. All Aristotle's pupils were not
Alexanders."

Mr. Mordaunt, in whose breast Ellen's agitation had raised the most painful
apprehensions, had counted every moment since she quitted him, with the most
anxious impatience: and no longer able to wait quietly her return, he had bent
his steps toward the parsonage. He met Ellen and Mary. From the first glance
of Ellen's eye, he learnt all he wished to know. "A blessing will follow all
you do, my dear Ellen," said he; "for all you do is founded upon good sense and
propriety."

"If I am right in your eyes, and not self-condemned, I know not that there is
any thing more in this world to be wished for," said Ellen.

"You have, indeed, laid the best foundation for happiness: and I entertain not
a doubt but the superstructure will be all our most anxious love can desire."

CHAP. XVII.
'Wisdom is his, and his alone, who knows
'His heart's uneasy discord to compose;
'In generous love of other's good to find,
'The sweetest pleasures of the social mind;
'To bound his wishes to their proper sphere,
'To nourish pleasing hope, and conquer anxious fear.
LYTTLETON.
SIR WILLIAM received mr. Mordaunt's summons to Groby Manor with a mixture of
the most lively pleasure, and the most tormenting solicitude. He could not
doubt of Ellen's determination in his favor: but he doubted the motives that
had produced it. He had begun his attentions to her by a scrupulous weighing of
her merits and blemishes: and he had ended in the most decided and ardent
passion. To be happy, he must be beloved, be beloved preferably, and almost
exclusively. To be less than all to Ellen, was, in sir William's mind, to be
little more than nothing. His vanity could scarcely hope, or his reason desire
this: and yet less than this would by him, before marriage, be lamented as a
misfortune, and after marriage be punished as a fault.

He hasted down into Northumberland oppressed by doubt, yet too much in love to
be disposed to be governed even by a confirmation of his doubts.

The sight of Ellen increased his love and his fears. He found her gentle,
complacent, yielding: but to all the symptoms of passion with which he was
infected, he found nothing correspondent in Ellen. From the even tenor of her
spirits, and the perfect freedom in which he was convinced her choice had been
left by her father, he could not suspect that she was influenced in her
acceptance of him by any motives but such as she avowed -- a sense of his
merits, and a conviction that her life would pass happily with him: but those
sentiments were far short of those he wished to inspire. He had been told she
had loved Henry. She could therefore love. The animation of character which she
displayed in all she did, put the matter out of doubt. Her warmth of friendship
for Mary, her attachment to her father, were farther proofs, if any had been
wanting. Sir William already began to think it an injury to him, that, with the
ardent feelings she possessed, she seemed to grant him only esteem.

To the querulous reproaches that sometimes escaped him, Ellen opposed at times
a good humoured raillery; and at others, with a frank honesty, would refer him
to time and his own virtues, as the only grounds on which he could build the
probable success of his desires.

"And have you no notion of any love but what is grounded on the merits of the
object?" Sir William would ask.

"Certainly not."

"And do you never love but in exact proportion to those merits?"

"I don't say so," said Ellen, with a blush.

"And yet you refer me to my merits?"

"As the groundwork; that once laid, let me alone for the superstructure."

"Is it not laid?" asked sir William peevishly.

"Without doubt: but hurrying me, will re^ard and not forward the building."

"Are you always so tardy in works of love?"

"All my loves," said Ellen with emotion, have hitherto 'Grown with my growth,
and strengthened with my strength.' I am of slow capacity, and cannot seize an
idea the moment it is offered me. You must not expect to reap before you have
sown: but wait the season, and be assured you shall have a full harvest."

So Ellen felt; and so Ellen believed. She saw much in sir William to esteem,
and much to like. Every day he grew more interesting to her. The happiness she
already began to feel, she imputed to him. She did not trouble herself to
analyze it too scrupulously, nor to examine how much ought to be referred to
the unbounded content that shone in her father's countenance, how much to the
newborn kindness of her mother, how much to the satisfaction of her sisters,
who saw in her marriage the probable sphere of their pleasures much enlarged.
If she adverted to any circumstance as making a part of her happiness,
independent of sir William, it was a self gratulation on acting right, and a
conviction that she should not by her new connexions grieve Henry. She
understood, as a certainty, that in a few months he was to return and marry
lady Almeria. This circumstance had not, it is true, made any part of her
motives for her present conduct: but it was impossible not to consider it as an
addition to the personal happiness she promised herself. The fear that in
yielding so implicitly to his father's will, he had been too careless of that
felicity which only can be secured by the wise choice of a partner for life,
would sometimes obtrude itself: but she drove it from her.

It is presumptuous in me, (thought she), to decide a question of which I know
so little. Lady Almeria may have all the virtues and perfections that I wish
her to have. I hardly know her. Shall I, by judging her harshly, make myself
unhappy?

There were other uncertain thoughts and vague suspicions, which she found
herself, when they occurred, less able to banish from her mind, and which
touched her own interests nearer.

These were some doubts of the goodness of sir William's temper, and the
liberality of his mind. She scarcely knew from what such suspicions arose;
perhaps from a word or look to a servant, an opinion carelessly dropped in
common conversation, an over solicitude for trifles, a something falling short
as it were of the thing she wished, rather than any thing directly inimical to
it. She had to oppose to these suspicions, the generosity and handsomeness with
which she knew he had dealt in all matters of settlement, and in all
transactions with her father -- the unvaried good humor and sweetness of
temper he displayed toward her -- with the exception of what might be called
the complainings of too ardent a love, an exception, which, however she might
lament it, she hardly knew how to charge upon him as a fault.

To these were added, the gaiety and pleasantness of his conversation, and his
desire of accommodation in all matters in which she was concerned. Sometimes
she thought this a little studied. But she checked herself in what she thought
might be too great a fastidiousness: and sometimes she feared, that whatever
idea arose in her mind to the disadvantage of sir William, might be wholly
owing to a comparison, which, do what she would, would sometimes force itself
upon her. When this thought occurred, she condemned herself as unjust, and
almost criminal: and sir William was dearer to her from the sense of the injury
she thought she had done him.

In a word, he had made that progress in her heart, and she had so accustomed
herself to consider him as the person who was henceforth to be her best friend,
that it depended wholly upon sir William's self to secure her love and her
happiness for life.

It is not to be doubted, that lord Villars received the accounts of Ellen's
intended marriage with the most heartfelt satisfaction: but it was a
satisfaction that he judged it expedient, at present, to conceal carefully from
his son. He imagined that he could never plead such an example of submission so
irresistibly as in the moment when the final and certain overthrow of all his
hopes should fill the breast of Henry with grief, disappointment, and probably
resentment.

Lord Villars entreated his sister to keep Ellen as happy and pleased with
herself as possible, and by the most marked change in her conduct toward her,
and the most unbounded approbation of her present designs, to make her, if
possible, forget the disappointment of her love, in the gratification of her
vanity. Hence the change of mrs. Mordaunt's behavior to her daughter, in which
the good heart of Ellen so sincerely rejoiced.

Lord Villars wrote to mr. Mordaunt, beseeching him to renew their intercourse
and friendship: and mr. Mordaunt, whose nature knew not implacability, accepted
the olive branch. Lord Villars ventured one step further; and sent to Ellen, as
a bridal present, a costly ornament of pearls.

Ellen felt this as an insult, as though her desertion of Henry was to be paid
with a pearl necklace. From the man who had so unrelentingly refused her
happiness, she could not accept of ornament: and she returned, with very civil
expressions, the expensive trinket.

Sir William was acquainted with this circumstance: and Ellen saw, with a very
sensible pain, that it displeased him. He was more willing that she should
sacrifice the dignity of her mind, than that she should betray any remaining
resentment to the person who had separated her from Henry.

But the thing was done, and could not be recalled. She endeavored, however,
to convince sir William, that what she had done, was not from a feeling of
resentment, but from that delicacy which forbids receiving obligation of any
kind, and especially of a pecuniary sort, from those of whom we think ill. And
she added, with a softness which ought to have subdued displeasure, even justly
founded, that she would have sacrificed even this delicacy, rather than have
done what was unpleasing to him.

CHAP. XVIII.
'Vola tanto col difio, che lent^
'Oli parrebbe il vento.'
ARIO^TO.
WHILE these things were transacting in Northumberland, Henry was amusing
himself extremely well in Italy, perfectly unconscious of the blow that awaited
him. He had been acquainted with Ellen's journey to Bath, and had suffered the
most cruel uneasiness as to the probable consequence of that expedition. But
his heart had recovered its composure, and resumed its hopes, when he knew that
she was returned disengaged into Northumberland. Although separated by seas and
mountains, the same satisfaction had filled the hearts of Henry and Ellen, on
her being again sheltered, as they both hoped, by the shades of Groby Manor,
from the dangers of solicitation, and screened from the possibility of notice.

This shelter had proved vain: and Henry now learnt, although indistinctly, and
from doubtful authority, of Ellen's intended marriage with sir William Ackland.
On the thought of the distance that divided Italy from England, an icy coldness
ran through his veins. There was no staying there in all the horror of
uncertainty, to be made perhaps still more wretched, by being put out of doubt.

He quitted Venice on the instant: and with a rapidity far short of his
desires, but almost beyond his powers, he arrived in England. Here he loitered
not for information: but, more and more alarmed by that which reached him as he
traveled on, with the same breathless haste he urged his way into
Northumberland.

Here, at the parsonage, on the close of a fine day, in September, the moon
giving a more affecting tint to objects, the sight of which, from the variety
of emotions that they raised, almost shook his frame to dissolution, arrived
the wretched Henry.

He asked, in a voice scarcely articulate, for mr. and mrs. Thornton; and was
told they were at Groby Manor. His informer was a female: and she added, "for
miss Ellen is to be married tomorrow: and my mistress is gone to take leave of
her."

Henry felt the adder's f^g in his heart: and casting up a look of despair,
that rather seemed to menace than to supplicate, he rushed forward, and,
unknowing what he did or what he meant to do, soon reached the wood that
adjoined to Groby Manor.

Amongst the few pensioners to whom Ellen's limited means enabled her to extend
her benevolence, was a poor woman, who, to the burden of fourscore years, added
infirmity and misfortune. To her necessities Ellen had often sacrificed the
variety of her dress, and the power of purchasing new books, or new music: and
it was to Ellen not amongst the least pleasing circumstances of her approaching
marriage, that it would enable her to secure poor Deborah from all the
distresses of penury for the remainder of her life. Nothing, however, seemed
sufficient to console the old woman for the approaching loss of the daily
visits of her beloved benefactress: and Ellen made it a point, not to remit her
attentions while it was in her power to continue them.

The hurry of the preceding day had prevented her usual visit to Deborah: but
as the cottage did not stand more than five hundred yards from Groby Manor,
just on the outside of the wood, she had withdrawn from her friends, while they
were assembled at tea, to give one quarter of an hour to Deborah, to bid her
adieu, and bestow her parting bounty; for Ellen was to depart on the morrow.

She was returning from this humane visitation, softened by the gratitude and
the blessings of the poor creature she had left, her mind full of past scenes,
and future expectations, when on a sudden Henry's figure stood before her.

Ellen neither shrieked nor fainted. But she doubted not but that which she saw
was supernatural, 'till Henry, who, on the sight of her, felt every tumultuous
passion dissolve into the most melting tenderness, rushed forward and clasped
her in his arms.

"Am I to believe my senses? are you indeed Henry?"

"Yes, yes, I am Henry, the forgotten Henry. I know I came unlooked for,
undesired. But I come to claim my own; to save you from the sin of inconstancy."

"Inconstancy! Do you charge me with inconstancy?"

"Yes, thou dear false one, yes. Can you deny the charge?"

"Most confidently. But, dear Henry, compose yourself. What means this sudden
appearance? What mean those looks, so eager and so wild?"

"Are you not married?"

"No."

"Are you not betrothed?"

"I beseech you be calm. I will hear all you have to say. I will satisfy you
fully. But do not terrify me thus. You will drive my reason from her seat."

"Do I terrify you? Forgive me? dearest, best-beloved of creatures, forgive me.
You talk of reason. Mine indeed is gone, is lost. Put your hand here, here --
feel here. Do you not feel the burning chain with which my brain is bound?"

"We will sit down here. We will converse together. You cannot feel pain any
where, Henry, that I shall not commiserate."

"How soft is your voice! How kind your accents! Oh, Ellen, you should not thus
have undone me."

A flood of tears stopped his speech. He wept, concealing his face in Ellen's
garment. She hung over him in unutterable distress, and sought to sooth him by
the kindest words of the most heartfelt compassion.

At length, he became more calm: and, starting up, "I meant not," said he, "to
play the madman and the fool. But let us reason the matter together. I will
walk from you for a few moments; and having recovered my understanding, will
try to keep it."

This was a seasonable relief to Ellen, and gave her time to rally all her
faculties; for the sight of Henry, and Henry in such distress, had deprived her
of every power of recollection, and made her sensible only to the extremest
misery.

"I think I shall not again terrify you," said Henry, returning to her. "I
think I can be master of myself. But, Ellen, I come to call you to a severe
account. I come to reckon with you for my ruin."

"How innocent I am of your ruin in act, or wish, I will not tell you, Henry;
for you know. I will not tell you to turn your mind to past transactions. My
exculpation, I am sure, is written in your heart, and cannot be forgotten."

"Is it your exculpation, that you have sacrificed the truest love to a vain
ambition? Is it your exculpation, that from disinterestedness, pure as what
angels feel, you are become sordid, mercenary?'

"Cruel Henry! -- No, my dear cousin, you are not cruel; you are not even
mistaken. You know I am not mercenary. You know I am not sordid. You know me
thoroughly; and can be at no loss for the real motives of my conduct."

"I know you thoroughly! -- No, no. -- Once indeed -- "

"No retrospect: -- It is not only upon the present occasion, I have promised
to forbear it; and to give it is not only useless but detrimental."

"Cool, reasonable Ellen! But it is false, dissembled. You shall not persuade
me that you forget."

"I forget nothing. I should be sorry to lay the foundation of my duty in the
loss of my faculties."

"And do you indeed remember? Dearest creature, do you remember? It was in this
walk, it was under these trees, -- "

"Forbear. It was indeed in this spot I first acknowledged the preference I
entertained for you; a preference justified by a father's approbation. But
here, also, I learnt that your father forbade a union, which it would be
impious in you to form under his prohibition: and here, too, I solemnly engaged
I would never be accessory to your disobedience, and your ruin. Which of these
recollections can criminate me in your eye, or justify your present
extravagance?"

"All, all may justify my extravagance. That heart with all its virtues has
been mine. It is torn from me -- most unjustly torn from me -- I have lost it
for ever -- Oh! Ellen, you bind me to the rack, and forbid me to complain!"

"Such complaint might have been pardonable twelve months ago. No future event
can place a more insurmountable bar between us than was my promise then given
to your father. In that promise you then acquiesced, why now -- "

"Are you not about to be married to another* Am I not to be for ever undone?"

"When I promised your father never more to listen to you without his
approbation, I knew I for ever renounced you. Tomorrow's intended ceremony
will not make the renunciation more absolute, then it then was. The duty of
that moment was yielding: the duty of this is perseverance."

"And you, madam, I find, are equal to both."

"You will not always, I hope, think that an ironical praise: and I shall be
happy to prove myself worthy of it."

They now walked on in silence* when coming to a walk that led immediately to
the house, Ellen turned into it, when hastily seizing her gown, "you are not
going?" exclaimed he.

"I am going no where," said she mildly, "but where, if you please, you may
accompany me."

"Accompany you? -- No, Ellen, I must never accompany you. But may the God of
all good accompany you. May he guard you sleeping, and bless your waking hours,
and may you never more think of such a wretch as I am."

And then quitting his hold, he rushed into the surrounding coppice, and was
out of sight in a moment. Perhaps, had he waited another instant, he had seen
those signs of weakness in Ellen, which he seemed to have taken such pains to
excite.

She was stunned with his vehemence, and overcome by her own recollections. Her
limbs suddenly failed her: and she sunk at the foot of a tree, nearly
senseless, and wholly unable for some minutes either to act or to think*

CHAP. XIX.
-- 'Celestial wisdom calms the mind,
And makes the happiness she does not find.'
^O^N^.
BUT the mind where reason is habitually paramount, gives place but for a
moment to the anarchy of the passions.

Ellen roused herself from the temporary stupefaction that had seized her; and,
rising, returned with all the haste in her power to the house.

Her absence had already given occasion for surprise and inquiry: and Mary had
suggested, as its probable cause, a farewell visit to old Deborah.

It had, however, been protracted until it had produced a considerable degree
of anxiety in the breasts of those who thought every moment of her absence an
hour.

Mary and sir William were about to have come in search of her, when, from the
windows of the room where they were, they saw her approach. They ran toward
her: and Mary, in accents of solicitude, and sir William in those of reproach,
eagerly enquired where she had been.

"With Deborah, said Ellen: and instantly the tone of her voice betra^ed the
emotion which still agitated her, and which the discomposure of her coun^enan^*
and the trembling of her limbs, made still more ^dent.

"Why, why would you go there?" said Mary* "That poor creature's gratitude was
sure to be too much for you. How much better had it been that you had been
playing and singing with us."

"I will play and sing with you now," said Ellen: and in a hurried and
fluttered manner hastily sat down to the harpsichord. She touched the keys: but
it was discord, not harmony, that she produced. Every eye was fixed upon her.
Her father drew near with extreme anxiety: and sir William, who had kept close
to her from the moment he had met her, said, with a tone of chagrin and
reproach, "this visit to an old woman has strangely discomposed you."

"I am indeed extremely discomposed," returned she; and rising, "my father, let
me speak to you."

Mr. Mordaunt, struck with a deadly fear, though he knew not of what, put his
arm round her waist -- she had need of the support -- and withdrew with her
into another room.

There a seasonable burst of tears relieved the almost bursting heart of Ellen.
But recovered from this agitation, she sought to quiet, by a recital of every
circumstance, the agonizing alarm that, she perceived, had seized her father.
The narrative, however, far from alleviating, increased every apprehension he
had before felt. In it he thought he saw the wreck of Ellen's happiness, and in
her happiness that of her reputation. He thought he saw the intended marriage
with sir William broken, and broken from a revived passion for another man; a
passion which ought to have been extinguished for ever before such a marriage
had been thought of. But he knew not Ellen. He knew not, that the severest
sufferings for another, fearless for herself, could not turn her aside from the
path of rectitude and reason. H^ saw her agitated, alarmed, and unhappy: and he
distinguished not the source from whence those feelings arose. He could not
hope that it was alone pity and fear for Henry that excited them. He remained
silent and thunderstruck, unknowing what to suggest, or what to advise.

"Let me entreat you," said Ellen, "to go to mr. Thornton. Let him seek out the
wretched Henry. Let him, if possible, sooth his desperation, and lead him to
patience.

"And sir William? -- What shall be said to sir William?"

"I will tell him myself every thing."

"Tell him! What will you tell him?"

"All that has passed. I am sure he will join in my commiseration for the
unhappy Henry."

Mr. Mordaunt felt his fears subside, and his hopes revive. "So untoward a
circumstance," said he hesitating, "may perhaps excite in sir William's mind --
"

"Nothing but compassion surely. How otherwise can it affect sir William? Have
I ever disavowed my affection to Henry? Have I ever pretended, that I renounced
him from any consideration but that of duty? The circumstance of tonight has
not altered the grounds of that renunciation. It has not shaken the esteem, the
love I have for sir William. They were not founded upon the absence of Henry,
but upon the good qualities and kind affections of sir William. My designs and
my sentiments are unaltered. I will, indeed, confess my happiness is
considerably lessened. I had been taught to believe that Henry too had
sacrificed his first love at the shrine of filial duty. This belief did not
form a motive for my own conduct: but it contributed largely to the happiness I
hoped to draw from it. I cannot be happy while Henry is so perfectly wretched,
and made so by me. But had I known the true state of his mind some months ago,
should I not still have acted as I have done? I was not to hold myself
accountable to him: and now I do know it, can it, ought it to have any
influence on my actions?"

"My dearest Ellen, you are every thing that a father can wish. You are every
thing you ought to be."

"Go, dear sir, go, and send mr. Thornton in pursuit of our poor wanderer; and
beg sir William will come to me."

The agony of suspense and fear that sir William had undergone during this
conversation, no words can describe; nor had the feelings of the rest of the
party been much less acute. On the return of mr. Mordaunt, they all crowded
around him.

"Don't be alarmed, there is no harm. -- Ellen has seen Henry. But go, my dear
sir William. Go, and hear from herself all that has passed. There is nothing to
be regretted in the affair but the misery of poor Henry."

"Seen Henry!" repeated every voice, when mr. Mordaunt pronounced these words.

"Nothing to be regretted but the misery of poor Henry!" said sir William, and
rushed eagerly into the room to which Ellen had retired.

She met him with her hand held out to him, "Come, my best friend, come, and
with your kindness sooth the agitation, that compassion for the unhappy Henry
has excited."

"Unhappy Henry! -- Can he be called unhappy, Ellen, whose, sufferings make
your eyes overflow? and for whose loss the bitterness of your regrets robs even
your bridal hour of happiness?"

"Away with such a thought," said the upright Ellen: "if my heart did not sink
within me, if my whole frame were not discomposed by having been witness of his
distress, I should be unworthy of your esteem or my own. Henry was my first
and, had not insuperable obstacles interposed, would have been my only choice.
But when I bowed before those obstacles, it was in a full and perfect sense,
without any mental reservation, without any lurking hope whatever, that I said
I renounced him. With equal sincerity, with equal singleness of heart, I have
avowed, that your merits and your affections have made such an impression on my
mind, that, in consenting to pass the whole of my life with you, I believe I
have secured a pure and rational felicity for the remainder of my days. The
circumstance of this night though it has clouded the serenity of my mind, has
made no alteration in its sentiments: and I shall tomorrow become your wife
with the same desires, with the same satisfaction, the same affections, and the
same hopes, that I should have given you my hand yesterday."

"In such an assurance you seem to give me all I can ask. Yet, how far short is
such a modified regard, of the ardent and exclusive love I bear you."

"Be assured," cried Ellen fervently, "that no love can be more exclusive than
mine, if you mean to confine the sense of that word to the love that a wife
ought to bear her husband. If indeed you extend it to all the solicitudes of
friendship, or family affection, know, that I never felt such a love. I am
incapable of feeling such a love: and if I were conscious of any tendencies
toward it, I should think I ought to repress them. I can feel a preferable
love, I cannot feel an exclusive one."

"You never felt such a love?"

"No. And the engagements that now subsist between us, is a proof of it. Had
not a parent, had not my friends, had not my duties, had each their share in my
heart, would those ties ever have been broken, upon the dissolution of which,
those that now subsist between you and me, have been founded."

"Oh, may I be able," cried sir William, tenderly embracing her, "to connect an
ardent, if not an exclusive love for me, with all the energies of such a
character, then shall I be the most blessed of men."

"Doubt not, but you will do so. Did I believe otherwise, no consideration
whatever would induce me to become your wife."

Sir William had then patience to listen to the circumstances of Henry's sudden
appearance and as sudden departure. He listened, but certainly with no
compassion corresponding to that felt by the relator; for, as he had a
deeply-rooted fear of Henry's influence over the mind of Ellen, so he was not
without a feeling toward him something resembling hatred.

Ellen, though she told all the truth, avoided, from a sentiment of delicacy,
to press u^ sir William's observation the extent of H^nry's wretchedness, and
the sense she had of it. And sir William, though he shrunk from every
particular that represented Ellen as tenderly touched for Henry, showed an
eager curiosity after the most minute circumstance that had passed. He sought
to draw something like censure of the vehemence Henry had discovered from the
lips of Ellen. But this he sought for in vain. The accents of the purest
sincerity were ever on those lips; nor did any imagined refinement of feeling
ever betray her into the wanderings of duplicity: and she felt only the most
lively and tender compassion for the sorrows of Henry* She knew she had herself
been deceived, as to the state of his mind; and had no doubt but that equal
deceit had been practiced toward him, though the nature of the falsehood was
probably different. She could impute his indiscreet appearance, his vehemence,
and his distraction, only to his having been kept designedly in ignorance of
the real situation in which she had been for some time past, and from its
having at length reached him in its full extent, and in so sudden a manner, as
to suspend for a time all the restraints of reason and of prudence. All blame,
therefore, was far from her mind; and never was anxiety more painful than that
she felt on his account.

Mr. Thornton at length returned. He informed her, that he had traced Henry
back to his chaise, which (his servants not having received any orders from
him) had waited at the parsonage, from the moment he quitted it until he
returned; that having put himself into it, he had driven back to the next inn,
where, changing horses, he had again pursued his journey, evidently with a
design to escape as soon as he could, from a place which overwhelmed him with
recollections he was unable to bear.

Ellen could not hope to hear any thing more consolatory. Yet the idea of Henry
a fugitive, under the guidance only of his ungoverned passions, flying from
her, and suffering for her, fixed a pain in her heart, which no considerations
on the rectitude of her own conduct, or the probable prospect of happiness
before her could remove. Her best balm would have been a frank and tender
participation in her sorrows by sir William. It would have been, on his part,
the surest means of avoiding the evil he dreaded. But she beheld him with
regret and apprehension, gloomy and silent. His attention toward her wore
rather the air of suspicion than of tenderness; and seemed to suggest to her
the propriety of concealing feelings, which she could not but consider, not
only as unavoidable, but laudable.

The evening wore away with little satisfaction on any side: and Ellen retired
to her apartment with a fear for the peace of her future life; which not the
sudden appearance of Henry, not those recollections which it had awakened in
her, but the dispositions which it seemed to have betrayed in sir William, had
impressed on her mind.

When Ellen appeared at breakfast the next morning, her countenance wore an air
of thoughtfulness, which no one in her present circumstances could reprove: but
she had endeavored, as much as possible, to banish all sadness from it. The
gay affection that sparkled in sir William's eyes, and the ardent love with
which they were darted toward her, did more, in one instant, toward producing
this effect, than all her reflections and resolutions, formed through a
sleepless night, had been able to accomplish.

"Forgive, my dearest love, forgive," said sir William, "all that last night
might look like distrust, or discontent, on my part. My feelings ^ight perhaps
condemn, but my judgment wholly acquitted you: and who that knows the real
value of my Ellen's heart, will wonder, that a fear, however unjustly sounded,
that it was not wholly mine, should overwhelm me with sadness?"

"My dear sir William, only do yourself justice; and you will never have any
fear concerning my heart, that can give you a moment's uneasiness."

Sir William, delighted, embraced her: and Ellen's almost lost hope, that the
road, which her reason had pointed out to her, as sure to lead to happiness,
began to revive.

The marriage ceremony was performed by mr. Thornton. Mrs. Thornton and her
daughter attended their beloved Ellen to church; and there they parted. The
pain of this parting scene was mitigated on all sides, by a firm promise on the
part of the Thorntons, that many months should not elapse, before they visited
Berkshire.

Charlotte accompanied her sister, and mr. and mrs. Mordaunt and their eldest
daughter were to join them at Oakley in about a month.

CHAP. XX.
'Patience sovereign over transmitted ill.'
JOHNSON.
TO Oakley, Ellen began her journey: but in the situation of this country
residence of sir William's, there was one circumstance, which since the
adventure of the preceding day, Ellen had adverted to with pain.

Oakley was situated scarcely half a mile distant from the small house
belonging to lord Villars, to which he had retired on the death of his son. It
was not the usual residence of the family: but she knew it was a favorite spot
with Henry, and a place to which he frequently resorted, to pursue the sports
of the field. She could not hope that he would soon be able to see her with the
composure, without which he ought not to see her at all: and she felt hurt at
being the cause of banishing him from a place, where, in the present state of
his mind, he might probably have found the most eligible retreat from the
distraction and regrets that preyed upon his heart. She feared his resource
might be again to quit England: and in this continued estrangement from his
country and family, she foresaw a probable change in his character and manner
of thinking, extremely to the disadvantage of his happiness and principles. She
knew him formed to be an useful and active member of society, capable of
fulfilling, with honor to himself and advantage to others, any civil or
political duty, which his rank in life, or the circumstances of his country
might call him to. To have him waste his existence in wandering from one
foreign court to another, distant from every domestic and every national
connection, a prey to useless repining, or the victim of frivolous pleasures,
was an idea that filled her mind with the most painful disquietude -- a
disquietude that arose almost beyond endurance, when she ventured to ask
herself the question, "What has driven him to this?"

Sir William observed, with chagrin, her anxiety, and the solicitude with which
she desired to hear something of Henry. But in every other particular he had
reason to think himself the most fortunate of men.

The charms of Ellen's person and conversation, the sweetness of her temper,
and the unfeigned affection that her every action manifested toward him, left
him nothing to wish, had he known how to regulate his wishes by the rule of
reason.

But, in fact, sir William was neither reasonable nor amiable. Under all the
exterior graces which a pleasing person, polished manners, and a good and
cultivated understanding could bestow, he was vehement in his temper, and, when
thoroughly provoked, implacable. Lavish in pursuit of his own gratifications,
niggardly in promoting those of others; he loved Ellen with all the ardency of
passion; but he loved her as a possession, in which he could not bear that any
other should have a share. The mildness of her manners and the reasonableness
of her conduct, with the complacent state of mind that belongs to a successful
lover, had preserved him, during his residence in Northumberland, from every
possibility of betraying his natural disposition: and without designing to
practice any deception, sir William Ackland, in the first months of Ellen's
knowledge of him, and sir William Ackland during the rest of his life, were two
men, of distinct and separate characters.

It was, however, only slowly, and by degrees, that the true and unamiable
character was disclosed to the unwilling observation of Ellen: and it was not
until every doubt was done away, in the most calamitous certainty, that Ellen
would allow herself to believe, that the man who could appear reasonable,
obliging, kind, and generous, was, in truth, unpersuadeable, harsh, violent,
and selfish. But the discovery was not yet made. The present hour was all
harmony: and the brightest prospects opened before her.

She was joined by the family, from Groby Manor, at the time appointed: and she
learnt, with a satisfaction that banished all sadness from her mind, that Henry
had signified his design to his father of taking up his abode in England. He
was at present engaged in making an excursion to the North of Scotland: bu^ he
had promised to join his father at the park at Christmas.

In truth, however vehement and restless Henry might have been, while his mind
was divided between hope and fear, and while inaction on his part might be
accessory to the loss of his happiness; he had no sooner recovered from the
paroxysm of grief and despair, into which the consummation of his misfortune
had thrown him, than he roused all the faculties of his mind to bear with the
constancy and dignity of a rational creature, griefs which no impatience or
extravagance could in any way lessen.

Of Ellen's person and Ellen's character he was enamoured. He looked round; and
in his idea saw nothing equal to her on earth: and he felt, that however
impelled by passion, or misled by fancy, he might in any future hour be tempted
to form a temporary engagement with another woman, that there was no other whom
the sanction of his judgment could allow as worthy to succeed Ellen in his
affections as a wife; least of all could the frivolous, the inconsequent lady
Almeria be worthy. He considered her, too, as the efficient cause that had
separated him from Ellen: and if to other woman he were indifferent, to lady
Almeria he was abhorrent.

But in resolving that no consideration should ever compel him to accept of her
as a wife, he wished to soften the obduracy of his opposition to his father's
will as much as possible. It was in this light that he turned with
disapprobation from the idea that had once appeared seducing to him, of living
like a vagabond upon earth, wandering from place to place, and finding no where
a home.

"I have a home, I have a family, I have a country," said he, "dearest Ellen:
with what delight, animated by your approbation, should I have endeavored to
have fulfilled my duties to them all. Your love must no longer be my reward.
But your virtue shall be my stimulator. Your eye shall follow me through life:
and it shall not weep for the degeneracy of your cousin."

Three days after the marriage of Ellen, Henry was sufficiently master of
himself to form this resolution, and to write the following letter in
consequence of it to his father.

Ill would it become me, my lord, to reproach you for the desolation you have
brought upon me. I wish my wrongs to be as silent, as they are now hopeless of
redress. I would willingly impute some part of them to mistake: and that the
fatal consequences of such mistakes may spread no farther, it behooves me, my
lord, to speak with the most unequivocal frankness as to my present sentiments,
and my future designs. Let me entreat your pardon while I do so."

The duty I would wish to offer to your lordship is unlimited obedience. But
the circumstances in which I am placed, render such a duty impossible. That
image which the hand of virtue herself impressed upon my heart, that affection
that was once honored by your lordship's sanction, must and will remain the
cherished inmate of my breast, until the warm current of life ceases to flow,
and the power of memory is suspended.

I will be now no husband, my lord. But, with this exception, I will endeavor
to be every thing that your lordship can desire. If I am taught to hope, that
upon this condition I may be allowed to resume my place in your family, and to
participate in the blessings of domestic society, I will rather endeavor to
find a balm for my griefs in the scrupulous discharge of my duty to my
relations and country, than seek an asylum in some foreign land, where, buried
from all observation, I once intended, I and my sorrows should be mentioned no
more. But, if -- O pardon me, my lord, that I am obliged to be thus peremptory
-- if still the persecution, which, in its progress, has involved me in so much
distress, is to be carried on, then, my lord, shall I be compelled to bid adieu
to my native soil for ever.

My resolutions are not to be shaken: nor will I, by allowing of the apparent
possibility of my wavering, be accessory to any prolongation of hope in the
breast of your lordship, or of any other interested in my decision, which must
end in disappointment.

I entreat your lordship, that these my unalterable resolves may be made known
in the most explicit manner to any whom you may imagine they may concern. I
would willingly in my own person be saved a harshness toward those who may
conceive they have a title to even something more than gratitude from me. But
if your lordship is averse from saving me this unpleasantness, I shall be
constrained rather to incur the charge of insensibility, than that of deceit.

I shall continue at this place until I am favored with your lordship's
answer: and whatever it may be, I shall endeavor to bend my mind to it, with
all the submission that becomes,

My lord, Your lordship's, Most dutiful and ever devoted, HENRY VILLARS.


Lord Villars had been apprised of Henry's interview with Ellen, and the
desperation that he had manifested; and his mind had been filled with the most
lively apprehensions in consequence. There was no extremity that he had not
feared Henry might be driven to: and therefore the contents of this letter
relieved him from a state of most painful anxiety.

At the instant it was written he could expect nothing less than a formal
renunciation of the whole sex for Ellen's sake: but lord Villars little feared
that a man of Henry's years, and Henry's disposition, would turn hermit. His
desire of being upon amicable terms with his father, and his purpose of
continuing in England, persuaded lord Villars that time might yet produce all
the effects he wished.

He readily promised, that neither lady Almeria nor any other woman should be
offered to his acceptance, and manifested the most parental concern for his
present sufferings. "Sufferings," he said, "which made his own heart bleed, and
which nothing but the most cruel necessity could ever have induced him to have
inflicted on a son, whom he loved as he did his own soul."

Promises and professions cost lord Villars nothing. They were equally for the
present moment, without reference for the past, or thought of the future. He
knew, indeed, how, by the coloring he could give to any after events, to "keep
his promise to the ear, and break it to the sense." He desired Henry to come
directly to the park, where, whatever lord Villars did, lady Villars longed to
see him. Henry had accordingly made them a visit of a few days; but at the
expiration of that time had gone upon a tour into the Highlands, hoping by the
means of a variety of objects, and constant change of place, a little to blunt
the edge of those remembrances, which, while they preserved their present
acuteness, were, at moments, more that his reason and his fortitude could
support.

CHAP. XXI.
I knew a wench married in an afternoon, as she went to the garden for parsley,
to stuff a rabbit; and so may you. SHAKESPEARE.
LORD VILLARS and his family had been amongst some of Ellen's first visitors.
From the offensive flattery and studied fondness of lord Villars, she could not
but turn with undisguised aversion: but in the friendship and partiality of
lady Villars she experienced a very sincere pleasure.

Lady Villars had no very clear idea of the whole merit of Ellen's conduct: but
she thought herself under important obligations to her for the readiness with
which she had quitted her rights to a connection with her son; a connection,
which lady Villars honestly believed, would have been attended with the most
fatal consequences to her whole family.

Lady Villars, therefore, rejoiced in Ellen's present situation, as in what she
thought a due reward for the generous self denial she had practiced in her
conduct toward Henry. But when she saw with what propriety Ellen supported the
rank of life in which she was placed, how she adorned and animated society, and
how she conciliated the affections of all who approached her, she could hardly
repress a regret that any consideration, however powerful, should have stood in
her way, to the securing to herself such a daughter, and her son such a wife.

With lord and lady Villars come lady Almeria. From lady Villars, whose
integrity forbade her concurring in any deception, she had learnt the contents
of Henry's letter. She therefore knew that her brows were bound with willow:
but her heart seemed not the less light for this. She rattled, laughed, danced,
rode, and walked with the gayest and happiest of her companions; made a jest of
Henry's cruelty; and rallied Ellen on her charms, which lost no part of their
ascendency even over a hapless lover. Ellen's gravity upon such occasions would
have taught any one but the insensible lady Almeria reserve upon this subject.
But lady Almeria had a love of mischief in her disposition, which no
consideration for another was sufficient to check her in the gratification of:
and though she had no pleasure in tormenting Ellen, she thought it good sport
to make sir William jealous.

To a wild girl of little more than seventeen, sir William, at past forty,
seemed a Methusalem, and she thought it comical to make the old gentleman (as
she called him) knit his brow and pout, by talking of the love and the merit of
his young rival.

Lady Villars would have repressed this impertinence. But lady Almeria was
incorrigible: for, joined to no common degree of inconsideration, she was
sensible of her importance to the family, and was not unconscious, that in
spite of the present coldness of Henry, lord Villars had not resigned his hopes
of making her one day his daughter-in-law.

She therefore often treated both lord and lady Villars with a kind of civil
insolence; and very openly asserted her right of having her own way in every
thing. She did not want talents, nor discernment: and she despised lady Villars
as much for the narrowness of her understanding, as she did lord Villars for
the sordidness of his views.

Lord Villars tolerated all this in consideration of the number of her estates.
But lady Villars soon conceived a decided dislike to her, and a deep-rooted
fear of her ever becoming the wife of her son. This dislike and this fear were
rendered more lively by the comparison she daily made between her character and
that of Ellen.

But lord Villars' hopes and lady Villars' fears were alike unfounded; and were
one proof more, added to the thousands that occur every day, that, if the
sufferings of life were to be confined to actual misfortunes, the mountain of
human woes, which now seems so immense, and extended, would shrink into a
molehill, of a size so small as almost to escape observation. It is, however,
inseparable from our nature, that our sufferings shall be more from what we
fear, than from what we feel: and in reckoning the sorrows attached to our
existence here, we are to estimate not what is, but what it is apprehended may
be.

Among the joyous circle that Ellen on her marriage had drawn round her at
Oakley, her brother was not forgotten.

He had continued under the private tuition where mr. Mordaunt had placed him
on his return from Jamaica, until of a sufficient age to be sent to college:
and at eighteen he had been removed to Oxford.

Mr. Mordaunt dreading the influence of his wife on the character of his son,
had suffered him to spend as little time as possible at Groby Manor, while he
continued a school boy; and after his removal to Oxford, had continued so to
fill up his vacations with some pleasurable scheme or other, as almost totally
to banish him from thence, without any appearance of design or unkindness. But
he was now grown to manhood: and precautions of this kind were no longer
possible or necessary; nor could mr. Mordaunt any longer refuse himself the
satisfaction of associating with his son, especially as he flattered himself,
that his own opinions might probably now have more influence over him than
those of his mother.

William Mordaunt had now therefore joined the family party at Oakley. He was
handsome, gay, and good-humoured: but he was wild, inconsiderate, and
ungovernable.

Lady Almeria and he were drawn toward each other, by a sympathy of character
and disposition. From the first hour of their acquaintance, they became
inseparable: and lord Villars saw that if he did not find some immediate remedy
for this impending evil, lady Almeria's fortune would be lost to his family for
ever.

He had recourse to his usual means, delay.

He laid before lady Almeria the inequality and degradation of the connection
that she seemed disposed to form; and declared, that while she was under his
direction, neither his honor nor his conscience would permit him to suffer it.

Lady Almeria listened in silence, and with an insolent non-chalance, to his
lecture: and when he had ended it, twisting her sash ribband round her arm, as
she went out of the room, replied between her teeth, "We must wait until I am
one-and-twenty then."

If lady Almeria would but wait, it was all lord Villars could dare to hope
from her: and from his own machinations during this period of expectation, he
was to look for what further was wanting, to his success. From his usual
coadjutrice, mrs. Mordaunt, he could not in this case expect any assistance;
for however desirous she might be to promote the interests of her nephew, in
general, when they came in competition with those of her son, they could not be
expected to have any but a second place. She had seen the growing fondness
between him and lady Almeria; and had secretly resolved to do all in her power
to forward it. It had been observed by mr. Mordaunt with very different wishes
and views: but he wisely thought a seeming inattention to what was going on,
the most likely method of preventing a fancy from growing into a prejudice: and
he imagined, if his son were nor led by opposition into making engagements with
himself, not to give up lady Almeria, that the present partiality would
probably end in a boy and girl's short-lived flirtation, without any farther
consequence.

But the precipitancy of lady Almeria's passions rendered the plans of
hindrance on the part of lord Villars and mr. Mordaunt, and those of assistance
on the part of mrs. Mordaunt, equally vain and useless.

Lady Almeria had listened to lord Villars with the most apparent indifference:
but this did not arise from her being careless as to his opposition to her
designs, but from her resolution, that all opposition from whatever quarter
should prove vain.

She went directly from lord Villars to William Mordaunt. She found him
practicing archery with some of his companions.

"Come along with me," said she, "I have something to say to you. Guardy," (for
so she was accustomed in contempt to call lord Villars) "Guardy," said she,
when they were alone, "has been fulminating his interdict against my becoming
your wife. Neither his honor nor his conscience, forsooth, can allow of so
unequal a connection. That is, his honor designs to give my person to his son,
who cares not a pin for me; and his conscience appropriates my fortune as the
provision for his younger children. But if I and my money are to go to ruin,
they shall go my own way. He will not find me so soon moralized and
sentimentalized out of my rights as he found your sister Ellen. What say you?
Are you inclined to trust my constancy through all the battleings and all the
temptations with which it will be assaulted in the next four years? Or will you
make short work of it, and meet me with a chaise and four at the corner of the
park wall, at one in the morning, and away to Scotland, and let guardy try,
with all his bay and brown coach horses, to overtake us?"

"To night! this moment! in the face of the sun, in spite of all the guardians
and all the coach horses in the world."

"That would be spirited; but no. We should have scolding, and hectoring, and
locking up, and the lord knows what. I think I could be a match for them there
too; but I hate unnecessary trouble, and have no desire to play the part of a
distressed damsel. Let us do the matter quietly, at one, by the silent light of
the moon. O lord, it does not shine: but no matter, the stars will do as well.
I will be punctual to the minute. If you are out of cash I can supply you. I
received my quarterage two days ago, and having paid no bills, it is luckily
entire."

"Well, be it so; at one exactly."

"To a second. There Is my hand upon it. And now let us go to our aunts, and our
uncles, and our cousins, and our guardians, and behave prettily, as a good
little master and miss ought to do: and we may laugh at them the more when we
are by ourselves."

And thus, in less than ten minutes did these two thoughtless creatures
determine upon a step upon which all the happiness or misery of their future
lives depended.

William found no difficulty in engaging a chaise and four to be at the
appointed spot, at the hour fixed upon; nor lady Almeria any in dismissing her
maid before she was undressed; nor, when she was gone, in wrapping herself up
in her furs, and, with a small bundle of linen in her hand, descending the
stairs, opening the door into the garden, or in proceeding from thence to the
park, or, finally, in keeping her appointment with William.

At the corner of the park wall she found him; he received her with all the
gaiety of youth, and all the raptures of a lover; they put themselves into the
chaise together, and before lady Almeria was missed in the morning, had
proceeded too far on their way to Scotland, to give any hopes of success from a
pursuit.

Whatever confusion the discovery of their flight might occasion in the family
at Oakley, or whatever inward vexation it caused lord Villars, who thus saw a
final end to all his ambitious projects, yet the nearness of the connection in
all the individuals who composed that family, prevented any violent display of
disappointment or chagrin. Lord Villars thought proper to gloss over the matter
with an assurance, that although the respect he had for the trust reposed in
him by lady Almeria's father, would have prevented his consenting to such a
match, yet the regard that he entertained for the interests of his nephew, made
him, since it had been concluded without his concurrence, sincerely rejoice in
it.

With an air of acting under these feelings, he made, though something with an
ill grace, his congratulations to mr. Mordaunt: and mr. Mordaunt, with
infinitely more sincerity, assured him, that had the connection depended upon
him, it had never taken place: and indeed the deep sigh, that the reflection
upon the misery that an ill-judged marriage can occasion drew from him,
evinced, that neither the splendor of lady Almeria's birth, or the greatness
of her fortune, compensated, in his opinion, for the lightness of her mind and
the unfeelingness of her heart.

The satisfaction, however, of mrs. Mordaunt, who judged very differently, knew
no bounds: and lady Villars could not help joining (though from very different
motives) in her pleasure.

The fate of lord Villars upon this occasion, was peculiarly hard. While half
the world called his honesty in question, for having sacrificed the interests
of his ward to those of his nephew; the other half arraigned his prudence, in
suffering such a prize to go out of his own family; these censures were equally
unfounded. He had spared no pains to preserve lady Almeria from his nephew: he
had left no art unessayed to secure her for his son.

This event affected Ellen very sensibly. She could not but be pleased that
Henry was relieved from all persecution on lady Almeria's account, and that he
was safe from the possibility of yielding to it. But the very unfavourable
opinion she had of lady Almeria's character, and which a farther knowledge of
her had confirmed, filled her mind with the most lively apprehensions for the
happiness of her brother.

The young couple, however, were welcomed on their return from Scotland,
without much reproach on any side. The necessary arrangements of their
establishment were made: and harmony seemed restored to all the parties
concerned.

Another event, which happened in the family of Ellen, at this time, occasioned
much more serious consternation and distress.

Mrs. Mordaunt had long had the mortification of being witness to the misery
and poverty of her eldest daughter. No one reproached her as the cause ^ but,
notwithstanding her natural indifference to every sorrow that did not attack
her personally, she could not avoid making herself the most severe reproaches.
She now saw the fatal consummation of her ill-laid plans of ambition and
vanity. The miserable daughter was returned upon their hands. The unprincipled
man, whom she had chosen for her husband, having collected the remnants of his
ruined fortune, had left his wife and two children to beggary, and had quitted
England, as he said, for ever.

Mr. Mordaunt was little able to bear this additional burden. There was however
no alternative. His daughter and her children were starving. Groby Manor was
the only asylum open to them: to Groby Manor, therefore, after a visit of three
months to Ellen, mr. Mordaunt conducted his wife and the rest of his family.

CHAP. XXII.
'We know each other's faces for our hearts.'
SHAKESPEARE.
ELLEN and sir William were now left alone: and Ellen had leisure to look
around her and consider the duties and engagements which her new situation
called her to the performance of.

In the scheme of happiness, which, in consenting to a marriage with sir
William Ackland, she had planned for herself, a very prominent feature had been
the regular and systematic assistance she should be able to administer to the
wants, both of mind and estate, of her poor neighbors. In the fullness of her
benevolent self-gratulation, she had said, "when the ear hears me, it shall
bless me: when the eye sees me, it shall give witness to me. The blessing of
him who is ready to perish, shall come upon me: and I will cause the widow's
heart to sing for joy."

In her imagination, she educated the young, she encouraged the middle-aged,
and she supported the old. She saw the neat cottage arise at her command; the
orderly arranged bee-hive rest against the wall, a source at once of pleasure
and of profit; the little flower plat put forth its beauties; the orchard yield
its fruits, and the virtues of integrity and industry ^ead content, health and
affluence in their train.

Such were the visions that filled the mind of Ellen, who, wholly insensible to
every happiness she could not communicate, thought she placed her own felicity
on the surest basis, when she extended it to others.

Such were the visions which had filled the mind of Ellen before her marriage:
and amidst the hurried and busy scenes which had held her almost wholly engaged
in what appeared more personally to concern herself for the first three months
after it took place, she had by no means lost sight of them.

In all her excursions in the environs of Oakley, she had looked around her
with reference to the favorite object that filled her mind. She had
endeavored to make some enquiry into the situation of the cottagers, and to
form an acquaintance with the poorest of her neighbors. But she found
difficulties that had never occurred to her imagination.

The long residence of sir William abroad, and the character of his immediate
ancestors, who had spent little of their time at their principal country
residence, and who had bestowed less of their thoughts upon the wants and
claims of the poor who surrounded it, had long occasioned Oakley to be
forgotten by the diseased and the necessitous; and had made its owners to be
considered as hard and selfish people of fashion, who regarded their estate no
farther than as it could furnish the supply to their pleasures or their vices.
There were no old servants to whom Ellen could apply for information, how to
direct her benevolence. Her household consisted of a set of domestics whom sir
William had collected upon his marriage, all strangers to that neighborhood,
and indifferent to its interests. The steward was a man whom sir William had
brought out of Wales, professedly that he should have no predilection for any
of those with whom he would have to deal. Sir William knew as little of the
residents on his estate, as any of his dependants, farther than if they paid
their rents well or ill: and whenever Ellen endeavored to lead him to think
upon the subject, or to open her own plans, he either repressed her by a look
of disapprobation, or laughed her out of countenance, on the taste she had of
becoming a lady Bountiful.

Ellen willingly imputed this backwardness to what she still believed sir
William must think right, and would therefore in time pursue, to the contrary
habits in which he had been so long engaged, to the different solicitudes that
at present occupied him, and to the novelty of a country life, and country
cares. To her he was lavish: and therefore she could distribute her guineas
around her to the relief of immediate and importunate distress: and with this
she endeavored to rest satisfied, until time would enable her to mature her
plans of more permanent assistance; assistance that would equally relieve the
distresses of indigence, correct the errors of ignorance, and reclaim the
wanderings of vice.

As sir William and Ellen rode or walked out together, she would ask questions
of the women or children that fell in her way, or would stop and enter any
cottage, which either from its neatness or desolation particularly drew her
attention. But sir William betrayed the greatest impatience on her thus
withdrawing her attentions one moment from him. He seemed enraptured to have
her left to himself, and as if he could not endure that even her duties should
share her with him.

The perfect indifference, or marked disapprobation with which he heard her
tales of distress, and her projects for relieving the sufferers, awakened Ellen
to a most painful conviction, that she must consider herself as sufficiently
happy, if she were allowed in silence and unobserved, as it were, to pursue
them: but that she must not hope from sir William either concurrence or
applause.

Ellen here first tasted of those waters of disappointment, which were
afterward to flow with so full a stream.

The affection she entertained for sir William was composed of confidence and
benevolence; of a sense of the virtues she believed he possessed, and of the
gratification that his manners and conversation afforded to her taste. On this
affection she had boldly promised herself happiness in her connection with him,
notwithstanding the decided preference she had formerly entertained for Henry.
She looked around her; and saw a very sufficient degree of happiness attached
to the state of marriage, where the contracting parties were well known not to
have united themselves with the objects of their first affections: and she
religiously believed, that felicity depended much more upon the qualities of
the husband, than upon the accidental circumstance of his having been the first
person whose merit had made any impression upon the heart of the wife. "Sir
William is worthy, is pleasing," said Ellen; "and I shall be happy."

Nothing could have been more just than her conclusion, had her premises been
firm. But if the virtues were to disappear on which her confidence and her
benevolence rested, how inadequate to her happiness would be that affection,
which had nothing left for its support but the external graces of manner and
conversation.

Ellen soon found the whole scheme of her happiness must be incomplete. But she
still flattered herself (for she was young, and had all that sanguineness of
disposition that accompanies the warmest philanthropy) she still flattered
herself, that some parts were yet in her power.

She had promised herself, indeed, that sir William would go hand in hand with
her in her virtues, as well as her pleasures. But if she could not accomplish
the first, she yet did not despair of the second; and was not without hope,
that by this circuitous road, she might at length lead him to the point she
wished. She therefore eagerly concurred with him in a design he had formed, of
building her a dairy house. But the ostentation he displayed in his manner of
doing it, and the parade he made of studying her taste, while he showed the
most unequivocal dissatisfaction if that taste differed in the smallest degree
from his own, effectually sickened poor Ellen of the dairy-house long before it
was finished; and she never drank one bowl of cream within its walls,
uncontaminated by the effects of sir William's selfishness, violence, or
jealousy.

Every day brought the disappointed Ellen, fresh proofs of all those failings
in the mind of him whom she had engaged to love and respect.

His expenses flowed but in the single channel of self-gratification. They
reached her indeed; because to ornament and indulge her made at present a
principal part of his gratification: but to have pleasures, however innocent or
praiseworthy, which she did not refer to him, she soon discovered would be
considered as a crime.

From the softest manners and most courtly address, she frequently saw him, on
the slightest provocation from a servant, become furious and abusive: and she
could not conceal from herself, that in his dealings with his dependants, he
was oppressive and tyrannical.

Ellen was the admiration and the love of the neighborhood. Her youth and
gaiety of disposition led her to participate in all the pleasures which were
offered her, and to promote them by every means in her power. Sir William soon
taught her, for no one could be more quick in taking a hint, that such gaiety
and such good neighborhood were displeasing to him: and Ellen quickly withdrew
from her usual parties.

To have made such a sacrifice to any reasonable feeling in the breast of sir
William, would have cost Ellen nothing. It was the consciousness that she made
it to the hydra-headed monster, jealousy, that gave it any sting.

Of whom, it will be asked, was sir William jealous? Of every body, of every
thing that contributed to the pleasures of Ellen, independent of his agency.

To all the unfavourable suspicions relative to sir William's heart, and
temper, which had, in a vague and doubtful form, arisen in her mind before her
marriage, the occurrences of every day now gave shape and stability: and Ellen
had not been married six months, before she found herself involved in the
difficult task of keeping alive, by every artifice in her power, her affection
for a man, who might, had he pleased, in half that time have secured her heart
immovably his own for ever. But the efforts of sir William seemed directed, if
indeed they had any direction, rather to destroy than to excite or nourish love.

On the successful cultivation of her affection for her husband, Ellen knew
that all her happiness, and she feared much of the performance of her duty,
depended. She had, it is true, been only acquainted with disappointment: and
she had proved herself equal to the severest self-denial. But her sorrows had
then found the softest soother, and her virtuous resignation the warmest
panegyric, in the kindness and partiality of her father. In the bitterest
moments of her distress, in the most laborious of her struggles, his sympathy
and his approbation had stilled the voice of complaint, and smoothed the rugged
road of virtue. In the trials which she now foresaw awaited her, she could hope
for no such support, for no such encouragement. Her first duty was concealment.
The most wilful blindness with respect to herself, and the most inviolable
silence with respect to others, was the first, the indispensable rule by which
she was henceforth to form her conduct.

But, feeling, how could she persuade herself she did not feel? And, suffering,
how could she be silent? Disappointed, how could she put on the air of
satisfaction? and losing all on which she could ground esteem, how could she
preserve love? These were points of constant and painful doubt and
deliberation. But more immediate evil pressed upon her.

"Where she could not love, she could derive no satisfaction from being
beloved. She felt that it was not the virtues of her heart, nor even the powers
of her understanding, that made her so much the object of passion to sir
William. She was thoroughly awakened to the conviction, that the solicitude
which, in the early days of their acquaintance, he had discovered as to her
real character, and upon which she had afterward reflected with so much
satisfaction, as a proof that his affection for her was founded upon those
qualities, of which he would be the more assured, the more he knew her, was in
fact nothing more than a selfish anxiety, lest, in the apparently gentle and
complacent virgin, he should hereafter discover the arrogant and self-willed
wife. In a regulated temper, he saw a security for his domestic peace. In
soundness of principles he beheld the guarantee of his honor. And in his
systematic search for a wife, by whom to give an heir to his estate, he had, in
respect to character, looked no farther.

In fixing upon Ellen, he had been determined, by finding reason to believe,
that in sweetness of temper, and in goodness of heart, she yielded the palm to
no one. He had warily decided to fix upon a wife before he was in love: and
Ellen's person, which had at first appeared to him, rather simply pleasing than
beautiful, seemed calculated to gratify his eye, without intoxicating his
senses. But although Ellen did not seize the soul with the first glance, here is
was even a more dangerous fascination. The charms of her conversation, the
graces of her manner, the winning sincerity and modest frankness of her
character, all conspired to render her irresistible, and to give her that power
over the mind which beauty alone never bestowed. Sir William had become madly
in love: and no sentiment in the breast of Ellen, not wholly correspondent to
that which he felt for her, could satisfy his desires, or lull his jealousies
to sleep.

In the well governed mind of Ellen this was a passion that could find no
admittance. No merit whatever could have excited it. How impossible, then, was
it, that she should feel such love for a man, who every day lost ground in her
esteem, not only by his conduct toward others, but even toward herself!

Sir William, in having become a lover, had retained his dread of being made a
dupe to the passion of love. Hence, even his fondness was captious, and his
indulgence tyrannical; and Ellen, who in marriage had sought a friend, found by
turns only a lover or a master.

CHAP. XXIII.
'How small, of all that human hearts endure,
'That part which kings or laws can cause or cure.'
GOLDSMITH.
IT was in making these mortifying discoveries that Ellen spent the first six
months after her marriage.

Disappointed in her schemes of benevolence, mistaken in the character of her
husband, dissatisfied with herself, she was sometimes tempted to arraign her
own conduct in having married sir William. But this was an idea that her good
sense easily corrected.

Keeping fast to principles, she knew herself unaccountable for events. If she
had been mistaken, it was from no want of due consideration, from no
precipitancy of action, produced by improper motives. She reviewed her conduct;
and found, that being placed again in the same circumstances, and assisted by
the same lights, she should again act the same part. This conviction somewhat
calmed her mind. What appeared so reasonable, she was persuaded must have a
sufficient portion of good in it, to satisfy a rational creature. She
endeavored to find out this good.

She considered that here is was no uncommon case; that marriage-discontent was a
weed that found nourishment in every soil; that it sprang up alike in the
fields of love, and in the wilds of ambition and avarice; that no foresight
could stifle, no prudence eradicate it. If her own marriage furnished an
example that the coolest investigation was not sufficient to guard from the
most fatal mistakes in a matrimonial choice, her father's equally condemned the
yielding to the blind impulse of passion.

"There are evils," said she, "which no human foresight can teach us to avert,
which no purity of intention, can enable us to escape. In the conduct under
such evils lies our trial, and the foundation of our future reward or
punishment.

This thought brought with it a train of the most anxious solicitudes. Ellen
had all the mistrust of herself, which true humility and an earnest desire to
do right, ever induces. To guard herself from that acute sense of her sorrow
which might lead to faulty regrets, or culpable impatience, she carefully
avoided every exaggeration of her disappointment which fancy could have
suggested. She would not allow herself to think here is a peculiar misfortune, or
attended with any particularly aggravating circumstances. She repulsed from her
mind all anticipations, and all retrospects. She made every hour bear its own
burden, and, as much as in her power, was ready to accept the present good,
without perversely dwelling upon the past, or anxiously conjecturing the future.

If sir William's ill humor, or his fondness, (for effects were often the
same, when causes were different) put her out of her way of virtue or of,
pleasure, she sought some other path which might lead, though not so directly,
to her point. His ill humor she endeavored to disarm by complaisance, and by
gaiety, and to meet his fondness with the genuine satisfaction of reciprocal
love. But this was the most difficult part of her task. Could she have esteemed
him, his harshness and his unreasonableness with respect to herself, she could
have more easily borne, and would hope to have subdued. But in losing her
esteem for him, she lost this hope: and, in losing this hope, she lost the
power of returning his passion with any but dissembled kindness.

Thus Ellen, with the most sincere and upright of human hearts, saw herself
obliged to cultivate hypocrisy as a virtue. But that which is a crime in
others, was in her only a misfortune.

From a never-ceasing succession of disappointments, and from the accumulated
weight of difficult duties, Ellen was somewhat relieved by her removal to town.
The novelty of the scene, the gaiety of the amusements, the objects of splendour
and curiosity with which she was surrounded, filled and amused her mind. Sir
William, too, seemed to have left much of his ill humor and narrowness of
heart in the country. The air of London appeared to be more congenial to his
character, and to call forth all the amiable parts of it. His liberality and
gaiety revived; his money flowed freely round him; his house was open to the
best society; his entertainments were elegant; and his establishment splendid.

But the principle of all this was little suited to that on which Ellen acted,
and on which she wished him to have acted. "This, this," would he say to her,
"is life! I grudge every guinea I expend in the country. I hate that my money
should be swallowed in thick ale down the throats of stupid country oafs, or be
wasted in courting a popularity, which is both the ruin and disgrace of whoever
enjoys it."

"But in the improvement of the beauties of nature," said Ellen, "or in the
relief of the distresses of sickness, or age, money will not be misapplied even
in the country."

"What beauties of nature are comparable to those displayed in Hyde Park, or
Kensington Gardens? And what distresses are those that the poor laws do not
amply provide for? There is no other country in Europe, where there is such a
provision made for the poor, by the laws, as in England: no country that can
vie with it in public institutions for the relief of all kinds of misery. I
approve all this: but having contributed my part to these institutions, I have
done enough; I have done what I can afford: and private charities, I am
convinced, are only the nourishers of idleness and the dupes of imposition."

Ellen did not press upon the subject: but she could not but observe to
herself, that the man who did not think two hundred pounds too much to expend
in one evening's amusement in London, could not, with much appearance of truth,
say, he had done all he could afford toward relieving the distresses of his
fellow creatures.

It was one of sir William's favorite maxims, that money spent in luxury was
of more use, than if given in charity: and he would point out to Ellen, with a
triumphant air, the splendour and richness of the shops, and ask her, if she did
not think that those who contributed to the support of them, were of infinitely
more use to society, than all the good housewives and lady Bountifuls that ever
were born.

Ellen was too wise to argue with selfishness and prejudice. "Could the whole
world be a London, my dear sir William," she would say, "your argument might be
conclusive. But after doing all we can to the support of these manufacturers of
the luxuries of life, there will still remain a large country world, who will
perish for the want of the necessaries of it, if those of superior fortunes do
not sometimes turn their thoughts from the shop to the cottage."

These kind of conversations made their rambles through London but little
pleasing to Ellen: but she seemed to follow sir William's lead; took more than
usual care of the elegance of her appearance; cultivated her inclination for
amusement; and sought, by every means in her power, to do honor to sir
William's taste, and to support her part in the society he had introduced her
to.

In the perpetual crowd in which she lived, there seemed to be little
probability she should make any selections that could alarm his jealousy, or
wound his self-love. She had not time to know any one well enough to become
attached to him. Her time and her thoughts were taken up by a perpetual
succession of engagements: but she had too good health and spirits to be easily
tired: and a person of Ellen's quickness of parts and cultivated understanding,
found, even in the promiscuous crowd of triflers and simpletons, many persons
from whom she reaped both advantage and amusement.

If Ellen's heart was heavy in scenes, where from her youth, her attractions,
and the advantages with which she appeared, she ought to have felt only
self-gratulation and pleasure; it was not from any retrospect in which she
indulged herself, but from the immediate weight which the conviction of the
real character of the man on whom she was to depend for happiness, and with
whom she was to pass her life, had fixed there. To love those with whom she was
intimately connected, was indispensible to the felicity of Ellen. This the
character of sir William made impossible: and hence Ellen, with every other
blessing which human beings implore, was wretched.

But Ellen was not wretched alone. Neither the hopeless state to which he was
reduced, nor the fortitude he had exerted, had been able to restore to Henry
his peace of mind. The marriage of lady Almeria had been a momentary relief to
him: but like the remission of a fever, the disorder seemed to have gained
strength by its temporary suspension. Had Ellen been unmarried, and the
obstacle of lady Almeria removed, (the thought pierced him with ten thousand
stings) another lady Almeria would have been found, replied his reason: Lady
Almeria was not so resolutely chosen as Ellen rejected.

"Be it as it may," said he to himself, "the die is cast; my fate is
determined. I will follow the track I have chalked out for myself."

In pursuance of this resolution he had visited his family. He had been kindly
received. He had endeavored to rejoice in the kindness, and to busy himself in
the interests of those around him. But the character of Henry was gone. His
gaiety, his impetuosity, his social humor, his openness of heart were no more.
An invincible gravity had taken their place, and a cold reserve to all, with a
chilling indifference to every thing around him, marked all his actions. He
rather appeared, however, to have lost the relish for pleasure, than to shun
it. He affected nothing: but from the genuine overflowing sorrows of his heart,
he was incapable of taking interest in any thing. There were times, when he
felt ashamed of being thus overcome with his feelings: and then he made some
more vigorous efforts to recover the natural tone of his mind. He imagined he
should be more likely to do so, were he again to see, and accustom himself to
the presence of Ellen.

"Henceforward," said he to himself, "she is to be nothing to me but the highly
cherished remembrance of an invaluable blessing lost for ever. Let me
familiarize myself to that dear picture. It may be a means of rendering the
sense of my loss less bitter."

Under the influence of these thoughts he came to town. It was easy for him to
see Ellen every day without being observed by her: and when he had subdued the
at first ungovernable tumults which the sight of her for the several first
times had occasioned, he resolved to present himself before her. He remembered
the last words he had ever heard her utter, "I am going no where, but where if
you please you may accompany me." I may see her still, thought he. As a friend
I may see her. And the friendship of Ellen is worth the love of all her sex
beside.

One evening as Ellen was coming out of her box at the opera, accompanied by
lady Almeria Henry appeared at the door.

"See, sir Doleful Dismal!" said lady Almeria. "Do you know you have quite
spoilt that man?"

Ellen involuntarily stopped. She could not for an instant move on. But Henry,
who had been learning his lesson, approached her. He had rather the air of a
person who was accustomed to see her every evening, than of a lover, who now,
for the first time after their separation, beheld the beloved object which fate
had torn from his arms, without being able to dislodge her from his heart.

He enquired after her health. He asked how she liked the opera. He desired to
know if he could be of any use. And all this before Ellen, astonished and
pained by the profound gravity and coldness of his manner, had sufficient
presence of mind to utter a word.

"How you two look!" said lady Almeria laughing. "Dear, she is very well. She
has been enchanted with the opera: and if you will see for her carriage, you will
do us a favor."

Henry disappeared like an arrow out of a bow. In spite of all his preparation,
the scene was too much for him; nor could he have borne it a moment longer.

"How very ill mr. Villars looks!" said Ellen, endeavoring to recover herself.

"And how very ill lady Ackland looks!" returned the unmerciful lady Almeria.
"Here, child, take my salts. If those impertinents were to come by just now,
who were disputing the other night whether you wore rouge, the wager would be
decided in a minute."

"How you rattle! I want no salts."

"No to be sure. Well don't be afraid! I will not tell the old gentleman at home."

"I must beg, lady Almeria," said Ellen, earnestly, "that you will not speak
so. You know I will not suffer it."

"Well, then, I will tell him. Will that please you? There Is no knowing how to
deal with you sentimental people."

Just then some gentlemen of their acquaintance inquired whether they would
call their servants. Ellen thankfully accepted the offer: but lady Almeria
said, 'How can you be so rude? don't you know poor sir Doleful is gone on the
same errand? he will be in despair, if you run away with out seeing him!'

Henry at that moment returned; and saying the coach was then at the door, took
Ellen's hand to lead her to it. It was with some difficulty he got her through
the crowd: and the embarrassments they were in from that circumstance, relieved
them both from the greater embarrassments of their own minds.

As he put her into the coach, "May I visit you?" said he, "and will you
introduce me to sir William?"

"Undoubtedly, with the greatest pleasure," said she. It was all she could say;
for lady Almeria followed her: and the coach drove off.

CHAP. XXIV.
"Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence."
SHAKESPEARE.
LADY ALMERIA accompanied Ellen home, nor did she spare her raillery. They were
engaged to meet a party at supper; but as it was somewhat early, nobody
happened to be arrived: and they therefore found sir William, who was just
returned from his dinner society, alone.

Ellen would have chosen not to have mentioned Henry's name before lady
Almeria: but as she was confident it would come out in the course of the
evening, that she had met with him, she thought it most prudent to speak, with
all the indifference she could assume, of the circumstance herself.

"I have seen mr. Villars," said she to sir William: "and he has desired me to
introduce him to you."

"Oh! I wish you had seen them both," cried lady Almeria, "one so grave, the
other so pale. Bow goes his worship; courtsey goes her ladyship. You would have
sworn they had not seen each other for three hundred years, and were not
overjoyed at the meeting now. Well, I protest I don't wonder Ellen chose you,
if she could have any notion what kind of man Henry would become; for I protest
I think you ten times the more agreeable person, I vow."

"Did you say you would introduce mr. Villars to me?" asked sir William very
gravely, without regarding lady Almeria.

"I did," said Ellen.

"Why, can you have any objection!" said lady Almeria. "Ellen you know jilted
him for you."

"What nonsense you talk, lady Almeria!" said Ellen.

"She certainly does not talk truth," said sir William, with the same gravity
as before. And here, much to the relief of Ellen, they were joined by more
company: and the evening passed as usual.

When they retired to their own apartments, Ellen remarked a gloom upon sir
William's countenance, which she had never before observed since their arrival
in London. She endeavored to dissipate it by more than usual cheerfulness on
her part: but he seemed to regard her with an eye of suspicion, and preserved a
gloomy silence. Ellen hesitated whether she should seem to remark this change
in his humor, and endeavor to regain his confidence, and dissipate his
chagrin, by explicit declarations of unalterable attachment.

But the case between them was much changed, from what it had been at the
period when she had last seen Henry, and when she had held this conduct with
advantage. Sir William at that mo^nt possessed her esteem and warmest
friendship. Now he had nearly lost both one and the other. With truth could she
have promised inviolable constancy: but to speak of an unshaken attachment
which no longer subsisted, seemed adding hypocrisy to unkindness. The
professions she had formerly made him, had flowed freely from her heart: now
they would be uttered with embarrassment and coldness. The fears which then
seemed to oppress him, she had regarded with compassion. The suspicions that he
now evidently entertained, she considered as injurious. They appeared but new
marks of that narrow and selfish mind, the effects of which she had every day
reason to deplore.

The debate whether she should conquer such feelings, or yield to them, held
her so long, that before she was aware, her silence was as marked as sir
William's: and they both retired to rest, with equal disinclination to sleep.

Some few hours of uneasy thought restored to Ellen her usual calm of mind.

However oppressed her heart might feel, by the afflictive change that appeared
to be wrought in the character of Henry -- and however alarmed, and somewhat
offended she might be by the suspicions to which she was aware sir William had
yielded -- yet her confidence, that her conduct would never justify the one,
and her hope that time might bring some alleviation to the other, enabled her
wholly to suppress her resentment, and so far to overcome her sorrow, as to
banish from her countenance and manner every appearance of it. In the course of
her reflections she had also made some which had softened her heart toward sir
William.

Oh! thought she, that he would but let me love him! The heart that can form
such a wish, is not far from its gratification: and it was with unaffected
tenderness, that Ellen proposed to sir William to pass the morning in an
excursion some miles out of town, which he had talked of a few days before. But
sir William coldly repulsed her by an air of scornful indifference, and by
saying he had engagements elsewhere.

Elsewhere he went: for he quitted Ellen the moment breakfast was over: and she
saw him no more in the course of the morning.

Ellen had previously dedicated this morning to some home occupations: but the
tumult of mind sir William's unkind behavior occasioned, with the train of
dangerous reflections it drew after it, made her afraid to trust herself with
herself for a whole morning. The moment, therefore, that she could compose
herself, after his departure, she ordered her carriage, and continued to find
occupation from home 'till a late hour.

On her return, the first card she saw was that of mr. Villars: but she had
little time to think of this circumstance, when she found to her surprise, that
sir William was not returned home.

They were engaged to dine at her brother's: but Ellen having waited in vain
beyond all dinner time, for the return of sir William, she found herself so
inexpressibly uneasy, that she was in no condition to keep her engagement. She
therefore excused herself on the score of indisposition: and with a heart
oppressed by fears and apprehensions, to which she scarcely dared to give a
name, she awaited with a degree of excruciating impatience, which she had never
before felt, the return of sir William.

The clock had struck nine when she heard his knock at the door. She ran to the
top of the stairs to meet him, and catching hold of his hand, "How glad I am to
see you! where, where have you been?"

"I have been at your brother's," said he coldly. "But I could not stay when I
heard you were ill. Are you better?"

"But where were you all this morning? Why did you not come home to dress?"

"I was kept late in the city. I knew your brother would excuse me. But what is
the matter? What kept you away?"

While Ellen detailed her fears, and her uneasiness, sir William regarded her
with an air as if he doubted the truth of what she said.

"I thought," returned he, "you had been above the foolish fears of your sex.
It is a pity you gave way to them in this instance. You have missed seeing an
old friend. Mr. Villars was at your brother's."

The insulting unkindness of these words filled Ellen's eyes with tears.

"No, sir William," said she, "I have missed nothing that I regret on that
account, I assure you. I see how your suspicions wrong me. But, receive my
solemn promise, that as far as it depends upon me, I have seen mr. Villars for
the last time."

"No romantic resolutions, I beg. Let me not be made ridiculous by your
high-flown virtue. If mr. Villars be as indifferent to you as he ought to be,
and as you have pretended, why should he not visit at my house like any other
person of your or my acquaintance?"

"I might have asked you that question; for the objection seemed to come from
you."

"And you did not know mr. Villars was to be at your brother's today? And you
did not stay away on that account?"

"No, upon my honor. I stayed away for the reasons I have given you."

"Then I ask your pardon. I have been too hasty in my conclusions perhaps. Mr.
Villars is now my acquaintance. You will consider him henceforward as such. And
if you would have me believe that you regard him in no other light, you will
make him as much and neither more nor less of your parties than you do any
other person, who has the same claim to your attentions."

This was almost too much for Ellen. But subduing every resentment, and every
tender feeling, she said, "I will do in this, and all other things, as nearly
what you wish as I can; and where I fail, I hope your candor and your love
will be heard in my excuse."

"Oh! Ellen," said sir William, grasping her hand, "could you but love me as I
have loved you! -- But I am a fool to expect it. I make myself ridiculous. I Will
change my dress and we'll go together to mr. Curzon's; and then let this
nonsense be forgotten."

"Oh!" cried Ellen to herself, with a deep sigh, as he left the room, "how
impossible it is to love this man!"

At mr. Curzon's they met lady Almeria.

"So, so, you are not sick after all," said she. "I never thought you were.
I Will lay my life you were afraid of meeting your old lover."

Ellen would have explained how the unaccountable absence of sir William had
alarmed her.

"Yes, yes, very likely. I don't believe a word of it though. But come, if you
are not really afraid, show it now, for there he is. In spite of his grave
face, I would bring him with me. Thank my stars, Mordaunt is not jealous."

Although all this was not professedly said in the hearing of sir William, yet
was he so near that he lost not a word of it. He now walked on: and lady
Almeria said, "I was running away; for the place is as dull as a quaker's
meeting. I cannot get a party at cassino, but with old dowagers, the very sight
of whom gives me the vapors. But now you are come I shall have a little chat:
or, come, let us sit down to cassino, and mr. Villars shall be of our party;
though he is almost as bad as an old dowager too. But perhaps your presence
will enliven him."

Mr. Villars then came up; and with great gravity, hoped Ellen was better.

"Bless me, she was never ill!" said the ever talking lady Almeria. "I told you
so all along."

"I hope mr. Villars will, in this case, rather believe me than you," said
Ellen with a smile. "But I am now quite well."

"This was the first time that Ellen had ever called Henry mr. Villars, when
speaking to him. The word ran through his veins like ice.

"Lady Almeria is so good as to answer for every body," said he, faintly
smiling. "It is no wonder that with so much business upon her hands, she is not
always quite accurate."

"I see you improve," returned she. "I have not heard you attempt being saucy
this age. But you must play at cassino with us. I have been doing nothing 'till
I am tired to death."

"Let sir William make a fourth," said Ellen.

"No, indeed," returned lady Almeria sharply. "I have had a dose of sir William
today, I can tell you. He really grows intolerable."

"I hope you intend I should love you better for such freedoms," said Ellen.

"You Will not love me the worse. Besides, I may speak what I think, whatever you
may do."

"I have not quite lost that privilege," returned Ellen: "and I tell you
plainly that if you mean I should be of your cassino party, you must be a
little more agreeable."

"Agreeable! I Will be as agreeable as an angel. And so do go, that is a good
soul, (speaking to Henry) and find us a fourth -- but not sir William."

However Henry might take most of these insinuations, for lady Almeria's
accustomed rattle, he could not but observe the shade of chagrin and melancholy
that rushed on Ellen's brow: and he observed it with an anxious curiosity to
know the real cause. He returned in a moment, bringing sir William with him.

"See, I have obeyed you," said he to lady Almeria.

"Obeyed me? No: I protest against playing with husbands and wives. Sir
William, you are the only man in the room I objected to."

"I must hope, then," said he with a laugh, "that you are the only lady in the
room that would have made the objection. And even that stretch of vanity will not
console me under the misfortune of your displeasure."

"Oh, I did not object to you positively -- only relatively, in your capacity
of husband."

"There may be something flattering in that objection," returned he. "And now
let you and me try to beat lady Ackland and mr. Villars."

This little party at cards diffused something like ease among Henry, Ellen,
and sir William, in its consequence; though it was little short of martyrdom at
the time: and from this night Henry visited and was received at sir William's
house on the footing of a common acquaintance.

CHAP. XXV.
"Ne s^^sa accetto che fosse amore
"Stato cagion di cosi grave errore;
"Che amor de far gentileun cor villano,
"E now far d' un gentil contrario effetto."
ARIOSTO.
AS Ellen and Henry now saw each other, almost every day, the emotion with
which they at first met, wore off by degrees. But Henry lost nothing of his
gravity: and he could not but perceive that it seemed in some degree contagious.

Ellen's both natural and assumed spirits too often sunk under the weight of
every day's vexations which she received from sir William: But Henry, who knew
nothing of all this, fluctuated between hope and fear, that the pensive
thoughtfulness which sometimes overspread her countenance, might be imputable
to the recollection of past scenes. He wished her happy. He wished her upright.
But he knew not how to wish her wholly forgetful of his former sufferings, or
wholly insensible to his present. Nothing, however, arose, that could lead to
the clearing his doubts. Ellen did not appear to shun, or to seek his company.
She conversed with him with her usual frankness; treated him as her relation
and friend; but seemed to have, forgotten he had ever been her lover. Yet he
often saw her eyes fill with tears, and a sigh o^ ^tisfaction would sometimes
escape her.

He turned his attentions toward (...) William; but could see nothing in his
conduct which could give him reason to suppose the source of her unhappiness
lay there. Sir William was in fact an impenetrable man. He knew how to conceal
from the whole world his real disposition: and he had besides habitually
different manners, and a different countenance, for his public and private
hours.

He dreaded to draw on himself the ridicule which is attached to the character
of a jealous husband: and he wished his acquaintance, especially those of his
own standing in life, to believe him perfectly satisfied in his choice of a
wife.

The fangs of jealousy, however, struck deeper and deeper into his heart every
day. The more he knew of Henry, the more he knew him to be the man most suited
to the sentiments and feelings of Ellen. In accidental conversations, he was
frequently struck by the coincidence of their opinions. Their minds seemed to
be formed in the same mould; their hearts to beat in unison; their wishes,
their pleasures, their pursuits to be the same. The similarity of their taste,
and of their virtues, seemed to form them for each other: and he knew not how
to trust, that the latter would be such a barrier between them, as the former
would not surmount. Yet could not the keen eye of jealousy discover in the
conduct of either any thing to reprove.

All was open, frank, and above board. He could not observe that Henry sought
Ellen apart from him, or from the rest of the world: no^ could he discover in
Ellen any affectation of too much or too little solicitude in her intercourse
with Henry. But he suspected that he himself lost ground daily in the esteem of
Ellen; for he knew that he deserved to do so: and he believed it not in nature
that Ellen not loving him, should forget that she had loved Henry -- Henry,
too, so deserving of her love! so consonant to her taste! so apparently, so
almost avowedly considering her as the first of women! He could not have been
more perfectly convinced of their mutual intelligence, had he received the most
unequivocal proofs of it.

Hence his private hours with Ellen were spent in indirect upbraidings, in
cruel insinuations, in direct charges of want of love on her part, which such
conduct served completely to verify.

Ellen opposed to all this injustice the calmness which good sense dictates,
and the gentleness which a regulated mind inspires. She treated sir William's
unkindness as the effect of a distemper: and she thought she saw no cure for
it, but in the most undisguised frankness.

"You have conceived the most distressing suspicions," would she say to him:
"and the misfortune is the greater, since, being totally unfounded, I know not
how to clear myself from them. If you would preserve any of that love in my
breast, of the diminution of which you so bitterly complain, you must give it
something whereon to feed. Complaints, reproaches, and calumnies, were never
the sustenance of affection. Take me where you will. I am ready to accompany
you to the remotest corner of the world: there I will live only with you and
for you. Fix upon any plan of life, where, though excluded from the society and
pleasures of it, you admit of its duties, and you will find me ever ready to
concur. But let us not continue amid scenes of imagined amusement and real
misery, where it is impossible but the very conduct you enjoin me, should fill
your heart with bitterness, and increase an evil which can only be cured by the
reflections which time and a continued observation on my real character will
enable you to make."

This was good advice. But it was the advice of cool reason, not the fervent
expostulations of ardent love, suffering under the misery of suspicion. Sir
William therefore rather resented than benefited by it.

Retirement, too, was by no means to his taste. He could not have been happy,
even in the love of Ellen, if he must only have enjoyed that love in a desert.
The world was the theater on which his talents and his accomplishments were
shown to most advantage. In the society of men of genius, in the assemblies of
people of high rank, in the circle of courts, sir William had been accustomed
to be listened to, and admired. And it was in scenes such as these that he
could alone find happiness. Could Ellen have accompanied him in them, and could
he have been convinced that she preferred him to every other man she met there,
his happiness would have been complete. But in a solitude the gratification of
his vanity was wanting to his felicity; and in the world, the gratification of
his love. Possessed, however, with the opinion, that Ellen's heart was wholly
given up to Henry, he no longer felt any pangs from jealousy, of which he was
not the object: and in removing her from him he removed her from all whose
attention toward her, gave him uneasiness. Yet to secure his own honor in the
preservation of here is, was more a point of delicacy than a cure for the wounds
of his mind. Once convinced that she had sacrificed it to her passion for
Henry, and he would have found, if not a compensation, at least a gratification
in the security of the punishment he meditated. But for the pangs inflicted by
a persuasion that he had irrecoverably lost her affection, no distance which he
could place between her and Henry, no vengeance which he could pursue, no
indemnification he could propose to himself, could heal his sorrows, or restore
him to peace. Solitude he would have thought rather favorable than
disadvantageous to the sentiments he believed she entertained: and therefore
both to occupy her mind with scenes in which Henry had no share, as well as to
gratify his own taste, they removed, on leaving town, to Weymouth.

Ellen, the unhappy victim of this mixture of selfishness and vanity, had
flattered herself that she should either have been permitted to visit Groby
Manor, or to return to Oakley. But sir William seemed to have an almost equal
aversion to both places.

The benevolent expenses of Ellen, at Oakley, which he had no inclination to
join in, or desire to countenance, he felt as a reproach to him: and the scenes
of Groby Manor he considered as too closely connected with the memory of Henry,
to be favorable to his interest.

Ellen quitted town without regret: but she did not go to Weymouth without
reluctance. The little lightness of heart which she had carried with her to
London, had long since been lost in the increasing unkindness, of sir William.
The amusements it afforded had lost their novelty, and with their novelty, to a
mind so ill at ease as here is, their power of interesting. But the duties and
pleasures of a country life she knew were so suited to her taste, as always to
afford employment for her faculties and gratification to her heart. She had
lost the hope of being able to love sir William, or of awakening in so
irrational and so selfish a mind as his, that spirit of justice, from which,
even while he continued to love her, she could alone hope for any degree of
happiness; and sometimes extending her views into a futurity when probably he
would love her no more, she trembled for the situation in which she might find
herself.

But Ellen's good sense forbade her to torment herself with the apprehension of
any probable evils: and she was more willing to encourage the hope, that if she
might be allowed to take up her abode at Oakley, whether sir William chose to
be with her or not, she might always be able to secure to herself a very
competent share of content, in the active discharge of her duties. At present
she was however compelled to give up all thoughts of the quiet and interesting
occupations of the country; and to prepare herself for all the fatiguing
dissipation, and sickening repetition, of a seabathing place.

Ellen had only been a very short time at Weymouth, before she had reason to
suppose herself in a situation which she believed would give the greatest
pleasure to sir William.

During the first months of their marriage, he had expressed an anxious
impatience for the prospect of becoming a father, and had more than once
testified chagrin and disappointment, when there were no appearances of his
soon being one. Ellen herself anticipated a thousand delightful cares and
pleasures which would arise from the duties of a mother; and was not shy of
owning to sir William, that the indisposition under which she then suffered,
would probably put him in possession of his wishes.

But this information, far from being received by sir William with pleasure,
seemed to overwhelm him with the sense of some sudden misfortune. His
countenance changed: his lips quivered with suppressed emotion: and he had
hardly sufficient command of himself to utter a word of kindness or
congratulation on the subject.

All this was a perfect enigma to Ellen. -- Happily in this instance her
innocence defeated her penetration: and after much uneasy conjecture, she
rested upon the supposition, (a supposition sufficiently painful) that sir
William having lost all love for her, had with it lost all desire of any
farther tie between them. She was confirmed in this idea, when she observed,
that he rather encouraged than restrained her in riding, walking, and dancing.
But Ellen, who began to see that all the felicity of her future life might
probably depend upon children, became extremely solicitous not to lose, by any
indiscretion of her own, her present promise of such a source of happiness.

Sir William, without seeming to advert to the care she was willing to take of
herself, was always projecting some party of amusement; some riding, fishing,
or frolicking expedition, which called for exertion of bodily strength. Ellen
had very good health; and knew not how to hold herself excused from such
engagements, without seeming to take a supersluous and selfish care of an
interest which nobody else appeared to think about.

Having spent two months at Weymouth, sir William formed a party with another
family to travel through South and North Wales, to cross the kingdom from
Chester to Scarborough, and fully to occupy the time until Christmas, when they
were engaged to spend a month with mr. Mordaunt and lady Almeria, at their
house in Devonshire.

Ellen ventured to plead for a little rest, and mentioned Oakley. But sir
William told her, that traveling would do her good, and that he had planned
the whole scheme entirely on her account.

She was less disinclined to give into it, from the hopes that when they were
so far North as Scarborough, she should be able to persuade sir William to make
a visit to Groby Manor. She communicated this hope to her father: and in this
hope she performed her peregrination through Wales, with much satisfaction. But
by the time they arrived at Scarborough, sir William declared the season so far
advanced, that no consideration would induce him to venture a mile farther
North: and under this pretense, he hurried her by hasty journies into Berkshire.

Ellen happily suffered little by all these journeyings. But when she found
herself once again at Oakley, she would have been very happy, if she might have
remained there for some time. Sir William, however, declared himself impatient
to join the society at Stanton Park; and to Stanton Park they accordingly went.

Lady Almeria had filled her house with a numerous party of young dissipated
people of fashion. Hunting, riding, shooting, billiards, and shuttlecock,
engaged the mornings. The pleasures of an expensive table, high play, music and
dancing, occupied the evenings. Here appeared love in all its degrees, from the
serious, sighing, jealous swain, to the pert fluttering coquet, who laughed at
the passion she affected to feel.

Mr. Mordaunt and lady Almeria had long ceased to affect even the semblance of
a passion which had carried them so precipitately into Scotland together: but
in ^aving ceased to contribute to each other's pleasures, they had but fallen
into a contrary extreme of wishing to interrupt them. He was careless, she
indifferent. He coquetted with every pretty woman who would listen to him: and
she flirted with all the agreeable men who came in her way.

She had just lain in of a poor neglected little girl, who, confined to the
nursery, was seldom visited by her mother. In scenes such as these, where Ellen
found so much to disapprove, and so much to lament, this nursery seemed her
best refuge: and here she spent many hours every day.

Sir William, since their abode at Weymouth, seemed to have lost much of his
former passion for Ellen: yet he could not see her, in such a circle as that
with which she was now surrounded, without feeling her superiority. He did feel
it. His love seemed to revive: and he often sought her in this same nursery,
where she passed so much of her time.

Ellen, who never lost sight of the virtuous desire of being one day able to
inspire sir William with such a way of thinking as would excite and retain her
affection, felt her hopes of the approach of so desirable a period spring anew,
whenever domestic pleasures, or domestic virtues appeared to engage his
attention, or occupy his heart. She was delighted to see him quit the
dissipated, and, in fact, vicious, society of the drawing room, or the eating
parlour, to seek her in the innocent recesses of the nursery. With sportive
fondness she would endeavor to make him take his share in nursing the
bantling; and would anticipate their mutual pleasure, when they should have
such a plaything of their own. But from this subject he always appeared to
shrink: and though he followed her to a nursery rather than be absent from her,
he came there only for the purpose of drawing her away from it.

CHAP. XXVI.
-- "I am angling now,
"Though you perceive me not, how I give line."
SHAKESPEARE.
ELLEN had now been at Stanton Park more than a month, and the little pleasure
she took in the society there, or rather, the positive disapprobation she felt
toward most of the individuals who composed it, had caused her, as it were, to
fold up her charms and her talents in a civil reserve, which forbade all
familiarity in those who approached her.

At this time mr. Villars arrived at Stanton Park.

There had never been any distinction between Ellen's manners toward him, and
toward those, who with him had frequented her house in town. There, whatever
difference of character might really exist, in the interchange of the
commonplace civilities of an assembled intercourse, little difference could
appear. But here, where, in the freedom and familiarity of behavior that
prevailed, every vicious principle seemed to be displayed, and every depravity
of the heart to be laid open -- here indeed there was a decided distinction.
When she conversed with Henry, no coldness sat upon her brow, or restrained her
tongue, Her heart was upon her lips. The smile of approbation dimpled in her
cheek, and sparkled in her eyes.

Henry came immediately from Groby Manor to Stanton Park. Of Groby Manor, of
her father, of her sisters, of her beloved Thorntons, she was never weary of
talking. There was no inquiry relative to all these, which was too minute, no
circumstance which was not interesting.

In these conversations, it is true, Ellen wished nothing so much as that sir
William should partake; for she wished nothing so much as that they should be
equally important to him. But the vivacity which the arrival of Henry seemed to
have inspired her with, was a mortal offense to sir William, and a
confirmation, "Strong as proof of Holy Writ," of all he had before suspected.

From this period the most deadly hatred succeeded in the breast of sir
William, to that love which he had once felt for Ellen: and from this period he
nourished the most determined resolution of revenge.

But sir William was indeed capable of that hypocrisy, of which he most
unjustly suspected Ellen. The dread he entertained of being marked as a jealous
husband, enabled him to dissemble, even with her, the pangs which wrung his
very soul.

Instead of the conduct he had manifested in town, he continued his newly
resumed fondness; frequently made Henry the object of his panegyric; pointed
out to her his superiority to those around him; showed a pleasure in his
conversation; and always sought to make Ellen a party in it. To this depth of
dissimulation he was instigated, not only by a desire to escape the ridicule of
jealousy, but by a hope, that by thus la^ suspicion asleep both in the minds of
Henry and Ellen, he should attain a certainty of that, which though he did not
doubt, he could by no means prove: and nothing short of proof he knew could
bear him out, even in his own opinion, in the course he was resolved to pursue.

The art of sir William was much more than a match for the ingenuous innocence
of Ellen. She entertained not a doubt but that he was convinced of the
injustice of his former suspicions: and the moment she believed such suspicions
were abandoned, she sincerely forgave them. She conceived, that he really was
well satisfied that she should entertain and manifest toward Henry, that
cousinly regard which she had never disavowed, but which, on the contrary, she
had always declared she should carry to her grave. On the strictest examination
of her heart, she discovered nothing in her sentiments for Henry which she
could wish to conceal: and when she beheld, as she believed, sir William
relieved from every jealous doubt, she had on this subject nothing farther to
wish. Henry too appeared to have recovered his natural tone of mind: and Ellen
secretly congratulated herself on the accomplishment of those hopes, which had
cheered the darkest gloom of her former sorrows.

Ellen's temper was sanguine. There were moments in which she could have
believed any thing as certain, which it was possible the united efforts of
virtue and good sense could produce.

"Now," said she to herself, "I see Henry happy. Sir William will in time be
all I wish him* His love for me will be as rational as it is tender. He will
deserve and I will give him my whole heart. After all my sorrows, and all my
apprehensions, there will not be a happier lot than the one I have drawn."

It depended wholly on sir William to have realized this picture of happiness.
He chose to convert it into scenes of the most genuine wretchedness.

The delight with which such thoughts often filled the mind of Ellen, as she
sat conversing with sir William and Henry, frequently spread an ineffable air
of satisfaction and tenderness over her features. Henry at these moments beheld
her as the image of virtue itself; and sir William regarded her as the most
abandoned of her sex. "The time will come," thought he, "the time will come!"
-- and in this thought he was able to repress the resentment which swelled his
heart almost to breaking.

The task, however, of dissimulation, at length became too painful: and he
longed to begin the period of punishment and vengeance. Ellen was to lye-in in
town: and to town for this purpose she removed about the beginning of February.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
BOOKS For Sale at MATTHEW CAREY's Store, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET, PHILADELPHIA.
1. JOAN OF ARC, an Epic Poem, by ROBERT SOUTHEY; with Notes. Price a dollar,
in boards.
"We do not hesitate to declare our opinion, that the poetical powers displayed
in it are of a very superior kind -- Conceptions more lofty and daring,
sentiments more commanding, and language more energetic, will not easily be
found* nor does scarcely any part of it sink to languor, as the glow of feeling
and genius animates the whole. The language is, for the most part, modelled on
that of Milton; and not unfrequently, it has a strong relish of Shakespeare."

Monthly Review, Vol. 19, p. 361. "We admire the noble spirit of freedom which
is evidently the poet's inspiring muse -- the ready invention which has enabled
him to embellish an historical narrative, of narrow extent, with all the charms
of fiction -- the fertile fancy, which has enriched his piece with every kind
of poetical ornament -- the learning which has furnished him with a great
variety of historical and mythological illustrations -- and the correct and
elegant taste in verification, which has qualified him to produce, with the
exception of very few lines, an harmonious Poem."

Analytical Review, Vol. xxiii. p. 177. 2. POEMS on various subjects, by ROBERT
SOUTHEY, Author of Joan of Arc. Price 62 1-2 cents, in bo^rd^.
"It can scarcely be necessary for us formally to recommend this little volume
to the notice of our poetical readers, and its author to their esteem. No one
who possesses a true relish for Poetry, we conceive, will open with
indifference, a volume by the author of J^an of Arc. Genius is a despotic
power, and irresistibly commands homage."

Monthly Review. "Our readers will immediately associate with Mr, Southey's
name, the Epic Poem which he lately published, Joan of Arc. From that dignified
and difficult species of composition, he has descended to amuse himself with
these easier and more artless strains: and we are happy to remark, that the
same lively fancy, the same delicacy of sentiment, the same melodious flow of
language, which marked that rapid production, and diverted the attention from
some of censurable defects, may be distinguished in the little volume that now
lies before us.

"It gives us pleasure that Mr. Southey has recalled our attention to the
sorrows of our fable brethren, and tuned his harp to the mournful accents of
the African. Six Sonnets on the Slave Trade are introduced by a short Preface,
in which he laments that the enthusiasm of those who once difused the
West-Indian productions, was of so transitory a nature -- and in which he
conceives the only remaining alternative for the abolition of the Traffic, to
be the introduction of maple sugar, or the just and general rebellion of the
Negroes."

Analytical Review, Vol. xxv. page 36. 3. LETTERS FROM A FATHER TO HIS SON, on
various Topics relative to Literature and the Conduct of Life. Written in the
Years 1792 and 1793. By J. AIKEN, M. D. Printed on fine wove paper, price one
dollar.
"The letters now before us, are the production of a mind endued with an
uncommon share of penetration, long exercised in the habit of accurate
discrimination and deep reflection, both with respect to subjects of
speculation, and to human life and manners; and firmly possessed of that manly
independence of character, which enables the inquirer to pursue truth wherever
she is to be found, and to follow her lead wherever she leads.

"The author, Dr. Aiken, has already acquired no inconsiderable degree of
celebrity by his former useful and elegant productions, in several different
walks of science and literature. The present work, while it affords new proofs,
that he possesses superior talents, and uncommon correctness of taste, will
exhibit him to the public, under the highly respectable characters of a
judicious observer, and a sage adviser. Agreeably to his motto, ' Liberi sensi,
semplice parole,' he has thought closely on a great variety of subjects,
without suffering himself to be shackled by systems, or led by authority; and
he has communicated his thoughts, for the most part, in plain and simple, but
always in pure classical language, perfectly suitable to the form under which
those papers appear as letters to his son.

"After the full detail we have given of the leading ideas and sentiments of
these excellent letters, it is wholly unnecessary to say any thing farther in
their commendation; only we must add, that they are, in our opinion,
particularly deserving the attention of young men, as happily adapted to
suggest to them important and pleasing topics of inquiry and reflection; to
exercise their judgment, and improve their taste; and to furnish them with
useful hints for the conduct of life.'

Analytical Review Vol xviii. page 136, 146. "There is scarcely any task which
lays society under higher obligations, than that which has for its object the
mental and moral improvement of the rising generation. In these Letters, which
appear to have brought to a close the parental duties of the author toward his
son, we trace much of Philosophy and true taste; and we are no less inclined to
expect good consequences from the example he himself has set to all parents,
than from the wholesome precepts he so judiciously inculcates.

"In order that we may be enabled to gratify our readers with as long an
extract as possible, we will concisely mention the subjects treated of. These
are, education, its purposes, benefits of a copious and varied one, etc. --
strength of character, the natural and moral process of acquiring, and the
causes which tend to impair it -- inordinate attachment to the literature of
the ancients -- on the pursuit of improvement -- on the love of applause,
exemplified in the younger Pliny -- on Homer's Story of Circe, its fable and
moral purpose -- on nature and art, and the love of novelty, -- on prejudice,
bigotry, candor, and liberality -- on religious societies -- on reply in
controversy -- on classification in natural history -- on the natural history
of Buffon, and his principle of diminishing the number of species, by
supporting artificial varieties -- on ornamental gardening -- on Pope's Essay
on Criticism -- on the analogy between mental and bodily diseases -- on spleen
and low spirits -- on consolation -- on the inequality of conditions, its
necessity and consequences, etc. -- on the prevalence of truth -- on second
thoughts and middle courses -- on the principal faults of poetical trans^^tion
-- on ruins -- remarks on Dr. Johnson's argument in favor of spectral
appearances -- on cheap pleasures -- on attachment to country -- on
independence -- on the choice of a wise -- and lastly ^ valedictory epistle,
stating the author's design in these letter.

"We cannot farther gratify the wish, which no doub^, the perusal of this
extract must have excited in our readers, but must refer to the publication
itself, which we think possessed of every species of excellence that can well
belong to dissertations on the most important subjects of taste and philosophy,
stripped of scholastic solemnity, and composed in familiar, but chaste and
correct epistolary language.

Critical Review, Vol. x. p. 273. 4. A JOURNEY OVER LAND TO INDIA, partly by a
Route never gone before by any European. By DONALD CAMPBELL, of Barbreck, Esquire.
who formerly commanded a Regiment of Cavalry in the Service of his Highness the
Nabob of the Carnatic. In a Series of Letters to his Son. Comprehending his
Shipwreck and Imprisonment by Hyder Ali, and his subsequent Negociations and
Transactions in the East. Price a dollar and an eighth.
"A Work like this has, in one respect, an advantage over those Books of
Voyages and Travels which are written on the spur of the occasion; for it
abounds with matured reflections, and contains the travels of the writer's
mind, together with his bodily peregrinations. We cannot take leave without
expressing our admiration of the spirit and perseverance displayed by Mr.
Campbell, in surmounting the difficulties and dreadful hardships, which he has
described with so much feeling and ability."

Monthly Review, Oct. 1795. 5. An HISTORY, or ANECDOTES of the REVOLUTION in
RUSSIA, in the Year 1762. Translated from the French of M. DE RULHIERE. With an
elegant Head of the late EMPRESS. Price 75 cents.
"This work was written by the author shortly after the transactions which he
relates, of which he was an eye witness. Great efforts were made by CATHARINE
at the court of FRANCE, to suppress the publication. Bribes and menaces were
made use of, but she could succeed no further than to obtain a promise that it
should not appear in her life time. -- The EMPRESS being now dead, it is just
published in France, by the heir of M. DE RULHIERE.

"The grounds of M. DE RULHIERE's information seem indisputable, and his
readers appear to have every reason to be satisfied with his discernment, in
unfolding the motives and circumstances that occurred in bringing about this
striking event. He is no servile copier, but has drawn his characters, and
described his scenes, with the hand of a master. -- Such is the account now,
for the first time, delivered to the public, of the circumstances attending the
melancholy end of PETER III. the absolute monarch of a vast empire; and who,
with all his infirmities; performed, during his short reign of only six months,
so many acts of humanity and mercy, and showed such dispositions to promote the
happiness of mankind* that his defects in point of prudence demand from the
sympathizing heart a tear upon his ashes.

"We shall only add, that we have seldom met with more interesting original
anecdotes, than those that are contained in the little work which we have now
reviewed."

App. to Monthly Review, Vol. 22. 6. AN INTRODUCTION TO THE KNOWLEDGE AND
PRACTICE OF GARDENING, by CHARLES MARSHALL, Vicar of Brixworth,
Northamptonshire. Price two dollars.
God Almighty first planted a Garden; and indeed it is the purest of human
pleasures. It is the greatest refreshment to the spirits of Man; without which,
buildings and palaces are but gross handy works.

Bacon's Essays. 7. AN ESSAY ON QUICKLIME, AS A CEMENT AND AS A MANURE, by
JAMES ANDERSON, L. L. ^. F. R. S. Price 62 1-2 cents.
This small treatise is esteemed, by the English farmers, one of the most
valuable improvements which have, of late years enriched the English system of
husbandry.

8. AMBROSE and ELEANOR. Price 87 1-2 cents.
"The design of the editor, we are informed in the preface, in the present free
and abri^ged translation of Fanfan and Lolotte, was to form a work expressly
for the perusal of youth: the native feelings of the heart unadulterated by
vice, the docility and industry of two children, abandoned to themselves at an
early age, the lessons of a watchful and enlightened preceptor, appeared to her
subjects proper to excite emulation, and interest the attention of youth.

"This little volume may be read with pleasure by those young persons for whose
use it is principally designed."

Analytical Review, Vol. xxiii. p. 603. PLAIN SENSE: OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY
VILLARS AND ELLEN MORDAUNT.

PLAIN SENSE: OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY VILLARS AND ELLEN MORDAUNT. A NOVEL. IN
TWO VOLUMES.

'REASON STILL USE, TO REASON STILL ATTEND.' POPE. VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY. NO. 118, MARKET-STREET. October 1,
1799.

ELLEN MORDAUNT AND HENRY VILLARS.
CHAP. I.
-- 'Oime fortuna fella,
'Che cambio e questo, che tu fai?
'Colui,
'Che esser dovea, levato m' hai.
'Ti par che in luogo, ed investor di quello
'Si debba por costui, ch' ora mi dai?'
ARIOSTO.
FROM the instant of their quitting Stanton Park, Sir William's behavior was
entirely changed. He seemed not now to wish to disguise the ill opinion he had
formed of her. He reproached her explicitly for the pleasure she had manifested
in the company of Henry: and he openly exulted in the art with which he had
laid her caution useless, and by which he had been able to ascertain her real
sentiments.

Ellen heard Sir William with an indignant astonishment, which for some time
deprived her of the power of speech. She kn^w not how to defend herself against
a charge, the truth of which involved no criminality. She had considered every
mark of regard which she had shown to Henry, as sanctioned by Sir William's
express approbation; and she knew it did not contain a particle of that kind of
love which the most extended of his rights could prohibit.

The resentments of Ellen were always short-lived: and even before she had
voice to reply to Sir William's injuries, she felt somewhat like compassion,
though perhaps a little mingled with contempt, rise in her mind toward him.

'That it can suit your ideas of honor and tenderness,' said she, 'to
endeavor to betray those whom you are bound to defend, is what I can only be
sincerely sorry for. But to treat that as a discovery which you owe to your own
artifice -- that, which at no time has been disavowed on my part, is a vain
endeavor to dupe me a second time. Though innocence is unsuspicious, it is not
sottish. Be assured you have discovered nothing; for nothing was attempted to
be concealed. From the first hour I accepted your heart, you knew the whole of
mine. If you have not secured it your own long before now, the failure has not
arisen from my partiality to another, but from the want of those qualities in
yourself, on which only affection can be grounded. I have labored to love you:
and never were you so nearly in possession of my heart, as at the moment when
you have chosen to load me with the most injurious reproaches. What can I say,
most unhappy of men, what can I say, but that my heart shall still be yours,
when you know how to deserve it.'

Sir William trembled with passion. The truth flashed upon him -- it was the
lightning's flash, that strikes and kills. To believe himself alone accountable
for the loss of Ellen's true affections, was a pang of such intolerable
anguish, as human nature could not bear. To think her false and worthless, was
a suffering of a milder kind. Barring his mind against conviction, he gave way
to a rage which was only a temporary assuagement of his sufferings, the source
in future of the bitterest self-reproach.

The agitation that his violence occasioned to Ellen, threw her into labor.
Her situation became critical and hazardous, in a very high degree: and Sir
William would have almost consented to see her in the arms of Mr. Villars, to
be assured of her life. It was not, however, by the death of Ellen, that heaven
had determined to punish Sir William. She was delivered of a boy, and declared
out of danger.

Amidst the varied anguish, composed of grief, terror, and resentment, that
filled the mind of Ellen, she experienced, as she clasped her child to her
bosom, a source of joy, which no misfortune, that threatened herself alone,
could embitter. Yet she regretted but the more, that, in the father of her
infant, she could not love the husband of her choice.

Sir William, under pretense of guarding her from every emotion that might be
prejudicial, absented himself for some days from her apartment: and Ellen made
use of this in^ to bring her mind into such a state of ch^ty with him, as would
enable her to receive him, when they did meet, with a kindness, which might
show her disposed to forget all that had passed at their last interview.

She presented his son to him, with a faint smile, saying: 'Let this be the
pledge of oblivion for all that is passed, and the assurance of an unbroken
amity for the time to come.'

'A son!' said Sir William, looking earnestly in the boy's face.

'Did you not know it was a boy?' said Ellen.

'Yes,' returned Sir William, and again repeated, 'A son!'

'Dear Sir William, take your child into your arms. The touch of his lips will
banish every uneasy thought. I have found them a sovereign panacea.'

'So might I too! -- '

'Why do you not try then?'

'No; it is a woman's remedy.'

'It is a parent's,' returned Ellen.

'True,' said Sir William; but he touched not the child.

Ellen, pained, wondering, confused, by a variety of indistinct thoughts,
hastily snatched the boy to her heart, and burst into tears.

Sir William alarmed, tried to soothe her by every tender expression he could
think of; but he did not caress the child. Nor did he appear to regard it
either as a pledge of oblivion, or as an assurance of amity.

Ellen recovered slowly: the anxiety of her mind affected her body. She saw Sir
William gloomy and discontented: and though he restrained himself from acts or
words of ill humor or reproach, the same dark suspicions seemed to lour in his
mind, and the same resentment to possess his breast.

Ellen was now able to go out in her carriage* and she thought it proper no
longer to delay making Sir William acquainted with the resolution she had
formed. It was not long before he gave her an opportunity of doing so.

On meeting her one day on her return from an airing, he observed, that the
color began to return to her cheek, and the usual life to appear in her eye:
and he added, in a cold and reproachful tone, 'You will soon be able to return
to society. You will soon be able to see all your friends.'

'I have a very few words to say, Sir William, on that subject,' returned
Ellen: 'and if you are at leisure, be kind enough to hear them now.'

'You are not going to make me a speech?'

'I do not deal in oratory,' replied Ellen. What I have to say, will be
comprised in a very few words.'

'Well, Mad^m, cried he, with an air of provoking mockery, 'I attend.'

'When first I was made sensible of the unjust ideas that you entertained of my
character,' said Ellen, 'I was led to hope that such jealousy might only be the
exuberancy of too ardent a love: and I trusted to that love and my own ^titude
for the remedy. When I had reason to think the evil had a deeper root, that it
spring from the constitution of your mind, and that, perhaps, you could not
change it, I offered with the most genuine sincerity, to withdraw with you from
the whole world, and to live only for you. This was treated as the flight of an
absurd and romantic mind: and I was enjoined to conduct myself to all with whom
I conversed, without distinction. I obeyed this injunction as far as it was
possible to obey it. The honest affections of the heart, which I had always
avowed, and the difference that must arise in our intercourse with the wise,
and the foolish, the good and the bad, stood not controuled, nor could they by
this injunction. You know if ever my distinction went beyond what such
affections and such difference could warrant: and I know most feelingly, that
notwithstanding a conduct resulting from such principles, as will stand the
strictest investigation, I have not been able to acquit myself in your opinion.
I believe it impossible that you should at this time doubt my honor: but you
scruple not to tell me, that I have voluntarily given my affections to another.
What may you not next believe? -- I shrink from the thought: and it behooves me
to preserve myself from a suspicion, that may involve in the effects of its
injustice those who are yet unborn. What I once assumed as a kindness to you, I
now ask as a favor and shelter for myself. I will not again join any society,
I will not again see any friends, that can awaken injurious doubts in your
breast. If it is your will, that I shall remain in town, I will remain there as
a close prisoner in my own house. But if you wish to avoid the appearance of
singularity, which this will have to the world, I beg you will suffer me to go
down to Oakley: my health will furnish a reasonable pretense for such a
seclusion: and there I cannot give you even the shadow of a cause for those
jealousies which wrong me, and make you miserable.'

Sir William appeared struck with the greatest astonishment, by the calm and
impressive statement, that Ellen thus made of her wrongs, and of her conduct.
Some purpose laboring in his mind, seemed, in spite of himself, to be
suspended by the power of truth.

'Would you go alone?' said he.

'I shall not be alone. My boy will be with me: and I will yet hope, that all
love for me is not so extinct in his father's breast, but that he may sometimes
be induced to visit us.'

A sudden shade of distrust and indignation crossed Sir William's brow.

'You doubt it not, -- his father will visit you.'

'I hope so,' said Ellen warmly. 'Then you approve my plan, Sir William? You
will suffer me to remove to Oakley?'

'Yes, to queen it there -- to court popularity by insidious charities -- to
form a party of the scum of the earth -- to build your reputation on the
downfall of mine.'

'Good God!' exclaimed Ellen: then checking herself, 'far are all such thoughts
from me,' said she. 'I have no predilection for Oakley. You have an estate in
Wales: let me go there. Send me into the North of Scotland -- banish me to
Ireland, -- do with me what you will; with this exception only, do not keep me
here, and compel me into company, where the purest innocence cannot preserve me
from the foulest suspicion.'

Again Sir William's resolution seemed to be shaken. He remained silent and
thoughtful.

'If I could b^lieve it was prejudice and falsehood -- '

'I know not what means to use to convince you it is so, but such as I have
used in vain,' said Ellen. 'It appears to me, that your mind is deeply infected
with a distemper that nothing but time and your own reflections will cure. Let
me wait the result of these quietly and inoffensively, far from any
possibility, by any manners or conduct of my own, of increasing the evils. --
No happiness results to either of us from being now together. On the contrary,
so many causes of mutual offense may arise, as may serve definitively to
alienate our hearts from each other, and make it impossible, at any future
period, however distant, to entertain that mutual friendship so essential to
our happiness, our virtue, and our reputation.'

'Well,' said Sir William, after a moment's pause, 'be it so; the experiment
may serve as a trial in more ways than one. But whom do you mean to take into
your secret? Who is to be confidant?

'No one. This is a secret I would willingly conceal from myself: and be
assured I will not burden any one else with the knowledge of it.'

'And shall you not write a pathetic letter to your cousin, desiring he will
keep out of your way, and bidding him farewell? -- And talk of the sacrifice of
friendship to duty, the hope of better times, when innocence will have all its
rights, when you may avow the esteem with which you always have been, and
always shall be -- And so turn a period and make a flourishing conclusion? --
Would not this be according to rule?'

'The paroxysm is strong now, indeed,' said Ellen. 'I will leave you, and wait
your decision as to where I shall go.'

'Stay; that may be decided in a moment. Oakley is the best place. Your retreat
there will appear most natural, and raise least conjecture. When shall you be
able to go?'

'In less than a week: and I entreat you, Sir William, to let that time be
spent with as little discomposure as possible. On my part, you shall see
nothing but good humor, and, if you will permit it, cheerfulness.'

'Good God! why should we part? -- Oh! Ellen, are you all you seem to be?'

'I hope you will, ere long, be convinced I am: and I think the present
arrangement most likely to produce that conviction.'

'You wish then to go?'

'I do; but I should not, if I could believe, that, continuing here, I could
ward off those unjust thoughts, that make us both so miserable*'

'I believe you had better go. Perhaps I shall sooner come to my senses in your
absence. Perhaps the present separation may make every future hour we are to
spend together happier.'

CHAP. II.
'Say, from affliction's various source,
'Do none but turbid waters flow?
MASON.
IN a few days, Ellen left town, for Oakley, taking her beloved boy with her.
He seemed the only human being whom she might love unreproved, or at least the
only one for whom her affections were not embittered by some painful reflection.

She could not conceal from herself, that Sir William studiously held her apart
from her family: and he had so professedly set his face against Miss Thornton,
that, except one single fortnight which she had spent at Oakley, Ellen ha^ not
seen her since her marriage; nor was he more willing that either of her sisters
should be with her: and i^ the early days of the breaking out of his
discontent, he had reproached her for loving her father with a warmer affection
than she loved him.

With lady Almeria, who was always surrounded by a society in which he himself
found pleasure, and whom he knew Ellen could not love -- and with her brother,
who showed not much love to her, he suffered her to associate with that degree
of familiarity which the nearness of their connection warranted* but he held
her as much as possible aloof from the whole world besides. He wished her to be
always in company: but he would have had the promiscuous crowd with which he
had surrounded her, wholly and alike indifferent to her.

A mode of life, in which the affections had no share, would have been, in
itself, extremely irksome to Ellen; and when joined to the more positive evils
that Sir William spared not to inflict, became insupportable. At Oakley, she
seemed to repose as in a secure harbor, after having been long tossed in
storms that threatened shipwreck.

She nursed her boy: and this was one reason that was given to the world for
her retiring to the country at that season of the year when every body else was
flocking to town. This occupation was a perpetual source of delight and
interest to her. Alone at Oakley, she could dedicate the whole of her time and
her thoughts to so delightful a care: and she saw, or fancied she saw, in the
stout limbs, and intelligent sparkling eyes of her darling, the proof and
reward of her more than common love.

Lady Almeria had dragged her poor little baby to town with her, where neglect
and want of good air soon reduced it to a very pitiable object. Ellen was told
it was ill, and ^arnestly entreated Lady Almeria to let it join the nursery at
Oakley. To this request she readily acceded; and the little Almeria was sent
down into ^shire* to add to the cares and pleasures of Ellen.

With her two children, and the various means of occupation which her
understanding and her heart provided her with, Ellen began to regain a degree
of ease and happiness, which, except at very short intervals, had been long a
stranger to her bosom. All remains of resentment toward Sir William entirely
subsided. She again flattered herself, that if she could once inspire him with
a taste for the calm delights of the country, she might be able in time to
correct his unhappy aptitude to suspicion, to eradicate all jealousy from his
mind, and, making him worthy of her love, to love him with an affection more
reasonable, and as warm as any he had ever felt for her. She congratulated
herself on the part she had taken; and was ready to persuade herself that her
past vexations were only a more certain road to happiness.

She wrote to Sir William frequently, detailing all she did, and recounting the
witticisms of Almeria, who, however, could not yet speak, and the wonderful
tricks and achievements of her boy. In return, Sir William's letters were
short, containing little but the anecdote of the day, and never replied in any
way to the domestic and nursery stories which made the subject of Ellen's.

Ellen was willing to lay all this insensibility to the way of life Sir William
was engaged in, so unfavourable to the feelings of the parent and the husband;
and to hope the cure for all lay in his being made s^sible of the superior
pleasure that could arise from such feelings, to that which every other
gratification apart from them could bestow. In this hope, she urged him much to
make a visit to Oakley: but hitherto he had attended little (...) her request.

CHAP. III.
'O sommo Dio! come i giudigi umani,
'Spesso offu^cati son da un nembo oscuro.'

WHILE Ellen was thus indulging herself in every virtuous propensity, and
already began to reap the reward that usually attends the gratification of such
propensities, Henry was a prey to the most tormenting disquietude.

On his arrival in town, he had learned Ellen's removal into the country: and
he had heard assigned as a reason for it, her own health, which had suffered
much from her confinement, and the cares she had taken upon her, with respect
to her boy. Nothing could appear more natural than these reasons: and with
Henry, who knew Ellen's disposition, they would have found, but for one
circumstance, a most ready belief.

Sir William's conduct during the time they had all passed in Devonshire
together, had completely deceived him. He believed that Sir William felt for
Ellen all the love that she was so well formed to inspire: and he never had
reason to suppose that Ellen did not rejoice in and return his love. But in
Henry's opinion, it ill consisted with such a mutual affection, that Sir
William should suffer Ellen to go without him into the country, in
circumstances in which she m^ be supposed particularly to call for more than
common attention, or that he could consent so soon to lose sight of their first
pledge of love; a boy too, which is generally as dear to a father as a mother.

It was this circumstance that raised a suspicion in the mind of Henry, that
there was something more in Ellen's present retirement than the world in
general believed. Yet was he cautious in his endeavors to discover whether his
suspicions were grounded in truth, lest he should communicate similar doubts to
others.

He threw himself as much as possible in the way of Sir William, who preserved
toward him the manners he had held when they were together in Devonshire: it
being Sir William's unalterable resolution, even in the vengeance that he
meditated against Ellen, that the world should never know that he had
entertained a suspicion of her virtue or her love.

Sir William would often speak of Ellen, would mention the partiality she
entertained for a country life, the newborn attachment to her boy, which
seemed to swallow up every other affection: and sometimes he would lament that
it deprived himself, and the rest of her friends, of her company in town.

Henry upon these occasions was strongly tempted to ask, what could detain him
there, while Ellen was in the country: but as he could not forget, neither
could he hope, that Sir William could forget the connection that had once been
between Ellen and himself. The remembrance of this connection imposed a
scrupulous delicacy upon him, whenever he mentioned Ellen to Sir Wi^m.

As it was a subject he never began, so it was one that he always put an end to
as soon as possible. Sir William perceived this shyness and imputed it to the
worst of motives. From a restless desire to discover what he dreaded to
ascertain, he scarcely ever saw Henry without introducing, in some way or
other, the subject of Ellen's retirement: and Henry at length began to think
there was something of affectation, or design, in this.

While Henry's mind was in this state of suspense, Lady Almeria awakened him to
a much more lively suspicion of the truth.

Lady Almeria's own attendant was cousin 'to the woman who waited upon Ellen.
They were both Northumberland girls: and Ellen's servant had spent all her
life, 'till taken into Ellen's service, within a bow-shot of Groby Manor.

Hence she could tell of the early love between her lady and Mr. Villars, of
the cruelties of Lord Villars, the distress of the lovers, the sudden
appearance of Henry on the eve of Ellen's marriage, with every circumstance
relating to the affair that was made public, and with many that had never
happened, and which were reported from misapprehension and conjecture.

It was from her knowledge of much that really had passed, and from her belief
in still more that never passed, that she had drawn the conclusion that Ellen
would never love Sir William. Thus from the day of her marriage she never saw a
shade of discontent upon Ellen's brow, that she did not impute (according to
the chamber-maid-like idea of the invincibility of a first passion) to her
having been crossed in love.

With a mind thus pre-occupied by this fancy, it was not possible, that the
whole of Sir William's unkindness, and its effects upon Ellen, should be
entirely concealed from her. What she fell short of in real knowledge, she made
up in conjecture: and all she conjectured she reported as fact. -- Much of it,
indeed, was so; though she did not know it.

Ellen having left some books in town, locked up in a cabinet, of which she had
the key with her in the country, about this time sent her maid to town to bring
them to her.

Jenny, who had her mind full of all that she believed had happened in Sir
William's family since she last saw her cousin, made use of some of the few
hours that she spent in town, in a visit to Lady Almeria's house: and there she
fully detailed to her sister gossip, all she knew, and all she believed she
knew.

She told of Ellen's violent illness, immediately following an angry
conversation with Sir William. She repeated some words she had accidentally
overheard. She dwelt on the length of time which he had absented himself from
the apartment of Ellen -- on the dislike that he seemed to have to the child --
on the grief that she had often witnessed in Ellen's countenance and manner --
on the unkindness of Sir William, in never having once visited Oakley since
Ellen had retired thither -- and on the contentment and ease which Ellen seemed
to experience, notwithstanding his absence.

From all these circumstances, those two Machiavels concluded, with a
certainty, that lest no room for doubt, that Sir William was jealous of Mr.
Villars; that he had banished Ellen into the country to prevent their meeting;
and that Ellen had more satisfaction alone, and left to the remembrance of her
first love, than, from the unkindness and suspicion of Sir William, she had
ever enjoyed in the world, and in his society.

As Jenny sincerely loved her mistress, all Ellen did was right in her eyes:
and if she had been employed by her in carrying on an intercourse with Henry,
she would easily have excused her on the score of the unconquerable nature of a
first passion, and the provocation received from a jealous husband; such
circumstances forming a species of apology, that in vulgar minds is a
sufficient excuse for every enormity.

But as Jenny thought Ellen extremely injured, so she knew her to be perfectly
innocent: and hence she painted her as the most patient sufferer, and Sir
William as the worst and most unkind of human creatures.

Lady Almeria's woman had often heard her Lady express somewhat of contempt,
and a good deal of surprise, on Ellen's withdrawing from town at that season of
the year: and she had heard her throw out, as no improbable supposition, that
it was contrary to her own wish, and the effect of Sir William's arbitrary
jealousy. She had, however, also heard her declare, that she was not in the
secret, and did not in fact really know what the cause was.

Lady Almeria, among her other foibles, had that most pernicious one of busying
herself much in the affairs of others. She had always taken upon her to
foretell that the marriage of Ellen with Sir William would end ill; and she
looked with some degree of eagerness for every circumstance that could tend to
prove that her predictions were fulfilled.

From these defects in Lady Almeria's character, Betty always found herself
well listened to when she talked of the characters of her Lady's acquaintance,
or repeated anecdotes out of their respective families.

All, therefore, that she had heard from her cousin, was most eagerly poured
out as a torrent, the next time she attended upon Lady Almeria: and it was
poured out with all those exaggerations and embellishments that so readily
occur to every relator of every story, who wishes to make the most of what is
to be told. Every thing that Betty related, found ready credence with Lady
Almeria: and in a few hours after she had heard the story, meeting with Henry:

'Now,' said she, 'I can clear up the wonderment of Lady Ackland's running away
from us in such a strange manner. That brute, Sir William, is jealous of you:
and he means to confine Ellen to Oakley as long as she lives. And woe be to you
both, if you approach the threshold!'

Henry turned pale as death.

'Let me beg, Lady Almeria,' said he, 'that you will not indulge yourself in
such wild fancies, -- much less repeat them.'

'Oh! you don't believe me? -- Come this way then; and I will give you such a
proof as will clear my veracity in a moment.'

'Why should I be convinced of what would give me inexpressible pain to
believe?'

'It cannot give you more pain than it does me. I have been in a perfect fidget
ever since I heard it. I am sure I dare not tell Mr. Mordaunt half: he would be for
cutting Sir William's throat, or some such thing, for you never heard of such a
dragon.'

Henry's curiosity now got the better of his prudence: and he listened to all
Lady Almeria had to tell. But with what emotions he listened to it, it is not
possible to express. His whole frame trembled: and his agitation was so great,
that lady Almeria began to repent that she had chosen a public assembly for
such a communication.

'Come, I will tell you more,' said she. 'How you do love this Ellen still! I
do not believe there is such another constant swain in the bills of mortality.'

'I must know all now,' said Henry, 'cost me what it will. You have set me on
the rack.'

'But I dare not. It will be you that will be for cutting Sir William's throat
at this rate.'

'No, I have no such thoughts. Sir William will live safe from my vengeance.
But what is there more to hear?'

'Bless me, not much. It is easy to suppose what a jealous, an unreasonable man
will say and do. But Ellen is so reserved that I don't find she has ever
complained, even to her maid.'

'Complained! -- To her maid! -- ' repeated Henry. 'No, Ellen knows how to
suffer, but not to complain.'

'And so she will have no redress! I see no mighty wisdom in that. Were I in
her place I would complain, and loudly too. Men may be managed by their fears:
and Sir William would not dare to use her so, if he thought she would expose
his conduct to the world.'

Henry was in no humor to discuss the propriety of such maxims: and finding he
could draw no farther particulars from Lady Almeria, he earnestly recommended
what yet he could not hope she would practice, the strictest silence; and
withdrew with a heart oppressed almost beyond sufferance.

Although Mr. Villars was well aware of the suspicious quarter from which he
had received his intelligence -- and though in any matter where the happiness
of Ellen had not been concerned, such evidence as that on which it rested,
would not have fixed any circumstance for a moment in his thoughts -- yet in a
case where so much was at stake, his apprehensions gave credibility to the most
doubtful testimony: and this testimony seemed to be confirmed by several
particulars, of the truth of which he could not entertain a doubt.

He knew the sudden and dangerous illness of Ellen, which was now ascribed to
Sir William's violence, to be a fact: and he had before been told, that it had
been occasioned by a fright. It was also certain, that she had retired into the
country, and that Sir William so far from accompanying her, had never even
visited her since her residence there. The frequent, and what now more than
ever appeared to be officious conversations, with him upon this subject,
returned with added effect upon his mind: and he felt persuaded, that they had
been held with a design to confirm or do away suspicions which he was now
convinced Sir William had entertained.

These suspicions seemed, it is true, ill to agree with the friendly and open
conduct he had held toward him while in Devonshire; or with the continuation
of the same in their intercourse in town. But Henry could not help fearing,
that this conduct, which might be used as a cloak to his real thoughts, was
rather a proof that the evil lay deep, than that it did not exist.

A thousand schemes did he revolve in his mind as to what he could or ought to
do toward the discovery of the truth; and toward the alleviation of the evil,
if it did subsist. But to every one he found insupportable objections; and was
obliged to rest in the conclusion, however contrary to his wishes he might find
it, that the safest and best course he could pursue, was to do nothing.

Impelled, however, by feelings very similar, Sir William and he met
continually. Their minds were equally occupied by the same subject; and though
both were shy in their manner of treating it, they found no interest in any
other.

Henry observed that Sir William enquired frequently into his motions; and
remarked, that he was particularly inquisitive whether his love for hunting did
not carry him often to the Lodge. Henry was sometimes, upon such occasions,
betrayed, by his eagerness to do away all suspicion in Sir William's mind, into
a minuteness of detail and a warmth of denial, that rather seemed as the cover
to the truth, than the simple declaration of it.

Seldom, therefore, did Sir William and Henry converse together without Henry
being more than ever convinced of the jealousy Sir William had co^ceived, and
Sir William confirmed in the justice of it.

By these conversations, and the reflections Sir William made upon them, his
mind was at length wrought up to such a pitch of misery and indignation, that
he resolved to withhold the meditated revenge no longer: but, preparatory to
the blow he intended to strike, it was necessary to see Ellen, and lull her if
possible into perfect security.

For this purpose he no longer delayed to visit Oakley. There, however, such a
scene awaited him, as again broke in upon all his designs, and suspended his
mind once more in the agitating balance of uncertainty.

CHAP. IV.
'What angel shall
"Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive!'
SHAKESPEARE.
SIR WILLIAM found Ellen blooming with health, and her ingenuous countenance
marked with the placid look of content, which virtue only can impress. He found
her busied in every rural and every domestic care, living with the children
perpetually in her arms, occupied wholly with them, and apparently without a
thought which wandered from the environs of Oakley.

He was received by her with such marks of genuine satisfaction, as seemed not
to leave a doubt but that he was truly welcome to her, and that it would be his
own fault if he did not derive from her society every happiness he could desire.

Such appearances were so entirely incompatible with the guilt he had been so
ready to impute to her, as to compel him for some time, in spite of himself, to
do her justice. Yet, if she did not love Henry, how came she to be so happy in
the absence of her husband? The answer that his conscience forced from him to
this question, gave ^im a pang of self-reproach, that he knew not how to endure.

If her heart be not another's -- yet I have lost it for ever, thought he. But
no, it is in loving Henry that she has ceased to love me. My conduct toward
her has justified this dereliction in her eyes; and hence the ease and
satisfaction that appears in her countenance; hence the deep hypocrisy she is
enabled to maintain.

Such thoughts as these were supplanted by others more worthy of Ellen: and
these were again driven from his mind by fresh suspicions and new jealousies.
What would he not have given for Morgana's cup, or the little boy's mantle.

Ellen remarked the perturbation of his mind: and she strove to allay it by the
most affectionate cheerfulness. It would not have been possible to have
supposed from any word or look that escaped Ellen, that she had withdrawn into
the country to avoid the violent effects of the most unjust jealousy; or that
she retained an atom of resentment for the injuries she had received. A perfect
oblivion as to all that had passed before her removal to Oakley, seemed to
pervade her mind. She appeared willing to consider that period as a new epoch
of her life, from which, if he pleased, Sir William might date their mutual
happiness.

Sir William had now spent three weeks in Berkshire: and so far had the mild
and wise demeanor of Ellen wrought upon his mind, that he began to consider all
his past fears but as the horrors of a frightful dream from which he was now
awakened.

If he could always live with Ellen at Oakley, he thought he could subdue his
jealousy: but to live always at Oakley, even with an angel, was what little
suited his taste. It would not, however, he knew, be difficult to persuade
Ellen to continue there altogether. This indeed appeared to be what she
desired: and if he could be assured that she lived there wholly to herself and
children, he was willing to flatter himself, that the kindness with which he
doubted not she would always receive him when he chose to join her, would be
sufficient for his own happiness.

To this scheme of selfish felicity there was only one objection arose in his
mind: he feared there might be some mystery in the choice Ellen seemed to have
made of Oakley for her residence. The neighborhood of the Lodge recurred to
his remembrance; and brought with it a sudden pang of jealousy that made him
start.

The experiment, however, he thought worth trying. If Ellen were innocent, she
might be safely trusted at Oakley. If she were guilty, the place of her abode
was a matter of little consequence. Time and observation could alone clear this
important point: and to time and observation he resolved to refer it.

Sir William was in this state of mind, not wholly cured of his suspicions, and
yet willing to believe them ill founded, when an event happened, that seemed to
his disturbed imagination to carry conviction with it. It fixed (...)
immoveably in his plan of vengeance, and sealed the destiny of Ellen.

Both the children were seized at the same time with the measles: and the
disorder put on its most alarming form. Ellen dispatched a messenger instantly
to Lady Almeria; and shutting herself up in the apartment with the children,
watched them with equal and unremitted solicitude. Before Lady Almeria arrived,
the little girl was apparently out of danger: but the boy continued in a state
of the greatest hazard.

Ellen, who had not a thought that she could disguise from him, did not observe
the almost undissembled indifference with which Sir William viewed the child's
danger, and her sorrows. But it struck every body else. Lady Almeria considered
it as a full confirmation of all that she had been told. She had promised to
inform Henry of the progress of the child's disease: and she scrupled not to
mention in the most explicit terms, all the observations that she had made on
Sir William's conduct.

Henry was almost driven to distraction with the idea of Ellen's sufferings,
and Sir William's cruelty: yet durst he not attempt to alleviate the one, or to
punish the other. He could only entreat Lady Almeria not to remit the frequency
and particularity of her details: and he waited the event in town, with all the
anxiety and perturbation that he might have felt, had he been indeed the father
of the child.

Not all the exertion of the best medical skill, nor all poor Ellen's
solicitous and unwearied care, could prolong her darling's date on earth, or
keep its spirit one moment from its native sky. -- It died! -- And Ellen
remained a motionless image of despair, by the side of the bed on which it had
expired.

Sir William had been out in his grounds; and, returning, entered the apartment
to make his usual cold inquiry, in his accustomed words of, 'How go you on?'

'It is all over!' said Lady Almeria.

'Thank God!' said Sir William, and rushed out of the room.

Ellen looked up; and instantly sunk down senseless, and to all appearance
lifeless.

Lady Almeria's shrieks brought Sir William back. 'You have murdered her -- you
have killed Ellen,' said she.

No words can describe Sir William's consternation. He hardly knew the force of
the words that had escaped him, and the effect they had had upon Ellen appeared
incomprehensible. But the sight of her, pale and breathless before him, drove
him almost to instant madness. He caught her in his arms; and, eager to remove
her from the chamber of death, carried her to her own apartment. There, while
every method was used to restore her, he threw himself on his knees before her,
and, regardless of all present, earnestly implored her forgiveness, upbraiding
himself as the most cruel and unjust of men, and promised never-ceasing love
and confidence, if she would but live to bless him.

Ellen opened her eyes. But, as if the sight of Sir William was baneful to her,
she put her hands before them and wept bitterly.

Sir William ordered every body to retire.

'No! no! no!' said Ellen.

'Do you then hate me?' said Sir William, 'Dare you not trust yourself with me?'

These words brought Ellen to her recollection. 'Do not talk so, Sir William.
But I am very ill. I want assistance?'

'I will assist you. I would give my life for yours: and do you refuse to let
me attend you*

'Leave us,' said Ellen faintly.

'Oh! Sir William,' said she, when they were alone, 'what mean those words of
love, after you have given me such a proof of your deadly hatred?'

'A proof of deadly hatred! -- Oh! Ellen, how you wrong me! what sense can you
have put upon my words, to make you think them words of hatred?'

Ellen wept but could not speak.

'The subject is too delicate,' continued Sir William, 'to explain upon. But is
it an unpardonable crime, when hope was extinct, to have been grateful that
suffering was no more?'

Ellen was silent.

'Dearest Ellen, say, you misunderstood; that you are convinced. Do not persist
in an error so injurious.'

'I cannot speak. My heart is cruelly oppressed: but never need you dread
injustice from me.'

'Then, my dearest love, look upon me. Do not thus turn from me, as if the very
sight of me was hateful to you. Often have I given you cause of offense. Never
did I find you unforgiving. Now when I would not offend you, be not less kind.'

'I would not think that there has been offense given. I would not think that
there is room for forgiveness.'

'Then, in this embrace, be all misapprehension forgotten. Be assured, you
cannot be grieved, without my taking a part in your affliction.'

'I will endeavor to believe it. But take it not unkindly, if I wish to be
alone, I am very greatly afflicted. I cannot now make use of the full powers of
my mind. I cannot at this moment be all you wish me to be, or all I ought to
be. Let me recollect myself. I hope soon to be resigned to all the ill I am
destined to suffer, and alive to all the good that is still afforded me.'

'May you consider my love,' said Sir William, embracing her, 'as the greatest
share of that good; and as a proof you do so, do not banish me long from you.'

Sir William then left her, and endeavored to calm the disturbance of his
mind, by persuading himself that he had given such a sense to the unkind words
that had escaped him, as would effectually remove from the mind of Ellen all
apprehension of their real meaning.

Whatever were the suspicions that had dictated these words, and whatever the
impulse to which he had yielded in uttering them, he was sensible there was a
barbarity in their sound, that no motive, and scarcely any offense, could
justify. He doubted not but Lady Almeria would repeat them: and he saw his
character at stake. In persuading Ellen that they were only the effusion of
compassion, he knew he secured a warm advocate: and in the kindness of their
intercourse he saw a refutation of any censure to which his unguardedness might
have exposed him

These were the selfish motives upon which his present conduct was founded. But
he was not without a very sensible compunction for what had passed, and had a
very lively interest in the sorrows of Ellen. He had lately accustomed himself
to consider her as rather injured than injuring: and in this light he felt for
her a revival of his first passion: and, mixed as it was, with pity toward
her, and reproach to himself, the expressions of it were more lively and tender
than even in the first days of their marriage.

But Ellen's heart was no longer in a state to receive pleasure from the love
of Sir William. No explanation that he could give to words so cruel and
wounding, could do away the effect they had produced in her mind. Without fully
understanding the feeling from whence they sprung, she felt them as the
greatest and most unprovoked unkindness he could have been guilty of. The
careless indifference he had shown through the whole of the poor baby's
illness, now rushed upon her recollection, and she found it impossible to
believe that words so strong had arisen only from a sudden impulse of
compassion to sufferings to which he had so long appeared insensible. Yet why
Sir William should rejoice in the death of his child, except because it was the
source of her purest delight, she could not guess. She had often thought, that
he had considered the boy with jealousy, as an object which had occupied that
place in her heart, which he alone ought to have possessed; but for a jealousy
so selfish and unjustifiable, with all her candor, she could find no excuse. A
sentiment of disgust and resentment now therefore mingled with the deep grief
of Ellen for the loss of her child; nor could all her efforts to subdue it,
wholly succeed. But grief in this case did more for her than reason. So
overwhelming was her affliction, that it overcame every other feeling: and had
the cause of the offense been unconnected with the subject of her sorrow, it
would have been instantly obliterated from her mind.

CHAP. V.
'Oft' expectation fails, and most often there
'Where most it promises.'
SHAKESPEARE.
WHILE Ellen remained almost wholly absorbed in grief, a circumstance happened,
which broke in upon her affliction, and convinced her, that no state could be
wholly wretched which afforded the benevolent heart an opportunity of
administering to the wants of others.

Her letters from Northumberland informed her, that the grandson of her
favorite protegee, Deborah, a young man distinguished for his intelligence,
honesty, and industry, had, from some unavoidable misfortunes, fallen into the
greatest distress, and that he, his wife, and two children, were in jail.
Charlotte, who wrote the history, deplored the utter impossibility of her
father to afford any effectual assistance to so much undeserved misery; as the
sum necessary for that purpose was not short of two hundred pounds, a sum much
too large for him to spare from the immediate wants of his own family.

Ellen's heart seemed to leap in her bosom, when she read this account. Sir
William had always ^tinued his usual allowance to her: and the little occasion
she had had for money for many months past, had made her rich. By anticipating
a part of her next quarterage, which might be made easy by a little future
economy* she was able immediately to command two hundred pounds: and by the
return of the post she transmitted a draft upon Sir William's banker for that
sum.

It is needless to attempt explaining the joy and gratitude of the family,
whose miseries she relieved. Their joy, however, was not short of her own; nor
was her gratitude less when she raised her thoughts to the Giver of all Good --
the giver of that good which includes all other, the giver of a good heart.
This transaction shed a calm over the mind of Ellen, and contributed more
toward restoring her to peace, than any gratification merely selfish could
have done.

Lady Almeria had been but too faithful a detailer to the wretched Henry of the
whole story of the death of the child, and the consequent sorrows of Ellen: and
he felt on the communication, his sufferings increase to so intolerable a
degree, that he found it impossible to forbear some effort toward their
alleviation. Yet, when he considered that all his information came from Lady
Almeria, and reflected upon her unfeeling character, and the talent she had in
exaggeration, he thought it prudent to judge with his own eyes, and determine,
by his own observation, before he took any step, the consequence of which might
involve the conduct of Ellen as well as his own.

Ellen, from the extent of her grief, which took in the whole of her mind,
excep^ what she could spare to the calls of benevolence, and from the
gentleness of her temper, which forbade any sharpness of resentment, had been
able to receive Sir William's attention and solicitudes with such a degree of
satisfaction and gratitude, as seemed to speak to all lookers on, that perfect
harmony was restored between them. Ellen had been also particularly softened
toward Sir William by his generosity, unlike his usual character, toward the
grandson of poor Deborah. The circumstance of what Ellen had done for him came
accidentally to his knowledge: and he was too accute not to perceive the
favorable opportunity now in his power, of doing more toward reinstating
himself in Ellen's favor, than all his studied fondness to herself could ever
have produced. He praised, in the highest terms, Ellen's benevolence; and by
imitating, give an irrefragable proof that he approved it. To the two hundred
pounds he added another, as a means by which the young man might be enabled to
enter the world again with some advantage.

On this occasion, Ellen looked upon Sir William with an air of the sweetest
complacency: and she once more said to herself, his heart will at length open
to the true use of riches. Our minds and our wishes will be in unison: and we
shall be happy.

Sir William had explained the offensive words to lady Almeria, in the same
sense in which h^ had explained them to Ellen: and he sought more and more by
the marks of the fondest love, and most sincere participation in her present
affliction, to prove that they could justly bear no other sense. Ellen seemed
now to have forgiven, or at least to have f^gotten all that had passed: and
Lady Almeria now saw nothing between Ellen ^d Sir William that could justify
her former opinion, or the tales of Jenny.

She was not, however, willing, notwithstanding those favorable appearances,
to suppose herself mistaken: and while she acknowledged in her letters to
Henry, the change that had taken place, she scrupled not to impute it to the
consummate art of Sir William, who meant by this means to deceive her. For the
truth of this conjecture she appealed to the sorrow in which Ellen was still
plunged; and which, she said, it was impossible to believe occasioned by the
death of a brat not four months old.

But Henry, who saw no such impossibility, considering the peculiar
circumstances in which Ellen was placed, and feeling his hopes revive, that her
sorrows did not wholly flow from so irremediable a cause as he had been taught
to believe, thought this a proper time, when Sir William was with her, and they
appeared to be on perfect good terms with each other, to make use of his own
observation to come at the truth if possible. For this purpose he came down to
the Lodge: and the next morning after his arrival, walked over to Oakley. He
had been told by Lady Almeria, that Ellen was so much indisposed, that she
seldom left her apartment 'till two o'clock in the day: and he had therefore
chosen an hour for his first visit, in which he believed he should only see Sir
William.

He had crossed a corner of the park, and had entered through a part of the
gardens which led him directly to a small hall where servants always waited.
But in going toward this hall* he necessarily passed before the breakfast-room
windows, which opened to the ground, and at which at that moment Lady Almeria
was standing. They saw each other: and Lady Almeria beckoning to him, said, 'So
you are come? I thought you could not stay away: but you have good information:
for I suppose you know Sir William is not at home?'

'Sir William not at home?' repeated Henry, 'Why did you not tell me so before?'

'Oh, he went away two days ago, upon some sudden business or other, that
signified not a farthing, and will stay away a week I believe. Well, sit down,
and I Will run and tell Ellen. I am sure the sight of you will do her good.'

'Stay, I beg you will stay,' said he. 'Do you suppose, knowing all you do,
that I would see Lady Ackland in the absence of Sir William?'

'Why not? I tell you it will do her good: and it was an hundred to one but you
had found her in this room. She is much better than she was, and comes down to
breakfast: but ^he had a headache this morning; and so kept her ^ber.'

'I am happy she did so. And now, Lady Almeria, if it be possible for you to
keep a secret, promise me that you will not mention to Lady Ackland that I have
been here. As some little indemnification for such restraint, I give you leave
to tell Sir William every circumstance of my visit.'

'Tell Sir William indeed! No, I will never tell him any thing that I think can
give him satisfaction. But, in the name of common sense (for as to high-flown
heroics I do not pretend to understand them) pray tell me, why you will not see
Lady Ackland.'

'If half what you have told me is authentic, I think you may answer that
question yourself. My visit was to Sir William, not to Lady Ackland: and when
Sir William returns I will repeat it. I have no objection to seeing Lady
Ackland: but I will not see her apart from her husband.'

'But why not give yourself the merit of your mighty forbearance with Ellen? --
Objection to seeing Lady Ackland indeed! I know you would give one of your eyes
to see her with the other. Why not tell her what hardships you impose upon
yourself for her sake?'

'Dear Lady Almeria, would you have me show to Lady Ackland, that I know Sir
William is jealous? I hope in God this is a truth she will always remain
ignorant of. Have you not told me yourself, that even to you she will never
appear to see this: and shall I convince her, that not only you, but that I am
in possession of the fatal secret -- a secret she wishes to conceal from the
world!'

'Why then did you not stay and see her, as you would do if you knew nothing of
the matter?'

'And so expose her to the unjust suspicions and unkind treatment of Sir
William. Even you suppose I had received intelligence of his absence: and do
you think he will be less liable to fall into such an error? When Sir William
knows of my visit, and knows I have not seen Lady Ackland, it will be
impossible but that he should believe, what is truth, that I came to see him,
and not her.'

'Well, I pretend to no great skill, either in matters of prudence, or in
matters of sentiment. But I Will engage for it I should manage a jealous husband
better than either of you. -- I should go my own way. If it were agreeable to
my mighty Lord so much the better for him: if the contrary, he would be soon
weary of complaints that hurt nobody but himself. There, now you must see Ellen
-- that is her chamber door -- I hear her foot on the stairs.'

'Good morning then: and I entreat you do not say I have been here.'

Henry darted out of the room; and to avoid the path that would have detained
him for some time within sight of the windows, turned hastily into a more
private one, which led into a part of the pleasure ground, that did not connect
with that part of the park by which he had entered. After wandering about some
little time, he found his way over a fence, from which he regained the public
road, and from thence his own house.

When here, he reflected upon the escape he had, and upon the injury he might
have caused Ellen, had he seen her in Sir William's absence. Such a
circumstance would, he well knew, have carried to a jealous mind, conviction of
a private correspondence. He determined to learn forbearance for the future,
and from henceforth to act as if the sorrows and injuries of Ellen were
indifferent to him. The evil that might have attended the gratification of his
solicitude upon this subject, though he had guarded, as he thought, the mask of
it with every possible caution, fixed the pang of self reproach in his h^t.

'Dearest Ellen,' said he to himself, 'I am forbidden to contribute to your
happiness: but let no alleviation to my own misery, tempt me again to hazard an
increase of yours.'

Alas! if the possibility of increasing the sorrows of Ellen appeared thus
insupportable to the feeling and generous heart of Henry, what would have been
his anguish had he been conscious of the evils he had already prepared for her.
Determined by these thoughts, Henry measured his steps back to London; and
firmly resolved, on no pretense whatever, again to attempt seeing either Sir
William or Ellen.

Lady Almeria had a sharp contest between her love of communication, and her
pride, which was somewhat piqued by Henry's words, 'If it be possible you can
keep a secret.' Her desire to show him that she could, prevailed more than any
motives of prudence or delicacy, or desire of obliging him, in inducing her to
hold her tongue* but being fidgetting and restless under this restraint, she
dragged Ellen with her into the garden, and then ran away from her, to look all
around, for the purpose of seeing if Henry was quite gone.

Ellen was returning slowly alone to the house, when she saw, with some
surprise, Sir William coming toward her. He was attended by a servant, whom
she heard him question very ^nestly, and with something of displeasure in his
^e, whether there had been any visitors in his absence. On the (...) answering
in the negative, he (...) angrily (...) him, and seeing Ellen, started (...)
discomposure. Ellen was (...) steps to meet Sir William: and so far from its
appearing that Sir William hastened to meet her, that she thought for an
instant he would have turned another way. The next instant, however, he came
forward, and joined her.

'You are much improved,' said he, in an unconciliating tone, 'since I left
you. I hear you come down to breakfast; and I see you walk in the garden.'

'Yes,' said Ellen, taking hold of his arm: 'but that giddy Lady Almeria has
run away from me: and I should have found it difficult to have gained the house
without some support.'

'You had support when you left it, I suppose?'

'Lady Almeria was with me: but she has ^own off upon some of her ^luttering
expeditions, I know not where, or why.'

'Have you been alone, since I left you?'

'Yes; and poor Lady Almeria is so tired, I think she would have left me to
myself, if you had not returned to put an end to our tete-a-tete.'

'She will not like the party better for my being of it.'

'Indeed I believe nothing will detain her here much longer. She thinks she has
already sacrificed enough to charity; for she declares she is here wholly upon
that score now.'

Here they reached the house: and Ellen was glad to repose herself upon a sofa.
Sir William stood silent before her, with his eyes fixed intently on her face,
and lost in deep thought.

Struck with his appearance and manner, so unlike all that he had lately shown,
it occurred suddenly to Ellen, that something unpleasant had happened during
his absence. 'What's the matter?' said she kindly. 'You are returned sooner
than you intended. Nothing, I hope, is amiss.'

'It is plain, I have returned sooner than I was expected,' said Sir William;
and went hastily out of the room.

Ellen, astonished and alarmed, knew not what to think or conjecture. She was
sure some new jealous fancy had taken possession of him; but could not guess
from whence it originated. Had she known, that he had seen Henry scrambling
over the fence, which divided the pleasure ground from the road, the enigma
would have been explained. This, indeed, was the case: hence his earnest
questions to the servants, hence his increased suspicions on meeting Ellen in
the garden, and hence that implacable desire of vengeance that proved so fatal
to Ellen.

CHAP. VI.
'If she be false, oh, then heaven mocks itself.'
SHAKESPEARE.
LADY ALMERIA returning to the house, learnt from Ellen the unexpected return
of Sir William; and she learnt it with much satisfaction; for being heartily
tired with her residence at Oakley, she was resolved to seize the moment when
Ellen had a companion to leave it. She therefore replied, 'Well, then, you will
want me no longer: and therefore I will return to town tomorrow, where, I
flatter myself, many people want me.'

'You will leave me,' said Ellen, with a deep sigh, 'you will leave me your
little girl?'

'Most willingly. But I hope you will not think of staying here: you will never
recover your spirits if you do. But if Almeria grows inconvenient to you,
either send her to me in town, or let her maid take her down into Devonshire.'

Lady Almeria then went to give some ^irections to her servants, for her
removal the next day: and Ellen, dispirited and occupied wholly with
conjectures as to the cause of Sir William's discomposure, retired to her own
room.

Lady Almeria returned sometime afterward to the breakfast parlour* and it
occurring to her, that it would be a good thing to apprize Henry of the arrival
of Sir William, she wrote him the following lines.

'Sir William returned this morning. You made your escape in the nick of time.
The enemy would have been upon you in a moment. Now, however, you may make your
approaches in all due form, and with a decorum that will set suspicion at
defiance. I shall be gone tomorrow; so to all your other motives, you may add
that of charity, for your visits here. Perhaps the world will be kind enough to
impute them wholly to that laudable principle. However, pray come; for poor
Ellen will be moped to death, if left wholly to the conversation of caro sposo.'

This note she left open upon the table, while she ran up stairs to countermand
some directions she had given to her maid. She was not absent ten minutes: but
Sir William entering the room in her absence, his eye was involuntary caught by
his own name, written in Lady Almeria's hand. No motive of honor, or delicacy,
could at that moment have restrained him from the gratification of his
curiosity. He read -- every word was a dagger to his heart. He rushed out of
the room into the garden, with the fury of a mad man, impelled by a sudden
impulse, to seek Henry, and make him atone by his blood for the injury he could
no longer doubt he had received from him.

A few moments, however, brought him to calmer reflection. His resolution was
previously taken, and taken upon what he thought a certainty little short of
that which he had this moment received. But such evidence as this brought
conviction with it: and he felt somewhat like satisfaction, that, acting upon
sure grounds, that would now be justice, which might before have been cruelty.
His victim, if a victim he made, he had always determined should be Ellen. Her
criminality was, in his eyes, of a much deeper dye than Henry's. It was the
complicated product of hypocricy, infidelity, and treachery. He considered each
action of her life, since he became her husband, as marked with the most
vicious duplicity: and he held himself acquitted to his own heart, for using
the same means for the punishment of vice, which, he believed, had been pursued
in the perpetration of it.

The present tumult of his mind, however, was too great to escape notice, if he
were to subject himself to observation. He returned, therefore, to the house;
and summoning his servant, complained of sudden indisposition, and went to bed.

Ellen was soon informed, that Sir William was not well, and going to his
chamber, sa^ his inflamed eye, and felt his burning hand, with a truly tender
compassion: she entreated h^ (...) send instantly for a physician, and seating
(...) by his bedside, declared her intention of wate^ing by him, 'till the
physician arrived. Sir William opposed this resolution so strenuously, and with
somewhat of such unkind warmth, that Ellen, fearing to be of more disservice by
opposition, than of use by her attendance, at length yielded: and she yielded
the more willingly, as Sir William positively asserted, that his illness only
arose from having rode fast in a ho^ s^ and he averred that a few hours sleep
(a^ ^e affected to feel himself drowsy) would entirely remove all his
complaints.

Ellen was not, however, so well satisfied with Sir William's medical skill, as
to rely wholly either upon his account of the cause of his illness, or in his
confidence in its cure. She therefore sent for a physician; and frequently
visited the door of Sir William's apartment, to satisfy herself, if she could,
whether he slept or not. She was soon convinced that he did not sleep, being
sure that she heard him up, and walking about his room. She gently tried the
lock of the door, but finding it fastened, did not venture to push her
intrusion farther.

This circumstance fixed the most uneasy solicitude on her mind. The humor in
which Sir William had appeared, on his return home, and which, when he
complained of illness, she had persuaded herself to attribute wholly to that
cause, she now began to consider more as a cause itself* and to fear, that if
there really were any indi^osition, it was brought on by discomposure of mind.
But she apprehended that illness was (...) pretense, and that Sir William meant
(...) withdraw himself from all observation, (...) exciting any curiosity by
doing so. In (...) case, no good could be produced by her forcing herself upon
him against his will. If he were really ill she could not doubt, but that he
would do all that was necessary in such a case: and if any thing had arisen to
vex him, she thought her influence to calm his mind, would be exerted with the
most hope of sucess, when he appeared more willing to listen to her. She
therefore retired to her own room; and there waited in anxious suspense, 'till
Sir William's bell should give her a pretense again to appear in his apartment.

While these things were passing, Lady Almeria had returned to the
breakfast-room, had sealed her note, and dispatched it to the Lodge, by the
servant whom she was sending to the neighboring town, for post horses for her
carriage the next day. When she was told Sir William was ill, she was somewhat
alarmed, lest she should be again involved in the cares of charity, and that
his illness should be of such a nature as would not allow her, with decency, to
leave Ellen while it continued. She went to Lady Ackland's appartment, to make
all the enquiries possible; but could learn nothing more that was satisfactory.

In the mean time, the physician arrived: and Ellen desired he might be shown
immediately to Sir William. The servant, however, informed her that he had
received the most positive commands from his mas^, not to enter his room until
called for, and that he durst not disobey.

As Ellen's fears on the account of illness had very much subsided, she yielded
to the servant's remonstrance; and affected to suppose that Sir William slept,
and that sleep would be his certain cure. In her stolen visits to the door, she
had observed all was quiet; and began to hope that the paroxysm of ill humor,
which she was induced to think was the whole of the case, was going off.

About eight in the evening, Sir William rang his bell. His servant found him
up: and on being told that Doctor Wilson was in the house, he readily admitted
both him and Ellen. With a kind of bitter raillery, he treated her wife-like
fears, that had induced her to trouble Doctor Wilson to ride ten miles in a hot
day, to visit a man who had gone to bed to sleep off a headache; and stre^ching
out his hand to the physician, 'Feel, Sir,' said he, 'if that pulse does not
beat healthfully.'

Doctor Wilson affirmed it did; and assured Ellen she need have no farther
apprehension, for that Sir William had known how to cure himself.

Ellen, convinced that her suspicions as to the nonexistence of any complaint,
were perfectly well founded, now withdrew; and informed Lady A^meria, that Sir
William had slept off all his c^mplaints, and that Doctor Wilson said he was
quite well.

'Thank God!' said Lady Almeria.

Ellen could not help smiling. 'I am sure Sir William is much obliged to you
for the interest you take in his health!' said she

'Pish! -- no. That Is not quite the thing. But you know I have fixed to go to
town tomorrow: and I could not have gone, and left Sir William ill, and you so
drooping.'

Then shook her head; and moralized a little to herself, on the good and ill
that attended a disposition so thoroughly selfish.

Sir William appeared both at supper and at breakfast next morning: but it
happened that he was never an instant with Lady Almeria apart from Ellen: and
if he had been so, it is probable she would not have mentioned the visit Henry
had made, both from the reason she had given, of never willingly contributing
to the satisfaction of Sir William, and the feeling no particular stimulus to
relate that which had nothing out of the common way to recommend it, and which
contained no mischief in it.

When she shook hands at parting with Ellen, 'Pray endeavor to recover your
spirits,' said she. 'But you ought to go some where. You Will never be yourself
again if you stay here.'

'I think,' said Sir William, after Lady Almeria was gone, 'I think for once
Lady Almeria gives good advice. I have been thinking of the same thing. What
say you to an expedition for some little time?'

'I will accompany you any where willingly,' said Ellen, her heart beating with
the hope that Groby Manor would be the place thought of.

'Your health, your spirits, require some change of scene,' returned Sir
William. 'Our newborn happiness (hurryingly, and with a clouded brow he spoke
it) requires nurture. In a distant residence, in a foreign country, I hope we
should be able to re-establish the one and secure the other. What say you to
going abroad for a few months?'

The thought of Northumberland crossed Ellen's mind; and prevented that
promptness of compliance with which she usually met any proposal from Sir
William. She hesitatingly repli^d, 'I can have no objection, provided I can
(...) Groby Manor before I go.'

'Why visit Groby Manor? That would derange all my plans. I want to be gone
immediately.'

'You do not mean then to be absent very long I suppose?'

'Not very long; I should propose returning in something less than a
twelvemonth.'

'A twelvemonth!' repeated Ellen, 'and do you not call that long?'

'I think a less time will not answer any of the purposes for which we go: and
as I do not wish to spend any time in London for the next year and half, I
would not return to England 'till next June.'

'If our absence is to be so long, you can have no objection to my visiting
Groby Manor before we set out. It is now a year and a half since I saw any of
its dear inhabitants.'

'When,' said Sir William peevishly, 'shall I propose any thing, to which you
will give a ready assent?'

'You cannot wonder,' returned Ellen mildly, that I do not willingly consent to
add another twelvemonth to the separation which has already taken place between
me and some of those whom I best love, and who best love me. My father, in
particular, I know longs to see me.'

'I should have no objection to your going into Northumberland, but the thing
is impossible. Let me see. This is Wednesday. By Monday se'nnight I hope to be
landed in Holland.'

'By Monday se'nnight! Indeed I am very sorry to hear it: for, pardon me if I
say, I fear my father will take it very unkindly, if I leave England for so
long a time without seeing him.'

'You may easily exonerate yourself from the charge of unkindness. Lay every
thing upon the cruelty and tyranny of your husband: and then you will not only
be excused but ^pitied.'

'Alas! if we carry such thoughts as these abroad with us, change of place will
add little to our happiness.'

'Why then do you give reason for them? In no one instance since we were
married, have you been willing to sacrifice the feelings of others to my
wishes.'

'Indeed! this then shall be an instance. I am ready to quit England with you
if you choose it.'

'And do you say this from your heart?'

'From my heart, and with my heart. I had hoped your wishes would never have
been in competition with the duties that I own my father: but since it is so,
your wishes shall have the place they ought to have.'

'How inexplicable, how impenetrable is the heart of a woman?' exclaimed Sir
William.

'Indeed, my dear Sir William, you make the mystery you seem to wonder at.
Surely there is not a leaf in the whole book of nature sooner read than that of
my heart.'

'Do not I know, do not I know -- ' then hastily checking himself, 'well, I
will put you to the test.' Then opening a book of maps, 'Let us trace our
intended route. We will have none of the beaten road of France and Italy. Let
us begin with the North of Europe. My sister's marriage with a Saxon nobleman,
has occasioned me at times to reside so much* in the Northern part of Germany,
that I feel myself at home there: and some of the happiest hours I ever knew,
were spent at Dresden. We will go to Dresden. I will introduce you to my
sister. We will go first to the Hague; from thence we may see every thing that
the United Provinces have worthy of observation. I will show you Hanover,
Brunswick, Hamburg. You shall visit the shores of the Baltic. We will then turn
to Berlin: there we may spend some time. But we will winter at Dresden.'

'And by what route shall we come home asked Ellen.'

'Oh, I will travel you through Bohemia to Vienna: perhaps enter Italy. But
there are scenes with which I think you would be particularly pleased, in the
Archbishopric of Saltzburg.'

'I think I should like to go from Vienna to Venice,' said Ellen; 'from thence
through the Tyrol to Switzerland. I should be sorry to leave Switzerland out of
our tour. But we seem to be furnishing materials for a very long absence.'

'We could easily pass through a much greater extent of country, than we have
marked out, in much less time than we think of being absent.'

'Yes, pass through it. But that is not the manner in which we should like to
see it.'

'Well, this is only a rough sketch of what we may do. We must model it as
circumstances and inclination may arise.'

'But do you really design to leave England next week? Is it possible we should
do so? Must we not have a traveling carriage built? And your own affairs --
can you put them in a proper state, in so short an interval, to be left for so
long a period?'

'All this may be managed. Give yourself no trouble about the matter. Make what
arrangements you may find necessary as speedily as possible. And be assured I
shall be ready to accompany you to town in less than a week, in our way to
Harwich.'

Sir William then left her, and with an air as if he would immediately begin
his preparations: and Ellen retired to her room with a mind extremely
distressed and embarrassed by the consideration of all that had passed since
the preceding morning. She could not help connecting this sudden journey with
the discontent and disturbance Sir William had manifested the day before. But
all her reasoning and all her penetration were unequal to the discovery of the
link that was between them.

From the habit, which had arisen from principle, that Ellen had acquired, of
always looking on the bright side of events, and of opening her mind to all the
good it was possible they could produce, she was enabled at this moment to
subdue a crowd of painful apprehensions, and indistinct fears, that arose in
her thoughts. She endeavored to gather from some words that had fallen from
Sir William, that his present conduct was designed as the final test of her
integrity and affection* and she flattered herself that a prudent management on
her part would fix the content of her future life upon a tolerably firm basis.

It was this thought that had made her so readily yield her consent, and her
reasonable desire of seeing her family before her departure, to the needless
hurry, as it appeared to her, and capricious wishes of Sir William: and it was
this thought, that inspired her with fortitude to conceal the bitter regret
that she felt in consequence of this sacrifice. She was resolved that Sir
William should see on her part nothing but good humor and alacrity: and she
hoped that in the cheerfulness with which she quitted every other attachment to
accompany him, he would find a full refutation to those unjust suspicions that
had hitherto destroyed her peace, together with his own.

CHAP. VII.
'Ne fune intorto credero che stringa
'Soma cosi ne cosi legno chiodo,
'Come la fe che una bella alma cinga
'Del suo tenace, indissolubil nodo.
'Ne dagli antichi par, che si dipinga
'La santa fe vestita in altro modo,
'Che d'un Vel bianco, che la copra tutta,
'Ch' un sol punto, un Sol neo la puo sar brutta.'
ARIOSTO.
THERE is no virtue which so immediately produces its own reward, as a vigorous
exertion of the mind, arising from a purity of principle.

Ellen soon felt that cheerfulness and that alacrity which she had judged it
proper to assume. She wrote without delay to her father, informing him of the
journey she was about to undertake. But softening the apparent harshness of
their declining to visit Northumberland before the set out, by representing
that Sir William's haste to be abroad arose from his solicitude on her account,
which would not suffer him to listen to any delay: she intimated a very
probable hope, that her absence would be much shorter than was at present
talked of. She suggested that it would depend upon her perfect restoration to
health: and as she could truly say, that all remains of indisposition were even
now trifling, she dwelt upon the strong probability, that they must meet again
early in the spring. She endeavored, by an appearance of cheerfulness and
satisfaction, to leave no doubt upon the mind of her father, that the journey
met fully with her concurrence: and she promised the most constant and minute
details of all she should see or hear.

The letter, however kindly designed, or artfully framed, by no means answered
the purpose for which it was written. Mr. Mordaunt was struck with the glaring
inconsistency of the degree of indisposition, that required so precipitate a
removal into another country, and the choice that had been made of the country
to which the invalid was to be removed. The climate of the northern part of
Germany seemed ill calculated for the recovery of a constitution debilitated by
sickness and sorrow.

Ellen had indeed mentioned, as a concurring motive for her journey, that from
change of scene was hoped a relief to her spirits, as well as from a change of
climate to her health. But Mr. Mordaunt well knew, that, if left to her own
choice, Ellen would have sought every relief that she could hope for her mind
in Northumberland, rather than elsewhere: and the cheerfulness which she had
assumed in her manner of writing, with the pleasure she affected to take in the
prospects before her, seemed to say, that she did not stand in need of much
assistance in this way.

These reflections perplexed and disturbed Mr. Mordaunt* and he resolved to see
Ellen before her departure. He wrote accordingly to inform her of his
intention: but that he might not delay for a moment a journey upon which Ellen
had described Sir William as so earnestly bent, he told her, that he should
immediately proceed to town, where he hoped he should be time enough to catch
them for a few hours as they passed through it; he having understood from Ellen
that Sir William did not mean to make even a day's stay in the metropolis. But
Sir William's haste defeated Mr. Mordaunt's kind purpose: and though, had he
known the fears and suspicions that had found their way into Mr. Mordaunt's
mind, he would willingly have spared not one day only, but several days for the
purpose of removing them; yet it not having occurred to him that Mr. Mordaunt
would not rest satisfied with Ellen's representation of the matter, he was not
aware that there were either fears or suspicions to remove.

On the very day that Ellen's letter arrived at Groby Manor, she and Sir
William left Oakley for London. Contrary to the first plan, they passed two
nights and a day there: but pursuing their journey the day following with
diligne^, they had sailed from Harwich before Mr. Mordaunt reached town.

The circumstance that had detained Ellen a whole day in town, was the sudden
marriage of her own maid. Jenny had been courted by a young man, son to one of
Sir William's principal tenants. It had been agreed that the match was not to
take place until the young man could take a farm of his own: and this they had
considered as somewhat a distant prospect. But the day after Sir William had
determined upon the plan of going abroad, his steward had offered a farm to
Thomas upon such advantageous terms, that nothing was wanting but the consent
of Jenny to become his wife, to make him one of the most contented of men.
Jenny objected to the impossibility of leaving her Lady so suddenly, and so
much to her inconvenience. But her scruples were soon overcome by the rhetoric
of Thomas: and she mentioned, though with some reluctance, to Ellen, how
unlucky it was, that she was obliged just then to go into foreign parts, when
if she were to stay at home, she might have been married to Thomas.

Ellen easily understood her: and as no personal inconvenience ever caused her
to hesitate, when the happiness of others depended upon her decision, she
cheered Jenny with a ready and kind consent to her remaining in England, and by
assuring her, that she did not apprehend any unpleasantness to herself in
consequence of her doing so.

Sir William seemed highly pleased with Ellen's disinterestedness on this
occasion; and gratified both the mistress and the maid, by making Jenny a very
handsome nuptial present.

Ellen received this act of Sir William as a farther proof, that his manner of
thinking was becoming more congenial to her own. Of servants he generally spoke
as of creatures of a lower order of beings, who were bound, if well paid, to
consider themselves, without murmuring, as the slaves of caprice and the
victims of tyranny. She had feared he would have inveighed at the ingratitude
and unfeelingness of Jenny: and she had prepared several mollifying arguments,
to make him submit quietly to the inconvenience her sudden desertion must
occasion. She was much delighted to find him in so different a disposition; and
readily acceded to his request, that, as she had now no English servant, to
whose services she had been accustomed, she would supply Jenny's place with a
foreign one, which, he assured her, she would find much more convenient during
her sojourn abroad.

Ellen had written to Lady Almeria to desire she would find her some person who
could supply the present emergency: and the choice she had been obliged to make
between several candidates had detained her in town. Having fixed upon the
least exceptionable, she had dismissed Jenny; and with her new attendant had
proceeded on her journey.

Nothing could exceed Mr. Mordaunt's disappointment, when, on his arrival in
town, he found Ellen had left it. But he had such comfortable assurances both
from Lady Almeria and his son, of the state of her health, and the ease and
apparent contentment of her mind, that he became perfectly satisfied in every
respect, but that of having missed the pleasure of seeing her. He imputed the
unnecessary hurry which had accompanied their departure wholly to the
solicitude of Sir William, to re-establish the health of Ellen, a little aided
by the pleasure that it was reasonable to suppose he would feel in returning to
the scenes and habits of foreign courts: as it was very apparent that those of
his native country, were not nearly so pleasing to him.

Mr. Mordaunt returned to Northumberland, well enabled by the satisfaction his
own mind had received, to tranquillize the anxious apprehensions of Ellen's
friends and well wishers, who were, indeed, as numerous as her acquaintance,
with only the exception perhaps of her own mother.

Mrs. Mordaunt, however, had long ceased to feel that rancour of dislike, which
for many years had occasioned so much misery to Ellen. Her marriage had removed
her from the situation where her superior qualities had given Mrs. Mordaunt
perpetual umbrage: and the power that this marriage had given Ellen, of
gra^fying many of her mother's wishes, had in some degree conciliat^d her
affections -- affections which never yielded but to the voice of selfishness.
^en had taken care to supply her constantly with some new fashionable article
of dress or furniture. She had written her every fashionable anecdote she could
collect; and had furnished her with every new play, or political pamphlet,
which made the conversation of the day; and which, from being early
communicated to Mrs. Mordaunt, enabled her to support that superiority over her
country neighbors, in which all the desires of her still existing vanity
seemed now to cen^r^. Mortification, too, had humbled her: and though it had
not corrected the faults of her temper, it had made her more careful to conceal
them. The constant sight of her eldest and favorite daughter, who, with her
two children, drew their scanty support, and to the inconvenience of the
family, wholly from Mr. Mordaunt, was such an undeniable proof of the fatal
consequences of her misjudging pride and vanity, as compelled her to appear to
adjure the principle that had led to such fatal mistakes. She no longer dared
to express a desire to rule in a family, every individual of which suffered, in
one way or other, from her once unbounded sway. A never intermiting discontent
preyed upon her heart, and undermined her constitution. The marriage of her son
with Lady Almeria, from which she had hoped to have derived so much
satisfaction and consequence, yielded her neither one nor the other.

Lady Almeria showed her the most pointed disrespect; never condescended to
visit her; or invited her daughter to partake with her in the amusements of her
country house, or the gaieties of a London life. The unwise and unjustifiable
partiality she had manifested toward her son, he repaid, rather as if he
considered the effect than the motive. No consideration for her maternal
tenderness softened with him the censure which her character so well justified,
and he by turns ridiculed and disregarded her.

From Mr. Mordaunt however she continued to receive every mark of consideration
and kindness, and as her increasing ill health softened his heart toward her
more and more, all past offenses were by degrees forgotten by him, and
something like his first love began to revive in his heart.

From the contemplation of a character so selfish as Mrs. Mordaunt's, it is
relief to turn the mind to that of Henry's.

Stunned as he was at the first intelligence of Ellen's journey to the
continent, and by the certainty that she was thus removed from his sight and
observation, yet when he learnt from Lady Almeria her improved health, and
apparently recovered ease of mind, he found ample compensation for every
selfish pang, in the hope that she was now about to reap the reward of a virtue
and strength of mind which had proved itself superior to all the buffetings and
crosses of fortune. In the progress, and event, as he hoped it would prove, of
her trials, he acknowledged the force of that principle of the mind, which
makes the inviolable preservation of a once vowed duty the rule for conduct,
and the standard of happiness.

Ellen will pursue, thought he, her path of rectitude in foreign climes, far,
far distant it is true from me: but if I am enabled to tread the line marked
out for me, with an equally steady foot, then, in spite of present distance,
and probably future separation, we shall meet at last -- meet where no decorum,
no unjust suspicions, no unworthy fear, will restrain the pleasures of our
intercourse. We shall meet where we shall be allowably dear to each other
through a long and happy eternity.

CHAP. VIII.
'Happy the man who sees a God employed
'In all the good and ill that chequer life.'
COWPER.
WHILE with these kind thoughts and flattering hopes the English friends of
Ellen endeavored to console themselves for her absence, she was pursuing her
route abroad with much less satisfaction than she had promised herself.

The haste with which she had quitted England, had occasioned every hour from
the moment when the scheme was first suggested to that in which I had taken
place, to be wholly occupied with preparations for the journey: and she had had
little leisure or opportunity to attend to the occupations of Sir William, who
was equally engaged with herself. In the little communication she had with him
on any subject apart from the one that so mutually employed their thoughts, she
had had reason to believe him satisfied with her; and though his satisfaction
was not accompanied by the gaiety that it used to be, before any unkindness had
arisen between them, yet it appeared of that genuine kind, which promised
continuance and increase.

Ellen, however, soon began to fear, that her willingness to believe the best,
had deceived her.

A profound gravity, almost a gloom, seemed to have pervaded the mind of Sir
William. He treated her with an austere coldness, totally different from any
thing she had hitherto seen in him: and as the bursts of passion and sallies of
ill humor she had before been exposed to, appeared the result of sudden and
irresistible suspicion, and had therefore subsided as the suspicion vanished;
the arbitrary severity that he now assumed toward her, seemed as if it could
only be justified by a conviction of her depravity. It was the lordly tone of a
despotic husband, which he now took upon him: and he extended his privileges to
the regulating the most trifling articles of her economy. Her own servant
appeared to be particularly the object of his caprice: repeatedly Ellen was
obliged to change her attendant: and every succeeding one seemed but still more
the object of Sir William's dislike.

Ellen's correspondence with her English friends was more than every thing else
a cause of offense to Sir William. He reproached her continually, that though
in person she had accompanied him abroad, her thoughts, her wishes, and her
affections, were in England. He seemed to regard every packet she received with
suspicion; and sometimes scrupled not to hint, that they should never be happy
together until she broke off all intercourse with every one but himself.

Ellen turned a deaf ear to all such insinuations. Nothing, she was resolved,
should induce her to make such a sacrifice of her duty, nor any thing but force
compel her to it. 'All the affections in a good heart, would she sometimes say,
are so closely entwined, that the one cannot be destroyed without the
destruction of the others. If I did not love my parents, my sisters, and my
friends, I could not love you.'

Sir William understood nothing of this: and as he had given up the hope of
being beloved by Ellen, his present unkindness was rather the result of ill
humor, than the effect of jealousy. Of the guilt of Ellen he had no doubt. The
readiness with which she had concurred in his scheme for leaving England, the
cheerfulness and good humor which had accompanied this concurrence, he
considered all as parts of that mass of intended hypocrisy, which he believed,
had pervaded her whole conduct, from the first hour of their marriage -- an
hypocrisy that swelled her guilt, in his apprehension, beyond all bounds, and
excited in his breast a proportionate resentment: he had been willing to appear
duped by it, while it could any ways further his own purposes: but he was
determined to punish it by every act of unkindness and provocation, which an
irritated and revengeful mind could suggest.

In a more generous and candid disposition than Sir William's, the conciliating
and affectionate manners of Ellen, with the ingenuous frankness of her
sentiments, must have produced different effects. They must have induced a
doubt of the strongest appearances that indicated guilt in her: they must have
led to explanation and acquittal: or at least they must have suspended
condemnation, and withheld the arm of chastisement.

But Sir William's resolution was taken. Nothing could now divert him from his
purpose. It is true, had he been entirely master of himself, he would, until
the moment of putting it into execution, have concealed all desire of
vengeance. But the ill passions rankling in his heart broke out in spite of
every effort to the contrary, into paroxysms of tyranny and ill humor: and
poor Ellen was the victim of them all.

In these circumstances it is not to be wondered at, if Ellen placed her most
fervent wishes on a return to England, or that she found little real
satisfaction from the varying objects that occurred. But still Ellen's
disposition and principle of making the best of every thing, did not forsake
her. Her perfect good sense directed her to the best means for attaining this
end. It taught her to keep her own passions under control. It repressed the
tyranny of imagination. It enabled her to balance the real good and evil of her
situation: and it showed her, that, in the scale of human miseries, there were
more above than below her. The circumstances of every day seemed, however, to
change this proportion.

The pressure of Sir William's ill humor became so perpetual, that Ellen, with
all her patience and ingenuity, could scarcely contrive to escape one moment
its weight. She hardly knew how to extract one drop of comfort from any
reflection that her present situation or future prospects afforded.

She had nearly lost all hope, that any conduct of hers could meliorate the
disposition of Sir William: and she was farther confirmed in this hopelessness,
by considering, that his present unkindness could not be the fruit of any
suspicion arising from the events of the passing hour. She was separated from
all who were dear to her. She was alone with Sir William in a world where there
did not exist an individual who engaged her attention, or interested her
affections. What, then, could he suspect? what, then, could he fear? It was not
possible, that the events of the present time should excite either fears or
suspicions. This ill treatment, therefore, she could only impute to a deep
resentment for former imagined offenses, to estranged affections, and to
natural temper, evils hopeless of cure.

Mild reasonings, cheerful tenderness, affectionate attention, and hitherto
unwearied patience, she had tried in vain. She knew of no other remedies: and,
resigning hope, she endeavored to arm herself with a double stock of
fortitude, and thus strove to support, with calmness and dignity, the miseries
of a destiny she knew not how to escape.

She could hope little from time, except as the dissolver of that union which,
as long as it lasted, she was now convinced, must be a source of unallayed
affliction to her. But it was not in Ellen's nature, even in wish, to establish
her happiness on the death of a fellow creature, no^ in her chastened and
religious mind, to desire to accelerate to herself so awful a period. She was
desirous in this, as in every other particular, to refer herself, wholly and
without reserve, to the disposal of a being, on whose wisdom and goodness she
had the most profound and unsha^en reliance. She left events to his care, who,
in superintending an universe, withdraws not his attention for an instant from
the smallest atom of which it is composed; and bent her solicitude* undivided,
to the right conduct of that part allotted to her and on the performance of
which depended a happiness or misery, as unlimited in degree as duration.

Ellen judging it expedient to avoid, if possible, all self commiseration,
allowed herself little leisure for reflection upon her chagrins. She contrived
to be almost wholly occupied by the variety of persons and things which their
continual journeyings threw in her way: and as her general knowledge and the
cultivation of her mind, fitted her to enjoy the best conversation, and
supplied her with observations and reflections upon every subject of curiosity
that occurred, either in nature or art, however she might be deprived of
happiness, she was by no means destitute of a very interesting amusement.

She never yielded to the supineness and langour, which, from the hopelessness
of her sorrow, would sometimes invade her mind. She considered it as a signal
to rekindle her activity, and to double her efforts toward procuring
occupation.

They moved from place to place, according to the will and caprice of Sir
William: and having consumed some months in visiting several of the Northern
Courts of Germany, on the shores of the Baltic, and in a short residence at
Berlin, they found themselves, toward the end of December, settled in a
pleasant house, on the banks of the Elbe.

Ellen was, on her first arrival at Dresden, introduced to Sir William's
sister. She found her perfectly well bred, and highly accomplished, assidious
to render her all the little offices and attentions that politeness required,
but apparently without a wish to cultivate any intimacy with her, beyond what
common civility demanded. There seemed to be little attraction between their
characters. Madam Teschen had been so long absent from her country, that
England had no place in her affections. Her sentiments and her inclinations
were German: and the evident disregard and coldness with which Sir William
treated Ellen, must unavoidably give her an unfavourable idea of her character,
which it could not be expected, in the kind of intercourse that took place
between them, Ellen would be able to destroy.

CHAP. IX.
'Patience herself, what Goddess ever she he,
'Does lesser blench at sufferance than she does.'
SHAKESPEARE.
ELLEN, indeed, soon found that neither with Madam Teschen nor any one else was
it Sir William's wish that she should associate. He seemed unwilling that she
should be known, or that she should have it in her power to make herself
friends.

After she had been introduced at court, and into all such houses as Sir
William had been formerly acquainted with, and after she had seen all that the
place afforded, worthy of curiosity, Sir William made it appear very evidently,
that he was never so well pleased with her, as when she remained shut up in her
own habitation.

This desire of Sir William's to seclude her from all society, agreed much
better with her inclination than her prudence. Sir William was seldom at home:
and thus left to herself, and deprived of the means of indulging the active
propensities of her mind, or the benevolent dispositions of her heart, she
found no interest in the common occupation which her books or her work
afforded, sufficiently powerful at all times to suspend the querulousness of
regret, or the anticipation of fear.

It became absolutely necessary to find some employment, which, from its
novelty, might engage her whole attention. In this dilemma, the advantage which
would accrue from learning the German tongue, occurred to her. Hitherto she had
never continued long enough in any one place to attempt it: but she had now
more than sufficient leisure. It had been represented to her as extremely
difficult: but this was rather an inducement to her to attempt to learn it at
this time, than any discouragement. Whatever would call for the greatest
exertion of her faculties, and demand the largest share of her attention, would
best answer her present purpose in seeking employment: she therefore resolved
to learn German: and she hoped, in the labors of her understanding, to forget
the sorrows of her heart. She entered, therefore, upon her task with avidity.
Her master attended her every day: and the eagerness with which she bent her
whole mind to the business, with her natural talents, soon convinced her, that
the difficulties of the language had been exaggerated. She was not, however,
disappointed in the main end. The newness of the pursuit interested her. It
filled her time; and it filled her thoughts. It prevented her thinking of
herself. -- Employment (thought she) is the great secret of contentment.

She had been thus busied about ten days, when Sir William, whom she seldom saw
in the course of the day for more than a few minutes at a time, and who knew
nothing of her new employment, unexpectedly entered her apartment.

He asked in English, angrily and eagerly, what she was about

'I am learning German,' said Ellen with a smile.

'And do you not know languages enough?' returned he rudely. 'What affectation
is this of the love of study?'

Ellen doubted whether she heard him aright. Among all the foibles of Sir
William's character, he had always appeared wholly free from the mean jealousy,
which some men betray, of female talents and female acquirements. On the
contrary, she had often heard him declare, that in marrying, he had sought not
merely a mistress but a companion: and he had said, that his choice of her had
been as much determined by the cultivation of her mind, as by the attractions
of her person, or the sweetness of her temper.

It is true, these were the fondnesses of his early love; and might be, with
respect to herself, no more than the flatteries of it. But she had invariably
seen him seek the society of the best-informed females: and he had always
appeared to have a more than common pleasure in their conversation.

She knew not, therefore, what to impute his sudden displeasure to, on his
discovery of her desire to add another language to those which she already
understood.

'You are not serious,' said she, 'that my attempt to learn German gives you
offense?'

'Perfectly so, and I desire you will immediately dismiss that gentleman there,
and inform him that you shall not again require his attendance.'

Ellen turning to the German, told him, in French, that she was at present
particularly engaged; and that she would let him know when she again wished to
see him.

The man departed: and Ellen turning to Sir William said, 'Pray, what am I to
understand from all this?'

'That it is my will, that you do not learn German; and that any farther
attempt to acquire the language will be, on your part, an act of disobedience.'

'You have so little used me to so authoritative a style, that you must forgive
me, if I say I am somewhat surprised with it.'

'I knew the new philosophy of matrimony, as with every thing else, is
equality. But I believe we were united upon the old terms of the wife's
obedience and subordination: and there ought to be nothing surprising, if I
exact from you no more than what you voluntarily engaged to perform.'

'I thought I understood,' returned Ellen, 'that you preferred receiving your
rights in the free will offerings of love, rather than in the tribute of duty.
If I am mistaken, of two unhappy people, you will be the most to be pitied. But
you may be assured you shall most strictly receive you due.'

'If there ever were a time when I had such an option,' said Sir William with a
sigh, 'is it not gone for ever? Will you, (added he, after some little pause)
will you order your maid to fold up those books? pointing to the German
grammar, etc. that lay upon the table, 'and I will put my seal on them.'

'I will do it myself,' said Ellen: and immediately wrapping up all the books
and papers relating to the intended study, she bound them round with a string,
lighted her taper, and presented the parcel, and a stick of sealing wax to Sir
William.

While she was thus employed, Sir William regarded her with the most fixed and
melancholy attention. Preserving an invariable silence, he took the wax from
her, melted it at the taper, dropped some drops on the string, and impressed it
with his seal, then casting up his eyes, 'Oh!' exclaimed he, with a deep sigh,
'that there were a possibility of a doubt! that I might be again deceived!'
and, so saying, he hurried out of the room.

'Miserable inconsistency!' said Ellen, sinking quite oppressed into a chair,
'thus ardently to desire to be beloved, thus assiduously to destroy all ground
for affection.'

After this incident Sir William seemed as if more than ever to shun being
alone with Ellen. He appeared as if afraid that she might resume her influence
over his mind. Her present situation made her particularly interesting. She was
again with child: and she could not help remarking with surprise, that
notwithstanding Sir William's increasing indifference toward her, this
circumstance seemed to give him much more satisfaction than he had appeared to
derive from it, when she believed herself in the full possession of his
affections. To herself it conveyed little happiness

The present depressed state of her mind, and the remembrance of the bitter
disappointment in which her former hopes from the same source had ended,
deprived her of the power of looking forward to the birth of her child either
a^ an alleviation to her own sorrows, or as the probable beginning of a state
of happiness to another human being.

In this manner the winter passed away at Dresden. Sir William had been more
than once absent from her for two or three nights at a time, either engaged in
visits to such of his former friends as resided at some distance from Dresden,
or in the pursuit of the sports of the field. For the latter purpose he
declared his intention, in the early part of the spring, of establishing
himself, for some little time, in a Saxon village, on the confines of Bohemia.
It was a part of the country with which he was well acquainted, and which would
afford him plenty of game; and from the liberty of sporting which he had
received from many of his friends, it would be fully in his power to pursue it.

Ellen had no reluctance to accompany him. She rather hoped advantage from
change of place, than dreaded any increase to her present chagrins; and Dresden
had been to her too melancholy a sojourn not to find some relief in bidding it
adieu.

CHAP. X.
'Studi^i og^^n giovare altrui: ch' e rade
'Volte il ben far, ^enza il suo premio sia.'
ARIOSTO.
THEY were soon settled in a small house little better than a cottage, in a
small Saxon village, situated in the mountain that separates Saxony from
Bohemia. Here, however, having previously provided themselves with every
necessary at Dresden, they wanted none of the comforts and conveniences of life
to which they had been accustomed.

Ellen soon began to think her situation much improved. The manners and
appearance of the villagers became extremely interesting to her. In a little
hamlet, scarcely containing twenty houses, surrounded by extensive forests, and
apparently shut up by rugged and almost inaccessible rocks from all intercourse
with civilized life, Ellen sound a gaiety, a hospitality, a sociability of
manners, which she had often in vain sought for in more polished societies.
These were accompanied, it is true, by the hardest labor: but the virtuous
exertions of individuals for the support of their respective families, seemed
to be the source of no obstruction to the general hilarity.

Ellen also observed, with pleasure, that almost every body could read, and
that this general diffusion of knowledge was far from being an obstacle to any
of the cares of the most assiduous housewifery. Clean, active, and spirited,
the women particularly charmed her by the beauty of their shapes, and the
animation of their looks; and she more than ever regretted the want of a common
language between them and herself.

In spite of this obstruction to their more intimate intercourse, Ellen spent
much of her time in the cottages and in walks through the adjacent woods. She
longed to clamber among the rocks, as she had been accustomed to do in happier
days in dear Northumberland. But this her present circumstances forbade.

Sir William was so frequently absent, that he knew little how she passed her
time; and had he known, it could have made no objection.

One of her favorite walks was round the back part of the village through a
small wood, which led along the side of a rivulet, which coming suddenly to an
abrupt and somewhat steep rock, overgrown by brush-wood, threw itself down with
a precipitancy that produced in miniature one of the most beautiful cascades
imaginable. The path wound gently below this rock: and the rivulet, after its
fall, resuming its calmness, flowed quietly along the valley.

Immediately at the foot of this rock was placed a cottage, which, from its
situation and the accompanying features of the surrounding scene, was
picturesque beyond description: and Ellen had often stood contemplating it from
above with a pleasure inexpressible; and often had she descended to rest
herself on the bench at its door, and to receive the welcome refreshment of a
bowl of milk, with which its hospitable inhabitants were always willing to
supply her.

One morning she directed her steps to the favorite spot; and, finding herself
more than usually fatigued with her walk, thought with uncommon satisfaction of
her resting place, the bench. What then was her grief and disappointment, when,
arriving on the top of the rock, from whence first the cottage could be seen,
she looked for it in vain? The cottage was no more: but from its site arose a
curling smoke, which told with too much certainty its fate. Of self in such a
moment no one would have thought. Ellen knew not that she existed; but an with
a precipitancy round the rock, that left her no breath when she arrived at the
bottom of it.

Here she found the ruined and desolated family given up to all the horrors of
despair. It consisted of a mother, two daughters, and three children, the
offspring of one of the daughters, the husband of whom, a miner, being at
present engaged at some distance from his home, had left the helpless females
without that assistance which would probably have averted a calamity, which,
with a lamentation useless as their own, he would now only be able to deplore.

On the sight of Ellen, all the poor sufferers gathered around her. The old
woman grasped her hand; the children caught hold of her clothes; the mother
pointed to her ruined cottage, and then to her infants. The appeal was
irresistible. There was no need of language. The note of supplication is the
same in all. Ellen's heart was ever responsive to its cry. She returned the
pressure of the old woman's hand; she embraced the children; she took out her
purse; it contained not much; for the supplies of Sir William were no longer
regular. But happily much was not wanted. The ruin, it is true, was complete;
but the means of recovery were not very extended. Ellen gave all she had. It
appeared a mine of wealth to the receivers: and their expressions of gratitude
were more than the feeling heart of Ellen could bear. The bench was gone. But
she sat down on a stone: and the younger sister, who was the first to observe
her emotion, ran hastily to the rivulet, and brought her a little water in a
wooden bowl. Ellen drank it; was relieved; and rose to depart. Again the
gratitude of the now happy family threw them at her feet.

At length, escaped from these, to her, painful effusions of their feelings,
Ellen turned her steps homewards with a lightened purse, but with a heart ten
times more lightened. She had not known a sensation so delightful since the day
in which she had relieved the distresses of the grandson of old Deborah.

Oh! said she to herself, how little do those know of happiness, who confine it
to the gratification of self!

Ellen now grew so near the time of her confinement, that she began earnestly
to wish that Sir William would remove from their present situation. It had been
determined that she should lie-in at Vienna; and that from thence, after her
recovery, they should prosecute their tour; a tour, which Ellen no longer
wished to be extended. Her wishes were fixed on England: and she sometimes
thought, if she might be permitted to return thither, with a healthy baby in
her arms, she might still secure to herself a tolerable portion of happiness.

Day after day passed away: and Sir William still found new reasons for
continuing where they were: but at length their removal could he delayed no
longer, if indeed Ellen was to arrive at Vienna before her lying-in.

Sir William had for some time past suspended the unceasing attention, which,
on their first leaving England, he had shown to the personal attendants upon
Ellen. Her present servant had lived with her since her arrival at Dresden, and
she had no reason to wish to change her. Two days, however, before the day on
which it was now fixed they should leave the village, Sir William expressed the
most pointed disapprobation of her; told of his suspicions of her honesty;
complained of her impertinence; and desired Ellen would dismiss her.

Ellen could not help a little remonstrating against a request, the compliance
with which would expose her to all the fatigues and inconveniences of a long
journey in her present helpless circumstances, without the assistance she had
been so long accustomed to: and she proposed that she might be allowed to
retain her servant until her arrival at Vienna, when she said she would
willingly discharge her. Sir William urged her immediate dismission: and
whatever were the inconveniences that Ellen might fear from it, she thought
them less than those which attended a contest with Sir William. She therefore
acquiesced: and Sir William promised to seek out some peasant's daughter, who
might accompany them on their journey, and continue with Ellen until she could
find somebody more to her mind at Vienna.

Fortunately his enquiries were answered by a young person who was just
returning from service at Dresden: and she willingly consented to attend upon
Ellen as long as she wished her to do so. The caprice which Sir William
manifested in these particulars, was not confined to the attendants upon Ellen.
He had repeatedly parted with his own personal servants: and at this time their
whole suite consisted of the newly hired Saxon girl and one footman.

'We will establish ourselves comfortably at Vienna,' said Sir William.
'Already we have a good house taken there: and I have desired a female friend
of mine to hire us servants. I will now add to the list a femme de chamber for
you.'

'My dear Sir William,' said Ellen pressing his hand, 'how happy should I be,
if you would realize your words -- if indeed we might have a comfortable
establishment any where. Long have we wanted it: and yet every comfort and
every happiness seem to be in our power.'

'Be satisfied,' said Sir William. 'All will soon be as it ought to be.'

CHAP. XI.
'Not with the purple coloring of success,
'Is virtue best adorned.'
BARBAULD.
THE road from the village where Sir William and Ellen then were, to the great
road which leads from Dresden to Prague, was intricate, and in some degree
difficult: but Sir William relied on his knowledge of the country; and
undertook to instruct the drivers of the carriage the best and safest way.

They left the village early in the morning; and hoped to be able to reach a
tolerable good inn on the direct road from Dresden to Prague before a late hour
at night. But either Sir William deceived himself in the degree of information
he possessed, or he never seriously intended to arrive at the spot marked out.

The day's journey was fatiguing, the roads rugged, often alarming, and they
found themselves, at the close of night, entering into a thick forest, which by
no means answered the description that had been given of any of the environs of
the place they had been directed to.

Ellen, who seldom felt vain or unfounded fear, was more fatigued than alarmed.
She did not think any danger threatened her: but she felt her strength so much
exhausted, that she apprehended she should not be able to support herself much
longer.

Sir William expressed a very lively compassion for her situation; and
endeavored by ^y means in his power to raise her drooping stre^ and spirits.
The gloom of the forest and the darkness of the night made it hazardous to
attempt finding a road through the wood. Yet there seemed to be no alternative,
except the remaining where they were in the carriage all night. Ellen proposed
this: but Sir William encouraging her with the hopes that this (...) really a
forest with which he was well acquainted, and in the midst of which was
situated a hunting box, where, if he were not mistaken in the place, he was
assured they would be able to meet with some accommodation; it was at length
determined to endeavor to find their way through the wood.

They proceeded very prosperously for some time; and had begun to hope that
even should they not find any house, they might at least be able, without
accident, to penetrate through the forest. But at the moment they indulged these
hopes, the postillion, not able to see the track, drove over a fallen tree that
lay on one side of it, and overturned the carriage.

Sir William was supporting Ellen in his arms at the instant the accident
happened; and happily contrived so to break the shock of the fall to her, that
she received no material injury. It was, however, from the darkness of the
night, and the position of the carriage, with difficulty that they were able to
disengage themselves from it: and even when they were all safely placed on the
ground, they knew not what next to do.

The carriage was broken: and to have attempted to mend it in the present
darkness would have been a fruitless labor. It rained h^ily: and Ellen was
wholly unable to prosecute her journey on foot, when every step she took might
lead her still farther from her way, and from every necessary assistance. To
stay where they were, without shelter, chilled with cold, and drenched in rain,
with no resting place but the wet ground, seemed to threaten the most fatal
consequences to Ellen.

Sir William appeared half distracted, repeating every moment, 'Good God! what
have I done?' The servants exclaimed, 'What shall we do?' The poor Saxon girl
wept bitterly: and Ellen, when a little recovered from the first shock, seemed
the only person capable of a rational thought.

'I cannot stand,' said she, almost sinking from Sir William's arms as she
spoke. 'But if you can contrive to get at the little seat on which I rested my
feet in the carriage, I can sit here 'till the postillions have a little
ascertained where we are. If this is really the forest you take it for, we
cannot be far from the hunting box you have described; from thence we may
possibly procure light, and such assistance, as will enable us either to remove
thither, or so to raise the carriage, that we may remain safe and sheltered
from the weather the remainder of the night.

Sir William pressed her tenderly to his heart, as if at once to thank her for
her calmness and resolution, and to re-animate his own.

The seat was soon found: and Sir William placing Ellen in it, knelt behind her
and supported her in his arms. He then gave orders for one of the postillions
and his own servant to pursue the track they were in, which, he said, if he
were right in his conjectures concerning the place, must bring them in less
than a mile to the spot he had mentioned. There they had only to mention his
name, and tell his distress; and he was assured of every assistance that could
be given.

The servants were absent nearly an hour: and Ellen was so much overcome by
fatigue, the beating of the rain, and above all by the uncommon kind of
distress that seemed to have seized Sir William -- for as he joined his face to
hers, she felt his tears trickle down her cheeks -- that when they returned,
she had scarcely power to benefit by the assistance they brought.

The most cheering part of this assistance was light. But that which afforded
the most essential service was a small tilted cart, the bottom of which was
well covered with straw. Upon this, Sir William contrived to place the cushions
of the carriage, so as to form a tolerable bed: and having, by the help of the
light, been enabled to get at a box of ^ordials, he made Ellen take some of
them; and then with the assistance of the servants easily lifted her into the
cart: here he also placed the maid servant, who, shivering, wet and crying,
made a most deplorable figure. The trunk that contained the night clothes
furnished her with a seat: and Sir William, making one of the men who had come
from the house, lead the way with the lanthern, he himself mounting one of the
chaise horses, accompanied the cavalcade by the side of the cart.

In this manner, they proceeded rather more than a mile; and reached the house
without any new accident, and with little farther inconvenience.

The first object was to change Ellen's clothes, and put her to bed: and when
this was accomplished, Sir William made her take such refreshments as could be
procured; and then left her in the hope that she would repose.

Nor was his hope vain. Worn out with fatigue, she soon dropped asleep; and
after some hours of rest, awoke much recruited.

Sir William appeared extremely pleased, when (...) was assured the adventures
of the preceding night had been attended with no essential ill consequences. He
proposed to continue where they were, through the day, both because it was
necessary the carriage should be repaired, and as a farther refreshment to
Ellen.

Toward the evening of the day, Sir William told her, that he had indeed
widely mistaken the way he meant to have taken; and that he found he had
wandered very distant from that which led into the public road to Prague: but
that the mistake had brought him so near the mansion of an old friend, that,
except for the inconvenience that had occurred to her, he could not lament it.

He then mentioned the name of a lady, with whose son Ellen knew he had
formerly been extremely connected: and he spoke in the highest terms of the
hospitality and kindness which she had always shown him.

'We are not more than six miles from her house,' said he: 'and I should never
forgive myself, if I were to be so near without paying my respects to her. The
carriage is now mended: we will go together: she will he delighted to see you:
and I shall be surprised, from what I know of her character, if she does not
offer you an asylum with her, till you are in a fitter state to undertake a
long journey. The misfortunes of yesterday have made me a coward. When I think
of the length of the travel that is before you, I tremble for the consequences.'

Ellen declared herself very able to prosecute her journey to Vienna; and
avowed the preference she should give being in a house of her own, during her
confinement, to any accommodations, however comfortable, that might be afforded
her in another.

'Well, we need not settle this now,' said Sir William. 'We will act as we see
occasion. This night, at least, we will pass with my old friend. But can you
dispense with the attendance of your maid? I never saw such a fool. She
blubbers and shivers yet. I should be very glad to exclude her from the party,
and for one night -- '

'Oh! I can do very well without her,' interrupted Ellen: 'and indeed I shall
be glad to save her any farther fatigue for a few hours. She has reason for her
tears. She is extremely bruised and hurt; and is so stiff with the cold she
caught last night, that she can hardly move. I shall desire that she go to bed,
and continue there till we rejoin her at this place tomorrow.'

All this being arranged, Sir William and Ellen began their little journey. But
it seemed as if Sir William was doomed to be convicted of ignorance whenever he
boasted of his knowledge of the country. The six miles seemed to be lengthened
into twice that number: and it was already nearly dark, and yet there was no
appearance of the habitation to which they were going.

'Surely you cannot be again mistaken,' said Ellen. 'I should be sorry to pass
such another night as the last.'

'There is no mistake this time,' returned Sir William rather peevishly, 'nor
any danger.'

'But surely we must have come much more than six miles.'

'Don't you see the roads are bad and tedious?'

'I fear arriving at an unseasonable hour, and that your old friend, though
glad to see us, may be put to some inconvenience.'

'I never knew women direct their fears aright. I entreat you not to perplex
yourself with what does not concern you.'

Ellen remained silent and sad. The deepning shades of night added to the
uneasiness of her sensations: and a confused apprehension of, she hardly knew
what, stole over her mind. At length they arrived at the top of a long avenue:
and Sir William calling hastily to the man to stop, 'This,' said he to Ellen,
'is the place. I will get out, and announce our arrival before the carriage can
be heard at the house; lest our appearance at so late an hour may alarm the old
lady. Stay where you are ^out ten minutes, and then follow me slowly down the
avenue.'

So saying, Sir William jumped out of the carriage, and left Ellen, wondering,
disturbed, and unhappy. The servants obeyed the directions given, and in about
the time prescribed followed Sir William.

CHAP. XII.
'All gracious heaven,
Just are thy ways, and righteous thy decrees,
But dark and intricate; else why this meed,
-- 'This sad return,
'For innocence and truth.'
ANSTY.
THE avenue was closed at the other end by a large pair of gates, which opened
into a court surrounded by buildings. The gates they found open, and were
directed, by a light immediately opposite, to drive up to the door of the
house. Here they found Sir William.

'We are extremely unlucky,' said he as he opened the chaise door, and assisted
Ellen to get out. 'My old friend has spent the winter at Prague, a thing she
never did when I knew her: and she is not yet returned.'

'Then,' said Ellen, shrinking back, 'let us return. The night is fine: and now
we kn^w the road, it will not appear half so tedious as it did in coming.'

'No, no, I will not suffer that. I have still a friend in the garrison. We
shall be well accommodated tonight: and I will not again expose myself to your
unreasonable fears of darkness and rugged roads.'

'That's a reproach I hardly deserve,' said Ellen smiling. 'But be it as you
will.'

She then entered the door, which opened into a long and narrow passage, and in
which there was no other light than that which Sir William held in his hand. He
led the way: and they soon found themselves in a hall, not very spacious but
very gloomy. Here they were met by a respectable looking person, who had also a
light in her hand. She was a woman of about fifty, and seemed to regard Ellen
with looks of the most scrutinizing curiosity.

'That's my old friend the housekeeper,' said Sir William: 'and she assures me
her lady would never forgive her, if she were to turn us from her doors at this
time of night.'

Ellen was going to make her acknowledgements, in French: but Sir William said,
'You may spare your civilities; for the old dame understands not a word of any
language, but her native German.'

'Upon how many occasions lately,' exclaimed Ellen, 'have I had reason to
regret my ignorance of that language!' Then from a sudden feeling, that this
might sound as a taunt to Sir William, who had refused her permission to learn
it, she added, 'but all cause for regret will soon be over. Once returned to
dear England, and I hope we shall speak only English for the rest of our lives.'

As she said this, the light that the woman h^ld fell full on the face of Sir
Willian, and Ellen saw with surprise the sudden alteration of his countenance.
He cast up his eyes, with a look almost of horror, and repeated, 'Once returned
to England!'

Ellen took hold of his arm, and perceived it trembled. But at this moment
their attendant opened a door; and they entered a large and tolerably furnished
parlour, where there was a blazing wood fire, and two lighted candles placed on
a table before it.

The servants said something to Sir William, to which he gave an answer
apparently of assent. She went out: and Sir William giving Ellen a chair, threw
himself into another, and seemed lost in thought.

Ellen regarded him with surprise for a few moments; and at length ventured to
say, 'are you not well?'

At the sound of her voice, Sir William started from his reverie; and said,
'Well? yes, very well, I believe: but I am hungry. Our old lady has promised us
some supper. I care not how soon she keeps her word.'

Then endeavoring to appear in spirits, he would have rallied Ellen on the
apprehensions he said she betrayed on the road. But his cheerfulness was
evidently forced: and, before the servant returned, Sir William had again sunk
into thoughtfulness.

It was not long before the housekeeper made her appearance, accompanied by
another female with preparations for supper: and presently after, the supper
was on the table

The meal, for which Sir William had expressed so much desire, was not relished
by him in a manner that justified the impatience he had shown for its
appearance. Ellen pressed him to eat, and, yielding to her entreaties, he took
some fowl on his plate: but Ellen observed, that the moment her eye was
withdrawn, he seemed to forget that it was there; and fixed a melancholy and
disturbed look upon her.

In making these observations, Ellen lost all appetite also; and the supper was
served and taken away without having been much diminished by either.

When the servants were gone, Sir William shivering, drew his chair near the
fire.

'I am sure you are unwell,' said Ellen anxiously. 'It is hardly possible you
should have been exposed so many hours to such weather as we were out in last
night, with impunity. Do you think Madam Housekeeper has no family medicine
that might be of service to you? something that would make you perspire might
remove all your complaints before morning?'

Sir William seemed not to hear her: and the shuddering with which he was
seized, had more the appearance of proceeding from emotion, than from cold.
Ellen felt dreadfully alarmed. She took his hand, but dropped it suddently,
startled with the burning heat which it communicated to her own. 'You are
feverish -- you are ill -- for God's sake let us inquire what there is in the
house that it will be proper for you to take.'

'Oh! God of heaven and earth!' said Sir William, with a sigh from the bottom
of his very soul.

'Dear Sir William!'

'Dear? -- Oh, Ellen, no, no, no.'

Ellen, seized with an instant fear for his intellects, snatched up one of the
candles, and was making toward the door.

'What are you about? and where would you go?'

'I am going to seek the housekeeper. I hope she will be able to furnish me
with something that will be of service to you.'

'And if you speak to her, she will not understand you. -- It is true, I am not
well. I shiver; I burn; I have an intense headache, the effects all of a
violent cold. Something to make me prespire, and a good night's rest, will set
all to rights.'

'God grant it!' said Ellen fervently.

'There's no doubt,' said Sir William, as he went out of the room.

He was absent nearly a quarter of an hour, which seemed almost an age to
Ellen. When he returned, his looks were composed, and his air somewhat more
cheerful. He was followed by the servant they had first seen, who had a bowl in
her hand.

'Our good friend there,' said Sir William, with a melancholy smile, 'has made
me a mixture which she says is sovereign for a cold. She has also prepared me a
bed apart from yours, lest I should disturb you. I will drink your health, and
then let us retire to our rooms.' He took the bowl. He fixed his eyes intently
on Ellen for a moment, 'Good night, God bless you,' said he, with an emphasis;
and raising the bowl to his mouth, he drank off the contents. But Ellen
perceived that he turned deadly p^le, and that his lips trembled. -- Horrible
apprehensions crossed the mind of Ellen, which she durst not suffer to harbor
there for a moment.

'Will not you have something warm?' said Sir William, 'some negus? or whey? I
did not offer you any of my potion; for though it may be salutary, it was
nauseous.'

'I think I will,' returned Ellen: 'I am cold myself. I should be glad of any
thing warm.'

Sir William spoke to the woman, who instantly withdrew: and Sir William,
taking Ellen's hand, drew her toward the fire, 'You look uneasy; you look
frightened; I assure you my indisposition is trifling. I shall be well
tomorrow: and then you will wonder how you came to be so much alarmed. You say
you are cold,' added he: 'for once let the arms of a husband warm you.'

He snatched her to his heart, and held her there for a moment. Then letting
her go, as the door opened, 'Oh! Ellen!' said he, 'why not thus for ever!'

'For God's sake, tell me what all this means. Either you or I are strangely
disordered.'

'Means! -- It means justice -- but come, we will talk it all over tomorrow.'
Then taking a bowl from the servant, who had just presented it to Ellen -- he
put it to his lips, and assuming a cheerful look, 'Excellent white wine whey, I
assure you, much better than mine. Now drink my health.'

'Heaven is my witness, how sincerely I do,' said Ellen* 'and taking the bowl,
she drank a part of what it contained. It appeared to her what Sir William had
said it was, except that she thought there was some taste in it more unusual
than disagreeable.'

'Now,' said Sir William, 'let us go to bed. Rest will do us both good.' Then
speaking to the servant, and again to Ellen, 'If you will follow the old lady,
she will show you your apartment. I know the way to mine.'

'I wish I might accompany you thither,' said Ellen earnestly. 'If I were to
see you asleep, my rest would be better.'

'No, no, that must not be. You had too disturbed a night last night, to become
a watcher this. I shall want no attendants: but if it will make you easy, James
shall sit up an hour or two in my room: and when I am asleep, he shall let you
know.'

Ellen joyfully accepted this offer: and stretching ou^ her hand to Sir
William, she bade him good night. He pressed it tenderly between his; held it
to his lips; and she felt a tear drop upon it. Yet he spoke cheerfully and with
unconcern: 'Pray lend me your watch. Mine has been spoilt in last night's
overthrow, and does not go.'

Ellen gave him her watch; and again bade him good night. He followed her to
the door of the room, as if unwilling to lose sight of her; and as he turned
from her, she heard him sigh deeply.

Ellen, following her conductor, crossed the hall, from the upper end of which
went a pair of stairs that led to a gallery above, in which were several doors.
The woman opened the second, on the left hand: and Ellen found herself in a
spacious room, the modern furniture of which somewhat surprised her. Around the
fireplace, which was well supplied with fire, were arranged her night dress,
and every thing she could require, in the nicest order. The woman opened a door
on one side of the room, which Ellen saw was designed for her bedchamber. This
also had a fire in it, and seemed to be provided with every comfort, and with
many of those accommodations Ellen could not have expected to have found in the
apartment of an old Bohem^an lady.

Her attendant offered her service to assist in undressing her: and Ellen,
harrassed in mind and body, was willing to take off a part of her clothes, and
put on her dressing gown. But she meant not to go to bed, until she had heard
something more of Sir William: and she now felt the most tormenting perplexity
from not being able to explain herself to her companion, who seemed resolved
not to leave her 'till she had seen her in bed.

At length it occurred to her, that she might easily make her comprehend her
wish to have a written paper delivered to Sir William: and she wrote these
words with a pencil: --

'Pray inform my too civil attendant, that I wish her to leave me alone: and be
so kind as to direct her to come to me as soon as James can inform her that you
are asleep.'

The woman readily understood what she was to do with the paper. She took it,
and in a few moments returned with these words from Sir William.

'If you have any regard for my health, let the old lady see you in bed. I
promise you she shall bring you good news of me in consequence. But if you are
left to yourself, I know you will sit up all night: and this thought will keep
me waking.'

Ellen in return wrote, 'I acquiesce: but remember your promise.'

She then suffered her attendant to assist her in going to bed. She made the
woman understand that she wished to have a light: and this being procured, the
woman drew the curtains and left her.

Ellen in her own mind, was confident that she should not close her eyes, until
she had heard from Sir William, such an impression had his apparent
indisposition both of body and mind made upon her. But her head was scarcely
laid upon her pillow, before she fell into a sleep profound as death.

She awoke from this sleep with a sudden start, supposing that drowsiness had
only for a few moments overcome her. But, surprised by the kind of light that
she saw in her room, which she thought could proceed from neither fire nor
candle, she hastily undrew the curtain; and was amazed and chagrined to find a
meridian sun shining full upon her bed. She rose hastily; and wrapping a few
clothes around her, opened the door which led into the next room, designing to
go from thence to the gallery to see for somebody, of whom she could make
inquiries after Sir William. On opening the door, she found in the adjoining
room, as if in waiting, the woman who had attended her the night before.

Ellen was proceeding to make her understand what she wanted, by earnestly
rep^ating Sir William's name, when the woman delivered her a sealed letter, the
direction of which she saw was in his hand. On the sight of this letter, her
heart sunk within her, as if it foretold all she had to suffer. Yet at the
moment she thought not of herself. She was seized with an universal trembling.
The letter dropped from her hand: and she sunk almost senseless into a chair. Yet
how wide were her apprehensions from the truth! -- For Sir William she only
feared: and yet Sir William, withheld by no compassionate consideration for
her, was at this moment consummating that vengeance for imagined crimes, which
he had been so many months in preparing with the coolest deliberation.

The woman, as if she had expected the effect that even the sight of the letter
would have, ran readily to the assistance of Ellen; poured drops and water down
her throat; gave her air; and seemed, by the tone of her voice, to exhort her
to patience.

Ellen, whose mind was fixed wholly upon the draught that she had seen Sir
William swallow the night before, and now convinced that the soundness of her
sleep had been procured by medicine, could think only of one catastrophe; and
regarding the letter with horror, had not courage to open it. The woman took it
from the floor; presented it to her; and seemed to entreat her to read it.

Confused and overwhelmed as Ellen's mind was, there seemed to her something in
this action of the woman's, which spoke the evil not to be so bad as she
feared. She took the letter, she broke the seal -- and, in the relief from the
horror which at had first seized her, forgot for a few moments the extent of
that misery which was announced to herself. The letter was as follows:

'Summon to your support all that strength of mind, which has so often given me
cause to admire you. Oh! Ellen, had it been uniform, had it sprung from
principle! -- But away with every vain regret. Where the guilt is certain, all
compunction for the punishment should cease: and if the chastisement is heavy,
you will not affirm it is disproportionate to the crime. It would, however, be
useless to reproach you. My injured love, my violated honor, cannot speak more
severely than will your own heart: and in guarding myself from the possibility
of being again deceived, I wish not to inflict any unnecessary rigor.

'When you know, that I was apprised, by the conviction of my own senses, of
the last visit you received from your undoer -- when you are told that I read
the invitation for a repetition of his visit under such forms as would elude
suspicion and lay jealousy to sleep -- you will not wonder, that in a cause
which would not admit of doubt, I have thought all explanation unnecessary; or
that being convinced of having been once betrayed, I resolved upon such
measures, as would secure me from the possibility of a second insult.

'In knowing that I never possessed your heart, I ought, perhaps, to have
foreseen all that followed. But, deceived by the appearance of an integrity and
candor, which, unsupported as they were by reality, will remain, I confidently
believe, unparalleled, the warnings of my reason were unheard, and the
misgivings of my mind were disregarded.

'How often has the semblance of a sincerity, which, had it been genuine,
angels might have copied with advantage, baffled the precautions of prudence,
and suspended the rod of justice? But the veil is now fallen: and even you can
elude no longer. Here then let all retrospect end.

'You need not be told, how a husband ought to feel and act on such a
discovery. Yet the agonies you witnessed in me this night, with so much alarm,
may show you, that I am not yet free from that weakness, which has so long
enabled you to deceive me. It may show you, that the measures which justice and
honor demanded from me, are not pursued without a torture of mind equal to any
I can inflict upon you. If this conviction can lighten the destiny which from
henceforward awaits you, I grudge you not such an alleviation, poor, undone,
miserable wretch as you are!

'Again I entreat you to collect every power of your mind. Consider, it is no
single life that is at stake. Suffer not any extravagance of grief, any excess
of despair, to hazard an existence, which you cannot believe you have a right
to dispose of. Take pity also on yourself. If you would preserve one ray of
hope to gild your future life, destroy not, by any extravagance of grief in the
present moment, the only source from which it can proceed.

'I expect not that a creature which must partake of my nature shall be dear to
you, as was that cherished darling in which I had no part. But if it be mine,
it is also yours. Let that consideration make it an object of your care; and
add not the guilt of murder to those other crimes which so deeply stain your
conscience.

'This is not the upbraiding of resentment. It is the warning of friendship.
Take it as such: and may you be enabled to endure, with tolerable moderation,
the severity of a punishment, the justice of which you will not dispute. Know,
then, you will never henceforward go beyond the boundaries of that habitation
in which you are now placed. But every comfort, and every accommodation, and
every amusement which your situation will admit, will await you there.

'You will see the necessity I have been under of depriving you of the solace
of conversation, and of leaving you destitute of all property. Devoid of all
means of influencing the feelings, or of bribing the avarice of your
attendants, I have secured, beyond a fear, your perpetual imprisonment: and I
have, by cutting off from you all hope of escape, preserved you from the
continual irritation which must have attended any attempt for that purpose,
which, even in circumstances more favorable to success, such is the extent of
the precaution I have taken, would certainly have ended in disappointment: nor
in such a case would disappointment be all that you would incur. Necessity
would then induce a much more rigorous confinement, an infinitely severer
restraint.

'When you reflect how much it imports me to perpetuate a confinement which I
have once begun, you will not doubt but that I have taken the precautions I
speak of, nor the consequences to yourself should you endeavor to elude them.
Although unable to converse with you, you will find your attendants always
respectful, attentive, and ready to administer to your wants. You will be
regularly supplied with accommodations of every kind: and if it should so
happen that my attention on this head does not fulfill your wishes, you have
only to write down in French any thing that you may wish to be supplied with,
and you shall obtain all you desire. Books, musical instruments, or materials
for work, or drawing, I include in this permission. But you will find vain any
attempt to convey a letter, even to me. Never, Oh! never, will I renew an
intercourse which has cost me so much. Could I doubt, I would hear you. But, if
justice cannot make me happy, neither shall a weak compassion increase my
misery. Resolved to punish, I am henceforth deaf to the voice of penitence: and
desiring to love no longer, I seek only forgetfulness! -- In the hour of pain
and danger, which now draws so near, you will have every assistance you can
possibly desire: and you will receive in a very few days every necessary
preparatory to that time, which either yourself or your infant can want.

'And now, most guilty and unfortunate Ellen, what more can I add? -- To my
regrets and my good wishes you are probably alike insensible: nor can I expect
that my admonitions will prevail, where considerations of so much more
importance have failed to have their due effect. But if it were possible that
you should at last be wise, if by taking your punishment with patience, you
make the best of the time which is yet allotted you for penitence, and thus
make all the amends in your power for the evils you have occasioned, you will
fulfill all the wishes and gratify all the desires which yet remain in the
breast of your injured husband.'

CHAP. XIII.
-- 'Dona e toll ogn' altro ben, fortuna:
'Sola in virtu non ha possanza alcuna.'
ARIOSTO.
ELLEN read this letter with an astonishment which suspended for a time all
powers of recollection or feeling. She could neither believe nor comprehend
what she read. Never once had the idea that Sir William suspected her of guilt
beyond the estrangement of her affections, crossed her mind; nor could the
evidence of her senses now convince her that she was judged, condemned, and
punished unheard.

'Where is Sir William?' cried she, rushing to the door, forgetful that she
spoke to those who understood her not, and thoughtless of the disorder of her
dress.

The woman mistook this motion for an attempt to escape; and, placing herself
between Ellen and the door, endeavored, though with respect and gentleness, to
detain her.

'Let me go,' said Ellen struggling. 'Let me see Sir William. I implore you,
let me see Sir William.

The woman shook her head in token of the impos^bility of a compliance: and
again she offered her the letter, which Ellen had a second time let fall to the
ground. On this opposition from her attendant, a sudden recollection struck
Ellen. -- She remembered that she spoke in vain, and that her present efforts
were probably misunderstood. Again she read the letter: but she read it with
nearly as little comprehension of the contents as before.

Totally ignorant of the circumstances on which she had been condemned, and
sure of her own innocence, she could not believe that Sir William could think
her guilty. She could not believe that, unheard, he could punish her as guilty.

As she continued to read, she looked for some hidden sense in words, which she
could not conceive to be used in that which was obvious. When she came to the
expression, 'From henceforward, you will never go beyond the boundaries of the
habitation in which you are now placed,' she looked toward the high windows,
and around the room, with an air at once wild and thoughtful. Then covering her
face with her hands, she endeavored to collect her senses, and be assured that
she did not dream.

Again she turned to peruse the letter, and to weigh every syllable of it. But
she had read it many times, before she was able to give it credit as a reality,
or was awakened to a full sense of her true situation. At length, convinced
that Sir William was gone, and that he had consigned her to perpetual
imprisonment, she rested persuaded that her case was as hopeless as it was
miserable

But even under this overwhelming conviction, Ellen did not forsake herself.
She need^d not Sir William's exhortations to shun all excesses in her grief,
and every undue and unbecoming violence. Stunned rather than roused, afflicted
rather than irritated, the first recollection of her real situation, which was
sufficiently perfect t^ form any resolution upon, was followed by a
determination to do nothing which could be injurious to her child, or
disagreeable to herself. But it was not on her own strength that she relied for
power to bear up under such a load of hopeless misery.

The woman who had remained an attentive but forgotten spectator of all her
movements, saw her with surprise rise from her chair, with an air of dignified
humility, and prostrating herself upon her knees, continue for some moments in
fervent prayer.

When she arose, she cast her eyes upon the woman, and appeared to see her for
the first time. She advanced toward her; and with a mild and complacent aspect
held out her hand toward her; seeming by this action to bespeak her
friendship, and to declare her own submission. The woman, struck and moved by
her manner and look, could not forbear raising the hand that was offered her to
her lips, and then immediately presented her with some of her cloths,
endeavored to make her understand, how ready she should be to serve her. From
this moment, it it seemed as if a treaty of amity was sealed between them: and
Ellen felt something like hope revive in her bosom.

When Ellen was dressed, her attendant opened the door of a room which was
opposite to the one that led to the bed chamber; and invited Ellen to enter it.
Ellen found this room much larger than either the dressing room or bedchamber;
and casting her eyes round it, saw in the manner in which it was furnished, a
sad certainty of the intended length of her captivity.

Two book-cases, which, with the books they contained, seemed to be new, and
recently put up, filled the large recesses on each side of the fire. A
harpsichord, which also appeared to be new, stood on the one side of the room:
near it was placed a harp. A writing table, furnished with all the materials
necessary for writing, stood near the fire. A sofa, and one or two chairs, of
different forms and dimensions, with two more tables, made up the furniture.
The room was fitted up with striped linen: and there seemed diffused over the
whole an air of cheerfulness which suited ill with the sadness of Ellen's soul.
Hitherto she had not shed a tear. On beholding an apartment so evidently
prepared for her solitary prison, she burst into a passion of weeping, and
threw herself on the sofa, in an agony of mind not to be described.

The calmness which she had hitherto preserved, arose more from the stunning
nature of the blow she had received, and the natural temper and acquired habits
of her mind, than from any fortitude that she had yet been able to assume upon
the present occasion. Suddenly and irresistably the recollection of English
friends and English joys rushed upon her heart, and the sense of their misery
in the loss of her, and of here is in the loss of them, formed a mingled torture
of so acute a kind, as for a time overcame all her sense of the duty of
resignation, and all her fears for the safety of her child. Agitated by
convulsive twitchings, almost choked by her rising sobs, she lay for some in a
state of the most alarming disorder.

Her new friend, not more terrified than grieved for the situation in which she
saw her, mingled so much genuine compassion in her attempts to relieve and calm
her, that Ellen, upon whom the voice of kindness was never lost, and whom death
alone could hold long insensible to the emotions of gratitude, began, in pity
to what another felt, to still the loud complainings of her own affliction.

She became composed and silent; patiently took what was offered her; and
returning after some interval to perfect calmness, she showed so earnest a
desire to be left alone, that the compassionate Mrs. Ulric at length complied.

Ellen, left to herself, wept without restraint and without measure: and this
free indulgence of nature saved her overcharged heart from breaking. Her mind
glanced hopefully on the compassion which she saw she had excited in her
attendant: and she began to believe it would not be difficult to win her over
to her wishes.

She wished but to be able to write to Sir William, secure, could she once
induce him to come to an explanation, that she must convince him of her
innocence. The rigor of his dealings toward her was all founded on error: and
hence, those passages of his letter which had at first given her the most
poignant distress, now inspired her with hope. Were I the victim of his hatred,
(thought Ellen) no justification would avail me. But while I am a sufferer only
from his mistaken ideas of justice, in establishing my innocence, I shall put
an end to my misfortunes. It seemed so easy to prove this innocence to any one
with whom she could speak, that the most bitter of her regrets at this moment,
was her incapacity to converse with Mrs. Ulric.

This tender hearted woman returned in a few hours to Ellen's apartment,
bringing with her a nicely prepared meal, of which she pressed Ellen with so
much kindness to partake, that she could not wholly refuse her. But Ellen could
not eat. Mrs. Ulric, however, induced her to drink a glass of wine, and again
left her to herself.

The close of this melancholy day now came on: and from those changes to which
the mind in the first stages of affliction is subject, grief seemed to return
with fresh force, as the shades of evening overspread the apartment; nor was
her grief wholly unmixed with a degree of terror. Frightful images arose in her
mind: and she scarcely dared to trust herself with considering, to what so
violent means as those already taken by Sir William might ultimately lead. But
these unfounded fears arose wholly from the shattered state of her nerves. The
benevolent countenance of Mrs. Ulric, illuminated by the light of two candles,
with which she presently entered the room, dissipated them in an instant: and
Ellen easily admitted the folly of tormenting herself with imaginary evils,
when she had so many real ones to deplore.

The fatigues which Ellen had undergone for three days, had entirely exhausted
her strength: and she readily yielded to the signs by which she understood Mrs.
Ulric to desire her to go to bed. When there, weariness so overcame affliction,
that if she found no refreshment, she at least received rest. Her mind was so
full of her project of making Mrs. Ulric her friend, that, in studying for
means to explain herself to her, she lost a part of the sense of what made such
an explanation desirable, She was resolved, also, to endeavor the next morning
to inspect every part of her prison, both as a matter of curiosity, and as a
means to ascertain what degree of indulgence would be allowed her.

Her sleep as it was broken, so it was short. She arose early, and looking for
her watch, now recollected, for the first time, by what artifice Sir William
had deprived her of it. She easily comprehended his reason for such a
procedure; and was not therefore surprised upon feeling in her pockets to find
her purse gone, and every trinket, of however trifling a value, except the
picture of her father, which was set very plainly in gold.

On the sight of a countenance, which never bent its regard toward her but
with looks of the fondest love, now never more to be beheld by her, her whole
frame shook with disorder, and her heart swelled almost to bursting.

'My father,' cried she, and pressed the picture to her lips. 'My father!'
repeated she, 'Now in vain do I call to you for help; now, in my uttermost
distress, impotent to save?'

Despair stopped her tongue.

'Oh! God,' cried she, kneeling down, 'be thou my father. Thou can burst the
walls of this prison. Thou can restore me to all I hold dear -- to
reputation, to friendship, to happiness. Thou can do more: thou can teach
me to endure with patience, perpetual imprisonment, never-ending deprivation.
Let it be as thou will.'

This act of pious resignation calmed the flurried passions of Ellen. Again she
pressed her father's picture to her lips; and felt an emotion of gratitude to
Sir William for having left her so precious a relic.

CHAP. XIV.
'There's some ill planet reigns.
'I must be patient, 'till the heavens look
'With an aspect more favorable.'
SHAKESPEARE.
WHEN Mrs. Ulric attended, she found Ellen dressed, and apparently perfectly
composed. Mrs. Ulric withdrew with intention of preparing breakfast: and Ellen
took an accurate survey of her apartments. She found, in addition to the three
rooms she had seen, two closets which belonged to her bed chamber, one dark and
the other light. The windows of her bed chamber and dressing room were both too
high to allow of any thing being seen from thence, except when standing close
to them. She saw, they looked upon a garden, which, as far as she could
discern, was walled round. Beyond it she could see only woods, which appeared
to extend far into the country. The windows of the apartment, which seemed to
be allotted for her fitting-room, were lower than those in the other rooms; and
appeared to have been newly put in. They opened into the courtyard by which
she had entered: and as the window of the light closet looked out upon the open
country, Ellen comprehended that her apartment occupied one entire side of the
building. The window of this closet was too high to look from, except when
standing upon a chair, or table; and was so small, that Ellen could not have
got her head through it. The country which could be seen from it, appeared wild
and desolate.

Ellen felt it a matter of great importance to herself, whether she should be
allowed the liberty to pass beyond this apartment, or whether it was indeed the
limits of her confinement. She was resolved to know.

When Mrs. Ulric, who had attended her at breakfast, was removing the tea
equipage, Ellen arose, and went toward the door of her apartment. Mrs. Ulric
instantly put down what she had in her hand, opened the door of the room, and
seemed to invite Ellen to enter the gallery. Ellen complied: and Mrs. Ulric
going before her, showed the rooms which were opposite those she inhabited.
Some of these appeared to be occupied by servants, and some not to be occupied
at all: and Ellen thought she understood that one belonged to Mrs. Ulric. The
furniture was scanty, and miserably old, and ill corresponded with that which
she had seen in her own apartment.

From the gallery she descended to the hall, and the first object which caught
her eye, was, the door by which she had entered it through the long passage
that led to the outer court. This was now closed, and fastened by a heavy
wooden bar, which was placed across it. She went into the parlour, where she
had been received the night of her arrival. It was gloomy: and by several
things that lay about, she concluded it was the place where Mrs. Ulric usually
sat. The remembrance how she had been betrayed into her present situation,
rushed powerfully on her mind: and she hastily quitted a place which called to
her recollection circumstances she could not bear to think of.

Returning to the hall, she made toward a door, which she then first
perceived. Mrs. Ulric stepping before, showed her it opened into the offices,
but directed her attention to one opposite. She opened that too, and Ellen
found, with great satisfaction that it led immediately to the garden. Mrs.
Ulric, as if yielding to the desire which Ellen showed to enter it, made way;
and, respectfully retiring, suffered Ellen to walk out alone.

Her heart bounded, when she found she was mistress of such a privilege; and
she felt herself half at liberty. She traversed the gardens with a kind of wild
tumultuous hope of immediate escape. But she was soon convinced of what indeed
her reason, if this had been a moment when reason could have been attended to,
would have told her before, that every avenue was securely closed.

The garden was spacious; and seemed to be laid out more for use than pleasure.
Yet at the greatest distance from the house, there were some retired and shady
places, which would afford no unpleasant retreat, in such weather as makes the
cooler air preferable to the house.

Many parts of the walls were old: and it appeared as if the new building which
connected them together, did not follow the line of any former wall which might
have been destroyed. From this circumstance, Ellen concluded, that the compass
of the garden had been lessened; at one sharp angle, however, the meeting lines
of which were formed of walls equally old, she discovered a small door: it was
very massive, and, though extremely old, retained great strength: upon it was a
lock; but as the fastening of the door did not seem to depend upon that. Ellen
tried to shake it, but found it perfectly steady. As well as she could judge
from its position, it must open immediately upon the country: and poor Ellen
stood for some minutes opposite to it, fixed in a deep and melancholy reverie,
so lost in thought, that she knew not that it was the hope of escape through
that door, that wholly absorbed her faculties.

Starting from this temporary stupor, she continued her search. But finding no
other spot in the whole circumference of the garden, from which it was possible
she should escape, she returned again to the door; again surveyed it with the
greatest accuracy; again tried to shake it upon its hinges; and again found all
her efforts ineffectual.

It was impulse rather than reason (as the new-caught bird flutters around its
cage) that had occasioned Ellen to make this search. Had it been attended with
the discovery of an immediate means of escape, Ellen was in no condition to
have availed herself of it; and must have declined, upon reflection, to make
use of it.

Her present circumstances, which made walking any distance impossible -- her
total want of money -- her entire ignorance of the language of the country --
would have made it madness to have attempted an escape, while there remained
any hope of inducing Sir William to do her justice. On winning Mrs. Ulric to
her cause, she rested all her real hopes and rational expectations of
deliverance: and she determined not to lose a moment in making the experiment.

Being returned to her apartment, she sat down with the design of forming that
letter, which she hoped to be able to prevail upon Mrs. Ulric to deliver. But,
upon reperusing Sir William's, to determine upon the best manner in which to
enter upon her defense, she found herself entirely at a loss. The circumstances
on which he grounded her condemnation, were entirely unknown to her: and the
conviction under which he seemed to write, that she must herself acknowledge
her guilt, as it took away every uncertainty upon which explanation could be
founded, so it appeared to make all explanation impossible.

But when she attended to the precise act of criminality with which she was
charged, in the words, 'I was apprised, by the evidence of my own senses, of
the last visit you received from your undoer,' a suspicion found place in her
mind which had not before entered it.

Ellen had never seen Henry, (for that he was meant by her undoer, she had no
doubt) since they parted in Devonshire. He had attended her to her carriage, at
the hour of her departure, and he had assisted her into it, in the presence of
Sir William, of several servants, and of many other people. This attendance
could hardly be called a visit; and if it could, it was not possible to fix the
stain of guilt upon it; nor could it be necessary that Sir William should
apprise her, as a piece of of information which must overwhelm her with shame
and confusion, that he had witnessed it. This she knew well: and she could
neither have had the power, nor a motive to conceal it. But as she was
perfectly convinced that no subsequent interview had taken place between them,
and as, from the circumstance of her having withdrawn into the country, before
Mr. Villars arrived in town, she thought Sir William must be as well convinced
of this as herself: she began to suspect that Sir William, so far from being
deceived, sought only to deceive her -- that, delivered up to his resentment,
on being persuaded, that he should never be able to touch her heart, he had
resolved to punish that as a crime in her, which he felt to be so severe a
misfortune to himself. His saying, that he had seen that which she was entirely
clear in her own mind he never could have seen, confirmed this idea; and made
her conclude that he only sought to color an act of extreme cruelty and
revenge, with the thin veil of justice.

These ideas filled her with despair. She had placed her hopes of redress upon
the belief, that her justification would be as acceptable to Sir William as
advantageous to herself. But now she began to think, that her greatest
difficulty would not be in prevailing upon Mrs. Ulric to deliver her letter,
but in inducing Sir William to give it a candid reading. His prohibition to
write to him -- his declaration that he wished only for forgetfulness -- his
acknowledgment, that the voice of penitance would plead in vain -- all
concurred to make it evident, that he wished not to have her innocence
established.

'It is hatred and revenge which have placed me here,' said she, the tears
running down her cheeks: 'and it would be in vain to hope for my deliverance
from tenderness and love.'

Her thoughts hastily returned to the garden. Again she reconsidered the walls
of it. Their height, their solidity, precluded every hope of escape that way.
Her own helpless state, even could she get out, now also rushed upon her mind.
To owe her deliverance to her own powers, she felt was impossible. And as she
would not neglect any possible chance of putting an end to her sorrows, she
finally resolved, not withstanding her hopelessness of its success, to try the
effect of a letter to Sir William -- Thus she wrote.

'I address you not as a penitent, not as an object of your love, I appeal only
to your justice. I am innocent. Never, even in thought, have I wandered from
the duty that I owe you. Of this you will some time be convinced. If,
therefore, you have any consideration for the future peace of your mind, wait
not for this conviction, until my injuries are past redress.

'I beseech you, let me understand the particulars of my accusation, that I may
be able to clear myself even from suspicion. To the present unintelligible
charge which you bring against me, I can only repeat, that I am innocent. If
you will condescend to explain yourself to me, I can prove myself so. I know of
no visit, I am conscious of no invitation, which can fix the slightest stigma
upon my name, of none which I would not avow in the face of the whole world. I
cannot comprehend what you mean. I suppress, however, all complaint. I am
willing to believe you have acted upon a mistake: and if you will only permit
me to see and to converse with you, I am confident I shall lose at once all
cause and all inclination to complain.'

Having finished this letter, she resolved to assail Mrs. Ulric with all her
powers, when next she saw her. Nor was the opportunity long wanting. This
compassionate woman, whose heart was ill suited to the task assigned her, was
not able to absent herself long from her unfortunate prisoner, lest some
consolation might be wanting which she could afford. She entered the room,
bringing with her some biscuits and a cup of chocolate; for Ellen, with all her
efforts, had not been able to swallow a morsel at breakfast.

Ellen took the refreshment which was offered her with a smile: put a part of
one of the biscuits in her mouth: and tasted the chocolate. But she could do no
more. Her heart swelled: and tears ran down her cheeks. Mrs. Ulric looked on
her with compassion, and sought to soothe her.

Ellen seized her hand; and pressing it fervently to her lips, 'Oh! if you
could be induced to assist me!' said she. The tone of these words seemed to
penetrate the heart of Mrs. Ulric. She too wept. The moment seemed favorable:
and Ellen, holding out the letter to her, looked in her face with a countenance
of entreaty that could not be misunderstood. It was perfectly intelligible to
Mrs. Ulric: But she put the letter back with her hand; and shook her head in
token of refusal.

'Let me prevail,' said Ellen, joining her hands together.

Mrs. Ulric withdrew a few steps.

'I have no hope if you deny me,' said Ellen; and threw herself on her knees
before her.

Greatly moved, Mrs. Ulric stooped hastily to raise her.

Again Ellen offered her the letter: but Mrs. Ulric withdrew her hand, and
walked toward the door.

'Have you no pity?' said Ellen.

The moving tones of her voice seemed to subdue Mrs. Ulric. She returned -- she
raised Ellen to the sofa. She took the letter; but opening the drawer of the
writing-table, she deposited the letter there, locked the drawer, and gave
Ellen the key.

The calm decision of this action robbed Ellen of every hope. She sat for some
moments a motionless image of despair. The blood forsook her lips; and she
scarcely breathed. Mrs. Ulric approached her. She kneeled down before her. She
took her hand; and respectfully kissed it: She seemed to say, 'Unhappy that I
am not to be able to do as you wish me.'

Ellen was not insensible, even to this degree of kindness. 'Cruel Sir
William!' exclaimed she, 'had you but allowed me to have been understood, how
easily should I have worked upon this worthy woman to have befriended me! But
you have indeed taken your measures securely. You have indeed known how to make
my ruin complete.'

Ellen wept bitterly as she pronounced these words: and Mrs. Ulric seemed so
affected, that Ellen resolved to make one more effort to prevail on her to
receive her letter. But, as she was about to unlock the drawer, Mrs. Ulric
perceived her intention, placed her hand upon it, and evidently showed her that
the attempt would be in vain and Ellen at length, persuaded that Mrs. Ulric was
inexorable only from what she considered as a principle of duty, finally gave
up the contest.

CHAP. XV.
-- "If powers divine
"Behold our human actions (as they do)
"I doubt not then, but innocence shall make
"False accusation blush, and tyranny
"Tremble at patience."
SHAKESPEARE.
MRS. ULRIC had not the shadow of a doubt of Ellen's guilt. Sir William had
made it clear to her, by a detail of circumstances, which seemed to admit but
of one explanation. His own distress, the tender consideration, which, even in
preparing the punishment, he had manifested for every possible consolation to
be administered to Ellen, not incompatible with that punishment, had convinced
Mrs. Ulric of the sincerity of his love, and the bitterness of his regret, for
the measures that he thought himself obliged to pursue. These circumstances,
joined with the agonies she had witnessed in him, when the moment at last came
of delivering Ellen into her hands, left her not a suspicion, but certainty,
that Ellen being no longer deserving of his love, could be alone his motive for
withdrawing it.

These were two points in which Sir William knowingly deceived Mrs. Ulric. He
had represented to her, that even in the punishment to which he had doomed
Ellen, he had been actuated by motives of mercy; that a much severer ^ate
awaited her from the customs of her own country, and from the indignation of
her parents; and that if he were to deliver her to them, not only imprisonment
would be her lot, but an imprisonment of a much more rigorous kind, aggravated
by darkness, fasting, and stripes.

Mrs. Ulric therefore considered Sir William not only as one of the most
injured and unfortunate of men, but as one of the most compassionate and
worthy. This deceit had been suggested from a knowledge of Mrs. Ulric's
character, who would never have consented to become an instrument of so much
injustice as was attached to Sir William's conduct, even in the case of Ellen's
actual guilt. But, acting under the error into which she had been betrayed,
although the mild and winning manners of Ellen, with the graces of her person,
and the misery of her situation, made the heart of Mrs. Ulric overflow with the
softest compassion; yet did she not look upon her as punished more than her
crimes deserved, or feel inclined to do aught toward restoring her to the
confidence of a husband, whom she believed she had so grievously injured.

In another particular, also, Sir William had misled Mrs. Ulric, and from
something of a similar motive, wishing by accumulated proofs of Ellen's guilt,
to take away the possibility at any future moment of her being able to fix any
blame upon him in the mind of a person on whose fidelity he was, after all his
precautions, obliged to depend for the final accomplishment of his purposes.

He had therefore signified to Mrs. Ulric, that the child of which Ellen was
then big, was the offspring of that guilty love, which she was now to expiate
by perpetual imprisonment. It therefore happened, that Mrs. Ulric never looked
upon Ellen, but she thought she saw an irrefragable proof of her crime. And
every effort Ellen made to prove her innocence, Mrs. Ulric considered only as
attempts either to move compassion, or as shows of penitence.

This Mrs. Ulric had, indeed, been the personal servant of the Bohemian lady,
whom Sir William represented her to Ellen as having served. But this lady was
now dead; nor had she inhabited the house where Ellen now was for many years
before her death. It belonged to the nobleman her son, an intimate friend of
Sir William, and, in the present circumstances, his only confidant. To him sir
William had communicated first his suspicions of Ellen's infidelity, and
afterward his certainty of it: and by him had been suggested the idea of the
nature of the punishment to be inflicted. He had pointed out the eligibility of
this decayed and solitary mansion for the purposes of a prison: and he had
represented, that, in the tried faith and gentle manners of Mrs. Ulric, he
would find such a jailoress as he desired. All he had to do was to convince her
of the justice and mercy of the plan proposed, and he might rely upon her
integrity without a fear. She was, when sir William's friend recommended her to
him, entirely dependant upon and supported by his bounty: and she would
willingly undertake any charge with which he would entrust her that did not
militate against her ideas of rectitude.

Sir William had resolved, in consequence of what he believed he had
ascertained, during his visit in Devonshire, to have removed Ellen ab^ad
immediately after she was sufficiently recovered from her lying-in to bear such
a journey.

But Ellen's conduct in her requisition to leave town, so seemingly the result
of the purest integrity, had staggered Sir William's firm belief in her guilt;
and had determined him to make one experiment as to what her residence in the
country would produce. He had been perfectly persuaded, that the child was not
his; and hence his evident dislike to him when alive, and the satisfaction he
had suffered to escape him, on his death. But there had been such an
unjustifiable brutality in his expression on that occasion, and the effect it
had on Ellen was so grievous, that there was nothing he would not have done, to
have effaced the impression it had made.

The placability of Ellen's temper had softened his heart. He began to believe,
he had been misled by an unfounded jealousy. He began to hope, that mutual love
might spring up between them: and he had nearly forgotten all his schemes of
revenge and chastisement, when the accidental discovery of Henry escaping over
the hedge of the garden, drove from his mind all doubt of the guilt, and all
moderation in the punishment of it.

From this moment, his whole thoughts were turned to concealing and perfecting
the designs, which he was now resolute to prosecute to the utmost: and to this
purpose might be referred every thing that he had done, from the moment in
which he announced to Ellen his intentions of quitting England, to that in
which he had followed her with his eyes for the last time.

Often, indeed, had the force of his emotions been too strong for his
hypocrisy. But Ellen having no clue to guide her suspicions aright, he had
escaped detection. She had considered what was indeed the breaking forth of his
future design, but as the remains of a jealousy with which she was but too well
acquainted, and for which she sometimes hoped a cure from time and the
undeviating prudence of her own conduct; and for which, at others, she was
sadly persuaded there was no cure possible.

Often had the fair and candid soul of Ellen, which appeared in her every
action, made him mistrust what he thought was the evidence of his own senses.
But the conviction that he owed his present persuasion only to such evidence
dispelled every doubt, and so fully settled his belief of the falsehood of
Ellen, that he could as soon have called in question his own existence as her
guilt.

Having communicated his final resolves to his friend, many steps preparatory
to the execution of his plan, had been taken before his arrival in Saxony: and
Ellen's imprisonment was to have commenced with the winter. But when Sir
William unexpectedly found her with child, at a time when he could not doubt
but that the child was his, his former desire for an heir to his estate, which
had so large a share in his determination to marry, returned with fresh force
to his mind. But to give a public legitimacy to the infant that Ellen would
bring, it was necessary that she should be known to have been with child; nor
must the date of her pretended death take place so early as to make it
impossible that the child, who was sometime to be produced, could be hers.

These considerations prolonged to Ellen the term of her liberty. But though
the circumstances of her pregnancy might delay the time of her being shut up,
it would in the end facilitate the plan. It was only by a feigned tale of her
death, that he could hope to put a stop to the enquiries of her English
friends: and there was no incident upon which he could found such a tale with
equal appearance of probability, as one so frequently attended by the most
sudden and fatal catastrophe. The dangerous state to which Ellen had been
reduced in her first lying-in, would contribute to establish the credit of the
pretended event of the second.

It was therefore settled between Sir William and his friend, that she should
remain at Dresden until within three months of the expected time of her
lying-in; that Sir William should then remove to the Saxon village, that he
might be sufficiently near the place of her intended confinement, to satisfy
himself, that every preparation necessary for it was executed to his wishes.
And it was agreed, that when she was within a very short period of the time of
her being to be brought to bed, she should, under pretense of beginning her
journey to Vienna, be conducted thither.

The tale that Sir William meant to tell, was, that, being seized unexpectedly
with the pains of labor, at an obscure inn on the road to Vienna, she had
there expired.

Sir William had some fears, that the agitation and grief which Ellen would
unavoidably undergo, when she found the heavy destiny that awaited her through
the rest of her life, might prove prejudicial to the safety of the child. But
he had also almost equal hopes that the co^ of this circumstance might operate
to imp^ (...) greater degree of patience, than she would otherwise be able to
assume. And these hopes, which were founded upon the excellence of Ellen's
character, were not vain.

It was Sir William's intention to linger near the spot of Ellen's confinement,
until she was brought to bed; and when he was informed of the consequences of
that event, then to dismiss her from his solicitude for ever, and make all the
advance he could in the road to forgetfulness.

That no circumstance might hereafter obtrude Ellen upon his memory, he gave
his friend on whose integrity he had a perfect reliance, power to draw upon him
for any sum necessary to defray the expenses of her establishment: and he
appointed an agent at Dresden, who was to be paid by the Bohemian nobleman, to
furnish every thing that Ellen might require. To authenticate her requisitions,
which he had signified to her were to be written in French, nothing more was
necessary than the signature of Mrs. Ulric.

Mrs. Ulric had, therefore, no immediate intercourse with Sir William: and had
she been inclined to have favored Ellen's cause, she would not only have had
Sir William's resentment to have overcome, but the reluctance of her late
master, who, she knew, concurred in all that Sir William had done; and
applauded the justice and mercy of his proceedings.

Mrs. Ulric had been directed to inform Sir William, through the channel of
this nobleman, how Ellen bore the first shock of her misfortune. And however
favorable this report might be, it was very unlikely that the friend of Sir
William should take any step toward reconciling him to a (...) of whose guilt
he was perfectly satisfied.

Mrs. Ulric had made a faithful representation of Ellen's mildness, moderation,
and patience. But imputing the whole to penitence, she led both Sir William and
his friend to believe, that Ellen had been sufficiently explicit in the marks
of this contrition, to furnish, if that had been necessary, fresh proofs of her
former guilt. Sir William, therefore, however miserable, was far from repenting
the step he had taken. He had truly said, "I am deaf to the voice of
penitence." To forgive was not in his nature: and nothing but the conviction of
Ellen's innocence would have induced him to have restored her to liberty: and
from this conviction he was farther removed than ever.

CHAP. XVI.
"Stone walls do not a prison make*
"Nor iron bars a cage;
"Minds innocent and quiet, take
"That for a hermitage."
LOVELACE.
WHEN Ellen found all the hopes she had entertained vain, of being able to move
Mrs. Ulric in her favor, she began to turn her thoughts upon some other
individual, who might probably make a part of the household.

She had hitherto seen only one other person; and she soon found that the house
contained no more. This was a hale, stout country girl, with an open good
humoured countenance: and though the being totally without the means of
applying to the interested feelings of such a one was an obstacle to her
success, in circumstances which admitted of any other hope, Ellen would have
considered as invincible, hers was not a situation, where even great
difficulties ought to discourage her: and she resolved to make the attempt. She
hoped, by the courteousness of her manners, to conciliate the girl's good will:
and she sometimes flattered herself, that precaution had not been so
unremittingly awake as to have extended to an ignorant girl, whom it was known
she could not bribe, the prohibition as to receiving any letter from her hands.
She had no doubt that she, like Mrs. Ulric, spoke only German; and had
therefore no hope of moving her by argument.

By having attended closely to the words which Mrs. Ulric always used to
herself when she sought to induce her to any compliance, she thought herself
mistress of one phrase of entreaty in a language that would be understood: and
armed with this piece of rhetoric, and a letter in her hand, she one day
accosted the damsel. But what was her astonishment, when, with a broad stare of
incomprehension, she was answered in sounds more uncouth and unintelligible
than had ever before met her ears.

Ellen shrunk back: and hope died within her, when she found this fresh
impediment to the success of her plans: for she easily comprehended, that the
girl was a true-born Bohemian, and spoke only her native Sclavonian.

The many plans which Ellen had laid to gain the attention of this girl, and
the various schemes which she had adopted and rejected as likely means, or as
being impossible to engage her compassion, and explain her own wishes to her,
had so fully occupied her mind for some days, that she had had less leisure to
reflect upon her actual situation. In the hopes of liberty, she lost, for a
time, a sense of her restraint: and when, by the discovery of the impossibility
of making the girl comprehend her, these hopes seemed to shrink to nothing, a
new, and even a more lively interest prevented her from feeling the whole
weight of her disappointment.

She had received those preparations for her approaching indisposition which
Sir William had promised her in his letter: and she busied herself in arranging
every thing relative to that period This subject being fully in her mind, she
naturally reverted to the ray of hope which Sir William himself seemed to allow
the birth of a child afforded her. She endeavored to discover the true meaning
of the words he had used.

It was evident, that he was persuaded the child was his own: and under this
persuasion it was but too likely he would not suffer it to remain in her care.
In the case of its being removed from her, what hope could spring from its
existence, to gild her future life? -- When Sir William had once announced her
death to her friends (and by a story of her death, she naturally concluded, he
could alone conceal her imprisonment) he had put it out of his own power,
without fixing an indelible reproach upon himself, to restore her to the world:
and however probable she might think it, that he would defer such an
annunciation, till after the expected period of her lying-in, which was well
known to her English friends, as a security against any doubts of the
legitimacy of the child he might produce, yet she felt it nearly impossible
that he should delay it longer. What good, then, could she derive from becoming
the mother of an infant, who, under these suppositions, would be ignorant of
her very existence.

If Sir William, therefore, really foresaw any advantage possible to accrue to
her from the birth of the child, it must be his having determined, under some
circumstances, to leave it to her care. But when she recalled the earnest wish
he had formerly expressed for an heir, and the very evident care he took to
preserve the existence of the unborn infant, she could not for a moment indulge
a hope, that this would be the case if the child were a boy. The hope,
therefore, which in so doubtful a manner he had endeavored to inspire her
with, seemed to rest upon one of these two suppositions: Either that he had
suggested it merely as a means to quiet the first excesses of her grief,
without any intention of its being followed by any real good to her; or, that
if the child proved a girl, he did in truth propose to leave her in possession
of it. To this latter possibility she clang with a fond partiality, as to the
only source of happiness which remained to her on this side the grave.

The more she considered the matter, the more she persuaded herself it was
probable: and the more it appeared probable, the more it became necessary to
her. Soon her mind could admit of no other idea. The gloom of the prison seemed
to clear up, its solitude to disappear. Wherever she turned her eyes, this
little girl was before her. She saw it in the helpless fatuity of the first
weeks of its life. She marked the first smile of intelligence that sparkled in
its eyes. She beheld the first symptoms of design in its actions. She heard the
first half-formed articulate sound which escaped from its lips. In imagination
she began the task of instruction, and beheld her most arduous efforts repaid a
thousand fold, by having gained a companion and a friend.

If such an illusory progression of but too often unrealised bliss fills the
breast of every tender and reflecting female, when about to become a mother,
and communicates a sense of happiness, unfelt and unimagined in every other
circumstance, even in the most prosperous life, with what trembling transport
must (...) desolated Ellen con^plate a blessing which would be her only one*
How must she prize a possession, which was to be her all of joy? And how must
her heart grow cold as she thought this blessing might be withheld from her --
that this possession might be snatched from her arms.

But that all this fabric of happiness should depend upon the sex of her child,
when her heart was disposed to love equally a boy or girl, pointed to her
apprehension the peculiar wretchedness of her fate, the circumstances of which
could suspend the most natural affections of the soul, and render it doubtful
whether a mother should view the face of her offspring with pleasure.

A short period brought the matter to an issue: and Ellen was delivered of a
daughter. Ellen clasped the infant to her heart; and forgot for a moment her
captivity. The next she feared to lose what she so highly prized. Those
reasonings which had before appeared so conclusively to insure her the
undisturbed possession of a daughter, now seemed weak and unsatisfactory. She
doubted where she had before been certain. She feared where she had hoped.

In the mean time, she recovered her health much faster than could have been
hoped: and, fully occupied in nursing her little girl, the days passed easily.
She began to believe, that Sir William had ceased to think either of her or his
child: and trusting in the vicissitudes which time always produces, she soothed
her mind with the distant hope, that a period would arrive when she should be
restored to those she loved.

Could she have found any means of informing her family and friends of her
situation, she would have been far from feeling her present lot as an unhappy
one. It was the thought of what they would suffer on her supposed death, which
at this time formed her bitterest reflections. Removed from the perpetual ill
humor and injurious suspicions of Sir William, mistress of her time and her
employments, holding in her arms, or nourishing at her breast the dear object
of her tenderest affections, she experienced a degree of calm satisfaction
which had long been a stranger to her mind -- that mind unclouded by
self-reproach, undistracted by selfish solicitudes, reposed itself in peace on
the protection of a Providence, whose wisdom it could not doubt, and of whose
goodness it was assured.

Three months were now fully past since the birth of Ellen's daughter: and to
the partial apprehensions of the mother she was already become a very
interesting companion. Ellen believed, or thought she believed, that there were
none of her actions which the child did not understand: and she was more than
repaid the compliment by undoubtedly understanding all that the child did.

Ellen now wanted no other companion. To Mary she talked; and to Mary she sung.
She held her in her arms all day: and when she had placed her in her crib for
the night, she drew her chair close to it, and, with her eyes fixed more upon
the face of the child, than upon the book she held in her hand and imagined
that she read. The fear that her treasure should be snatched from her now
seldom obtruded itself. Every passing day took away from the probability of its
being realized. If it occurred, she was tempted to consider it as an ungrateful
doubting of the benevolence of Providence: and she repressed, as faulty, all
thoughts that led to it.

CHAP. XVII.
'Oh you blessed ministers above,
'Steep me in patience.'
SHAKESPEARE.
IN this state of contentment and security was Ellen, when, one morning, as she
was engaged in suckling her child, Mrs. Ulric entered. Ellen raised her eyes
toward her, and was immediately struck with the sadness of her countenance.
Ellen, who in holding her child in her arms, felt that all the treasure she had
on earth was secure, thought not of herself. She held out her hand to Mrs.
Ulric; and longed for words to inquire into the cause of her grief, and to
offer her consolation. But, alas! she was herself the true object of
compassion. Mrs. Ulric sat down by her side. She sighed; and, taking the infant
from her, delivered her a letter.

Ellen cast her eyes on the superscription. She knew Sir William's hand: and
she anticipated, in a moment, all he had to say to her. The blood forsook her
lips. She became sick: and her whole frame trembled so extremely, that it was
with difficulty she opened the letter. These were its contents:

'I am willing to persuade myself that my present design will meet with a ready
acquiescence from you. The person who delivers this letter, has orders to take
charge of my daughter. She will be conveyed to me with every solicitous
attention to her safety and convenience, which you could yourself dictate. I
believe, that as your good sense will withhold you from any opposition to this
plan, which, you must be convinced, will ultimately prove fruitless; so I am
persuaded your humanity is such, as to take from you all selfish desire to make
this innocent victim of your misconduct, a partaker of your punishment. When
separated from you, she will be in the full enjoyment of every blessing a
father's affection can bestow: and you surely cannot but wish that her cheek
may for ever remain untinged by a sense of your shame, and her heart unwounded
by a knowledge of your afflictions. If your heart sadden with the thought, that
you will never behold her more, be consoled by the assurance, that from this
period I shall promote her happiness even at the expense of my own. For a
measure so consonant to the best interests of your offspring, no apology
appears necessary: and for the manner in which I see proper to dispose of my
own, I do not conceive I owe you any. With every wish, however, for the perfect
restoration of peace to your bosom, I now bid you finally and for ever farewell.'

'Never, never*' said Ellen, wildly snatching the infant from Mrs. Ulric, 'will
I part with my child. Go, go and tell his agent so. Together they may force us
from this place: but never shall they separate us.'

Mrs. Ulric was prepared for the tears and the grief of Ellen. But the wildness
of her air, and the determined tone of her voice surprised and disconcerted her.

'Ah! madam,' said she, 'would you have this poor innocent remain a perpetual
prisoner with you?'

As she spoke, she fixed her eyes upon the child, with a look of the tenderest
compassion. The sound of her voice, and her action smote upon Ellen's heart.
She burst into tears.

'No,' rejoined Mrs. Ulric, 'you are too good:' and she attempted to take the
child from her. But Ellen clasping it to her breast, rushed into the next room,
and fastened the door. Here in a tumult of passion, which, for some time,
suspended every power of reason, Ellen wept over her infant in all the
bitterness of distraction and despair. But in the abodes where virtue is
accustomed to preside, the usurpation of passion can be of no long duration.
Ellen was not so lost in self as to forget her child: and no sooner did her
heart acknowledge the cruelty there might be in a wish to detain her with her,
than her part was taken. But it was with a pang, far exceeding his, who, in his
haste to escape from immediate danger, destroys with his own hand that
property, on which alone all his future hopes of happiness depend, that Ellen
resolved to part with her daughter. Never had she felt a misery so
insupportable, and which seemed so entirely to drive reason from her seat, as
was inflicted by the thought, that she beheld, for the last time, this object
so beloved. To be restored to society and reputation, now became a hundred fold
more important to her than ever: and the despair of ever being able to
accomplish a purpose, now so momentous, drove her to the point of distraction*
Suddenly a gleam of hope burst through this gloom.

'My infant shall be the bearer of a letter to her father,' said Ellen. 'If I
can but once induce him to hear me, I must be justified.' At this thought, the
turbulence of her passions subsided. She became calm. 'Who can tell,' cried
she, fresh hope kindling in her heart, 'but these are the very means a merciful
God, who never forgets his creatures' sufferings, has appointed for my
deliverance.'

Ellen soon afterward appeared before Mrs. Ulric, who easily comprehended by
the settled, calm, and deep sorrow, which had taken place of a violence so
unusual, that Ellen was disposed to submit to the commands of Sir William.
Ellen, however, by never quitting her child for a moment, and by evidently
keeping over it a jealous and suspicious watch, showed that she meant not to
part with it immediately. Mrs. Ulric was willing to wait at least till the next
day, before she took any forcible means to deprive her of it: and so far their
intentions agreed, that Ellen had no design of retaining it longer with her
than till the next morning. This night, this last night that she might ever
embrace it, when the hour of its repose came, she placed it, not as usual into
its crib, but holding it on her knees, there lulled it to sleep. In this
posture, with her heart filled with despair, and her eyes overflowing with the
bitterest tears that ever woman shed, she wrote the following letter to Sir
William.

'To the voice of reason and of humanity may my heart never be deaf! though in
obeying their dictates that heart should cleave in twain.

'I deliver my daughter to you, because she is yours also; and because I wish
not for any alleviation to my sorrows, which must arise from my associating her
in my misfortune: But whatever may be her destiny, as to happiness; or misery,
she cannot be the victim of my crimes; for I am guiltless. The angels of heaven
are not more free of the crime of which you accuse me than I am.

'You have said, you listen not to the voice of penitence. It is not the voice
of penitence, it is the cry of innocence that assails you, an innocence as
spotless, in all that relates to you, as that of the babe who now looks upon
you, and bids you do justice to her injured mother.

'I am unable to understand the circumstances upon which you have condemned me.
I can therefore make no defense except you will explain yourself farther. Be
just alike to yourself and me -- see me -- hear me -- I ask not this as a
favor from your pity, or your love. I demand it as a right. I demand it in
compassion to you, as well as myself. My ruin involves your condemnation. I
would preserve you from too late a repentance. Refuse not to listen to this
solicitation. Considering the precautions you have taken, it is the last that
can ever reach you. It is the solicitation -- I must speak out, for who have I
to speak for me! of suffering virtue, of oppressed innocence, of wounded
justice. Oh! Sir William, when I offer so cruel a sacrifice to the rights you
assert over me, deny me not that, which the most abject criminal may exact.'

Ellen continued to hold her infant on her knees, and to gaze on its face
through the whole of this distressful night, without the power of closing her
eyes, or losing in forgetfulness the sense of her wretchedness for one single
moment. When the morning dawned, the infant awoke. Ellen put it to her breast.
'Dearest of human creatures,' said she, pressing it closely to her, 'and do I
give thee sustenance for the last time? Oh! my God, enable me to support a
deprivation so cruel!'

Ellen then proceeded to dress her child; and sewing up the letter she designed
for Sir William in a piece of cloth, she fastened it under the upper vest of
the infant. To have endeavored to convey it by any other means, she was
assured would have been fruitless: but she persuaded herself, that nothing
could be more certain, than that whoever found a paper directed to Sir William
in the clothes of his child, would carefully deliver it to him: and she thought
it very improbable, that the person appointed to convey the child, and who
would not have seen her, should have received any prohibition as to forwarding
any letter from her: and even if such a prohibition had been given, it would
hardly appear a disregard of it, to deliver a paper found upon the person of
the child, the writer of which could at most only be guessed at. These
considerations tranquilized her as to the delivery of the letter: but the
reception it would meet with, and the effect it would produce, were matters of
much more doubtful event.

Conscious of her own innocence, Ellen's first thoughts had led her to believe
that it was only necessary to be heard, to make this innocence evident: and
from the same purity of mind, she had felt a perfect confidence, that Sir
William's conduct originated rather from mistaken ideas of the punishment due
to the crime he supposed her to have been guilty of, than from any justifiable
resentment for that want of love on her part, of which he was accustomed to
complain, but which, he must be convinced, arose wholly from his own unkindness
toward her.

More reflection had introduced ideas into her mind much less favorable to Sir
William. She could not imagine any circumstances from which such a mistake, as
that on which she had supposed Sir William to act, could have arisen. The
appeal which he made to the evidence of his own senses, strengthened the
suspicion of unfair dealing on his part: and it had received additional force
by the unnecessary cruelty which appeared in his so carefully shutting from her
all means of making any application to him, and in the unfeeling harshness
discoverable in more parts than one of his last letter.

Added to these considerations, were others that seemed scarcely less to
militate against the hopes of her deliverance. She knew well the structure of
Sir William's mind. She knew how little she had to hope from his generosity or
candor. She knew the pertinacity with which he adhered to all his opinions,
the reluctance which he felt to acknowledge himself mistaken in the merest
trifles: and she could hardly flatter herself, that if he were convinced, that
he had fallen into an error, he would act from such a conviction, when, by so
doing, he must so painfully establish her superiority, and place himself for
the rest of their lives, in the light of the offending party. As she was aware
how impossible it would be to persuade him, that she really and in fact was
capable of forgiving, and banishing from her mind a sense of the injuries he
had done her, and as she knew he would feel assured that he must never hope to
possess her love, she but too reasonably concluded, that if even any love for
her remained, it would not be sufficiently powerful to induce him to restore
her to society under circumstances so disgracefully humiliating, and so little
happy to himself.

These reflections would probably have had influence enough to have prevented
any attempt on her part toward moving Sir William in her favor, and might
have put her upon turning her thoughts to some more certain, though more
distant, means of deliverance, if the insupportable agony which she felt, on
the threatened loss of her child, had not made her consider all delay in the
hopes of rejoining it, a lengthened torture of so acute a kind, that she
doubted her own ability to endure it with tolerable patience.

This feeling, and the reflection, that if she now omitted any one possible
means of declaring her innocence, it might hereafter be urged as a remissness
arising from conscious guilt, had determined her to try the fate of a letter to
Sir William. But although, in her present circumstances, this was all she could
do, so little did it appear likely to answer the purpose, that it was wholly
inefficacious in abating that misery which the idea of separation from her
child had impressed upon her mind: and when the letter was written and
deposited under the infant's clothes, a melancholy sense of its probable
inutility filled her breast; and gave to the approaching deprivation all the
horrors due to a farewell, which, as to this world, was to be final.

Ellen, notwithstanding the oppression of her feelings, wished to conquer
herself so far as to do that which she had resolved upon, with dignity and
composure.

The opening and shutting of the doors in the gallery now told her she might
expect the approach of Mrs. Ulric every moment. Her eyes were alternately fixed
on the face of her child, and now turned with a look of apprehension to the
door. She pressed her lips to those of the poor baby, with a fervency which, at
any other time, she would not have dared to have indulged, from the fear of
hurting it. Every kiss imprinted she thought was to be the last: and as she
intently gazed upon its features, she kissed each separately, with a sensation
of despair which ought only to belong to the guilty. Happy was it for the
intellects of Ellen, that this scene was not much farther prolonged.

Mrs. Ulric came toward her: and Ellen rising hastily, with an effort that
required all her fortitude, put the child into her arms, and rushed from her
into the next room. Mrs. Ulric, struck with her courage, and moved by the
tenderest compassion, committed the infant to the care of those who already
waited to receive it; and then hastened back, with all the dispatch in her
power, to administer to Ellen all the consolation which her humanity could
afford. But Ellen remained long insensible to her kindness and her cares. Mrs.
Ulric found her, on her return, in the highest state of hysteric affection. The
disorder baffled all the remedies which Mrs. Ulric's skill in medicine could
suggest; and continued so long unsubdued as to raise in her mind very serious
apprehensions.

At length, nature seemed quite exhausted: and Ellen fell into a heavy sleep,
which continued for some hours. When she awoke, she was less agitated, but so
extremely reduced in strength, as to be unable to quit her bed, or scarcely to
raise her head from her pillow.

She continued for some time subject to returns of the hysterical disorder: and
when she appeared to be recovered from these attacks, she was seized with a
depression of spirits, which incapacitated her from all exertion; and seemed to
deprive her even of the power of thinking.

Mrs. Ulric conceived nothing more likely to remove this kind of indisposition
than the open air, and a variety of objects. The latter it was not in her
power, to any extent, to afford her unhappy patient. But she accompanied her
for whole days in the garden, where she often induced her to continue by
spreading a repast under the shade of the trees, or by bringing her the harp,
and intimating a desire to hear her play upon it. Ellen was not lost to the
pleasure of obliging: and in the present state of her mind, having no desires
of her own, she seemed wholly directed by those of her companion. Mrs. Ulric,
somewhat to vary the scene, ventured to unlock the garden door, and to walk
some little way into the adjacent country. The door opened upon a wild heath,
which was skirted by a thick wood, and in this wood they frequently walked.
Insensibly this wise and gentle treatment produced the desired effect; Ellen
began to awake, as it were, from the lethargy into which she had fallen. Her
powers of reasoning returned: and if she felt more, she acknowledged, that a
state of so alarming an insensibility was well exchanged for one of suffering.
The first reflection she made was on the length of time which had elapsed since
the departure of her child, and when she found that six weeks were gone, never
more to return, she gave up all hopes of receiving her deliverance from the
justice or generosity of Sir William.

How he might have been affected, if the letter had reached his hands, it is
not possible to say: but the trial was never made: and Ellen owed the loss of
this feeble chance in her favor, neither to design or treachery, but merely to
accident.

The circumstance of any paper being concealed in the piece of cloth which
Ellen had fastened round the body of the child, had escaped the notice of its
attendant. She had taken it merely for a part of its garments, and with the
rest of them having been sent to the washer-woman, Ellen's letter, in fragments
and defaced, floated soon upon the water.

As Ellen had never attached much hope to this attempt to move Sir William in
her favor, she viewed the total disappointment of it without any of those
acute feelings which might probably have precipitated her again into the
melancholy state of mind from which she had only began to emerge: and it might
indeed be owing to her feelings being blunted, as it were, by what she had
undergone, that she bore so calmly that she considered as an undeniable proof
of Sir William's premeditated injustice.

CHAP. XVIII.
'But there is yet a liberty unsung
'By poets, and by senators unpraised,
'Which monarchs cannot grant, nor all the powers
'Of earth and hell confederate take away*
It Is liberty of heart.'
COWFER.
EVERY day Ellen began to recover her faculties: and she used every means in
her power to rouse herself to exertion, and to train her mind to fortitude.
Patience and resignation, thought she, are all the virtues which I am permitted
to practice. In the first moments of my overwhelming affliction, I was saved,
by insensibility, from the necessity of an exertion, which it might have been
impossible to have made; for what I then failed in, I am not responsible. I am
now called to make use of the reason which is restored to me; and let me attend
to the call: That life is a blank, which is unmarked with the efforts of
virtue: but it is a blank, which I shall be called to account for in another.

In consequence of these reflections Ellen began, for the first time, to turn
her attention to her books. She found the collection well chosen, and evidently
with attention to her peculiar taste. This circumstance softened her heart
toward Sir William. Some few which she wished to have were wanting. She wrote
down the names, and delivering the list to Mrs. Ulric, saw her sign the paper.
She readily understood, that this was the proof agreed upon, by which its
authenticity was to be ascertained. She observed, however, that Mrs. Ulric
carefully inspected the articles: and Ellen supposed she was instructed,
notwithstanding her ignorance of the French language, how to distinguish
between what was allowed and what was forbidden. Books, however, had been
expressly named by Sir William, as what would be considered a lawful
requisition: and Ellen was therefore not surprised to find herself speedily
supplied with what she wanted. As this, however, was the first experiment of
the kind she had made, she felt a sensible pleasure in its success. There was
something in it, which connected her again with the world, from which, before,
she seemed so totally excluded: and when she found, with certainty, that, by
the stroke of her pen, she could procure any gratification, or necessary that
she wanted, she no longer felt herself abandoned to the degree she had
conceived before.

The evenings now grew long, and the days cold. She lived more in the house;
and consequently wanted a greater variety of employments there. She had no call
for works either of ornament or use. With respect to her clothes, she was
supplied with a greater profusion than she had any necessity for. They were
all, it is true, of the plainest kind, and such as (though they were perfectly
conformable to her) could not be converted into bribes to those about her. To
work without any end, would defeat her purpose; for how could she be interested
in the progress of an employment, which, in the end, must be useless? and she
found books and music were not sufficient to carry her through wet and gloomy
days, succeeded by long and tempestuous evenings, without the aid of
conversation or exercise.

In this destitution of employment, her mind preyed too much upon itself: and
when her imagination represented to her the distress of her family and friends
for her loss -- or when she thought of her own captivity, cut off in her early
youth from every social affection, and from every active duty -- but, above
all, when she reflected upon her separation from her child, she found the task
of resignation almost beyond her power.

Anxiously she cast her eyes around for some means of filling her time and
employing her thoughts. Happily it occurred to her, that part of her
Northumberland education had been the art of spinning. No sooner did she
recollect this, than she set about procuring a wheel, and every necessary to
her employment. She knew the perfection to which the Bohemian linens were
brought: and therefore concluded, she should find all the assistance to her
manufacture which she could desire. She found her orders for a wheel as
speedily complied with as had been the one she gave for books: and she began
her new occupation without delay.

Mrs. Ulric seemed highly pleased when she saw her thus employed; and busied
herself in removing any trifling difficulties which arose. This new interest
produced a fresh tie between them. Mrs. Ulric frequently brought her work, and
passed the whole evening with Ellen. It is true, they could not converse: but
they had by this time established a kind of language between themselves, which
served extremely well for all common purposes: and Ellen had even attained the
knowledge of the meaning and the pronunciation of several German words.

This knowledge, however, she acquired against the inclination of Mrs. Ulric:
for Ellen easily perceived, that she seemed to be sorry when any word had
escaped her: and the pertinacity with which she always declined repeating any
word which Ellen endeavored to pronounce after her, and her apparent wilful
misconception, whenever Ellen took any means of inducing her to teach her in
German the names of those objects with which they were surrounded, made it
clear to Ellen, that she lay under the strictest possible prohibition as to
teaching her the language: and she saw, that she adhered to her orders, with an
integrity which all her attachment to Ellen, and the pleasure which it must be
supposed she would naturally have taken in conversing with her, could not shake.

Ellen revered Mrs. Ulric the more for this steady adherence to what, she had
no doubt, was with her a point of duty: and she easily forgave the effect, in
consideration of the cause, though the dreary melancholy of her life was so
beyond measure increased by this very circumstance. Had it not been for those
scruples in Mrs. Ulric, nothing could have been more easy than for Ellen to
have learnt German: and as she never lost sight of the hope of acquiring the
language, as one most essential means to bring about her deliverance: she
treasured up in her memory all that she had learnt from Mrs. Ulric: and in
spite of her precaution, she added almost daily something to her store.

The winter passed away: the spinning plan had succeeded fully: and Ellen now
began to interest herself about the cloth which was to be sent to the weaver,
and that which was to be returned from him. She could not sometimes help
smiling at the artificial business she had contrived for herself, and at the
perfect earnestness in which she saw Mrs. Ulric about the matter. But she
carefully avoided destroying the illusion, and went on spinning as if her web
were to be as long as Penelope's might have been, but for "the backward labors
of her hand."

Ellen's health was now thoroughly re-established: and she endeavored to add a
degree of cheerfulness to the patience and resignation which she had hitherto
practiced. By frequently repeating to herself all the German she could acquire
from her companion, her thoughts were more than ever fixed upon the language:
and with so few circumstances to divert them from any object, which even from a
flight motive might have engaged them, it is not wonderful, if they were almost
incessantly bent upon one, from which so important an advantage might be gained
-- to attain the German language became now the first wish of Ellen's mind; and
she was resolved to take some vigorous step toward it.

She had hitherto forborne to send for the books necessary to her instruction,
as far as it was possible she could instruct herself, from an apprehension that
this was a request upon which Mrs. Ulric would infallibly put a negative: But
observing that Mrs. Ulric now seldom cast her eye over the articles contained
in the lists she signed, she resolved to hazard the attempt.

Amongst several other things which she sent for, only with the design of
making the list larger, that so any particular article might more probably pass
unnoticed, she put down all the German books which she thought necessary to her
purpose. She delivered this list to Mrs. Ulric the next time she visited her
apartment. It was with no small degree of solicitude that she attended its
fate: But she had the satisfaction to see it signed without hesitation or
inspection, and instantly sealed and directed, by which dispatch she concluded
that there was some immediate means of sending it to Dresden; and she was
confirmed in this conjecture by the speed with which she received the packet
in return. And now, for the first time, she had a secret from Mrs. Ulric. She
carefully locked up her German treasure, and took care to secure the door of
her room whenever she recurred to the study of that language. It was with the
greatest assiduity that she pursued her task, but without some oral assistance,
she soon saw cause to fear that she should make no progress that could be
useful to the great purpose, for which alone, at this time, she had thought of
acquiring the knowledge of the German tongue. She found, however, an incidental
advantage in her new study: this was employment; and German for a time
superseded spinning.

In these several occupations, diversified with music and chess, in which she
had discovered Mrs. Ulric to be somewhat of a proficient, with a regular course
of reading, and in the regulation of her own mind, supported with a vague hope
that at some distant period her deliverance might make a part of the designs of
Providence, Ellen passed her time: and such was the tranquillity which the
innocence of her heart and the equanimity of her temper secured to her, under
the deprivation of nearly all that is supposed to make life desirable, that not
only she enjoyed a degree of happiness unknown to the most prosperous guilt,
but such as is unattainable even in the over eager pursuit of the most
legitimate objects: Her mind was calm and vigorous, her body healthy and
active; the roses, which even the chagrins of the first months of her marriage
had banished, returned to her cheeks; her eyes recovered their vivacity; her
well formed limbs acquired all their natural agility, and perhaps Ellen had
never, in the whole course of her life, appeared an object so proper to excite
love and admiration, as she did at this present period -- and must it be, that
such a rose is doomed for ever 'To waste its sweetness on the desert air.'

CHAP. XIX.
'Sweet is the breath of vernal shower,
'The bee's collected treasure sweet,
'Sweet music's melting fall; but sweeter yet
'The still small voice of gratitude.'
GRAY.
TWO years were now passed, and a third far advanced, since Ellen entered the
walls of this dreary habitation. No change seemed to await her: and amidst the
never ceasing vicissitudes of human affairs, her fate alone seemed fixed; as if
the grave, indeed, had enclosed her. But he who could break the bonds of death,
was not impotent to open the doors of her prison.

About this period Mrs. Ulric fell ill; and her illness proved a rheumatic
fever. Ellen attended her with all the assiduity that affection and gratitude
could inspire; she furnished her chamber with every possible accommodation,
from her own: She frequently passed the night by her bed side, and thought
nothing painful to herself that could contribute to alleviate the pains of Mrs.
Ulric.

It was in her frequent visits to the chamber of the invalid, that Ellen first
observed that the under servant had been changed; and that her successor was a
German. To this person, as Mrs. Ulric herself was entirely incapable of
attending upon Ellen, devolved all the duties of waiting upon her meals, or
administering to her any little services she might want. Ellen observed that she
performed all this with something more than a common zeal to oblige: that she
appeared pleased to be employed: and often lingered in her apartments without
any apparent reason. Ellen imputed all this to the natural good humor of the
girl; who might probably be moved by the state of captivity which she could not
but know she was in. It occurred to her that she might turn this compassion to
somewhat better advantage than merely having her dinner warmer, or more nicely
served, by learning from her new attendant the better pronunciation of some
German words. She made the experiment, and found it fully answered by the
alacrity with which the girl seemed willing to enter into conversation. She
observed that she spoke, what appeared to her to be purer German than that
spoken by Mrs. Ulric; and from hence she concluded her to be a Saxon. This idea
led her to imagine it highly probable that she could read; and if it should
prove so, behold her at length furnished with a preceptress in the German
tongue.

She made the trial on the instant, and was soon convinced that her conjecture
was well founded. The girl read with fluency and pleasure; seeming desirous to
recommend herself to Ellen to the best of her power. The book she h^d put into
her hands was a book of such familiar phrases as are calculated for the use of
learners; and when Ellen was satisfied with the experiment she had made, she
sought a sentence expressive of her thanks; and she read it with as good
pronunciation as she was mistress of. The girl seemed forcibly struck; and
turning over the leaves, stopped not until she found an expression, the sense of
which was, 'I owe all to you.' This she pronounced with so peculiar an
emphasis, pointing at the French on the other side, to Ellen, and looking upon
her with so much meaning, and with a countenance so suited to the sense of the
words she used, that Ellen felt an instant conviction that she was known.

When words are wanting, the most untutored will have recourse to actions. The
girl, as if impatient to explain herself, threw herself on her knees before
Ellen, and passionately kissing her hand, pronounced the name of the Saxon
village in which Ellen had passed so many weeks. This word instantly called to
her recollection the features of the person before her; and she recognized the
daughter of the cottager, to whom her bounty had furnished so seasonable a
relief, when her habitation had been destroyed by fire.

Ellen's bosom had long been a stranger to the degree of delight which this
discovery communicated: her quick conception anticipated, in a moment, all the
advantages she might derive from it: and her first sentiment being that of
gratitude to an ever-watchful Providence, she threw herself on her knees by the
girl, and, with uplifted hands and eyes, thanked Heaven for what she felt as an
earnest of her deliverance.

From this moment scarcely an hour passed without Ellen making some advance in
her powers of communicating her sentiments to her new friend; and as she had
from the first warned her to conceal their intercourse from Mrs. Ulric, their
hours of lecture were conducted with the greatest secrecy. Ellen thought it
unnecessary to explain any circumstances of her situation farther to the girl,
than to inform her that she was an English woman, and to assure her most
solemnly that she was unjustly detained from her country and friends; and that
all she desired was the means of releasing herself from her present
confinement. She, however, fully exposed her poverty, and her utter inability
to reward any risk the young woman might run in assisting her to escape. To all
such precautionary information, the girl constantly replied, in the grateful
and affecting words that she had first used, 'I owe all to you.'

It was only by degrees that they came to understand each other with tolerable
ease: but Ellen learnt, through all the imperfection attending the very first
of their communication, that her grateful Saxon was ready to sacrifice every
thing for her sake. When she was able more fully to understand her, she learnt
that she had only been taken by Mrs. Ulric on a disappointment she had of a
servant whom she had more approved: that as her subsistence depended upon her
labor, she did not doubt, as her character was good, of being able to find,
without difficulty, as eligible an establishment as her present one, should she
lose it in consequence of her services to Ellen.

Ellen, from her natural abhorrence to all disguise, hesitated whether she
should not, now she could explain herself with tolerable facility, take Mrs.
Ulric into her confidence; but, upon farther reflection, she found, that her
present hopes were too dear to be put to hazard by a communication, which, from
the proofs she had seen of Mrs. Ulric's high sense of the sacredness of the
trust reposed in her, might be the means of destroying them all together. She
considered that in effecting her escape, she did justice to herself, without
injuring any body: and she felt assured, from the idea she had formed of Mrs.
Ulric's character, that were she acquainted with the whole of the case, she
would rejoice in her deli^ance.

These considerations determined her to maintain her secret. She learnt from
Theresa, the name of Mrs. Ulric, and that of the nobleman in whose house she
was confined: and no longer wondered, from what she knew of his intimacy with
Sir William, that he had been able, with his assistance, so completely to
succeed in his plan of shutting her up.

Some weeks were now elapsed since Mrs. Ulric had been confined to her bed, and
though the force of the disorder was abated, she was become so lame, that she
could not be moved from thence; however, as some amendment appeared every day,
the time pressed, for Ellen's best hopes of a successful escape were placed on
her being able to conceal it for some days from Mrs. Ulric.

Theresa and she now daily consulted upon the best means of effecting this
escape. The absolute want of money was a great obstacle; for Ellen was desirous
to purchase a peasant's dress of the country, as she hoped, by such a disguise,
to pass wholly undistinguished from those with whom she was to mix. Money was
not to be procured: but Ellen suggested the possibility of exchanging some of
her own clothes for those of the kind which she now preferred. This was
accordingly accomplished; and Ellen found herself in possession of all the
necessary garments. Theresa had informed her, that until she could get beyond
the limits of Bohemia, even the little German she knew would scarcely be of any
use to her: that the Bohemians hated the Germans, and could never be induced to
apply themselves to the study of their language, though there were schools
established for that purpose in several places; that therefore she would find
few people in the interior parts of the country who understood it; and though
most of the farmers who were situated on the great roads had a very competent
knowledge of German, there were few who would be induced to converse in it:
Theresa therefore advised, that laying aside all attempts at making herself
understood, she should trust wholly to the compassion which her speechless
wants might excite, and the reward which her music might be thought to deserve.

The idea of the latter resource had also been suggested by Theresa, whose two
years residence in a Bohemian service had made her very well acquainted with
the predilection that the lower rank of people in Bohemia bore to music. She
had observed Ellen's harp, and had told her that could she carry that with her,
a few tunes upon it would scarcely ever fail to procure her a draught of milk,
or a night's lodging. The harp was too cumbersome for Ellen to think for a
moment of burdening herself with it: she had therefore determined to substitute
a mandoline, which she had sent for to Dresden, and Theresa fully approved of
the succedaneum.

Ellen could not help shrinking from the idea of performing such a journey as
lay before her alone: she would willingly have engaged Theresa to have
accompanied her: she found her perfectly ready to retrace in her company, the
steps which had led her from her native village: but, besides that, Ellen, from
her ignorance whether Sir William had returned to England, or had continued
abroad; was very unwilling to approach Saxony; it being the place where, in the
latter case, she was most likely to meet with him, or with some body, who from
their connexions with him might know her, she could not consent to bring
Theresa into a situation where she would again be a burden upon her friends,
when she had nothing in her power to make them any compensation for such a
burden.

There were similar objections to making her the companion of her travels in
any other direction: for let her part with her where she would, short of
England, she had nothing wherewith to reward her, or to assist her in finding
her way home. Ellen's secret wish was, that Theresa would accompany her to
England; there she doubted not of being able to make her such a recompense as
would fully repay her for all her trouble and fatigue; but to so distant a
peregrination, Ellen observed reluctance in Theresa, which she was too delicate
to try to overcome: and indeed a still farther reflection upon all
circumstances, soon reconciled her self-denial with prudence. She considered,
that if Theresa accompanied her, her escape would be immediately discovered;
and as she had no means of speedy flight, and no place of refuge, such a
discovery would inevitably lead to a renewal of her captivity. She recollected
what Sir William had said in his first letter, of the precautions he had taken
to render abortive all attempts to escape; and she became convinced that her
safety lay in leaving Theresa behind her, since by her continuing her
attendance in her apartment some days after her departure, she would not be
obliged to announce her flight until she was securely beyond the reach of all
pursuit.

The place from whence she thought it most easy to escape, was the garden-door;
since Mrs. Ulric had indulged her with extending her walks beyond the garden,
all fastenings had been removed from it except the lock. She showed the door to
Theresa, who assured her that she could easily find a method of opening that.

Every thing was now arranged. It was agreed that Ellen should appear
indisposed when she made her last visit to Mrs. Ulric before her departure: and
that the supposed continuance of this indisposition, should be the excuse that
Theresa should make to Mrs. Ulric for Ellen's unusual absence from the sick
chamber. To give this apology the greater air of truth, Ellen had no sooner
determined upon her flight, than she forebore, under one pretense or other, her
daily visits to Mrs. Ulric: and she even sometimes suffered two days to pass
without seeing her. This was a severe affliction to Ellen's grateful and
feeling heart; more especially as she could not but observe that Mrs. Ulric
seemed cast down by this relaxation in her attentions; but the necessity of the
case silenced her scruples, and she consoled herself with the thought that in
future she could explain her conduct to her friend, so as fully to exculpate
her from any charge of unkindness.

Ellen took from Theresa a direction to Mrs. Ulric, to whom she determined to
write from England an acknowledgment of all the obligations she had received
from her, and to send her some token of her esteem and gratitude. She also put
down the name of her faithful Theresa, and that of the place where she might
transmit the reward of her services, that she meant to send her.

She next studied all the maps of Germany and Bohemia, which she had in her
possession; and having learnt from Theresa the exact spot in which she then
was, she sketched out a kind of route for herself, as something of a guide to
steer her course by. Here Theresa could be of little use to her; as her
knowledge of the country, except by hearsay, was confined to within a few miles
of the place they were in.

Ellen having made all the preparations for her expedition, and taken all the
precaution which circumstances would admit of, appointed the next morning for
her departure. Theresa packed a small basket with cold meat and bread, at the
bottom of which Ellen put several trifles, which she thought might possibly be
of comfort or assistance to her. She made up also as large a bundle of linen as
she could carry with any convenience, both as a source of comfort to herself,
and as a means, if all others failed, of procuring food or lodging. She farther
provided a pair of shoes, besides those she wore: and being dressed in her
peasant's dress, her mandoline flung by her side, her bundle under one arm, and
her basket on the other, she quietly descended the stairs which led from the
gallery to the hall, and, accompanied by Theresa, made the best of her way to
the garden. Theresa easily burst the lock of the door; and Ellen saw herself at
liberty. She turned to embrace her faithful Theresa, saying, 'Oh, my friend,
how shall I ever repay you? Take all I have to give, as an earnest, that, when
I have more, I will give more.'

This all was a thin plate of gold, in which the picture of her father was set,
and which she had loosened from the picture for this purpose. It had occurred
to her, to make this use of it during the course of the preceding night, as she
lay sleepless and disturbed with the thoughts that she should be obliged to
quit Theresa, without leaving with her any mark of her esteem, or any earnest
of what she intended to do for her in future.

Theresa generously declined accepting the gold, urging, that it might be of
use to her: but Ellen felt there was so little difference between actual want
and the safeguard which such a piece of gold would be to her, that no
consideration of this sort could induce her to forego the pleasure she had in
leaving some memorial of her gratitude in the hands of Theresa. Yet, she
afterward experienced, that gold, even of less value, was to her of the utmost
importance. But though Ellen could conceive the pressure of want, she had not
yet felt its weight: she therefore forced all the property she was worth upon
Theresa, and again embracing her,

'God protect and reward you, my dear Theresa,' said she: 'and be assured,
nothing but death shall hinder me from showing the sense I have of my
obligations to you.'

'Oh! Madam,' returned the grateful hearted Theresa, 'God protect and reward
you. I owe all to you!'

And with these memorable words, accompanied by a flood of tears, she kissed
the hand of Ellen: and after watching her move some yards from the garden-door,
she withdrew, and closed it upon her.

CHAP. XX.
'Per mezzo i boschi, e per strano sentier^,
'Dunque Ella se nando sola, e romita.'
ARIOSTO.
IT was about five o'clock on a glorious morning in the middle of July, that
Ellen thus effected her escape from a captivity which had lasted more than
three years, and of which the miseries had been heightened by a stroke of
misfortune, which would have shed a gloom over the brightest days of
prosperity. Amid the variety of emotions which swelled Ellen's heart, at this
affecting moment, fear was a very predominant feeling.

Habit so far triumphed over reason, as to excite a most lively alarm, when she
thus found herself wholly dependent on her own powers. Unaided and unprotected,
she shrunk from the project she had undertaken. She thought for a moment it was
above the strength either of body or mind assigned to her sex, and that it was
presumption to have undertaken it. This was but the thought of a moment. The
next she smiled at the force of prejudice, and the artificial imbecility, and
false idea of decorum, induced by custom. She considered, that in the eyes of
all who met her, she was only a peasant; and could therefore neither draw on
herself the gaze of curiosity, nor provoke the observations of impertinence;
for that a peasant should make use of her limbs in moving from place to place,
unattended and alone, was according to rule, and the eternal fitness of things.
To those who knew not that her journey extended farther than from her native
village to the neighboring one, there was nothing daring or unfeminine, in
being alone; and in fact the whole of her journey was only to consist of a
certain number of such removals from village to village.

Thus the objections of prejudice were presently silenced by reason. But there
were yet certain difficulties and contingent dangers, which were but too real,
and to support herself under both, all her natural force of mind, and
undoubting reliance upon the superintendance of Providence, were no more than
absolutely necessary.

She had before her a journey of more than nine hundred miles, without money,
without a friend to whom she could make herself known, without the means of
warding off one evil that might attack her. Should her strength fail, or should
illness seize her, she had not the possibility of supporting herself until
vigor returned, or until health was restored. She was to depend upon charity
for the morsel necessary to her daily sustenance, and for her nightly lodging:
and from her ignorance of the route she was to take, and the impossibility she
must find in calculating her powers of reaching such places as would afford
shelter, it was but too probable she would frequently find herself hungry when
no food was near, and weary when she knew not where to lay her head. If the
public roads exposed her more to danger, the private paths rendered her more
helpless, if danger approached* and to the most eligible choice in such an
alternative, no wisdom was adequate. These, and many such thoughts as these,
alarmed, but did not depress the mind of Ellen.

With all these difficulties and dangers before her, she still thought herself
happy, that she was no longer a prisoner: and if she had been able to preserve
her equanimity in a more calamitous state, should it desert her in a less. She
endeavored, by reason, to divest her situation of all imaginary terrors, and
artificial hardships, and to collect all the powers of her mind to support
those which really accompanied it. She resolved then steadily to proceed;
making all possible use of her understanding, her patience, and her courage;
but trusting alone for the happy issue of her endeavors to that Being, who is
the defender of the weak, the supporter of the afflicted, and the enlightener
of the ignorant.

It was Ellen's design to proceed to Egra, from whence, as nearly as she could
calculate, she was something more than eighty miles. From thence she designed
her route to be to Frankfort, to Cologne, and through the Low Countries to
Helvoetsluys: here she knew she should find a ready passage to Harwich: and as
to her further proceedings, she left them to be determined by the circumstances
which might arise. At the distance which she then was from England, it appeared
to her, that the moment she set foot on its shores she was at home: and however
impossible she might have thought it in former times, to have found her way
into Northumberland from Harwich, alone, on foot, and pennyless, she considered
that the person who had found the means under all these disadvantages, with the
additional one of imperfect language, to make her way from the heart of Germany
across the English channel, was not the one who should distress her mind with
the difficulties which might arise in comparatively so short a pilgrimage.

The morning was gay and cheering. Ellen walked leisurely on: and when the heat
of the day induced her to seek for rest, she found a shady covert, through
which ran a brook, where, unpacking her basket, she indulged in the refreshment
which the friendly Theresa had provided* and she quenched her thirst with the
waters of the rivulet, which ran at her foot.

Having continued in this secluded spot till the fervor of the day was past,
and till her wearied limbs began to feel the invigorating effect of
refreshment, she again began her journey; and with the same leisurely pace,
happily arrived, as the sun was setting, at a small village. Her knowledge of
the situation of most of the Bohemian villages had induced her, on the sight of
a large wood, to quit the public road in search of one: and her sagacity was
repaid by finding this, at the moment when she most wished for such an asylum.

Here she was to make the first experiment as to the effect which her music
would have upon the charitable feelings of the inhabitants. Placing herself
therefore on a little mound of sods, which seemed raised for the purpose of a
rural seat, she took up her mandoline, and began a little wild and lively air.
Presently she found herself surrounded by half a dozen ragged boys and girls.
She changed her notes, and set them all dancing. This appearance of gaiety soon
drew others to partake of it; the dancers increased; and, whenever they
suspended their exercise, Ellen sung a few lines of a song, or diversified
their amusement by a change in her music.

She had soon the whole village for auditors: and singling from among the more
elderly part of the company a female, whose countenance she thought promised
well, she asked, in English, the favor of a night's lodging. She had not
chosen this language from the most distant hope of being understood, but merely
to show that she was a stranger, and to draw on a conversation, in the course
of which she thought she might be able to fall upon a method of making her
wants known. Luckily, however, for her, among her auditors, there was one of
those numerous individuals, who travel in large parties from Bohemia all over
Europe, loaded with glasses and trinkets of various kinds, and which they sell
to so much advantage, that they frequently return with a sum sufficient to
support them in affluence the rest of their lives in their native country. This
man had, in the course of his travels, visited England, and knew the sounds
which Ellen uttered, were English; and with a little closer attention was able
to make out with perfect clearness the nature of her request. He explained it
to the woman to whom Ellen had addressed herself: and it found a ready
acquies^ence from the charitable heart of the poor Bohemian farmeress, who was
moved with Ellen's sweet sounds, and pleased with the softness of her address
and the civility of her manners. So true it is, that, however vice may have
introduced a variety of tongues, the language of virtue is universal.

Ellen, after thankfully feasting upon a bowl of milk and bread, was conducted
to a straw mattress, covered with a rug, which had nothing disgusting or
offensive in its appearance, and with which Ellen, after having thrown herself
upon the mattress, covered herself. She flattered herself, that the fatigues of
the day would procure her some hours of sound sleep. But the novelty of her
situation, and the fullness of her mind, rendered this hope vain. If she closed
her eyes for a moment, the next she started, and awoke in some fancied danger.
Her slumbers were restless and feverish: and she was happy to rise with the
earliest of the friendly household, and after having received a breakfast
similar to her supper of the night before, and paid for it by another tune upon
her mandoline, she pursued her journey, taking the best directions, as to her
route to Egra, which she was able to procure.

Three days had Ellen thus wandered alone through the woods of Bohemia; and
three nights had she received shelter and sustenance from its hospitable
inhabitants. The timidity which reason could not wholly subdue, had yielded to
time. She no longer thought that the eye of every passenger was turned upon
her. She was convinced she was to no one an object of curiosity or wonder. She
no longer expected a ruffian to start from behind every tree: and when she
sought a covert wherein to pass the noontide hour, she felt secure that she
should meet with no interruption. Her mind, always alive to the simple delights
of nature, began to take a pleasure and interest in the scenes amidst which she
wandered. She often lingered under the cover of a thick wood, more from the
delight she felt in the shade, than any need she had of rest: and she often
prolonged her sojourn by the side of a rippling brook, that she might continue
soothed by its murmurs, or from being unable to forego the pleasure of the
harmony which resounded from every branch of the trees with which it was
overshadowed. Often would she compare her present mode of traveling with that
to which she had been formerly accustomed: and her good taste gave the
preference to that which she now pursued. Here no impediments from bad roads,
no impositions from innkeepers, no wrangling with postillions, no compassion
for the over-loaded and worn-out horses, arose to disturb the even tenor of her
thoughts, or to spoil her relish of the beauties which surrounded her.

But as the taste of Ellen was genuine, and formed from that love of nature
which is the result of good sense and a feeling heart, it was pure from those
allays of romance, which, while they give a greater currency to what is called
taste, do in fact debase its essential qualities. While, therefore, as a matter
of feeling, she preferred wandering on foot amidst woods and villages, with no
certain path to direct her to the shelter she was seeking; she fully
acknowledged the more certain comfort of a well built traveling chaise, drawn
even by miserable posthorses, along a road which presented no objects but the
regularly placed mile stones, and those posts of intelligence, which so
benevolently preserve the traveller from going astray.

The weather, since Ellen had begun her peregrination, had been uncommonly
fine; the sky above was serene, the ground beneath dry and firm. Bu^ she was
well aware what an alteration a change of seasons would make, not only in her
comforts, but in the pleasures of her imagination: and she felt sometimes, with
no little pain, that, though wandering in scenes such as she was in at present,
when it was voluntary, and the shelter at hand, might be delightful; yet to the
weary traveller, who had no option, and no refuge to flee unto, whatever
mischief might betide, it was attended with danger and inconveniences, from
the feelings and fears of which all its pleasures would be most readily
relinquished. If therefore she were willing and ready to make use of the
amusements which offered themselves on the way, as the means to cheer the
melancholy path she was treading, she was not less desirous to arrive at that
haven of rest, when such alleviations would be no longer wanted.

It was not, however, only from the woods, the birds, and the brooks, that
Ellen in this forlorn situation derived amusement to her fancy, or food for
reflection. While she marked the extreme poverty of that rank of people with
whom she now associated, yet saw them tread a soil rich with (...) every
blessing which nature could bestow, and which asked but the hand of labor,
working for itself, to crown them with abundance; how did her heart recoil from
the consequences of that feudal tyranny which makes the many subservient to the
few!

Yet was her pity often checked, and she was led to think it misplaced, when
she beheld the cheerful good humor of the people, the happy air of their
countenances, and the little sense they seemed to have, of their wants. In the
hopelessness of their state they seemed to find its consolation. They were at
the worst, and proved how much less painful it is to suffer, than to fear. If
the blessings of free men were beyond their reach, they were equally secure
from those ills, the probability of which alarm those who have any thing to
lose. The unfruitfulness of the seasons, the devastations of fire or of war,
all were to fall upon their Lord. They were but another part of his property:
and evils which did not affect their persons, were indifferent to them.

'Happiness, then,' said Ellen, 'is the plant of every soil; since it will
flourish even in the deserts of slavery. Who, then, shall deny that the God of
all is merciful to all?'

But Ellen's present situation called forth reflections more interesting to her
than any benevolence, however warm or extended, or however lively may be the
interest we take in the pains or consolations of others, can produce. She had
now subsisted three days on charity; and the alternative for many days to come
was starving. A circumstance to her so new, and in general considered as so
degrading, could not but fill the reflecting mind of Ellen with a variety of
affecting thoughts. The very people whom the tenderness of her heart led her to
pity, considered her as one degree below themselves, in the scale of human
happiness: and from the very poverty which she regarded with so much
compassion, she received a boon, without which she must have perished. But,
though thrown from her rank in society, Ellen considered herself not the less
as maintaining her station in animated nature. She was still one of those
beings who are placed only lower than the angels, and who, in the eye of
Providence, are all equal. Whatever distress, therefore, she felt from the
ungratified wants of cold and hunger, it was unembittered by any sentiment of
wounded pride. She considered it not as any debasement to be reduced to a state
in which a God, who is considerate alike of all his creatures, has seen good to
place so large a part of them: and it was with equal gratitude to that God, and
equal elevation of mind, though certainly not with an equal degree of
happiness, that she now stretched forth her hand to receive, as she had before
extended it to give. Are we not all alike children of God's mercy, thought she
-- and shall we conceive there is greater dignity annexed to receiving it
through one medium than another? On some he bestows his alms by the means of
parental inheritance. He gives it to others as the price of their personal
labors: but they are not the less absolute dependants on his daily bounty,
than those whom he appoints the ravens to feed. -- He has ordained my present
sustenance to flow from the charity of my fellow creatures. Let me serve him,
in receiving, as they serve him in giving. The greater blessing has been mine.
It may be mine again. But in the mean while, let me not grudge it to those, to
whom, in the present moment, God has granted it.

How much so just and yet so uncommon a manner of thinking, contributed to the
internal peace of Ellen, in her present distressful circumstances, may be known
by those who have experienced all the pangs a contrary way of reasoning can
inflict; who, in the loss of every thing that constitutes human happiness, have
breathed their bitterest sighs, from the sense of the shame, which they falsely
imagined to be annexed to a fall from affluence to poverty. But, if there be no
shame in being born poor, how can there be any, where the change is independent
of guilt in becoming so? If there be no shame in poverty, innocently incurred,
can there be any in receiving the relief which poverty requires? -- Can what is
the virtue of our fellow creatures be our degradation? Be it remembered,
misfortunes may afflict; vice only can degrade. The one is often the best of
God's gifts; the other is the work of ourselves alone.

CHAP. XXI.
'Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.'
SHAKESPEARE.
TOWARD the close of the fourth day of Ellen's wanderings, she began, as
usual, to look around her for those appearances in the country which generally
indicated where a village was to be found. She looked but without discovering
any thing that gave her reason to suppose she should find what she sought.

She was just emerged from a thick wood, and had entered upon a kind of heath,
which, from its extent and dreariness, presented her with an uncomfortable and
alarming prospect. No mark of human habitation, no mark of shelter of any sort,
was to be seen. She must either cross the heath before her, in pursuit of the
refuge she wanted; and to do this would take up a considerable time; or she
must return into the wood, which she had just left, and there take up her abode
for the night. Her fears forbade the one; and her weariness, she thought,
almost made the other impossible. Terror, however, was, for the moment, more
prevalent than fatigue; and she resolved to attempt to cross the heath. She had
still some daylight: and she considered, that should she arrive too late in a
village to find admittance into any house, yet that the shelter which some out
building, or shed, might afford her, was preferable, on many accounts, to any
which she could hope for in the wood.

Ellen set forward accordingly: but the wild seemed to lengthen as she went:
and she became so fatigued that she could hardly proceed. To stop, however, was
what she could not resolve upon. The evening was dark and louring, and, for the
season of the year, cold: and while she could move her limbs, she could not
consent to lie down upon the bare and hard ground, without a twig to shelter
her, and exposed to all the rain and storm which seemed gathering. With slow
steps she went on, and at length reached the other side of the heath. She found
it bounded also by a wood, but not so uninterruptedly thick, as that which she
had passed through before her entrance on the heath. The evening was already
too dark to enable her to distinguish with certainty: but there appeared as if
there had been once roads cut through the wood, though they seemed now nearly
grown up, and the spot where she then was, she thought was the entrance of an
avenue. Fatigued as she was, this thought gave her power to proceed. She
flattered herself that it might lead at least to some ruined building, where,
at the worst, a jutting cornice, or projecting wall, 'just nodding to its
fall,' might afford her some shelter from the rain, which now began, at
intervals, to fall very heavily, accompanied with loud and sudden gusts of
wind; nor was the conjecture ill founded. After about half an hour's walking,
in which time all her outward garments were completely wet through, she found
herself among the intricacies of some building, which she took for the
cloisters of a decayed monastery. She troubled herself, however, but little in
ascertaining whether she were right or wrong. There was too little light to
enable her to discover the truth, if it had been important to her to have known
it: but the most momentous concern was to find out some place where she could
rest her weary limbs unexposed to the weather. As the roof of that part of the
building which she then was in, was not destroyed, she withdrew to the upper
end of it: and there, taking off such of her clothes, as were most wet, she
seated herself upon a kind of stone bench, and began to examine her basket for
something to eat. Luckily it was tolerably supplied. She had that morning been
so much moved by the want of linen in the dress of the good farmeress, who had
lodged her the night before, that she had not been able to forbear, when they
parted, presenting her with a chemise of her own; though this was contrary to
the prudential rule she had laid down, not to part, in a country where she
could so easily discharge her bill with a song, with what, in another, whose
greater riches had banished equal hospitality, she might find necessary to her
support.

The woman was so much struck with this unexpected piece of generosity in
Ellen, that she loaded her with a thick slice of bread, and a small bottle of
milk. Ellen having found equal munificence where she had sought a dinner, had
preserved her morning store untouched: and she now found it a most seasonable
relief. Hungry and fatigued, however, as she was, she prudently consumed only
half of her riches, preserving the remainder for the exigencies of the next
day. In part, however, she supplied the deficiencies of her scanty meal by
swallowing a few drops upon a lump of sugar, she having had the precaution to
furnish herself with such a cordial, upon leaving the place of her captivity.

Having taken all the refreshment which she thought it prudent to allow
herself, she lay down to sleep: and though the floor on which she stretched
herself, was hard and damp, and her pillow only her bundle of linen, such was
the fatigue of her body, and such the calmness of her mind, that in a few
moments she fell asleep. She knew not how long she had continued in this
situation, when she was suddenly awakened, by some noise. She started up, and
looked around her, when, to her unspeakable terror, she beheld by the
glimmering of a light, not a hundred yards distant, two men carrying a lady,
who, by her helplessness, appeared to be dead.

Ellen's heart did not at this moment beat with its usual regularity: yet her
presence of mind did not desert her: and considering that though the light
enabled her to discover the objects which were close to it, it was not
sufficient to discover her to them in the distant and dark corner where she
lay. She slipped as quietly as she could, behind a pillar which formed the
place where she was, into something of a recess; and waited the event in
silence. The men bearing their burden between them, advanced nearer: and Ellen
was something comforted by understanding from the expressions of one of them,
who spoke in French, the deepest marks of grief for the situation of the lady.
He could not, surely, (she thought) be the murderer of one, whom he so much
deplored: yet, on laying her down, scarcely ten yards from the place where
Ellen stood, and the light shining full upon her, Ellen observed that her
clothes were stained with blood: and she fancied she saw the blood still
issuing from her bosom, which, from the disorder of her dress, was very visible.

'What will become of me?' (exclaimed the man, who was the only one who had yet
spoken) 'wretched Antoinette! dearest creature! How have you reason to curse
the hour in which you saw me!'

These words determined Ellen. She was assured there was no danger: but there
was distress, and she might be of use. Coming out, therefore, hastily from her
hiding place, she caused little less consternation by her appearance, than she
had felt upon being first startled from her sleep. 'Suspend your wonder,' said
she in French, to the person who seemed most interested, and whom she now
discovered to be a gentleman, and the other man appeared a servant, 'suspend
your wonder, and do not fear that I have any connections that may injure you. I
am alone here: but perhaps I have the means to assist that lady: and I am sure
I have the inclination.' A ready confidence took place of the suspicions which
had for a moment alarmed the breast of the stranger.

'Alas!' cried he, 'I can only thank you: but I fear, this miserable victim of
misguided revenge, is past all assistance.'

Ellen scarcely waited to hear these words. She now saw that the lady was
really wounded: and she seemed to have fainted from loss of blood. But though
the trace of the blood still showed whence it had flowed, it was now staunched.
The light enabled Ellen to discern, that the place they were in was, as she had
suspected, the ruins of a cloister: and it formed one side of a quadrangle, ^he
buildings of the other three sides of which were nearly destroyed. In the midst
of this square, had formerly been a fountain, and, though ruined, it still
contained water. Ellen ran thither: and filling a small cup which she carried
about her, with water, she washed the lady's wound; and had the satisfaction to
find it was small, and did not appear to be deep. She then cut a large piece of
a kind of sticking plaster, which made a part of her stores, and covered the
wound with it: and then mixing a little of the water with some of her cordial
drops, she contrived, with the assistance of the stranger, who aided her
benevolent efforts with the greatest assiduity, to pour a small quantity down
her throat. She then proceeded to chase her temples, and rub her hands: and in
a short time she was encouraged to continue her endeavors wit still greater
energy, by the lady giving evident signs of her returning life. In a few
moments, she opened her eyes. Ellen gave her more cordial: and in a very short
time, she recovered her senses.

While this was passing, the servant, at Ellen's suggestion, (for the stranger,
though he imitated and assisted her in all she did, seemed to have lost the
power of suggesting any thing) had been fully employed in collecting a few dry
sticks, which was a task of some difficulty: for the rain of the preceding
night had left nothing in a fit condition to burn, which had been exposed to
it. Luckily however, in his researches, he discovered several bundles of dry
brush wood, and branches of trees, which had been heaped together in one corner
of the cloister, probably by some peasant, who designed to carry them away at
some future opportunity. Of these he soon set fire to a sufficient quantity to
afford the comfort both of ^ight and heat. The lady was removed nearer to it,
and farther from the influence of the air, which blew cold on the open side of
the building. The lady's clothes were wet: and Ellen had no change to offer
her. However she took off her upper garments, as she had done her own, and
spread them all before the fire, while she furnished her with some linen from
her bundle, which supplied, though but ill, their place.

While Ellen performed the task of dressing and undressing the lady, the two
men had retired, but not before the one, who seemed the master of the other,
had assured the lady, in German, that she might trust wholly to Ellen, for
that, if ever there were an angel from heaven, she was one. The lady herself
appeared so weak, and so confounded, either with what she had passed through,
or with what she now saw around her, that she could utter nothing more than a
few broken expressions of gratitude, in German, and sometimes some passionate
exclamations, in a language which Ellen did not at all understand. Ellen had
now an opportunity of observing, that this unknown lady was possessed of a very
uncommon share of beauty; that her form was inexpressibly fine; and that,
notwithstanding her paleness and languor, her complexion and countenance had
charms which Ellen thought she had not seen equalled. Her dress, which was a
kind of traveling chemise, spoke her of affluent fortune; all the materials of
which it was composed being of the finest texture: and the air of conscious
superiority, with which she received the services of Ellen, if it did not give
her kind benefactor a favorable opinion of her heart, at least assured her,
that she was assisting one, who, from the habit of command, entertained the
idea, that all who approached her were bound to obey.

When Ellen had contributed all in her power toward restoring her to some
degree of comfort, she produced the remains of her supper, spared so prudently
from her own present wants, in reference to those of the next morning. The lady
readily ate the bread and swallowed the milk; and appeared so much revived by
the refreshment they afforded, and so fully restored to health and vigor, that
Ellen soon found she had been mistaken in having attributed the state of
insensibility, in which she had at first seen her, to loss of blood: from what
now appeared, it seemed more probable that it had only proceeded from fatigue.

CHAP. XXII.
-- 'Amazement reigns,
'Man's great demand. To trifle is to live:
'And is it then a trifle too, to die?'
YOUNG.
IT was upon the return of the gentleman to the fire that Ellen had first
leisure to observe him with any closeness of attention. She had no sooner done
so, than she was convinced that she had seen him before: and being persuaded by
his manner of speaking both French and German, that he was not a native either
of France or Germany, an opinion which was confirmed both by his countenance
and complexion, she could not doubt but that he was English. She made this
discovery with a mingled sensation of hope and fear. Again she looked at him,
again she listened to the tone of his voice. She was more and more convinced
that he was not unknown to her: but it seemed beyond the power of her
recollection to recall his name, or where she had seen him. Suddenly, on his
throwing himself into a particular position, it rushed upon her mind, that he
was the husband of her elder sister, that profligate man of fashion and broken
fortune, to whom the absurd vanity of her mother had sacrificed the happiness
and respectability of character of her favorite child. This discovery, though
the strangeness of it threw her into some confusion, relieved her from every
fear that she should be known by him. Ellen had never seen him since she was
fourteen, when he had visited Groby Manor, for the only time during his
connection with any one belonging to it. She was very sure that the change which
had taken place in her person in a period little short of twelve years, must
securely shelter her from any discovery from him: for while time had made no
other changes in his appearance than what arose from a few wrinkles, or a few
gray hairs in the place of the darker locks, and smoother skin, which he had
possessed in earlier youth; it had with her converted a rosy, sunburned,
romping, laughing girl, into an elegantly-formed woman, whose pure red and
white most truly blended, showed in her check, as if the rose and lily strove
for mastery. All gaiety was certainly at this time banished from her
countenance: and her large peasant's straw hat, which she had now again tied
closely under her chin, so effectually concealed her features, that, if they
had been much better known to Mr. Raymond than they really were, she must have
been safe from awakening any recollection in him.

As hopeless as she knew his return to England was considered by all his
connexions there, and the little probable good which would result if he were to
return, yet she could not avoid being shocked at the proof she had before her,
of the licentious life he continued to lead; nor could she help pitying the
lady, little conciliating as her manners were, for having formed a connection,
the extent of the iniquity of which she thought it probable she did not know.

While these thoughts kept Ellen silent, the lady and gentleman, having
dismissed the servant upon some message, continued to talk eagerly, and,
confident in the fancied ignorance of Ellen in the German language, or careless
of her opinion, unreservedly of their affairs and situation. From this
conversation she soon understood, that the lady was by no means deserving of
her pity, on the score she had granted it; for that she was herself a fugitive
wife, and that having been overtaken in the pursuit made after her by her
husband, an affray had ensued; and she had received a wound in attempting to
interpose between her husband and her lover, the latter of whom, becoming
desperate on seeing her blood flow, had fired at the husband; and, as he
supposed had killed him. This act of violence, with the farther acts of outrage
he and his attendants were on the point of committing, had so intimidated the
companions of the husband, that they had contented themselves with carrying off
his body, without making any farther attempt to impede the flight of the
lovers. The lady having fainted from pain and terror, and it being no longer
safe to continue in any high road, the lover had been obliged to convey her
before him on horseback, having dismissed all his attendants excepting one.

It appeared, from what Ellen heard, that, in the course of a journey of more
than twelve miles across a country, of which they were ignorant, it had been
impossible to afford her rest or refreshment; that she had returned to her
senses only to relapse again into insensibility; so that the lover had more
than once believed her dead. This was an additional circumstance, which had
forbidden him to stop at any house: and he had continued to travel on, in hopes
of finding some obscure and deserted building, such not being very unfrequent
in a country once much more populous than at present, where he might in safety
consider upon the course he had to pursue. Having passed through the outskirts
of a tolerably large village, toward the close of the evening, he had sent his
servant to procure the means of striking a light, in whatever place they might
find it eligible, or might be obliged to stop. It was in pursuit of some
refreshment, that Ellen found the servant was now dispatched: and the lovers
seemed to agree, that if they saw no reason against it in the morning, the
place they were at present in, would suit as well as any other, as a place of
refuge for a few days. They had no doubt but that the pursuit would be renewed
with redoubled ardour: and they agreed, that their best hope of safety was to
remain where they were, till their pursuers had overshot their mark.

Hitherto they were so much engrossed by their own concerns, that they seemed
to have forgotten there was such a person in the world as Ellen: but Mr.
Raymond now addressed himself to her, hoping, although he did not, from the
circumstance of her speaking French, take her to be a native of the country,
that he might be able to obtain, through her means, some local information. He
therefore enquired whether her home was near. Ellen replied, that at present
she had no home, but was endeavoring to make her way toward a very distant
one. 'In France?" 'No.' 'In Germany?' 'No.' 'In England?' 'Yes.' 'What the
devil!" exclaimed in English, the profligate Mr. Raymond, 'can then have
brought you into the midst of a Bohemian wild, alone and destitute?'
'Misfortune!' said Ellen, steadily fixing her eye upon him, "Misfortune, but
not vice!'

The conscious criminal seemed to shrink into himself; but rallying, 'And how,
my pretty one, do you mean to find your way from hence to England, in your
present helpless circumstances?' 'By making the best use I can of my
understanding and my strength.' 'A brave girl, faith. If I were not just now a
little encumbered, I would enlist you under my banner. I am charmed with your
spirit.' 'Your pardon, sir,' said Ellen with calm disdain, 'I am not so soon
enlisted.' 'Oh! you would go with me. My road through life has been the path of
pleasure. I have lived but to amuse myself. But, put aside that overshadowing
hat, and let me see whether the face is worthy of the form, and the spirit that
enlivens it.' Ellen without ever seeming to hear these words, turned to the
lady, and asked in her imperfect German, whether there were any thing she could
do toward her farther accommodation. The lady something sullenly replied,
'No.' And the gentleman said, still speaking in English, 'You understand German
then?' 'Scarcely,' returned Ellen. 'Enough, perhaps, to know what we have been
talking of: and if so, you may as well know the whole business. I believe you
will not turn informer.'

Ellen was silent; for she felt little curiosity to know more of an affair
which seemed a complicated tissue of profligacy and desperation. Mr. Raymond,
however, who thought the circumstances he had to bring forward offered a very
reasonable apology for an action which, he could not conceal from himself,
would be condemned by the general voice of mankind, did not desist from his
explanation. 'That angel whom you see there,' said he, looking at the lady, 'is
the daughter of a beast of an Hungarian nobleman, who, to fulfill some ambitious
schemes of his own, forced her into the arms of an old disagreeable rascal in
high favor with the emperor. What must a woman of feeling and spirit do in
such a case? Surely not submit to all the horrors of the worst kind of slavery,
because her tyrant was yclept a husband. I was the happy man, whom the lady
fixed upon to assist in breaking her chains: and with a liberality of mind for
which I shall ever adore her, she committed herself to my honor, loaded with
all the jewels and ready cash which she could collect: and though, at present,
we are put something out of our way, we hope still to find some sacred spot of
earth, where the pleasures of love and the fruits of generosity may be reaped,
undisturbed by the imagined rights of husbands and the abused authority of
parents.'

Ellen could not but wonder at the ingenuity that had been able to tell a story
of disobedience, treachery, adultery, and theft, in terms, which on the first
hearing, so little conveyed the nature of the actions they acknowledged. Mr.
Raymond was so little conscious that they conveyed it at all, that, without any
of that embarrassment which a person less hackneyed in the path of pleasure (as
he had called the road of vice) must have felt in consequence of such a
confession, that he went on to say, that having taken what they hoped would
have proved effectual methods to mislead the husband into a belief that they
had, on leaving Vienna, turned their fugitive course toward Italy, they had
indiscreetly neglected to make the best of their way toward Dresden, from the
direct road to which place they had deviated as a mean; of farther security;
and that they had, the day before, been overtaken, at a moment when they
conceived themselves in perfect safety. He then proceeded to detail the whole
particulars of the affray which had ensued, and to relate, that when he found
himself in danger of being pursued, not only as a ravisher, but as a murderer,
he had sent forward their carriage and their baggage, under the care of a
servant, in whom he could confide, to Dresden, there to wait his farther
orders; and in the mean time to spread a story, that the lady was dead, and his
master gone, he knew not whither; that in the haste, in which they were obliged
to make their arrangements, they had not been able to secure any part of their
property, except the lady's jewels, which were in her pocket, and what little
money they had about them. 'And now,' said this gallant hero of a story
composed of crimes, which, more than any other in the whole roll of guilt, are,
from their own nature, and the injurious effects they have upon the interests
of society, the just objects of the greatest abhorrence; 'and now, if fortune
will but smile for a few days, we may still baffle the malice of our enemies.
My intention is, to order the servant I have sent to Dresden to join us as soon
as possible, at Strasburg, from whence we will shape our course to some more
dear retreat in the mountains of Switzerland, and there, 'The world forgetting,
by the world forgot,' we will remain alive only to love and happiness.' Love
and happiness! thought Ellen, how widely have I been mistaken (...) the means
and the end of all that makes life desirable, ^ these miserables are right!

It was easy to be perceived, that this long discourse of her lover, in a
language of which she did not understand a word, was by no means pleasing to
the lady. She broke in upon it by something which she said very peevishly to
him, and which Ellen did not perfectly understand. Ellen now began to wish
impatiently for the morning, that she might escape from the consequences of a
proof so pregnant, how infinitely preferable the most helpless solitude may be,
to much of the society that is to be met with in the world. Yet how often had
she heard Mr. Raymond exalted as the most pleasant of his sex! how often had
she heard Mrs. Mordaunt declare, that he had not a fault but in the eyes of
those rigid mortals who hold pleasure as a vice, who refuse to enjoy the
blessings which are given them, and who seek heaven by abasing the noblest of
its works! Alas! thought Ellen, how fatally would he have been awakened from
the false peace into which his flatterers have lulled him, had not the rash
passion of his unworthy companion interposed between his life and the just
indignation of an injured husband!

Light, at the season of the year when these events happened, is suspended for
so short a time, that had it not been for the storms of the preceding evening,
which still filled the sky with thick and heavy clouds, Ellen would have been
very soon able to have pursued her wishes of quitting her new acquaintance. But
the first hours of the morning were dark; and it continued to rain in some
degree. Before these obstacles to her departure were removed, the servant
returned with a quantity of milk and bread, which he had purchased at a village
a few miles distant. Ellen was invited to partake of this refreshment, which,
in fact, she wanted as much as any of the party: and in the course of the meal,
Mr. Raymond, who really did possess a part of that kindness of human nature,
which had gained him the appellation of 'the best-humoured fellow breathing,'
expressed much genuine solicitude for the destitute situation Ellen appeared to
be in. He felt this the more, as, though he could draw nothing from her to
confirm such a suspicion, he was strongly persuaded, in his own mind, that she
had been accustomed to a rank of life, which could not have prepared her to
struggle with her present difficulties. Although she had been very sparing of
her speech, her accent, her manner of expression, and tone of voice, all
assured him of this, and still more the ease and softness of her manners. He
settled in his own mind her probable story to be, that, having left her own
country as an occasional companion to a person of his own principles, but who
possessed less of that compassionate good humor for which he had been often
complimented, and upon which he piqued himself, she had, by the change of
inclination, and want of generosity in her companion, been reduced to her
present difficulties. There was something, indeed, in the nice sense of
propriety which she appeared to have, and which was evident even to one who had
lost all such feelings from his own mind, which militated against this idea.
But as it was something beyond measure strange, that a person of real fashion
and character could be left by any, the most distressing occurrences, in the
situation Ellen was now in. He thought it was taking the less improbable side,
to suppose, that her former way of life had not entirely obliterated all traces
of those feelings which once adorned her state of innocence. This supposed
situation of Ellen did not in the least make her a less interesting, or even
less estimable object in the eyes of Mr. Raymond: and he even felt something of
an additional desire to assist her, from the proof such assistance would be to
all his acquaintance, that there is sometimes a sentiment of kindness in the
breasts of those called wicked, toward the distressed, which the more rigidly
virtuous are without. In consequence of these reflections, Mr. Raymond began to
press Ellen to attach herself to their party; and hinted, in pretty
intelligible terms, that besides all the difficulties and distresses which
would probably attend her finding her way back to England, she would find it
almost impossible, considering the circumstances in which she would arrive
there, to form any eligible establishment. Whereas he had no doubt, if she
staid with them, that he should soon be able to introduce her to a friend, who
would make her forget all she had lost. Although all this would have been
perfectly plain to the apprehension of Ellen, had she been the sort of person
Mr. Raymond took her to be, yet being entirely ignorant of all that could lead
her to his true meaning, and much of what he said applying to her real
situation, she at first understood his offers only in a general sense: and
when, by the turn and strength of the expressions, she began to comprehend that
there must be some particular meaning intended to be conveyed, she was
absolutely at a loss to guess what that meaning could be. The character of the
man who addressed her and the manner of his expressions, however, persuaded
her, there was something disgraceful in the protection he offered her: and as
she was too wise to think of showing her resentment, she contented herself with
coldly and steadily saying, she was indispensibly obliged to endeavor to
return to England, as soon as possible; and that when there, she was assured
she should want neither protection nor friends, The unmoved manner of Ellen,
and the little countenance that the lady gave to this plan of Mr. Raymond's, at
length obliged him to cease from further urging it. And soon after, the sun
breaking forth in all his splendor, Ellen repacking the bundle, and
re-adjusting her basket, rose to depart. 'We cannot suffer you to go,' said Mr.
Raymond, 'without making a small acknowledgment for the obligations we are
under to you. If you would have gone with us, I would have done much for you:
but now, so low are our finances reduced, that, except our jewels, I equally
divide the whole of our stock, when I offer you this trifle.' In saying these
words, he presented Ellen with a ducat. Ellen's first impulse was to refuse it,
so far did habit make her forgetful of the appearance she then wore. But Mr.
Raymond added, 'No, no, -- no refusals -- while you ramble amongst these wilds
indeed, the charity of these half savages may make money needless: but when you
are among the whole savages of a civilized world, you will have nothing but
what you can pay for.'

Ellen then took the ducat. But Mr. Raymond, who felt his solicitude increase
for her every moment, in spite of, or perhaps stimulated by, her reserve and
coldness, said, 'Devil take me, if I am not ashamed to part so. Stay; would it
not be possible to convey you a bill to Cologne? Do you mean to take Cologne in
your way?' Ellen replied she did. 'The moment we think it safe to quit this
retreat,' said he, we shall bend our steps toward Strasburg. We shall be there
in much less time than your poor little feet can carry you to Cologne. Come,
give me your directions: and at La Savage you shall be sure of finding, on your
arrival in that place, a bill for a sum sufficient to procure you an easy
conveyance to England, and to any part of it to which you may choose to go.'
Ellen hesitated. The performance of such an offer would annihilate half those
difficulties and dangers which she dreaded so much to encounter. 'Such a
supply,' returned Ellen, 'would indeed be extremely acceptable to me. But as,
on my return to England, I shall be perfectly able to return any pecuniary
obligations I may receive, I cannot accept your offer, however grateful I may
be for it, except you will put me in some method of repaying the money, when I
no longer stand in need of it.' Mr. Raymond regarded her with increased wonder.
'I would give the world to know who you are,' said he, 'and what has brought
you into this desert; for I am confident you are no common one.' 'You shall
know who I am,' returned Ellen, 'and all I have undergone, when I return you
the money: and then you will acknowledge that the human mind may support any
destiny, however hard, which has not been brought on by misconduct.' 'I believe
you are a parson in petticoats,' said Mr. Raymond. 'No,' returned Ellen, 'I am
no parson; but I am a kind of a prophetess: and I foretell that you will never
know happiness until you return to your wife and children.' Mr. Raymond
retreated a few steps, as if he recoiled from a dread of supernatural power. 'I
said, when first I saw you, you were an angel: but now I believe you deal with
the devil.' 'You shall know my dealings at some future hour,' said Ellen; and
giving him a paper, added, 'this is my direction: now give me yours.' 'And must
I wait till a future hour for the explanation of so much mystery?' said Mr.
Raymond. 'You must.' 'Well then, let it not be very distant.' He then gave her
a direction to himself, under the name of Mason, at a particular hotel in
Strasburg: and with reiterated wishes that her journey might prove more
prosperous than it promised to do, he at length suffered her to depart.

This adventure did not appear half so singular in the eyes of Mr. Raymond, as
it did in those of Ellen. The circumstance of finding himself known to her,
confirmed his former suspicions: and he had no doubt but that the story which
she promised him, would only be a detail of the ingratitude and cruelty of some
man of his own set, with whom he had associated before he left London. But
Ellen was struck in no common degree with the singularity of meeting in the
woods of Bohemia a man so nearly allied to her, in circumstances so
disgraceful, that she could not avail herself of their connection to the
alleviation of her own distresses: nor could she forbear adverting to the power
she had had, of administering, from her scanty pittance, to the wants of two
people, who, had it not been for their vices, might have been in possession of
every comfort and every accommodation this world can afford.

CHAP. XXIII.
-- 'I to bear this,
'That never knew but better, is some burden!"
SHAKESPEARE.
THIS adventure furnished Ellen with sufficient food for thought, as she walked
on: and as the day was much cooler than any she had yet experienced, she
continued her journey, without taking her usual rest at noon. Fortunately she
arrived at a decent village early in the evening: and here she resolved to take
up her repose for the night; the fatigues of the preceding day and night having
made rest absolutely necessary for her. In answer to the inquiries she made
here, she had the satisfaction to find, that she had not deviated very widely
from the direct road to Egra. She had fixed upon this place, merely as a point,
by which to direct her enquiries: but there was nothing she wished so much to
avoid, as large towns and cities; and being now pretty well skilled in the best
manner of going from one village to another, without straying too far distant
from the public road, she contrived, in about fourteen days from the time of
her escape from captivity, to enter Franconia, without having passed through
Egra, or suffered much either from fatigue, hunger, or alarm. Having thus
happily accomplished what she computed to be somewhat above the first hundred
miles of her journey, she drew a lucky presage for the remaining eight. But
accustomed as she now was to being alone, she felt a dread of that part of her
travels, which was to lead her among the more thickly inhabited parts of the
road, more than any one of the dangers which awaited her in the obscure forests
and solitary paths. The observation of Mr. Raymond often returned to her mind:
and when she reflected on the different treatment which the beggars wandering
through the populous streets of a great city usually meet with, from that she
had experienced in the Bohemian wilds, she could not help drawing a conclusion,
that a close neighborhood was not favorable to the virtue of hospitality.

These reflections made her view her single ducat with a sigh. But she
resolved, as long as the sale of her linen, her mandoline, or the poor ducat in
question, could preserve her from the necessity of it, not to ask charity in
any town. Ellen continued her method of traveling with tolerable success;
though she found a very sensible difference in the appearance and manners of
the country. The latter was more populous, it was better cultivated, but
beggars were more numerous, and simple hospitality less. Although she was
readily relieved at a door, she no longer found it so easy to be admitted under
the shelter of a friendly roof: her music was less an equivalent for all the
kindness which was shown her. Ellen, who could not pay for a lodging, and whose
soul recoiled from associating with the herds of common beggars who so
frequently crossed her way, was therefore necessitated often to content herself
with what accidental cover she could find, and which frequently amounted to
nothing better than what a wall afforded, where, with her head upon her bundle,
she often sought for that sleep which she could not find; and, sometimes,
overcome with fatigue, even in this exposed and comfortless situation, slept
soundly.

These frequent sleepings, exposed to the open air, or in situations little
sheltered from the weather, made more substantial clothing necessary. She durst
not part with the only piece of money which she was possessed of; for however
she might hope she should receive the supply promised her by Mr. Raymond at
Cologne, she was too prudent to act as if she were certain of it. Her mandoline
she now found of little use to her: and she was therefore resolved to make that
the first sacrifice. Its real value was small: and, in her present
circumstances, she was not likely to get even that value for it. But she
thought herself happy in exchanging it for a rug cloak, which made a part of
her bundle in the day, and covered her warmly over at night.

Thus she passed through the heart of Germany, keeping on the north of the
Main, and directing her course toward Frankfort. She found the little German
which she at first possessed, very serviceable to her: and she daily increased
her stock; so that she now found no difficulty in explaining her wants. Indeed
her difficulties did not lie in explaining, but in relieving them: and they
every day became more numerous and distressing. Her first pair of shoes were
almost worn out. Her clothes grew thin: and though, from habit, she could now
walk more miles in the course of a day, than she could, when first she set out,
so long a continuance of hardships and fatigue began to have an effect upon her
strength, and still more upon her spirits. The hope which had at first buoyed
her up, began to subside: for as she reflected upon the distance there was
still between her and England, she began to think it impossible, that her
powers of struggling with the difficulties which surrounded her, would continue
to her journey's end. A degree of despondency followed such thoughts: and this
increased the very evils she feared. She endeavored, however, to rouse
herself; to awaken hope once more in her heart; and to derive all the comfort
from her undiminished reliance on the goodness and wisdom of Providence, which
such reliance was calculated to afford. She adverted to the extraordinary
circumstance of her having met with Mr. Raymond, and the assistance it was
probable she should receive from him: and she was not unwilling to yield to the
degree of superstition which induced her to believe this might be one mark of
the superintendance of Providence, which, whether evident or not, she never for
a moment doubted.

Having revived her hopes, and strengthened her courage by such considerations
as these, she pursued her way toward Frankfort, but following her original
plan, she entered not that place, but turned aside to a village not far
distant, where she arrived in somewhat less than a month from the time when she
had entered Germany. Here she hesitated whether she should proceed to Mentz,
and from thence attempt taking a passage on the Rhine. The ease this would be
to her, was her strongest inducement: but she doubted whether the sale of all
she was worth, would enable her to defray the expenses of her voyage: and the
question recurring, what she should do, when thus without any resource, but the
precarious one of charity during the rest of her journey, should she find
herself disappointed of the promised supply at Cologne, determined her to trust
to her feet some time longer. She directed her course, however, as nearly as
she could, toward the Rhine, thinking it prudent to be within reach of the
only mode of conveyance, which her circumstances would allow her to avail
herself of, however her strength might fail, or her health sink under her
fatigue.

The romantic and highly cultivated country which this determination led her
through, could not be viewed by Ellen, even in her present state of depression,
without the livelist emotions of delight. The picturesque situation of the
villages, the striking forms of the hills, each crowned with a castle, the
vineyards, the chestnut groves, all formed a scene such as she had never before
witnessed, and which filled her mind with images of beauty perfectly new. She
observed, however, the extreme inequality which a wine country produces in its
inhabitants, even of the same rank. And the splendid situation in which she saw
some of the peasants, did not in her eyes compensate for the sight of the many
poor people with which some of the villages swarmed. This was a country,
however, in which Ellen herself fared very well. She often gathered chestnuts
enough to serve her for a meal, when no other was to be had: and wine she
sometimes received gratis, and at others could purchase for a trifle. She found
no difficulty in exchanging some of her linen, either for a little money, or
for such food as was necessary for her. It was, however, with the greatest
economy that she made use of this resource. But by the prudent management of
that, never forgetting the consideration of the future hour in the wants of the
present, and of the other means which were in her power, she was enabled to
move on prosperously, though slowly, toward her point. The beauties of the
country lessened as she approached Cologne: and when she set her foot within
that dark and ugly city, her heart sunk, from a mingled sensation of disgust
and fear. To wander, unknown and unprotected, through the dismal and half
deserted streets of this decaying place, where she was surrounded by falling
and empty houses, appeared to her infinitely more dreary and depressing than
all the thick forests and extended wilds which she had hitherto passed. She
would have instantly quitted a place so uncongenial with her feelings, and
sought shelter in some of the numerous farm houses which surround its walls,
and where she might have refreshed herself with milk and vegetables, had she
not been eager to ascertain what she had to hope from the promises of Mr.
Raymond.

With some difficulty she inquired her way to the hotel, to which he had given
her a direction; and soon found, with more grief than surprise, that there was
no letter for her. The very precarious circumstances in which she had left Mr.
Raymond sufficiently accounted for the breach of his promise to her: and
without accusing him of any intentional deceit, or criminal neglect, she
withdrew, congratulating herself upon the prudence with which she had husbanded
her little store, and which she now found was to be her only dependence.

CHAP. XXIV.
'There cannot be a pinch in death
'More sharp than this is.'
SHAKESPEARE.
AS she had en^red the hotel, she had observed two carriages, which seemed by
their appearance, and the people who were employed about them, to belong to
some traveller of distinction: but she had paid little attention to them. On
her return, however, one of the servants stood so directly in her way, that she
was obliged to stop till he removed. The moment he saw he was a hindrance to
any one, he made way with a civility which Ellen was conscious was not paid to
her appearance. On her thanking him, he turned suddenly round, as if struck by
the tone of her voice; when, what were her emotions when she knew him for the
personal servant of Mr. Villars! The man marked not the confusion into which he
had thrown her; for no sooner did his eyes sweep hastily over her dress, than
he seemed to have abandoned the thought which had before suddenly occurred: and
he returned to his business, which was disposing some parcels within the
carriage, with undivided attention.

The effect that such an unexpected rencontre had upon Ellen, was so great,
that for a moment she was unable to stir: but recollecting herself, she
considered that she had no proof that this person was still in the service of
Mr. Villars, and that if he were, there was nothing she ought more to avoid,
than the disco^ring herself to him. -- These thoughts made her remove from the
place which she was in, as speedily as her trembling limbs would allow. But she
felt it impossible to quit Cologne, without being assured whether or no Mr.
Villars was there. She therefore took shelter in a baker's shop, which was
immediately opposite the hotel, and where she hoped she might be allowed to
remain, until the carriages moved off, especially as it was plain, from the
bustle among the servants, that this would soon take place.

Many and diverse were the thoughts which occupied Ellen, as she watched from
her retreat the motions of the people employed in making the necessary
preparations for their departure. If the master of those servants should prove
Mr. Villars, the desire of discovering herself to him, seemed almost
irresistible. Her necessitous situation, the nearness of his relation to her,
the perfect innocence which had always accompanied the whole of their
intercourse, made her in one moment decide, that such substantial advantages as
would accrue from her making herself known to him, were not to be sacrificed to
punctilios and the fear of misconstruction. But the reflections of the next
instant corrected this too flattering, but unjust conclusion. Whether she were
ever again to live with Sir William, or whether she were to be regularly
separated from him, her justification and her all of happiness in this life,
would depend upon being able to clear every hour of her life from suspicion.
Her return to England with Mr. Villars would make this impossible. Her sense of
propriety also revolted from the idea of making the man, who had never ceased
to be her lover, the first confidant of Si^ William's jealousy and ill usage. A
conversation between them on such a subject must place them equally in the most
critical and embarrassing circumstances. It must unavoidably recall ideas and
sentiments which neither ought to feel and still less to avow. Regret and
resentment must arise in the breasts of both, when canvassing the consequences
of a marriage, which had broken asunder all the ties that love had formed
between them: and it could hardly be supposed, that the lover would not be
tempted to seek revenge for the injuries done to the object of his affections,
where the natural relation which he held to her, would seem to give him a right
to be the punisher of her oppressor.

Ellen saw she had but one resolution to take: but scarcely ever before had she
found her will such a rebel to her reason. While she was engaged in these
reflections, she observed, that a lady's maid was also busied about the
carriages. Ellen's first thought, on seeing her, was, that she might have
spared all her debatings. Henry was not near her; for Henry was not married.
The next reminded her of the length of her absence from England, and of her
ignorance of all that had taken place there during that period. This thought
was followed by another. If he was married, all objection to making herself
known to him would vanish. She stepped out of the shop with a design to make an
enquiry of one of the servants, when her better reason caused her as hastily
again to enter it. There was no doubt but that Mr. Villars believed her dead.
It was uncertain what would be the effect upon him of her sudden appearance in
such peculiar and afflicting circumstances. His emotions might be mistaken: and
she might, by this ^lfish act of gratification, introduce the fiend jealousy
into the breast of a woman, who now believed herself happy in his undivided
love. If the first wish of Ellen's heart had been, to make the happiness of
Henry herself; it had long given place to a second, little less fervent, that
of seeing him happy with some worthy object, who, in deserving all his love,
might possess, and return it. Probably he had now found such a one: and no
personal inconvenience could weigh with Ellen against the slightest hazard of
an interruption of their mutual happiness. She resolved, therefore, to give up
every thought of discovering herself to him: but she waited in breathless
impatience, and with an agitation not to be described, the moment which would
clear up all her doubts. She waited not long. Scarcely had she decided to
remain concealed, when the master of the carriage appeared. It was Henry
himself! He was in deep mourning, and, leaning familiarly upon his arm, was a
young genteel looking woman, in deep mourning also. Ellen's heart beat: she
gasped for breath. Henry assisted his companion to get into the carriage: and
immediately jumping after her, the door was shut, and they were driven away
full speed. The other carriage drove up; two servants entered it; and with two
others on horseback, followed the first carriage.

Ellen stood immoveably ^ed, with her eyes eagerly following the whole train,
until not a glimpse of them remained to be seen. Then bursting into tears, she
hastily left the shop, almost unconscious that she had ever entered it, and
wholly unknowing where she meant to go. A few moments brought her to her
recollection. But such was the indescribable anguish which had seized her, that
for some time she thought, in the varied vexations of her distressful life, she
had never known so bitter a moment as the present. To have been obliged, in the
helpless and wretched state she was in, to suffer him who would have been the
softest soother of her sorrow, her warmest friend, her most strenuous
protector, thus to depart unassistant to her wants, and unconscious of her
distress, pressed so heavily on her mind the severity of her fate, and showed
her to herself so far removed from all human aid, that, for a time, even her
strong and well-disciplined mind was not able to bear up against such a weight
of wretchedness. If Cologne had before appeared disgusting, it was now become
insupportable. She hurried to get beyond its hated walls. The three classes of
people, beggars, ecclesiastics, and nobles, into which its inhabitants are
divided, were all alike indifferent to her: nor was the ugliness or desolation
of the city itself any longer objects of attention or soliloquy. Her mind
contained but one idea: Henry carried rapidly from her when she most stood in
need of his friendship and assistance. No other thought found admission into
her mind. She felt, she saw, she thought of nothing else.

CHAP. XXV.
'Hope humbly then. To doubt, is to rebel.
'Let us exult in hope, that all will yet be well.'
BEATTIE.
WHEN Ellen got again beyond the city walls, she seemed to breathe more freely:
the tumult of her mind began to subside: she began to acknowledge, that no new
misfortune had befallen her; that she was in no respect worse in consequence of
what had happened; that Henry, placed beyond the power of assisting by
distance, or by situation, was the same thing in effect; and that if she had
been able to bear the one with patience, there was no reason why she should
find the other intolerable.

Having thus restrained that power of imagination, which is never indulged but
to our hurt, with a recomposed mind she began once more to call a council of
her own thoughts, as to what was the best method in which to proceed. Her
finances seemed to allow her little choice: and she resolved, keeping as near
to the Rhine as possible, to make the best of her way to Nimeguen, and from
thence to Helvoetsluys. But the days were now considerably shortened: and the
proportional length of the nights made the trusting to any or no shelter, that
might or might not be near when darkness came on, more formidable and grievous
than ever. Ellen, therefore, often sound herself obliged to sacrifice what
would have procured her a meal, to the now almost equally necessary comfort of
a lodging secured from the weather. She still avoided resting in any towns; and
made her way from village to village, which, in the populous and cultivated
country which lies n^ the Rhine, between Cologne and Nimeguen, she found it not
difficult to do: nor had she reason to complain of want of humanity or charity
in the people. Her gentle manners, her being a foreigner, and above all, the
languor and melancholy which had now too strongly taken possession of every
feature, seemed to plead irresistibly in her favor. To a night's lodging, and
a bowl of milk in the morning, were often added, on dismissing her, a few
stivers, or a slice of bread which served for her dinner. The money she
carefully hoarded; for her passage to England was perpetually in her mind, and
the means when there, which she should take to arrive in Northumberland.

In this manner and by slow degrees, she reached Nimeguen, without any material
evil, or extraordinary adventure. It was at Nimeguen that she had crossed the
Rhine, when she traveled with Sir William: and she was well acquainted with
the different routes to be pursued, and the manners of the people in Holland.
But she well knew the difference of situation in a country where nothing is to
he had without money, between the wife of a rich Englishman of fashion, and a
poor mendicant, whose very existence depended upon the charity of others. That
country where a man pays for the few moments that his great coat lies upon a
bench, cannot be very favorable to the wants of any individual, who does not
contribute something to the great stock of national wealth: and Ellen could not
condemn the principle, which made a nation hard-hearted to beggars, whose very
existence depended upon the industry of all. The little sustenance she took,
she therefore contrived to pay for: and as the cheapness of a conveyance by the
trechscuits enabled her to avail herself of them, as a suspension of her
hitherto never-ceasing fatigue, she reached Helvoetsluys easily and somewhat
recruited in strength. Fortunately she arrived only a few hours before the
sailing of a packet, in which she easily procured a passage, and at an expense
proportionate the meanness of her appearance. The only passengers of any
fashion were a gentleman and lady, who had few attendants, and appeared not to
be rich. Both the lady and her only female servant were sufferers in the
greatest degree from sea sickness: and as Ellen was happily free from all
indisposition, and the only woman besides themselves in the packet, she
attended them, at the request of the lady's husband, in the cabin; and afforded
them all the assistance and comfort in her power. The passage was prosperous,
and not of the longest kind: and when they landed, the gentleman, in
consideration of Ellen's cheerful attendance upon his wife, and judging by her
clothes, that she was by no means above receiving a small gratuity, gave her,
before they parted, five shillings.

Ellen was now in England. But the emotion with which she once again put her
foot upon her native land, after so long and so disastrous an absence, were not
those of unmixed joy, or even of very cheerful hopes. During her tedious and
difficult journey, she had seldom had leisure, from the pressing wants of the
passing hour, to turn her thoughts upon the fate which might await her, if ever
she should so far surmount those wants as to accomplish the purpose she had in
hand. But now, when nearly all her difficulties were over, and her necessities
drawing to a conclusion, the situation which she should find her friends and
family in, with what might be the resolutions that circumstances, or the
requisitions of Sir William might call for on her part, filled her mind with
anxiety and dread. So far from knowing what to hope, she knew not what to wish:
and if the idea of being regularly separated from Sir William, and being
allowed to live unmolested with her father, by occurring the most frequently to
her imagination, seemed to say that this was really what would be most
acceptable to her; there were so many considerations which checked the rising
desire, that it amounted not to a wish.

She had a child! (at least she hoped she had) and for the sake of this child
she would have consented to have been placed in a situation much more repugnant
to her feelings than a reunion with Sir William would place her in. Even of
Sir William's conduct toward her, she was cautious of forming a too decided
opinion: and if it could be proved, that he had been mistaken, and not
malicious, she felt nothing within her unresentful heart, which should prevent
her endeavoring, by a life of duty and affection, to obliterate from the minds
of both all the misery which they had mutually caused each other.

It was impossible not to think of these things. It was impossible that
thinking of them should not sink her to the lowest degree of sadness: but it
was equally impossible, that she should form one probable conjecture, how she
should in future be induced to act. Her impatience, however, to bring her fate
to an issue, increased to a feeling of the most painful kind. But, although in
England, she was still more than two hundred miles from that home where she
could alone be sure of a kind reception, or where she could inform herself of
those circumstances upon which the conduct of her future life must depend. To
appear as a beggar in a country, the laws of which provide so amply for the
wants of the indigent, as at first sight seemed to render it impossible that
vice and beggary should be disjoined, and where those very laws, acting as it
were upon this supposition, make the very act of asking charity criminal, and
assign a punishment for it, was a situation which to Ellen appeared
intolerable. The seasonable sup^ly of the five shillings given her by the
gent^^man, rescued her from a necessity, to which, however, she must otherwise
have submitted.

She had, indeed, during the sad reflections which occupied her mind on this
subject, during her passage from Holland, debated whether she should not, on
her arrival in England, make her case known to some magistrate: and it is
probable she would have had recourse to this method, rather than have appeared
in the character of a vagabond, had she continued as entirely destitute as she
was previous to the gift of the five shillings. But she was very thankful to be
saved from this extremity: since, resolute not to have told a false tale, she
must have been obliged, both against her inclination and judgment, to have told
at least so much of the truth, as might have led to discoveries, which, she was
sensible, ought to be made only to her nearest relations, and most assured
friends; so seasonable and so important was a gift, in itself so small, that
probably the giver would scarcely place it, in balancing his account, on the
side of charity. With these five shillings, which had proved a mine of wealth
to Ellen, and by the ^ale of almost every thing she possessed, except the
miserable clothes she wore, Ellen was enabled to procure a passage in a
coasting vessel, which was to sail the next day for Newcastle, and also to
provide for her sustenance on the voyage.

CHAP. XXVI.
'Oh, take the wanderer home.'

BEATTIE.
NOTWITHSTANDING the lateness of the season, the passage proved a happy and
tolerably short one: and Ellen at length beheld herself landed within thirty
miles of Groby Manor. But she was now absolutely pennyless, nor did she possess
a single article of clothes, for which, in the opulent and money-getting town
of Newcastle, she would have been able to have found a purchaser. Her
objections to appearing as a common beggar, seeking her bread from door to
door, were as strong in Northumberland as in Essex, and the fear of applying to
any person in any of the higher ranks of life still stronger. It appeared
impossible to her, that she should be able to tell such a story as would
entitle her to any thing beyond the most common relief, to any person in her
own country, without leading to questions, which would either involve her in
falsehood, or lead to the discovery of too much truth. One valuable she was
still possessed of: this was her wedding-ring: and though it had only been the
seal of misery to her, she felt an extreme reluctance to parting with it. But
scruples and sorrows founded only in imagination, she was in the habit of
subduing. Her reason acknowledged that the giving up her wedding-ring was the
most eligible method of supplying her present wants of any in her power. She
was within a few yards of a silversmith's shop. She turned toward it. She
stopped for a moment at the door. She dreaded to encounter the curiosity she was
aware the application she was about to make would excite. She hesitated. The
same thoughts passed through her mind. But now compelled by the conviction,
that every other way to relieve her distress, was still more objectionable,
than this, she entered the shop. She entered it however with a look of so much
embarrassment and irresolution, as drew on her the notice of the man who kept
it. It was not until he had enquired twice in words, and with a manner
perfectly civil, what she wanted, that she had courage enough to advance
toward him. Then taking off her worn-out glove, and drawing her ring from her
finger, she said, with hesitation, 'If, Sir, you will let me have three
shillings, or half a crown, upon this ring, I should think myself much obliged
to you.' She saw the man's eyes fixed instantly upon her hand, the whiteness of
which, with the delicacy of its form, ill accorded with the shabbiness of her
garments, and the distress her present application indicated. 'I am not
accustomed to take pawns, Madam,' said the man. 'Perhaps then,' replied Ellen,
'you would give me the value of its weight, Sir?' 'It must distress you, Madam,
to part with your wedding-ring,' returned he, looking earnestly in her face. 'I
would not willingly part with it entirely,' said Ellen: 'If therefore you would
be kind enough not to dispose of it for a few days, I should take it as a
favor. In less than a week I hope to be able to repurchase it.' 'No, Madam,
said the man, 'I will not take your ring. You are so like a lady who is dead,
and who was always better than her word, that I will take yours for so small a
sum as this,' laying down five shillings, 'and if I should lose it, I will
think it is given to that lady, and I shall be very well satisfied.' Ellen,
astonished and embarrassed, thought herself discovered; and, eager to remove
from the earnest scrutiny of her new friend, hastily took up the money; and
saying, 'I am indeed extremely obliged to you, Sir, I will take care not to
discredit your friend,' she hastened out of the shop: she saw that the man
followed her to the door of it, and attentively watched her. She therefore
turned, as soon as she could, into another street, and with a beating heart and
trembling limbs, took shelter in the first shop that presented itself, which
could afford her any refreshment. Here, as she purchased some rolls, her
thoughts were busily employed in endeavoring to recollect the features of the
silversmith, who, she was persuaded, must have seen her before, and whom, it
was probable that in her happier days she had befriended. Suddenly the
remembrance of the grandson of old Deborah crossed her mind: and in the kind
relief just now granted her, she recognized the gratitude and worth of that
honest young man. Cheered by the recollection of an act of benevolence, which,
from the seasonable return it had produced, seemed to have placed her in a
particular manner under the protection of Providence, Ellen pursued her way
with a mingled sensation of delight and hope, which had long been a stranger to
her bosom. The five or six and twenty miles which now lay between her and the
haven where she hoped to repose, after all her sufferings, however it might
have appeared six years ago as a gulf not to be passed by her, in
circumstances like the present, now seemed little more than a needle's point.
She felt no difficulty. She apprehended no danger. She thought every object
familiar to her. She imagined that she must know every face that she passed;
and almost expected to be called by her name by every person she met. The day,
however, was somewhat advanced, and night came on, when she was still sixteen
miles from Groby Manor: she easily procured herself a decent and comfortable
accommonation for the night (for she was now rich, and could pay sumptuously
for what she wanted): but sleep, which had often visited her under the
imperfect shelter of a wall, or when exposed to the droppings of a tree, now
fled the warm comforts of her present chamber. The thoughts of the next day
filled her mind, and held her eyes waking. She arose with the first rays of
light, and resumed her journey.

It was a bright frosty morning, in the beginning of October; all nature looked
cheerful, and Ellen's heart, which still retained the impressions she had
received in the silversmith's shop the day before, partook of the cheerfulness
around her. As she walked forward, these sensations subsided; and gave place to
the fears which the probable changes that had taken place during the last four
years in the home to which she was returning, naturally gave rise to. The day
passed on. Ellen drew every hour nearer to that spot, where alone, in the whole
course of her life, she had known happiness, and where only she could hope, if
ever happiness were to be hers again, to find it. Her emotions increased every
step she advanced. Sometimes she was obliged to stop for the refreshment which
the failing powers made necessary; at others to remain a few moments motionless
where she was, without the power of seeking any.

CHAP. XXVII.
'From incoherent words and sighs,
'Such wondrous transports break,
'Far more than honied Eloquence,
'With all her tongues, can speak:
'And now with strong, inquiring look,
'They search each other's eye;
'And ask, if what they see be true?
'And doubt the real joy.'
OLD BALLA^.
THE evening approached; and the distant chimnies of Groby Manor appeared. 'If
time,' said Ellen, 'has not changed the habits of the dear inhabitants of that
beloved mansion, this is the hour when they are about to assemble round the
social tea board. Now the evening music, or the evening lecture begins. Oh!
beloved friends! there awaits you an interruption to your pleasures, which will
be infinitely dearer to you than them all.' Ellen said this, as she began to
ascend the hill which led by gentle windings to the house. She had determined
to approach it on that side which looked upon the valley leading to the
parsonage, and to make her entrance, if she could, through the windows of the
common sitting-room which opened from the ground: there it was likely that
some, if not all the family would be assembled: and (...) the sun was not yet
set, she did not fear finding her entrance barred. The tumult of her mind was
such, that her designs might rather be called impulse than reasoning: and as
she ascended the hill, her limbs could hardly support her trembling frame. She
reached the top. She drew near the house. A plane tree was placed so near one
of the windows, as to prevent all objects beyond it from being seen from
thence. It was on this side that Ellen approached. The window immediately
behind the plane tree was open: Ellen intended, or thought she intended,
entering through it. She advanced. Her tremblings increased. She was obliged to
support herself against the trunk of the plane tree. She heard the sound of an
instrument. She could see within the room; she looked; at the harpsichord sat
the very lady whom she had seen accompanying Mr. Villars six weeks before into
his chaise at Cologne. Mr. Villars himself was at that moment behind her chair:
and hanging upon her gown was a playful little girl. In another part of the
room, sat Mrs. Raymond at work, and near her Mr. Mordaunt, and two young girls,
who were also at work. Ellen remained speechless, motionless, and gazing
intently upon what she saw, and yet unconscious that she saw any thing. Every
faculty was suspended. A temporary stupor had seized her.

At this moment, one of the girls raising her head from her work, saw a figure
under the plane tree. 'Who's there?' said she, in a voice of affright. 'It is
I,' said Ellen; and sprang forward: but could do no more: she sunk lifeless on
the window frame -- 'What sounds are those?' cried Henry. H^ ^shed toward her.
He raised her in his arms. 'It is -- Oh heavens! is this my Ellen?' 'Ellen,'
said the astonished and bewildered father, 'Gracious God! have thou suffered
her to leave thy mansions of bliss, to comfort her afflicted parent?'

Ellen was laid upon a sofa; but she continued senseless; nor were those who
continued gazing round her more conscious of existence than herself. One of the
young people, less interested than the rest in the scene before her, ran for
assistance. The room was presently filled with servants. Ellen began to revive.
Henry kneeling before her, had seized both her hands. 'I have found her; I have
again found her,' repeated he; 'and no power on earth shall part us more.'
Ellen heard him not; she saw him not: she saw only her father; and with a
sudden motion threw herself at his feet. He clasped her in his arms. 'It is
herself! she is alive! Oh! blessed God! what wonders are these!' Although
Ellen's worn-down frame was little able to support such violent and affecting
emotions, yet, being prepared for the scene, she was the first to recover some
degree of composure. 'I am indeed restored to you,' said she, 'by little less
than a miracle. Let us not, by our own vehemence, make vain all that God has
done for us;' and looking around her, she seemed to demand whether she saw all
the family that time and absence had spared. Her father pressed her to his
heart. 'You will see your sisters. They are married; they are happy. But your
mother -- (let us not repine) -- instead of a mother's embraces, receive those
of your daughter.' 'My daughter!' said Ellen rapturously, 'is this my
daughter?' The lovely child was already in her arms. 'Dearest infant!' said
Ellen: and, overcome by the pai^ess of her ^ollections, a rising sob checked
her voice, and she burst into tears. 'Then you, Madam,' said she, as soon as
she could again speak, and addressing herself to the young lady whom she had
seen at the harpsichord, 'then you, Madam, are not the mother of this beloved
baby?' 'Her mother!' returned the lady: 'how cruel has fortune been, thus to
make strangers of such near relations.' 'She is my sister,' cried Henry, 'my
youngest sister, the exact image of my Ellen, the darling of my heart.'

There was a question which Ellen longed to ask, yet knew not how. The manner
and words of Henry, so different from any he had ever used since she became a
wife, suggested a thought, which she knew not how to express; and by the
variety of emotions it excited, pressed upon her heart with a weight which was
intolerable. She threw herself into her father's arms, and, hiding her face in
his bosom, 'Oh! my father,' said she, 'where is Sir William Ackland? Where is
my husband?' 'Be composed, dearest creature,' said Mr. Mordaunt. 'It is perhaps
happy for us all, that he can no longer answer for his conduct in this world.'
Ellen became suddenly sick. 'Let me retire, I beseech you,' said she. Poor
unhappy man!' (tears running down her cheeks) 'mistaken, or cruel, I equally
pity you.' Mrs. Raymond and Mr. Mordaunt withdrew with Ellen: and Henry
accompanied her to the door of Mrs. Raymond's room, carrying the little girl in
his arms, from whom Ellen could not bear to be separated a single moment. Ellen
was unable to support herself any longer: and, at her own request, she was put
to bed, and all parties being in possession of the great outlines of those
events which it most concerned t^ to know, all farther explanation was, by
mutual consent, deferred. Mrs. Raymond could not consent to quit Ellen's
bedside during the night, in spite of her remonstrances, who told her,
smiling, she was much more accustomed to be left wholly to her own care, than
she could be to spend a night in watching. 'In this bed, in this room,' added
she, 'with a table covered as that is, with every thing that can tempt the
appetite, or mitigate the pains of sickness, I am much more likely to be
sleepless from astonishment, than from any fear or want of accommodation.'

Mrs. Raymond, who could not feel the full force of this observation, yet
understood enough of it to be unable to restrain her tears, at the thoughts of
the former hardships to which Ellen alluded. 'It seems so impossible,' returned
she, weeping, 'that you should be really here, that were I to leave you for a
moment, I should not expect to find you on my return.'

Henry was no sooner apprised by Mr. Mordaunt, that he must not hope to see
Ellen that night, than he set off to the parsonage. The tale he had to tell,
was so beyond all credibility, that his friends there for some minutes believed
him raving. But seeing nothing in his looks or manner to confirm such an
opinion, their feelings became little less agitated than his own. The fact
which he so constantly averred, that Ellen was alive, and at Groby Manor, he
pretended not to account for or explain: and though they began to be convinced
that he doubted not the truth of what he said, yet they could not persuade
themselves, that he was not by some means deceived. They resolved, therefore,
to verify his words by the evidence of their own senses: and, late as it was,
Mr. and Mrs. Thornton, and Mary, who (although she had been married a
twelvemonth) still continued at the parsonage, resolved to accompany him to
Groby Manor. Mr. Mordaunt had taken his station in a corner of Ellen's
bedchamber: for to separate from her he found to be impossible: and he thought
the loss of sleep amply recompensed by seeing her breathe, and sometimes
hearing her speak. Miss Villars and the two young Raymonds were in the parlour,
waiting the return of Henry. They confirmed to the wondering Thorntons the
events of the evening: and their mutual joy and astonishment, with the variety
of exclamations and conjectures that engaged them, so perfectly banished all
desire of sleep and rest from the whole party, that it was determined they
should sit up together for the remainder of the night. Henry and Mary often
stole gently to the door of Ellen's room. They listened. All was quiet. They
hoped she slept. They returned to the parlour to communicate their hopes to
their friends; and then again crept to the door to confirm them to themselves.
Ellen, however, was sleepless: but the quiet she imposed on herself enabled her
to collect her thoughts, and to prepare for the renewed emotions of the next
day.

CHAP. XXVIII.
-- 'Try'd but not subdued
'Doth she appear."
GLOVER.
THE next day at length came: and Ellen found her bed insupportably irksome to
her. She could no longer delay the knowledge of a thousand particulars so
interesting to her, and so important to her happiness: nor was the impatience
of her friends much less than her own. Mrs. Raymond furnished her with clothes;
for whatever Ellen could have done, none of her family would have borne to have
seen her in those tattered and worn-out garments, which were such painful
indications of the hardships she had suffered.

The result of the reflections suggested through the whole of Ellen's wakeful
night, had been a determination to learn from her father, in a conversation
between themselves, all the circumstances attendant on Sir William's death, and
the actual situation of Henry; it having appeared plainly to her, in the few
words which she had yet heard him utter, that his sentiments toward her were
the same as ever, and that his hopes of possessing her, were now again risen as
high as in the happiest days of their mutual affection. But Ellen had too long
been accustomed to place the curb of reason upon her wishes, to suffer them
alone to influence her actions. She had long ceased to consider Henry as her
lover: but she had never ceased to entertain for him that friendship, which his
virtues and his love toward her so well deserved. If affliction had subdued
her passions, it had awakened her affections. She was now a mother: and she
felt that no consideration on earth could tempt her to any act which might, in
its remotest consequences, be prejudicial to that dear infant, so newly found
and so highly cherished. If, in her early youth, she had yielded her partiality
for the man of her choice, to a sense of the duty he owed his parent, she well
knew now how to make it submit to that which she owed her child. But it was
possible that duty and inclination might at length agree. Ellen's heart
flattered her at the thought: but she suffered it not to rise into a wish. She
would have no wish on this subject unsanctioned by her father.

Ellen was scarcely dressed, when she desired to see him: and the enraptured,
yet anxious parent, flew to obey her summons. She begged Mrs. Raymond would
leave them together: but she placed her little girl upon her knees. 'I cannot
fear,' said Ellen to herself, 'any faulty impulse of my heart, while I hold to
it this pledge and reward of its rectitude.' As Mr. Mordaunt viewed the languid
and travel-worn figure of Ellen, as he considered the paleness of her cheek,
and the heaviness of her eye, his emotions almost choked him. 'Oh! my child,'
said he, 'what must you not have suffered, and for what?' 'Tell me, my father,'
said Ellen, 'how long you have supposed me dead?' 'We were taught to believe
you died in bringing that infant into the world.' 'And did Sir William appear
afflicted for my loss? and where and how has he lived since? and, above all,
did he not in dying give you some reason to suppose I existed?' 'He did not
return to England till a twelvemonth after your supposed death; and then for
the sole purpose of placing his child under the care of a relation of his
mother's: and it was not until after I had repeatedly urged him, by every
motive I could imagine, to afford me the satisfaction of seeing him, that I
could prevail upon him to make me a visit. I was then attending your mother in
her last illness: I could not go to him. He remained here only two days, and
appeared the most wretched of men. I repented that any consideration for self
had induced me to force him into a visit which seemed so painful to him. Yet
there was something in his grief which ill accorded with mine. It had more of
fury and desperation in it than softness. Once, and only once, I attempted to
lead him to speak of you. He started from his chair, "Oh! name her not, she has
undone me! she has ruined my peace for ever! Worthy old man," continued he,
"you know not how fatal a gift you bestowed, when you gave me your daughter!" I
believed the violence of these expressions to be the ravings of grief for a
loss, which my own sufferings told me mu^t to a husband be almost past
endurance. I entreated he would let me see my grandchild, the sole remains of
Ellen. "She is not like her," returned he. "She does not bear her name. She
will not, I hope, bear her features." 'Oh! I hope she will,' returned I fondly:
'and in time, Sir William you will find comfort in what now, perhaps, might be
too lively an emblem of what you have lost.' He seemed almost convulsed with
passion: "No more," said he, "if you would not drive me to madness." I sought
to soothe him: and most carefully, during the short time he afterward staid
with me, did I avoid a subject which I now saw he could not bear. He remained
some months in London: and I heard from every one of the deep shade of grief
which was impressed on his behavior and countenance. He quitted England the
following spring, and returned to it no more. Four months are scarcely past
since he died suddenly, with no previous illness, at Vienna. I was informed of
the event by a Bohemian nobleman, whom I understood to have been Sir William's
intimate friend. There were some words in this gentleman's letter, of which I
never, until now, could guess the meaning, but which must certainly have
alluded to the unhappy mistake, from which my beloved child must have suffered
so much, and which appears to have made Sir William's life entirely wretched.
These words seemed to intimate, that had Sir William been allowed any time for
deathbed reflections, he might have been induced to have mitigated the
severity of some determination, the justice of which had not been sufficient to
satisfy him under the rigor of it. I considered this intimation merely as a
sort of apology for some action of Sir William's which might some time probably
come to my knowledge, which his friend was conscious would stand in need of
one.'

'I found,' continued Mr. Mordaunt, for Ellen broke not in upon his discourse,
'that the guardians appointed to your dear infant were people unknown to me,
and wholly unconnected with my family: and it seemed as if Sir William wished
to keep her as far apart from every one of us as possible. But my heart longed
to see her: and our dear Henry, who has been my guardian-angel under all my
troubles, and is now the support of my declining age, procured me this
blessing, as he has done many others. He prevailed upon the lady with whom she
is placed, to trust her to the care of his sister and himself, when they were
about to make a visit to Northumberland: they have been with me ten days: and
there has not been an hour in any one of these days, in which Henry and I have
not soothed our never-ceasing regret, by endeavoring to trace your features in
the lineaments of that infant's face.'

Ellen felt that her heart was not indifferent to this panegyric upon Henry.
'And Lord Villars,' asked she, 'does he still pursue the same projects of
ambition and avarice, so often defeated but never given up?' 'Lord Villars,'
repeated Mr. Mordaunt,' 'do you not know -- but alas! you cannot know -- there
is now no other Lord Villars than Henry.' 'Gracious heaven!' said Ellen; and
her pale cheek became still paler. 'He died of a liver complaint about three
months ago,' continued Mr. Mordaunt. 'His death was foreseen: and Henry crossed
the channel to bring home his sister, who had been some time abroad with Lady
Edwards: but Lord Villars died before they could return, before indeed Henry
had reached the place where his sister then was. Since his return to England,
he has been wholly taken up with his family affairs: and it was not 'till
within these ten days, that he had leisure to give me, what he knows to be my
best comfort, his dearly beloved society.' 'But, dear sir,' said Ellen, 'my
brother, what of him, does he afford you no comfort?' 'None, Ellen, none. He
and lady Almeria have no relish for the shades of a northern retirement, or for
the society of an old man, though that man is their father. Their life is one
unvaried round of dissipation and expense: and the only satisfaction I reap
from their union is, some times the company of some of their children, of which
they have three.' 'My sisters?' said Ellen. 'Are happily, though not
splendidly, married. They are both settled in this country; and do every thing
in their power to make my old age comfortable. My daughter Raymond and her two
girls are kind and good to me. And now,' cried he, clasping her in his arms,
'since I once again embrace my Ellen, there is nothing this world has more to
give.' 'And I,' said Ellen, 'if I can bless the declining years of my father,
and guard the opening dawn of this dear child, what more shall I have to ask in
this world?' 'Oh! my Ellen," returned the delighted parent, 'you have much more
to ask, and much more to do. You have to reward, I will not say the constancy,
for that may be objectionable, but the virtues of our Henry. Happiness too is
in long arrears to you: and you may now reasonably ask for payment.' 'But can
I,' said Ellen, 'give my child another parent? Can I hazard her welfare on the
shock of interests, so often the consequence of a second connection?' 'Who would
you sooner choose for a parent to your child,' returned Mr. Mordaunt smiling,
'than Henry? Who would you rather make the guardian of your dearest interest
than him? But I leave him to plead his own cause. My Ellen must have undergone
a wonderful metamorphosis, indeed, if she find in her breast any impediment to
his wishes from mistaken delicacy, or weak punctilio: and every reason must be
on his side. And now, my dearest, let us go down together. I am impatient to
hear your story: but I will not detain you from your friends, whose tender
interest in all that concerns you, kept them waking the whole night, and who
are as impatient to see and hear you as myself.'

CHAP. XXIX.
'The form of virtue dignified the scene.
'In her majestic sweetness was displayed,
'The mind sublime and happy. From her lips
'Seem'd eloquence to flow.'
^LOVER. 'Last came joy's extatic trial.'
COLLINS.
ELLEN arose: but she was surprised, when she came to move, to find herself so
enfeebled and trembling, that she could not but suppose, had her journey been
prolonged one other day, she must have sunk under the fatigue. But she
recollected not how much more the emotions of the mind exhaust the strength
than any labors of the body. What she had undergone, since her arrival in
Northumberland, had contributed more toward the destruction of her bodily
powers, than all the hardships to which a pilgrimage of more than eight hundred
miles had exposed her.

No sooner was the door of her chamber heard to open by her listening friends
below, than Henry flew up stairs: and seeing her inability to support herself,
and that Mr. Mordaunt tottered with her weight, 'Let me support you, my dearest
cousin,' said he. 'It is a relation's office, which you will not deny me.'
Ellen, almost sinking, suffered him to put his arms round her; but he was
seized with so violent a sit of trembling, that he was obliged for a moment to
support both himself and her by leaning against the wall. Ellen had been
apprised, that the Thorntons were below: and they, therefore, having no fear of
her suffering from the surprise of their sudden appearance, could no longer
restrain their impatience, but hastily followed Henry up stairs. It was
fortunate they did so: for so great had his emotion become, that he could not
have supported Ellen another moment. Mr. Thornton clasped his arms round her:
the beloved Mary received her sinking head upon her bosom; while Mrs. Thornton,
half frantic with her joy, deluged her with perfumed water one moment, and
stifled her with caresses the next. A moment's consideration convinced them
all, that Ellen was unfit to be removed down stairs. They therefore agreed to
assemble in Mr. Mordaunt's library, which was immediately opposite the bed
chamber assigned to Ellen. Henry could not, however, prevail upon himself again
to quit her: and having regained steadier nerves, he carried her, with the
assistance of Mr. Thornton, into the library, where being laid upon a sofa, a
few moments sufficed to recompose her mind.

'I could not have suspected myself of so much debility,' said she smiling,
'and when I come to tell you what I have been doing for the last three months,
you will agree with me, that I have little right to such fine lady-like airs.'
'Oh!' cried Henry fervently, 'you are weak. We all are weak from feelings no
fine lady ever knew.' Indeed the groupe who were now gathered round Ellen,
seemed to have forgotten all consideration of self, in the thoughts of the
beloved object they encircled. Mr. Mordaunt had drawn a low stool close to the
sofa; and held Ellen's hands in his. Henry was leaning over the back of it,
with his eyes intently fixed upon her face. Mary was upon her knees, pressing
close up between Mr. Mordaunt and Ellen; while the rest of the party had
disposed of themselves into a kind of outward circle, and all were alike
emulative of the pleasure of administering to Ellen's wants. One idea seemed to
prevail with them all, that the miseries she had suffered, and the hardships
she had undergone, called for every indemnification in their power. Ellen had
scarcely any voice, and, bathed in tears, was unable to look up. 'I have not,'
said she, in broken and interrupted accents, 'in all my sorrows, shed so many
tears from grief, as I now shed from joy. But indeed I must not indulge myself.
I must shake off this weakness. Yet who can wonder that the sense of the
mercies I have received, is so overcoming?'

Impatient as the whole circle were to be acquainted with the every particular
of Ellen's fate, they all, with one voice, declared against the indulgence of
their curiosity 'till she was somewhat ^ore restored to composure. But she was
aware, that this would never be, while she had so interesting a story to
relate. 'Believe me,' said she, 'that nothing is so likely to hush these
contending feelings as the dullness of narrative. I shall perhaps fatigue
myself with the length of my story: but such fatigue will be salutary. I want
sleep. Mine has been long broken, and for the two last nights wholly
interrupted. If I can talk myself to sleep, there is nothing from which I shall
receive so much benefit: and to sleep, while I have such a story to tell, is
impossible.'

The party drew closer round her: and Henry, half invited, found a seat on the
sofa, at her feet, as, supported by pillows, she changed her posture from that
of lying down to a sitting one. It cannot be doubted what were the emotions
with which Ellen was listened to. Pity, admiration, grief, indignation, and
astonishment, succeeded each other: but when she came to relate the
circumstance which seemed to have sealed her fate, and of which being
absolutely ignorant, she was at a loss whether to impute it to mistake, or
contrivance, Henry, in an agony he could not restrain, threw himself on his
knees before her. 'Oh! my Ellen,' cried he, grasping her hands, 'my suffering,
my ever-beloved Ellen, do not, do not hate me! I am the wretch who have undone
you. I conducted you to that hateful prison. I closed its doors upon you. Your
agonizing days, your sleepless nights, were all the gift of my hand. But, Oh!
if you cannot pardon me, do not, do not hate me.' 'Oh! Henry,' replied Ellen,
gently returning the pressure of his hand, 'be assured I never entertained a
sentiment of hatred, even toward the real author of my sufferings. How then
should I hate you?' 'And can you forgive me? And do you call me your dear
Henry? Mr. Thornton pray for me: I shall not keep my senses.' 'Nor,' said Mr.
Thornton fervently, 'suffer Ellen to keep hers. Can you admire the strength of
mind, which has supported her through* such trying scenes, and yet desert
yourself so pitiably?' 'But I was not tried with joy,' said Ellen, holding out
her hands toward Henry (who had hastily let them go, on hearing Mr. Thornton's
rebuke), 'and those, who have felt them both, know how much more difficult it
is to bear joy than sorrow.' Henry's tears rolled down his cheeks. He
endeavored to conceal his face as he stooped to kiss again and again the dear
hands he held. 'Say,' cried he, in accents scarcely articulate, 'say you
forgive me for all my faults.' 'Let us not talk of forgiveness,' returned
Ellen: 'and but this once suffer me to assure you, that you have lightened my
heart of the single remaining weight that oppressed it, by clearing the memory
of a man whom I would not condemn from the imputation of the only act of
villainy with which I could charge him. It is easy to pardon injuries
originating in mistake, and a mistake too, which I understand has cost the
unhappy person so deceived still more than it has cost me.' Henry then
explained how fatally his scrupulous attention to the delicacy and peace of
Ellen had succeeded. He remembered the contents of lady Almeria's note; though
he could not at that distance of time call to mind the exact terms of it, upon
which Sir William's mistake was grounded. The good heart of Mr. Mordaunt
rejoiced equally with Ellen's, that there was so strong an appearance of
impropriety in the conduct of Henry, as to justify the confirmation it had
given to those injurious suspicions which had, however, been before most
unjustifiably taken up. Without such an apology, Sir William must have appeared
one of the worst of men. But neither Mr. Mordaunt, nor the christian Mr.
Thornton, much less could Henry, admit of any excuse for the method he had
taken to gratify his revenge, nor the right he had assumed to himself of so
cruelly punishing offenses for which the laws of his country have appointed a
much less severe chastisement. Nor will it be expected that the females of the
party were more favorable to so illegal a proceeding: and Ellen, though she
did not choose to join in the condemnation, entered not into defense of a
conduct which she considered as indefensible. In mentioning the adventure in
the ruined monastery, she carefully avoided mentioning the name of Mr. Raymond,
though she expatiated on the happy circumstance it had proved to her, in
procuring her the ducat, which she had found of so much use. It was with the
greatest emotion that she related what she had felt on the sight of Henry at
Cologne. 'And could you, did you,' echoed from every mouth, in such
'circumstances, in such distress, could you suffer him to depart without making
yourself known to him?' 'What could I do?' cried Ellen, in a tone of
self-defence. 'What power on earth could have convinced Sir William of my
innocence, had I returned to England with Henry? And would you have had me
barter my reputation, and my only chance of happiness, for an escape from
hardships which I had already proved not to be insupportable? But God only
knows what it cost me to make the choice I did!' 'The choice!' said Mr.
Mordaunt rapturously, 'the choice was like yourself. It was the result of the
purest principle and the steadiest reason. But this story will kill us all. For
God's sake make haste to arrive in England, or I too shall incur Mr. Thornton's
censure; for my brain will hardly bear it.' 'Mr. Thornton,' said mrs. Thornton,
sobbing, 'has little reason to reproach you. Look at him; did you ever see him
so moved before?' 'Oh! who would not be moved,' said Mr. Thornton, 'at such a
proof of the strength of rectitude, and the power of reason? And yet, wonderful
as it appears, it is in the power of every one to whom God has given common
understanding, and has not cursed with unnatural depravity, to act as uprightly
and heroically as Ellen has done. All the rest is the result of cultivation, or
self discipline, and of a continued habit of referring all our actions to
principle.' 'My ever dear preceptor,' said Ellen, 'if I have been able to act
rightly, I owe it to you, to my dear mrs. Thornton, to my father; but chiefly I
will say to you, who, never sparing of your praise when I deserved
commendation, gave it always with the same judgment you have now done; and by
convincing me the path of virtue was practicable to all, made me ashamed to
represent it to myself as difficult.' Henry could not speak: he sat with his
face rested upon the arm of the sofa, in a state of emotion that shook his
whole frame. He heard not mr. Thornton's moral. He gave no credit to the easy
practicability of such virtues as Ellen's. He thought her an angel, and that it
was scarcely among her fellow angels that she was to be equalled. Ellen
hastened to conclude a narrative, the circumstances of which so deeply affected
her auditors. She was happy to have the task over; and felt herself more
capable of composure and rest when it was done. She now learnt, what from the
multiplicity of events each side had to communicate, had hitherto remained
untold; that the unhappy Mr. Raymond had met the fate his vices provoked; and
that instead of the safe retreat he had promised himself in Switzerland, the
vengeance of an injured family had overtaken him in a few days from the time
when Ellen had left him. Refusing to subm^t to the officers of justice, who
were employed to secure him, he had attempted a defense, impossible to be made
good, but which was conducted with so much violence and danger to his
opponents, as had obliged them to attempt subduing him by means as desperate as
those he had used in his defense. In this struggle he had received wounds which
proved mortal in a few days. His death had put Mrs. Raymond in possession of a
small jointure; and had secured to his daughters the few thousand pounds which
had been settled upon them. Ellen now revealed, that it was to Mr. Raymond that
she owed the seasonable relief which she had before mentioned; and expatiated
on the earnest desire that he had shown of being farther serviceable to her. To
hear of such praiseworthy dispositions in a man whom she had once loved, was
very acceptable to Mrs. Raymond. But as ill usage had long ago worn out her
affection for him; his death had rather shocked than afflicted her: and in the
present happier prospects of her family, she soon learnt to consider it rather
as a release than a misfortune. Ellen's two other sisters joined the happy
party at Groby Manor the next day; and most unfeignedly partook of the joy that
reigned there. In a few days, Ellen recovered her usual serenity of mind: and
in a few weeks she was perfectly restored to bloom and health.

CHAP. XXX.
'Such a sacred, and home-felt delight,
'Such sober certainty of waking bliss,
'I never knew till now.'
MILTON.
AND now what avails it to prolong a narrative, the conclusion of which is
already anticipated? Opposed by no one duty, supported by her own wishes,
sanctioned by the authority of a parent, can it be supposed that Henry's
revived claim to the hand and heart of Ellen was disallowed? Yet did she feel
an unspeakable reluctance to becoming his wife, until her reputation was as
spotless as her life. Her return to existence must of necessity be known; and
with it must be known the suspicions which had so long held her in seclusion
from the world. The death of Sir William made her vindication difficult; since
no one could be assured of her innocence, but those who would naturally screen
her guilt. The most unequivocal testimony was that of the Bohemian nobleman,
and to him it was resolved to apply; Henry determining that if the matter could
not be settled satisfactorily by letter, he would himself take a journey to
Vienna. Mr. Mordaunt drew up a plain statement of all the facts upon which he
had reason to think Sir William had grounded Ellen's condemnation: lady
Almeria's testimony on those which had seemingly been such unequivocal marks of
her guilt was added thereto: and the nobleman was entreated to declare, whether
Sir William laid any thing more to her charge than this explanation obviated.
The natural eloquence of a parent trembling for the reputation of his child,
gave an energy to Mr. Mordaunt's entreaties and remonstrances, which must have
affected any heart not wholly callous. The heart of the Bohemian was not of
this nature. He had long entertained doubts of the guilt of a woman to whose
excellencies Sir William's never-ceasing regrets had done reluctant justice:
and since her escape, he had received such proofs from Mrs. Ulric of the purity
of her mind and the goodness of her principles, as had well prepared him for
the vindication of her conduct which he now received. The answer he returned
was the most satisfactory possible.

He informed Mr. Mordaunt, that Sir William himself had frequently declared, in
the last months of his life, that, were it possible, he could have been
mistaken in what his own senses had witnessed, he should be persuaded he had
wronged the unfortunate Ellen; that remorse for the severity of the punishment
he had inflicted, even supposing her guilty, had haunted every hour of his
life; that he seemed not unfrequently to regret the strictness with which his
orders, not to convey any letter or message to him from her, had been observed;
that nothing withheld him from again seeking her, but the insupportable shame
which must have overwhelmed him, either had she been able to have cleared
herself from the crimes imputed to her, or which would have attended his
restoring her to the world, guilty or innocent; and that, finally, even the
dread of this shame would probably have given way to the increasing
wretchedness of his mind, had his life been spared a little longer.

The Bohemian stated it as having been his own intention, after the death of
his friend, to have visited Ellen in her prison, and from the opinion which he
should have been able to have formed of her from such an interview, to have
regulated his own future conduct, as to the continuation of her imprisonment,
or the putting a speedy and final end to it. He ingenuously confessed, that
though, had he found her innocent, he should have held his friend's reputation
as nothing when compared with the injustice and cruelty of detaining her any
longer a captive; yet, that had she appeared to him guilty, he should have
preferred suffering her to languish out her life in perpetual confinement, to
the fixing such a stain upon Sir William's memory, as her restoration to the
world and the publication of the whole story must have done.

The generous Bohemian after congratulating the happy father on the innocence
and escape of his daughter, informed him, that in order that no cloud might
obscure a happiness so dearly purchased and so amply deserved, he had written a
full vindication of her character, to the guardian of her child, and the
trustees of her settlement: and this he had done, he said, not more from a
conviction that by such a testimony to her virtues he offered the most
acceptable proof of his inviolable attachment to his deceased friend, than from
the assurance he had in his own mind, that he was offering a tribute to truth,
and from the pleasure which resulted to himself, in an act of justice and
compensation.

In consequence of this well-judged and generous interference of the amiable
Bohemian, Ellen found no difficulty in having her daughter given to her wishes.
By this agency she was enabled also to acquit herself, as far as money could
acquit her, of obligations to the good Mrs. Ulric and the faithful Theresa; nor
can it be supposed that the grandson of old Deborah was forgotten. Henry, in
the ample provision which his disinterested heart had apportioned to every
branch of his family, had left himself poor: but he had more than sufficient
for happiness. He revived the scheme which, so many years before, he had
pressed with so much fruitless earnestness. Ellen and he resolved to content
themselves with her jointure, until his estate had cleared itself of every
encumbrance: and, at the earnest entreaty of Mr. Mordaunt, they took up their
abode at Groby Manor. The cottage of old Deborah was enlarged, and fitted up
for the reception of Mrs. Raymond and her daughters, that they might (while
always most welcome to Groby Manor) have a place to retire to, when under the
dominion of that wish which is felt at times by every human mind, the wish,
that as we shut the door upon us we may be able to say, 'Now I am at home.' Of
the happiness of Henry and Ellen, of the feelings of Mr. Mordaunt, of the
contentment of the Thorntons, and of the peace and satisfaction of all within
the reach of their benevolence, it were needless to tell. To those who have
hearts and principles similar to theirs all that could be said would be
superfluous: to those of opposite feelings and opinions it would be
unintelligible.

Such then is the history of Ellen. Instructed by her example, let no one
affirm the omnipotency of love: let no one assert the uncontrollableness of
sorrow. Be it remembered, that in the exertion of PLAIN SENSE, and the exercise
of unshaken integrity lay all her powers, and let not any one who means not to
forego his claim to such distinctions, plead as an excuse for vice or weakness
the dominion of passion, or the irresistibility of grief.

FINIS
BOOKS For Sale at MATTHEW CAREY's Store, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET, PHILADELPHIA.
1. VINDICATION OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMAN. BY MARY WOLSTONECRAFT. Price a dollar.
"The author addresses herself in this publication chiefly to those of the
middle rank, because she thinks them most in a natural state. She wishes to
point out in what true dignity consists -- to persuade women to endeavor to
acquire strength of mind and body, and to convince them that the soft phrases
"susceptibility of heart, delicacy of sentiment," etc. are synonimous with
epithets of weakness; and that those beings which are objects of pity, and that
kind of love which has been termed its sister, will soon become objects of
contempt.

"It is with some reluctance that for the present we take our leave of this
singular, and, on the whole, excellent production. The subjects which it
investigates, are of the utmost importance to human nature, and we should be
wanting in our engagements, and in our duty, if we passed it over too slightly.
We have no doubt if even our cotemporaries should fail to do her justice,
posterity will compensate the defect; and have no hesitation in declaring, that
if the bulk of the great truths, which this publication contains, were reduced
to practice, the nation would be better, wiser, and happier, than it is upon
the wretched, trifling, useless and absurd system of education which is now
prevalent.

"In so extensive a range of sentiment and observation, we have been able to
select comparatively but a few thoughts for the gratification of our readers;
and even in the selection we may have erred in not preferring the best. We
cannot therefore dismiss this work, without recommending it warmly to the
perusal of all classes of society, as we are convinced all will find some
partial instruction at least in it. Many readers will probably demur to Mrs.
W.'s proposal of enlarging the representation in favor of the female sex; to
her plan of continuing the sexes in certain cases in the same seminary, even
beyond the age of nine; and in a few instances they will probably think that
she has descended too much into detail; but all will find some benefit from her
pointed observations on the maintenance of pernicious prejudices, and from her
judicious thoughts on the different branches and objects of education. The
style is strong and impressive."

Analytical Review, Vol. XII. page 241, and Vol. XIII. page 481. 2. CHARLOTTE
TEMPLE: -- A TALE OF TRUTH. By Mrs. ROWSON, Author of Victoria, the Inquisitor,
Fille de Chamber, Trials of the Heart, etc. Price, bound, 75 cents.
"It may be a tale of truth; for it is not unnatural; and it is a tale of real
distress. Charlotte, by the artifice of a teacher, recommended to a school,
from humanity rather than a conviction of her integrity, or the regularity of
her former conduct, is enticed from her governess, and accompanies a young
officer to America. -- The marriage ceremony, if not forgotten, is postponed;
and Charlotte dies a martyr to the inconstancy of her lover, and treachery of
her friend. -- The situations are artless and affecting -- the description
natural and pathetic. We should feel for Charlotte, if such a person existed,
who, for one error, scarcely, perhaps, deserved so severe a punishment. If it
is a fiction, poetic justice is not, we think, properly distributed."

Critical Review, April 1791, page 468. 3. COUNT RODERIC'S CASTLE -- OR, GOTHIC
TIMES a Tale. Price 75 cents.
"From the beginning to the end, this novel presents an un^nterrupted
succession of surprising and terrible adventures. Without allowing his reader
time to breathe, the author conducts him from one gloomy castle, dismal
dungeon, and dreary forest, to another: and delights to terrify him with
hazardous enterprises, hair breadth escapes* and events so astonishing, that he
is surprised to find them not supernatural. The scene of the tale is laid in
Italy, during the reign of the Lombard kings. The principal business of the
piece consists in rescuing a princess from the hands of a cruel uncle, who had
deposed her father; and conducting her through various perils to the arms of
her hero.

"The incident^, though sufficiently extravagant, are numerous and well
arranged; and the language is correct and elegant. Any detached quotation would
not be understood, without forestalling the pleasure of perusing the whole by
acquainting the reader beforehand with the plot."

Analytical Review, Vol xx. page 488. 4. DRAMATIC DIALOGUES, FOR THE USE OF
YOUNG PERSONS. By the author of the BLIND CHILD. Price 62 cents.
"These dialogues are, in general, well adapted to correct the foibles, and
form the manners of children. The particular purposes, which they are intended
to answer, are, to make children sensible of the folly of indulging a
passionate temper; to guard them against the exaggerated expression^ and
unnatural sentiments of false sensibility; to correct the injurious propensity,
so common among children, of indolent trifling and procrastination; to expose
the folly of despising those who have had inferior advantages for external
accomplishments; to teach the lessons of humanity and generosity; and to
inculcate principles of submission to civil authority. Several of the stories
are well contrived and wrought up; particularly that of the little trifler."

Analytical Review, Vol. XV. page 348. 5. WOLSTONECRAFT'S LETTERS FROM SWEDEN,
DENMARK AND NORWAY. Price 75 cents.
"A vigorous and cultivated intellect easily accommodates itself to new
occupations. The notion, that individual genius can only excel in one thing, is
a vulgar error. A mind endued by nature with strong powers and quick
sensibility, and by culture furnished in an uncommon degree with habits of
attention and reflection, wherever it is placed, will find itself employments;
and whatever it undertakes, will execute it well. After the repeated proofs,
which the ingenious and justly admired writer of those letters has given to the
public, that her talents are far above the ordinary level, it will not be
thought surprising, that she should excel in different kinds of writing; that
the qualifications which have enabled her to instruct young people by moral
lessons and tales, and to furnish the philosopher with original and important
speculations, should also empower her to entertain and interest the public, in
a manner peculiarly her own, by writing a book of travels.

"We have no hesitation in assuring our readers, that Mrs. W. has done this in
the present volume: her active mind has, throughout her tour, been awake to
every object and occurrence. She has been at no loss to find in every new
situation something interesting to describe, or some occasion for just
reflection. The letters are evidently not the effect of elaborate study. But
from a mind well stored, and exercised, as this writer's, the easy and
unsolicited effusions of the moment, in a work of this kind, are preferable to
artificial arrangements. "In order to avoid becoming stiff and affected, I
determined" says Mrs. W. "to let my remarks and reflections flow unrestrained,
as I perceived that I could not give a just description of what I saw, but by
relating the effect different objects have produced on my mind and feelings
whilst the impressions were still fresh." Her plan as stated by herself was
simply to endeavor to give a just view of the present state of the countries
she has passed through, as far as she could obtain information during so short
a residence; avoiding those details, which without being very useful to
travelers, who follow the same route, appear very insipid to those who only
accompany you in the chair."

Analytical Review, Vol. 23, page 229. 6. ELEMENTS OF MORALITY. Price 87 cents.
"The tales, as a series of moral lessons, are excellent. They are of a nature
sufficiently suited to afford amusement; and at the same time are happily
adapted to fix upon the heart strong impressions in favor of amiable and
virtuous manners: they are not fetched out of the wilds of fancy, nor out of
the clouds of abstraction, but from the common walks of life: they inculcate no
romantic or impracticable maxims of conduct, but the plain principles of useful
morality: they abound with amusing incidents, and are connected by a continued
course of narration, which is both more agreeable in the perusal, and, better
rememrered, than a miscellaneous collection of short and detached stories: the
style in which they are written is correct and easy; and the whole is enlivened
by a great variety of prints, which are well executed, and which have this
peculiar excellence, that almost every plate is applied to the illustration of
some moral sentiment. We have no hesitation in pronouncing the work one of the
best moral manuals we have seen, and in recommending it to parents, as very
happily suited to excite and fix young minds in the sentiments of virtue and
piety."

Analytical Review, Vol. XI. page 217. 7. ZIMMERMAN ON SOLITUDE. Price one
dollar, on fine paper:
"In the midst of the numerous attempts which in the present age of speculation
and controversy are made to enlighten the understanding, the cultivation of the
heart is perhaps too much neglected. It is with pleasure that we find our
attention called to a work of which the principal objects appear to be, to
impress the hearts of men with just sentiments respecting human life and
manners, and to conduct them, by the plainest and most direct path, to the true
happiness of rational beings. The writer is not one of those extravagant
misanthropes who would advise men to withdraw from society, and from spleen and
superstition lead the lives of monks and hermits.

"The work is enlivened with well chosen quotations and entertaining anecdotes.
-- The present translation, which is from the French, contains only select
parts of the original German work, consisting of four large volumes in octavo.
It is but justice to the author to add, that this work has been generally
admired in Germany, and that Mr. Z. in the year 1785, received from the Empress
of Russia a valuable ring and a gold medal, accompanied with the following
note: "To M. Zimmerman, Counselor of State to his Britannic Majesty, to thank
him for the excellent precepts he has given to mankind in his treatise on
solitude."

Analytical Review, Vol. xi. page 319.
