MR. STRONG's ELECTION SERMON, MAY 9, 1799.

^ A SERMON, PREACHED AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY
9, 1799.

BY CYPRIAN STRONG, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN CHATHAM.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1799

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A.D. 1799.
ORDERED, That the Hon. THOMAS SEYMOUR, and Mr. HEZEKIAH GOODRICH present the
thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend CYPRIAN STRONG, for his Sermon
delivered before them, at the General Election, on the 9th of inst. May, and
request a copy thereof for the press.

A true Copy of Record, Examined by SAMUEL WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

An Election Sermon.
1 CHRONICLES xxix. 11. -- Thine is the KINGDOM, O LORD, and thou art exalted
as HEAD above ALL.


IN the passage which has now been read, we have the devout acknowledgment of
king David, who was the first magistrate, in the most respectable kingdom,
which, at that time, existed. He was as remarkable for piety and religion, as
for eminence and distinction, in the Jewish nation.

IT was not an inconsiderable evidence, of the fervor of his piety, that he
maintained the most exalted and reverential conceptions of God, in the height
of earthly magnificence, amid the splendour and pomp of a Court, which so
commonly dazzle the eyes of mankind, and plunge them into scenes of
voluptuousness.

NEBUCHADNEZZAR, who was at the head of the Chaldean Empire, was so
intoxicated, with the splendors of royalty, that "his heart was lifted up and
his mind hardened in pride," so that he did not know and consider, "That the
MOST HIGH rules in the kingdom of men." And, fact and experience afford the
most convincing evidence, that worldly distinctions and honors, through the
native corruption of the human heart, have a most powerful tendency to render
men unmindful of Him, by whom "kings reign and princes decree justice." But,
this was very far from being exemplified in David. Although, from a shepherd,
he was raised to a throne, and exalted as the head of a respectable and truly
great nation, which always reverenced his authority; yet, he did not, through
pride of heart, so rate his dignity and worldly consequence, as to think it
beneath him, devoutly to acknowledge God, as the Supreme Ruler of the universe.
He was sensible, that his elevated station and worldly magnificence, were the
fruit and effect, of God's sovereign disposal. In the text, he most devoutly
ascribes every thing to Him. "Thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art
exalted as head above ALL." And, in the succeeding words, "Both riches and
honors come of thee -- in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength
unto all."

IT may be further observed, that king David was not only ready, most solemnly
to acknowledge, the existence of God; but he viewed and reverenced him "as head
above all." Not as the prophet Elijah sarcastically described Baal, as an idle
talker, or as pursuing a journey, or as sleeping; or, in a word, as being an
idle and unconcerned spectator of the world; but as being particularly
concerned in the government and control of the universe. -- "Thine is the
kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all."

THE text will naturally direct our attention, to the two following things.

I. THE nature of that kingdom, which is said, in the text, to be the LORD's.

II. IN what sense the kingdom may be said to be the LORD's, and that He is
exalted as HEAD above all.

IT is hoped, that in the prosecution of what has now been proposed, such
observations and remarks will be made, as will render the discourse both
seasonable, and pertinent to this public anniversary.

I. IT is proposed, to attend to the nature of that kingdom, which, in the
text, is said to be the LORD's.

THE inhabitants of this world, are divided into many kingdoms and governments,
which, in the sacred scriptures, are called "the kingdom of men." But that
kingdom which is said, in the text, to be the LORD's, has not a respect to any
one of those kingdoms, in exclusion of the rest.

THE time has been, indeed, when God took upon himself the government of the
Hebrews; and, in his dispensations, a very special respect was paid them. His
administrations were particularly directed, to the establishment of that
favorite people; yet God was, at the same time, as truly at the head of other
nations, and did dispose of and superintend all their affairs, in the same
manner that he did the affairs and concerns of the Jews. God had purposes to
answer, relative to the Jewish nation, which he had not respecting other
nations; for they were a chosen people. Although the allotments of God, to
other nations, were subordinated to the advancement of the Hebrews, yet, events
were alloted out to the former, in as immediate and efficient a manner as they
were to the latter. The purposes of God, respecting different nations, have
been different; yet God has not at the present time, nor ever had in time past,
a more immediate disposal of the affairs of one nation than of another. The
kingdom, which in the text is called the LORD's, is not limited by or confined
to any earthly kingdom.

BUT, the kingdom which is the Lord's does, in a sense, embrace the universe;
consisting of all ranks and grades of creatures, throughout all worlds. The
government of God extends to all things, both animate and inanimate. All the
worlds and creatures which God has made, constitute one system. The various
orders of existences, from the archangel to the most inconsiderable insect,
constitute the links of a perfect chain, and are like wheels which are
necessary to complete a perfect machine. They are all necessary to form a
perfect system. And, as the Lord is "exalted as head above all," so all things
which exist, are comprehended in his kingdom. God manages every part of the
universe, in such a manner, as shall best answer the purposes which he had in
view, when he brought them into being.

THE sacred scriptures teach us, thus to consider the extent of the kingdom
which is the Lord's. In them, God is said to rule among the nations -- to build
them up or pluck them down at what instant he pleases. Famine, pestilence and
the sword are said to be under his control. It is God who balances the clouds,
and gives the former and the latter rain in their season. And it is further
asserted, that the superintending care and disposing hand of God are concerned,
even in the falling of the sparrow to the ground. The kingdom which is the
Lord's, therefore, comprehends the universe. Hence, in the text, God is said to
be "exalted as HEAD above ALL," -- above every thing which exists.

AGAIN; to our having proper apprehensions of the kingdom which is the LORD's,
it is necessary to bring into view not only its extent, but the object or end
of it.

GOD does not exercise a control over the universe, and concern himself with
the affairs of all ranks of creatures, as a mere amusement; he has an important
object in view, in all his administrations; and, that is to raise up and
establish a kingdom of holiness and righteousness.

THE government of God does consist, summarily, in so conducting and arranging
events, as shall, eventually, advance the spiritual and moral good of the
universe, or establish a holy and spiritual kingdom. All the plans,
institutions and operations of God are directed to that end. The end of the
natural is the moral world. As all the ranks and orders of existencies are to
be considered, as so many links of a perfect chain, so all the events which
take place, and all God's appointments and institutions are to be viewed, as so
many means to advance the moral and spiritual good, or the holiness and
happiness of intelligent beings; and so to establish and perfect a kingdom of
holiness and righteousness. And, all being united, do form a perfect system of
means and events, for the security of so important an object. -- As the
advancement and establishment of a kingdom of righteousness require, God builds
up or pulls down earthly kingdoms. The great Monarchies of the world, which
have been raised up and again tumbled into ruin, have been subordinated to this
interesting design. The constitution and laws of the natural world, when they
cease to contribute to the establishment of such a kingdom, will be abolished;
yea, the whole natural world, when it shall have accomplished every thing of
that nature which it can answer, will be consigned over to destruction. Events
will roll on until a holy and spiritual kingdom shall be established and become
triumphant. Then, the rotation of events, like the present, shall cease.
Earthly kingdoms and empires shall sink into ruin -- the sun shall shine no
more, the various parts of the natural world shall be unhinged -- a universal
conflagration will take place, and former things shall be remembered no more.

THAT this representation, of the object of God's government, is real and not
imaginary, appears from many considerations, which can be but very briefly
mentioned, at this time.

IT appears, very particularly, from the design of the incarnation and
sacrifice of Jesus Christ; or the introduction of the mediatorial plan.

THIS great event is considered, in the sacred writings, as above all others
calculated, to answer the purposes, which God had in view, in the whole work of
creation and the government of the world. And, the end which God had in view in
that astonishing event was, indubitably, the establishment of a kingdom of
holiness. Hence it is said, that he "gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works." Titus ii.14.
And the church is said to be redeemed by his blood, "to the intent, that now
unto the principalities and powers, in heavenly places might be known, by the
Church, the manifold wisdom of God; according to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." Ephesians. iii.10, 11.
And, Jesus Christ is now exalted at the head of all principalities and powers,
and will reign until all enemies are brought at his footstool. And the issue of
this great affair is summed up in this, that God shall "reconcile all things to
himself, by him, whether they be things in earth or things in heaven." From
these passages of scripture, as well as from the declarations and prophesies
concerning the increase, progress and issue of the kingdom of Christ, which is
founded in his blood, it is extremely evident, that the end God had in view, in
the incarnation, death and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and in the whole work of
redemption, was the advancement and establishment of a kingdom of holiness and
righteousness. And, from thence we may certainly infer, that this is the great
object, which God has in view in his whole government.

THE same conclusion becomes further evident, from the end, which God has in
view, in the religious institutions he has made. The end proposed in
institutions of a religious nature, is, unquestionably, to render mankind holy
and spiritual.

AGAIN; that the end God has in view, and that the object of his government is,
the establishment of a kingdom of righteousness is evident, from the great and
fundamental laws of his kingdom; or, from what he chiefly requires, of his
intelligent creatures. God's requirements are all summed up in holiness and
righteousness -- in universal love and good will. This clearly indicates what
that is, at which God is aiming in his government; and, particularly, that it
is the advancement of a kingdom of righteousness.

THAT the establishment of a kingdom of righteousness, is the great object of
the government of God, appears, not only, from the end proposed in the work of
redemption, in all religious institutions, and from the requirement of the laws
he has established; but, it is also evident, from the design of civil
government.

CIVIL government was not instituted, merely to amuse men; nor, to lift up some
over the heads of others, without proposing an important object. And, although
it is an institution, which is peculiar to this world, and may seem more
immediately designed to protect men from injury and violence; yet, Is it not
certain, that like the other institutions of God, it is ultimately designed for
and to be administered, with a view to the advancement and establishment of a
spiritual and holy kingdom?

I AM not insensible, that some are fond of making, a total separation between
civil government and the protection or establishment of religion, or the
advancement of a spiritual kingdom; and do even consider the former as having
nothing to do with the latter. But, I beg leave to inquire, Whether the
prosperity and advancement of a kingdom of holiness and righteousness among
men, be not the great object of civil government? And, whether every civil
constitution, which is not ultimately calculated to nourish and cherish true
religion, and so to advance a spiritual and holy kingdom, be not, in the view
of God, whatever it be in the view of man, not merely censurable, but
absolutely abominable? Take a retrospect of the ancient dispensations of God,
and you will see, how God views civil governments and administrations in this
respect. Is it not evident, from the past dispensations of God, that he
approved or censured civil governments, according to the respect or disrespect
paid by them, to his church and the advancement of a kingdom of holiness? This
was certainly the case, respecting the administrations of the kings of Israel.
This was also the case, respecting the Chaldean monarchy. It is the very reason
offered, why God brought ruin on that mighty empire. It was because it rejoiced
in the ruin, and was instrumental in destroying the heritage of God. The
vengeance of God was, also, denounced upon the Ammonites, upon Moab and Seir,
upon Tire and Egypt for their opposition to and derision of the church of God.
We are, also, assured, that it will always be thus, that God will pull down
kingdoms and utterly destroy them, when they stand in the way to the prosperity
and advancement of his church, or a kingdom of righteousness.

IT may here be said, that there are none, who suppose, that civil government
and administrations are to oppose the advancement of a spiritual kingdom, or
the progress of religion; all which is contended for is, that civil government
should be neutral. But, in answer, it may be asked, Whether it be possible that
civil government should take such a position? Our Savior asserts, "He that is
not with me is against me: and he that gathers not with me scatters
abroad." Matthew. xii.30.
There is according to these words of Christ, no such thing as neutrality. And
this is as true, respecting civil government, as respecting an individual. A
mere neglect to countenance and support religion, or a kingdom of
righteousness, in a civil administration, will operate against it. It was
always supposed of old, that the conduct of rulers, or their administrations,
had a very great influence on the religious state and character of the Jews. It
is impossible, therefore, that civil government should take a neutral position,
respecting religion or a kingdom of holiness. It must aid and countenance it,
or it will discourage and bring it into contempt.

WITHOUT attempting, particularly, to point out what aid or support civil
government may and ought to give, to religion or the Church of Christ, I would
only further observe, that the sacred scriptures do teach, in a very direct
manner, that civil government is designed by God, ultimately, as a mean and
expedient to advance religion, or a kingdom of righteousness among men. Is it
not directly and positively asserted, by the prophet Isaiah, that in a future
period, when civil government shall be rightly applied and faithfully
administered, "Kings shall be nursing fathers and their Queens nursing
mothers," to the Church of God? And, does not the apostle Paul most expressly
teach us, what the end of civil government and magistracy is? Romans xiii.3 --
5.
Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Do that which is good,
and thou shall have praise of the same, for he is the minister of God to thee
for good. He bears not the sword in vain; for he is the minister of God -- a
revenger to to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Does not this account of
the design of civil government and magistracy, clearly teach, that they were
designed to encourage and support a kingdom of righteousness among men? And,
the same apostle directs, " that prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made -- for kings and for all that are in authority, that we may lead quiet
and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty." 1 Timothy ii.1, 2.
It must be clear, from what is said concerning the design of civil government,
in the sacred scriptures, that it was instituted as a mean, to advance and
support a kingdom of holiness and righteousness: And, therefore, it is one
thing which serves to point us, to the great object which God has in view in
his government; or the nature and design of his kingdom.

AGAIN; the use and improvement, which God requires us to make of the various
allotments of his providence, farther point out the end of his government, or
the nature of his kingdom; and that it is a kingdom of righteousness.

THE improvement God requires us to make of providence is this, that we grow in
righteousness and holiness. The goodness of God is to lead us to repentance.
Under adversities, we are to "learn righteousness." Or, to adopt the language
of an apostle, when speaking of trials and adversities, he says they are sent
"that we may be partakers of his holiness." Now if our holiness, be the end of
divine allotments, it becomes evident, that the advancement of a kingdom of
holiness, is the end of God's administrations.

THE same truth will appear with additional clearness, if we turn our
attention, to the particular designs of God, and his providential
dispensations, as they are stated in the sacred scriptures.

IF we take a view of events under the former dispensation, we must see, that
the establishment of a holy and spiritual kingdom was, uniformly, the object
which God had in view in all his allotments. It is evident, that his Church was
kept constantly in view, as the chief object of attention. God set up the
Church as his great object. This appears, incontrovertibly true, not only
relative to those administrations, which respected the Jews in particular; but
the affairs of all other nations, were subordinated to the prosperity and
advancement of the Church. Whole nations were exterminated and utterly
destroyed, as the prosperity of the Church demanded. God conducted and
disposed, not only, of the affairs of the Jews, but of all the nations around
them, with a direct and immediate reference, to the enlargement and prosperity
of his Church. Of this, no one can doubt, who has attended to the history of
God's proceedings, as they are stated in his word. Which point us directly to a
kingdom of righteousness, as the object of God's government.

FARTHERMORE, the declarations and prophecies contained in the sacred
scriptures, relative to the future dispensations of God, point us to the same
object. -- They are all aimed at the advancement of a kingdom of righteousness,
as the great object which God has in view.

GOD has actually decreed that all other kingdoms shall come to an utter end --
That his spiritual kingdom "shall break in pieces and consume all other
kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." And that, as the great Monarchies which
have already existed, have, one after another, been utterly destroyed, to make
way for the enlargement of his Church, and the advancement of his spiritual
kingdom, so it shall be hereafter. Although God may suffer the powers of this
world, to trample on his Church, for a season; yet He assures us, that "the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it" -- That he will suffer the wrath
and madness of men to proceed no further, than shall be necessary, to prepare
the way for its establishment. "The wrath of man shall praise thee, the
remainder of wrath will thou restrain." And, we are further assured, that such
will be the allotments or providence, and that the affairs of all nations shall
be so overruled, as that, eventually, "The earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord" -- That the corrupt passions of men, which are naturally
so violent and overbearing, shall be softened down, so that nothing shall hurt
or destroy, in all God's holy mountain -- That all shall know him "from the
least to the greatest."

HENCE it appears, that the great object, which God has kept in view, in former
dispensations, and which he will keep constantly in view in his future, is the
advancement and establishment of a spiritual and holy kingdom.

BUT one consideration more will be suggested, to show that the end of the
kingdom, which is the LORD's, is the establishment of a kingdom of holiness and
righteousness, and that is the result and final issue of his administrations.

IN what the administrations of God, or the various dispensations of providence
will end, we have full information in the sacred scriptures: and information
can be derived from no other source. We are clearly informed, by the word of
God, that one event after another shall roll on, 'till all God's designs are
completed -- that in the end of the world, the whole number of the righteous
shall be gathered together, into one society -- that the wicked shall be
separated from them, with every one that "loves and makes a lie." So that the
righteous will form, a perfectly holy and pure society. -- We are further
informed, from the oracles of God, that when all the righteous shall be
gathered in, from out of every nation under heaven, the ends and the purposes
of God, in all preceding dispensations, will be attained -- that there will be
no further employment for the kingdoms and nations of this world -- that the
wicked, although they have been improved as instruments to accomplish the
purposes of God, will be improved no longer; but will be turned down into
destruction, from which they will never be recovered -- and, the material
world, the earth with all its apparatus, which has served as a theater on which
the affairs of God's kingdom, while in an infantile state, have been
transacted, (when the righteous are all gathered in,) will be of no further
use; and, therefore, will be subjected to absolute destruction. -- "The heavens
shall be rolled together as a scroll," and "shall pass away with a great noise:
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat." -- National distinctions shall
be known no more -- the sceptres of kings and the swords of magistrates shall
be laid aside -- the sun shall withdraw its shining, and the moon will be
turned into darkness -- "the earth and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up;" and there will be no more remembrance of former things. The grand
drama will then be closed. -- From a consideration of the final result of
things we learn, with the utmost certainty, that the object which God ever had
in view was, the establishment of a kingdom of holiness.

THUS the design of Christ's incarnation -- of religious and civil institutions
-- the requirements made in the law of God, of moral and intelligent beings --
the improvement to be made of providential dispensations; -- together with the
final result or conclusion of things, when a holy and pure society shall be
formed and rendered triumphant; all these various considerations unite, in
pointing out to us, that the great object of God's government is, the formation
and establishment of a spiritual and holy kingdom.

ALTHOUGH so much has already been said, concerning the kingdom which is the
Lord's, one observation more must be added, which is, that the important ends
and purposes of that kingdom, are to be secured, through the medium of the
mediatorial plan, and under the administration of Jesus Christ, as mediatorial
king.

IN illustration of this truth I shall only observe, that the sacred scriptures
very expressly teach us, that in consequence of Christ's faithfulness, in
executing the work of redemption, God did invest him with kingly authority, and
empowered him to call in and train up for glory, all those that were given him.
And the affairs of angels as well as of men were committed into his hands.
Accordingly we read, that when Christ was raised from the dead, God "set him at
his own right hand, in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and
power, and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come: and has put all things under his
feet, and gave him to be HEAD over all things to the church." Ephesians.i.20 -- 22.
And, in another place, concerning Christ it is said, "Who is gone into heaven,
and is on the right hand of God, angels, authorities and powers being made
subject to him." 1 Peter iii.22.
We are further assured, that in the course of his government, he will
"reconcile all things to himself, whether they be things in earth or things in
heaven." Which imports, that Christ will unite, in one society, the sinless
angels and elect men. The apostle Paul expressly asserts, that his kingdom will
not be delivered up, 'till "he shall have put down all rule, and all authority
and power: for he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. --
And, when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the son be also
subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be all in all."

WITHOUT any comment on these passages, thus much must be evidently taught in
them, that the great purposes of God in his universal government, in erecting
and establishing a kingdom of righteousness, will be accomplished, under the
reign and by the administration of Jesus Christ, as mediatorial king; or
through the medium of the Christian system.

FROM the foregoing observations it appears, that the kingdom which is the
LORD's, is one which is universal -- extending to all things throughout all
worlds. The end of it is, to raise up and establish a kingdom of perfect
holiness and happiness -- the great object is to be secured, under the reign
and through the administration of Jesus Christ, as mediatorial king. I now
proceed,

II. To consider, in what sense the kingdom may be said to be the LORD's, and
that He is exalted as HEAD above all.

As great brevity will be observed, in attending to this inquiry, as its
importance will admit.

1. IT may be proper to observe, that such ascriptions and acknowledgments, as
those contained in our text, very frequently occur in the sacred scriptures.

THE pious psalmist says, "The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, and the
multitude of isles be glad." Our Savior, in that form of prayer which he gave
his disciples, taught them always to pray, " Thy kingdom come:" and to conclude
in this manner; "For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory." And he
enjoined it on his disciples, to live in a firm belief of the agency of God, as
being concerned in the most minute events -- that a sparrow does not fall to
the ground, without their heavenly Father.

2. THE propriety of its being said in the text, that the kingdom is the
LORD's, and that He is exalted as HEAD above all, appears from his being the
maker, and so the original owner and proprietor of all things.

THE universe, comprehending all worlds and creatures, owes its existence to
God. The highest archangel is as dependent on God, for being, as the meanest
insect. This being the case, the kingdom is the Lord's. All the kingdoms (...)
the earth are the. Lord's, as he raised them up. Kings and magistrates, and all
who are in authority are the Lord's, as he has invested them with all that
power and authority which they possess.

3. IT is with propriety, that the kingdom is said to be the LORD's, and that
He is exalted as HEAD above all, as He is, most certainly the rightful ruler
and governor of the universe.

THE Lord, who made and upholds all things, has, certainly, an original right
to dispose of them, according to his good pleasure. He must have a right to do
what he will with his own. He must have an original and exclusive right, to
turn every wheel in government, and to ascertain every event, so as to
accomplish his own purposes.

4. I SHALL only observe further, That the kingdom is the LORD's, and that He
is exalted as HEAD above all, not only as he is the maker and proprietor of
all, and so has an original and independent right to reign; but as he does, in
fact, exercise a government over the whole universe, comprehending all
creatures and all events.

INDEED, if God did not constantly exercise his Almighty power and
superintending care over the universe, it would immediately cease to exist.
That same power which created can, alone, uphold the things which are made. The
absolute and constant dependence of all things on God, renders it certain, that
he must be "exalted as head above all" -- that he must rule over the whole
universe.

SOME have, indeed, represented it as too trifling a business, for the Supreme
Being, to concern himself with the affairs of creatures; and, had rather
consider God, only as an unconcerned and uninterested spectator of the affairs
of the world.

BUT such may be asked, Why God did not consider the creation of the universe
as too trifling a business for him to undertake! If it be now beneath his
notice and care, it was beneath him to exercise his wisdom in contriving, and
his power in giving it existence.

WE can hardly conceive it to be possible, that God should bring such a
universe into being -- that he should construct such a complicated machine as
the natural world; and introduce into existence, intelligent and moral beings,
with capacities for immortal happiness, without proposing some important end in
it. If God had an important end originally in view, we may be assured, that he
will concern himself, so far, in the affairs of the universe, as to order and
arrange events, in such a manner, as to secure it. Either God had or he had not
an important end, in creating the universe. If he had not some important object
in view, Why did he make the worlds which now exist? Was it for mere diversion
and amusement! But, if he had a sufficient end for creating there certainly
must be a sufficient reason, for his exercising a constant government over the
created universe.

THAT there is so much apparent evil -- so much seeming confusion -- so many
jarring and mysterious events extant in the world, has sometimes been
considered, as a forcible objection to the supposition, that God is at the HEAD
of all things, and exercises a universal government. -- But it ought to be
considered, that short-sighted men, who are full of sinful biasses and
prepossessions, are very miserable judges, as to the events which are necessary
to take place; so as to secure the welfare of a kingdom, which is as extensive
as the universe, and as durable as eternity itself. The little concerns and
exigencies of an earthly kingdom, or a petty state, yea of a family or an
individual, often confound the wisdom of men. The most dark and mysterious
events are often found to be pregnant with the highest good. The little
occurrence of Joseph's brethren selling him into Egypt, was a dark and gloomy
event, and foreboded great evil, in the view of Jacob; yet, eventually, it
proved to be of the utmost importance.

BUT, whatever the ignorance, pride or vanity of man may suggest, the sacred
scriptures do assure us, that God does reign, and is particularly concerned in
the production of all events -- that cold and heat -- summer and winter, rain
and drought, feed-time and harvest -- health and sickness -- war and peace --
good and evil; yea, all the affairs of the natural and moral world, are under
the government and control of God -- that he raises up empires and pulls them
down -- creates kings and magistrates and deposes them, according to his
sovereign pleasure.

WE are taught very particularly, in the sacred scriptures, as appears from
what has been said, that God disposes of nations and arranges all events, with
a view to one object; and that is, The establishment of a kingdom of
righteousness; and that he will continue to do so, till that kingdom shall be
established and rendered triumphant. Then his purposes will be answered -- the
drama will be finished, and God will be all in all.

IT now only remains, to point out the use and improvement that may be made of
the subject: which we have considered, in a few particular inferences and
remarks.

1. As the kingdom is the LORD's, and He is exalted as HEAD above all,
obligations to obedience and subjection to God, must be universal.

IT must be the incumbent duty, not only of those, who are ranked in the lowest
class of men, and are busied in the most humble employments, to yield a
universal obedience to the will of God; but obligations of the same nature, are
incumbent on those, who are exalted to places of the highest dignity and honor
among men. They are equally under the government of God, and their obligations
to reverence and obey him, are, in kind, the same. Yea, the obligations on
those, who are in the higher walks of life are, in some respects, peculiarly
enhanced. Their example will have a peculiar influence, on the conduct and
morals of those, who are in more humble stations. Hence that demand of the
prophet, "O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; Is it not
for you to know JUDGMENT." Hence, also, that direction of the psalmist, " Be
wise now, therefore, O ye kings, be instructed, O ye judges of the earth; serve
the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the son lest he be angry
and ye perish from the way."

2. Is the kingdom the Lord's, and is He "exalted as Head above all, We see,
that we have a stable and unfailing source of comfort, in the most dark and
gloomy times, and amidst the changes and revolutions which take place, in the
rotation of events, respecting the present world.

IF clouds and darkness surround our nation -- if foreign powers threaten us
from without -- if convulsions and civil dissentions do exist within -- if
vice, immorality and the most outrageous wickededness do prevail, far and wide
in the earth; yet the consideration, that the kingdom is the LORD's, and that
He is exalted as HEAD above all, affords the most ample support, and lays a
foundation for the most substantial peace. God is both able and fully
determined, to establish his kingdom.

WE live in a day of mighty revolutions. Great events are rolling on in quick
succession, and presage some great and interesting changes in the state of this
world. The prophet Jeremiah demands, in the language of surprise, "Has a
nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods!" as if it were an unheard of
affair, that a nation had laid aside its false Gods. But we live in a day, when
a powerful nation, which had ranked itself among those, who acknowledge the
true and living God, has absolutely rejected and disowned Him, and even
proceeded to abolish the ordinances of heaven! "The mystery of iniquity," as
the apostle expresses it, "does already work." A deep concerted plan to spread
infidelity far and wide -- to subvert religion and undermine government -- to
give to the lusts and passions of men full scope, has been propagated among the
nations of Europe, with surprising success. Its bitter consequences and baneful
influence have already produced, "distress of nations, with perplexity," and
even threaten to shake all Europe, to its very center. The effects of it have
not been limited to Europe, Asia and Africa feel its bitter consequences. And
even in America, the leaven has begun to ferment, and is, most probably, the
source of the opposition which has been, to the administration of our national
government -- but we have a substantial and unfailing source of consolation,
under all those gloomy appearances -- the kingdom is the Lord's.

INDEED, were we to have our views directed by the prophetic declarations,
contained in the sacred scriptures, we should be led to expect, instead of
being surprised to see such events. Amidst the confusion, and infidelity of the
present day, we see, that the man of sin is in a measure destroyed; and that
the papal hierarchy is crumbling into pieces. Nor are we to expect that the
scenes of distress, which are now experienced in Europe, will terminate, till
something still more important is produced. The clouds appear to be gathering
and preparations are making, for scenes far more extensively distressing, than
those which have been, as yet, realized. -- But God reigns -- the kingdom is
his. He will take care of it. Neither earth nor hell can prevail against Him --
the wrath of man shall praise him, the remainder of wrath will he restrain.

3. FROM the observations which have been made, we are led to see the important
nature of the institution of civil government.

THE kingdom is the Lord's; and all the institutions which God has made, as
well as all the events which take place, have a reference to the establishment
of a kingdom of righteousness? -- are designed, by God, as means of
accomplishing and perfecting so important a purpose. I do not say, that this is
the object which mankind have had in view, in forming civil constitutions and
qualifying governments. Nothing, perhaps, has been further out of view. They
have, probably, for the most part been dictated by worldly views and motives.
But God has instituted it, as one mean and expedient, to advance the progress
of a spiritual kingdom. This gives the institution of civil government, an
aspect of great consequence. It teaches us, that it was not contrived, merely
to exalt some men over the heads of others; or to secure to the members of
society, an equal enjoyment of privileges of a worldly nature; or, merely, to
protect life and property; but it has a further reach and more important
design. It is nothing less, than one of the expedients which the Supreme
Governor of the world has adopted, to forward the great and important purposes
of establishing a spiritual kingdom. Viewed in any other point of light, it
dwindles into nothing, in point of consequence and importance.

I AM not insensible, that writers on civil government, have generally
considered it, as a mean to secure the peace and welfare of society in this
world; and as having no concern with or reference to a spiritual kingdom. But
can it be so, that in the institution of civil government, which has such
prodigious influence on the state of this world, the Supreme Being has
forgotten the great object he has in view in his government! Must civil
government be considered, as a solitary exception, as to its design, from all
the works and other institutions of God! Can we suppose, that God would build
up and pull down kingdoms, on account of their influence and tendency, to build
up or obstruct the progress of religion, and the establishment of a kingdom of
righteousness, if civil government were not designed as a mean to advance and
promote them?

WERE it not for the treaty of peace which God is now carrying on, through
Jesus Christ, civil government and earthly kingdoms would be utterly abolished:
and the whole material world would be destroyed. The advancement and progress
of that treaty, is the end of all God's administrations. Hence we find, that
when civil government is rightly applied and administered, kings will be
nursing fathers and their queens will be nursing mothers to the Church of God.
In this view of the design of civil government, it appears to be an institution
of great consequence.

4. WE are naturally to conclude, from what has been said, that such men as
have fixed moral and religious principles, are the only characters which can,
with any propriety, be elected into offices of trust, to direct the affairs and
concerns of civil government.

THIS inference is fairly deducible, from the design of civil government. If
civil government be designed, as an handmaid to religion -- as a mean to
advance and forward a kingdom of righteousness, it must be important, that
those, who are elected into civil office, and especially into the principal
offices of government, should be friends to the cause; and so, men of fixed and
established moral and religious principles. Yea, may we not proceed so far as
to say, that they should be firm believers in christianity? For the kingdom
which God is raising up among men, is founded on the christian system; and is
to be advanced, under the reign of Jesus Christ, as mediatorial king. That such
characters alone are to be sought and elected into places of trust, in a civil
government, is not only dictated by the design of the institution; but is
enjoined by God. "Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as
fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness," etc. men of no other description
are friendly, to the real end of civil government.

THE liberalizing spirit of the present day (which looks with indifferency and
patience, on every thing, excepting strict religion and fervent piety,) I am
aware, inculcates a different doctrine. Such as are under its influence will
tell us, that moral and religious principles are of no importance; yea, it is a
discovery made by the modern Illuminati, that both religion and government are
enemies to the happiness of mankind. Hence it is, that extensive combinations
have been formed, and unwearied efforts made, to overturn religious and moral
systems, as well as to unhinge and subvert civil constitutions and governments.
But, it happens fortunately, that what may be expected, from a government
administered by men, who are void of moral principles, and are plunged deep
into infidelity, has been so openly exemplified. When moral feelings and
religious restraints are eradicated, and God is not acknowledged and
reverenced, the barriers against the most atrocious wickedness are removed, and
the lusts of the human heart will be unrestrained. With men of such a character
at the head of government, we could hardly expect any thing else, than that the
rights of men should be trampled on -- the laws of humanity be sported with,
and an ambition prevail, which knows no bounds. -- All this we see exemplified
in Europe, at the present time. No more striking picture can be given, of the
baleful influence and effects of infidelity, when dictating the measures of
government, than are exhibited in the rise and progress of the revolution in
France. When we review the various measures which have been adopted -- what
rivers of blood have been spilt -- with what coolness and deliberation the
lives of the old, the young and the innocent babe have been despoiled -- the
property of subjects seized -- the boundless ambition and insatiable thirst for
domination which has prevailed -- the piracies which have been committed on the
seas -- and the insidious and wicked policy which has been practiced,
respecting other nations; or to sum up the whole in a word, when we behold a
nation, once famous for its civility and polished manners, changed into a
nation of barbarians; I say, when we see these things actually existing, and
can be accounted for in no way, unless from the influence of infidelity, Can we
need any thing further, to teach us the importance of placing men of fixed
moral and religious sentiments, at the head of government? The Supreme Governor
of the world, has designedly given the nations of the earth, a striking picture
and example of the baneful influence and ruining tendency of infidelity. And,
no nation which, after this solemn warning and admonition, shall act the same
part, by committing the management of the concerns of society, into the hands
of infidels, or of men whose feelings are loose and unhinged, respecting
religion and morality, can expect less, than to share, in a higher or lower
degree, in the same plagues.

THERE can hardly be a greater inconsistency, than for a christian people, to
appoint such men, as the guardians of their rights, and as nurses to the Church
of God, who have not fixed moral and religious principles; and, who are nearly
afloat respecting christianity in every view of it.

5. THE subject, which we have been considering and illustrating, is of use,
and may be particularly improved, by civil rulers and legislators.

ALTHOUGH they are placed at the head of government, and have authority to
enact laws, to regulate the community over which they are placed; yet, they are
to consider, that there is a higher power, which presides over and controls the
affairs of men. The kingdom is the LORD's, and He is exalted as HEAD above ALL.
Civil rulers and legislators are but servants or ministers of God.

Their work is assigned them by Him. They are servants, raised up by God, to
forward the great object of his government, in forming and establishing a
kingdom of righteousness. At the same time therefore, they are framing laws,
for the security of the lives and properties of their constituents, and for the
equal administration of justice, they are not only to be cautious, that they do
no harm to religion and the Church of God, but to be careful to do every thing,
in their power, to countenance and support them.

IT is not pretended, that civil rulers and legislators have a right,
absolutely and authoritatively to impose creeds and confessions of faith; yet,
most certainly, it must be incumbent on them, in all the measures they adopt,
to manifest a governing regard for God and the interests of his kingdom. It
must be their indispensible duty, to adopt such measures, as will, most
directly, encourage and promote, the progress of that treaty of peace and
reconciliation, which God is carrying on with men.

IT is in the power of civil rulers, in many respects, to prepare the way, for
an advantageous tender of salvation to mankind. They may set up their banners
against vice -- encourage men of religion and virtue, and support the
institutions of Christianity. -- Many of the subordinate officers of government
are appointed, by the legislature. If men of virtue, who are professed friends
to the christian system, as well as of good government, were distinguished as
objects of particular favor; and if, on the contrary, the profane -- the
despisers of religion and fervent piety, and those who neglect religious
institutions were rejected, it would, certainly, be a worthy testimony of
regard to the kingdom of God; and an encouragement to men to do well.

DISSOLUTENESS of manners, if not a contempt of christianity has been, within a
few years, greatly increasing. It would be very unhappy, indeed, if those, who
are distinguished as rulers and legislators, should be wanting, in their
exertions, to stem their progress; but above all so; if they, by their example,
should countenance them. -- The influence of rulers is great and extensive;
although they are often the objects, at which the shafts of envy and malice are
levelled. Their station respecting religion and virtue cannot be neutral. Their
transactions and examples will, necessarily, have an extensive influence.

THE people, in this state, have reason to be very thankful that the Supreme
Ruler of the world has given them such a succession of rulers, as have, not
only been firm friends to their civil rights, but have been disposed to
encourage the cause of religion and virtue. -- And it is no small occasion of
joy to the friends of Zion, that the late legislature of this state, while the
zealous advocates for religion, in England and Scotland, have provided
missionaries, to sound the glad tidings of salvation in Africa, in the
East Indies and in the islands of the Pacific ocean, have adopted measures, to
make provision, for the preaching of the gospel among the new settlements, in
this country; and, if possible, to christianize the heathen nations.

AS the kingdom is the Lord's, we may assure ourselves, that he will take care
of it; whether earthly powers nourish and cherish, or neglect and abandon it.
It will certainly flourish and finally triumph. Yet, let it be remembered, that
those who are raised to places of trust and influence, as well as those in
private life, must, finally, give up a most solemn account to HIM, who is
exalted as HEAD above all.

6. THE subject which we have had under consideration, may be improved, to
animate and encourage the ministers of the gospel.

THE ministers of Christ are officers in the kingdom of the Lord; and their
direct business is, to be "workers together with him." They are sent out,
purposely, to explain the nature of God's kingdom -- to plead its cause among
men, and to persuade them to inlist as subjects in it. The kingdoms of this
world are to be managed by other hands. Ministers are, by office, to exert
themselves, in endeavoring to build up and establish a spiritual kingdom. And,
since God is at the head of it, what encouragements have ministers to be
zealous and active? Did success depend, merely on their strength and efforts;
and had they not reason to expect the interposition of no higher power, they
might well be discouraged. But the kingdom is the LORD's. He will succeed and
prosper its advancement. He is, at this time, most evidently disposing of the
affairs of earthly kingdoms, so as to prepare the way for the establishment of
his own kingdom. He has given the most absolute assurance in his word, that all
the evils which are extant -- the distress and revolution of nations, shall
conspire to advance a kingdom of righteousness; however gloomy it may appear to
short-sighted men -- that one event shall roll on after another, till all God's
designs are accomplished. However weak and depressed this kingdom may now
appear, the time is coming, and probably is not far distant, when "it shall
break in pieces and consume all" other "kingdoms and it shall stand forever."

THERE is, therefore, from the nature and importance of the kingdom; and,
especially from the determinations and power of Him, whose is the kingdom, the
most-abundant encouragement, for the ministers of Christ to be active and
zealous. Besides, their only encouragement of sharing in the triumphs and
glory, which await the kingdom of God, does arise from their being "faithful
unto death." Since the last anniversary election, there has been but two
instances of mortality, among the pastors of the Churches in Connecticut; viz.
The Rev. IZRAHIAH WETMORE of North-Stratford; and the Rev. NATHAN FENN of
Worthington. The former was advanced in age; the latter was in the prime of
life and usefulness.


CONCLUSION.
My Brethren and Fellow-Citizens.
LET us rejoice in the goodness of HIM, who is exalted as HEAD above all, that
we, according to the invariable practice of our ancestors, are permitted to
celebrate the religious solemnities of this anniversary, with so few things to
interrupt our religious joy. Although disease and death have, the year past,
spread desolation in some of our capitals, yet the heads of our tribes have
been preserved, and we are permitted to meet them, this day, in the house of
God. Although God has been pleased to preserve the lives of those, who were
acting in the first offices in this state, through the last year; yet he has
removed by death, His Excellency MATTHEW GRISWOLD, Esquire, formerly a Governor
of the State; whose faithful services and persevering integrity, through life,
entitle him to the most grateful remembrance of all its citizens.
-- Although we have been threatened with war, by a nation, which is neither
bound by the ties of honor or justice, yet, He, who rules among the nations,
has, as yet, preserved us from so deplorable a calamity.

OUR nation, which has been considered as divided, has been led to unite in
adopting spirited measures for our national defense.

WE enjoy privileges and blessings, which are not realized by any other nation
on earth. Let us unite, in a firm and manly support of our national government
and constitution. Be careful to guard against the intrigues of designing men.
Let infidelity and modern liberality find no countenance, nor have any hand in
the administration of government. Avoid them, as you would avoid that plague,
which has already interrupted the peace -- unhinged the government -- destroyed
the order -- and bathed the plains of almost all Europe with human blood.

BE careful, to enrol your names among the subjects and citizens of the kingdom
of God. Be assured, that this kingdom will prosper, for it is the LORD's; and
HE is the HEAD of it. The time for securing a part in its triumphs is short and
uncertain. But a short delay may be fatal.

MAY the SUPREME KING and LORD of the UNIVERSE, engage all our hearts and
feelings in his cause and kingdom; and dispose us to spend and be spent in his
service. That at the time, when earthly kingdoms and empires shall be
destroyed, and the whole material world shall be dissolved, we may be safe in
the KINGDOM of God, and unite in his PRAISE forever and ever.

AMEN.

