AN ORATION; PRONOUNCED IN PRINCETON, MASSACHUSETTS, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4, 1799.

BY JOSEPH RUSSELL, A. M.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER: BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. July -- 1799.

PRINCETON, July 5, 1799.
AT a meeting at the CENTER SCHOOL HOUSE. Voted that the Committee of
yesterday's arrangement, be appointed to wait on the REV. JOSEPH RUSSELL with
the thanks of this meeting for his very spirited and animated ORATION on the
FOURTH DAY of JULY, and request of him a copy for the PRESS. The Committee
waited upon the ORATOR for those purposes, who expressed his sense of the honor
which had been done him and complied with their request.

ABIJAH HARRINGTON, Chairman.

AN ORATION.
THIS DAY, my FELLOW CITIZENS, completes the Twentythird year of AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE. On this memorable day, AMERICA was severed from the British
empire, and three millions of people liberated from foreign domination, and
raised to a level with the independent sovereignties on the globe. On this day,
the thirteen UNITED STATES* by their Delegates in General Congress assembled,
after appealing to Heaven for the rectitude of their cause, signed the
instrument of separation from Britain, and pledged their estates, reputation
and lives, to support their declaration of rights, and defend the liberties of
their suffering country.

THANKS to that band of PATRIOTS for their wisdom and firmness amid the dark
and gloomy scenes which followed in quick succession. When Britain threatened;
when fleets and armies crossed the wide Atlantic, in confident expectation that
the colonies would fall an easy sacrifice to their victorious arms; and when,
in several instances, our own armies were greatly reduced, and our political
prospects darkened, by repeated losses and embarrassments, our civil Fathers
stood, like a rock in the midst of the sea, firm and unmoved, and bore the
waves of opposition without dismay. Let their memory be forever dear to every
American; and may future generations rise up and call them blessed.

PRECIOUS are the privileges! invaluable the rights and freedom which we enjoy!
We welcome the day -- we hail the auspicious morn, when liberty first dawned
upon these western shores -- when the chains of tyranny were broken asunder --
and a nation of freemen born in the world. May our minds gladden at the
thought, as this anniversary reminds us, that we are the free citizens of an
independent nation, that our laws are formed by men of our own choosing, that
all power originates in the people, that our Constitutions of government can be
altered whenever the people please, and that we are under obligation to obey no
superior power but that of the GREAT SUPREME.

IN most parts of the world, the government is the government of men. The will
of one man, or the interest and caprice of a few, constitute the law, by which
the people are governed. Here the government is that of laws, framed by the
united wisdom, and enacted by the voluntary consent of the people, with a view
to their common good. Our government, therefore, is as free in its principles,
and as mild in its operations as it can be, and have energy sufficient to
render it effectual.

THE happiness of a people depends much on their improvement of their rights
and privileges. The greatest blessings bestowed by Providence on men may be
perverted to their misery. Liberty well understood and well improved, is an
invaluable privilege, a pearl of great price, and will always be conducive to
the happiness of a people. But, if they are ignorant of its principles, and
ignorant of its use and design; and, in addition, inclined to counteract its
principles, it will inevitably prove a curse. Witness the wretched situation of
Ireland and France. When the people of France threw off the chains of tyranny,
they expected to be free from all the restraints of law, and to have liberty to
pursue, every man his own private inclination. The nation in general have acted
on this principle. And what has been the effect? The whole country, ever since
the revolution, has been filled with cruelties unparalleled in history, and
with the most unwarrantable invasion upon private property and safety. The same
error has existed and produced disturbance in some parts of our own country.
The emigrants from Europe, now settled in this country, made no distinction
between tyranny and the restraints of law -- between a mild, rational liberty
and libertinism or licentiousness in the extreme. With this error they crossed
the ocean, settled down in the southern States, and when called to submit to
government were immediately exasperated and hurried into arms.

LIBERTY, in the extreme, becomes the worst of tyranny. There must be restraint
and power in the hands of some, or there can be no order, no safety in society.
True liberty consists, not in having no government, not in a destitution of all
law, but in our having an equal voice in the formation and execution of the
laws, according as they effect our persons and property. On this principle
there is among individuals a reciprocation of right and power. By every
individual some rights are relinquished and as many acquired. As much as we are
obliged to serve others, so much we are sure to be, directly, or indirectly,
served by them. This forms a spacious level on which all the members of society
are naturally equal.

IT is true, as property naturally gives power to the owner, the unequal
distribution of property, which we must always expect in every country, will,
in many instances, destroy this equal, reciprocal influence in society. To
prevent this evil, without introducing a greater, is a task too great for the
human genius. The attempt has been repeatedly made, but without success. Trade
of every kind must regulate itself. From the great diversity in the abilities
of men, some will rise, and others fall; some will be rich, and others poor.
And that government is most perfect which encourages best an improvement in all
those arts, labors, and sciences, which have for their object the advancement
of human felicity. And with that government we ought to be satisfied --
submitting to all its restraints from a fixed principle, that laws are made not
for individuals but for community, and that private interest must always yield
to the general good.

ELEVATED to the rank of an independent nation, and holding an honorable
station among the sovereign States on the earth, we have now an extensive and
fertile country to defend, an admirable constitution of government to support,
and persons, families and estates to protect, against foreign invasion on the
one hand, and internal faction and disturbance on the other. Nations, like
individuals, are always an object of ambition or envy, in the view of some,
according as they are affluent, or happy. In consequence of this, they are ever
exposed to the pride of learning, the obstinacy of ignorance, the intrigue of
faction, the violence of power, and the rage of lust and prejudice. The eye of
malice is continually searching for some vulnerable part, where a mortal blow
may be levelled at the vitals of society. Innumerable are the devices of
political intrigue to effect the ruin of the devoted nation. The blackest
designs are often clothed in the specious garb of perfect cordiality, and
unsuspecting innocence abused, as a medium for insuring the most deadly poison.

THIS remark derives a striking illustration from the conduct of that
perfidious nation whom we all, without a suspicion of treachery, were too ready
to embrace as our cordial friends. With strong professions of the warmest
friendship, they reached out to us a helping hand for our defense against the
armies of Britain, while with fixed purpose, so far as Frenchmen are capable of
it, they were busily pursuing an infernal plan to wrest from us our
independence, to destroy our national dignity, and to reduce us to the same
contemptible level on which Holland, Switzerland and Italy are at the present
day. This was the design, this the work of Frenchmen, at a time when our united
prayers were ascending, from the altar of a sincere and grateful heart, to
Heaven in their behalf; and that their kindnesses, which we, in the
overflowings of gratitude, considered too important for us, ever to repay,
might receive from above an adequate reward. Thank GOD their treachery is
discovered, and their villainy brought forth to light, to the astonishment of
the world, and the shame and confusion of wickedness itself.

AMERICANS! we are under no obligation to the French. We owe them not a
farthing. For the money and military stores which we received from them, during
our war with Britain, we have made remittances to the full amount. We owe them
not the least gratitude. They never sought our happiness -- they never wished
us to be independent. Private emolument, the ruin of Britain, and the extension
of their own influence into these states, was their governing and only motive.
Judge then, my Fellow Countrymen, if we are under any obligation to aid them in
their war, to give them our trade, or to seek their friendship and interest to
the displeasure and injury of other nations.

AMERICANS are on the West -- Frenchmen on the East side the Atlantic. There
let them live, and there may they be happy! We neither desire nor need any
immediate connection with them or with Britons. By bitter experience we have
found the tender mercies of both to be cruelty. We cannot confide in the
friendship or faith of either. We ought to be fortified on every side against
the influences of both. And it can never be safe for America to be connected
with either of them by any treaty but that of commerce.

IN forming treaties, we ought ever to act in character, as a sovereign state,
with a view to the benefit of our own commerce, without consulting the
inclination of any other nation. To a treaty of commerce, lately formed with
Britain, it has been objected -- "It will displease the French." -- And are WE
to ask the French what nations we shall treat with, and upon what terms? On the
other hand* shall the British dictate what treaties we must form with France?
The answer in either case is equally positive, NO. We are not to be influenced,
or controled, by any power on the globe. To admit the agency of any foreign
nation would be a sacrifice of our independence -- a prostration of our
national dignity.

WITHOUT consulting the French, our Envoy to the Court of Britain formed, and
our Executive, by the advice of the Senate, ratified a treaty with that power,
which, in their opinion, was the best that, in the then existing circumstances,
could be obtained. In this affair they used the powers given them by the
Constitution. They acted the part of able, independent men, and merited the
approbation of their Country. And may our supreme Executive ever be equally
firm and impartial, and never be influenced by a desire of pleasing, or a fear
of offending, foreign nations, any further than the public interest requires.

THE internal resources of the United States are so ample, that, if well
improved, they will enable us to support this decided character, on the
political theater of the world. Separated as we are from every powerful nation,
by an intervening ocean of three thousand miles in extent, and having no
immediate connection with them, we need never be entangled in the intricate
policies and interwoven interests of European courts. But, should a war be
inevitable, our enemies must contend amid insuperable embarrassments, and from
the greatness of the expense attending the prosecution of a war at a vast
distance from home, and the impracticability of affording seasonable supplies,
their operations must, in a short time, inevitably fail.

AS it will be difficult for our enemies to invade with success, so on the
other hand, it will be easy for us to defend our borders. A country, like ours,
intersected by innumerable rivers, and covered with hills, valleys, woods and
morasses, forms a natural barrier against the progress of an enemy. Our country
abounds with provisions of every kind, and with materials for shipbuilding,
fortification, gunpowder, swords, bayonets, and small arms of every
description. The American Shipbuilders, Engineers and artists, are equal to any
in Europe. Fortifications, and the manufactory of gunpowder, cannon, and other
warlike implements, are carried on rapidly in many parts of the country. In the
course of two years, we have equipped nine frigates, and a larger number of
smaller vessels of war, for the defense of our maritime towns and cities, and
the protection of our foreign trade. The regular forces in the United States
exceed five hundred thousand; the greatest part of which, are well equipped,
and can be called into active service whenever occasion may require.

TO every true American it must be peculiarly grateful to behold, as we pass
from Hampshire on the north, to Georgia on the south, five millions of strong,
healthy, and well enlightened people, very generally united in their resolution
to defend their country's rights, and to hazard their lives in defen^^ of her
constitution and independence. The general voice of America is -- "We are
determined to be free. Our country and constitution we are able to defend. And,
if the violence and aggression of our enemies should render it necessary for us
to enter again on the field of battle, we will go determined to conquer or die.
Refering our cause to the court of Heaven, and trusting in the GOD of armies
for success, we will spend the last drop of blood in the glorious cause, and if
we die, it shall be our consolation that, we die fighting for our country."

WHEN this is the sentiment and spirit of a people, inhabiting a country
enriched by every production necessary for their support and defense, what may
we not expect from their united exertions! And with an ADAMS, the great
political luminary of the age, to stand at the helm of government, and direct
in the cabinet of state; and, with a magnanimous WASHINGTON, the pride of
America and wonder of the world, to head our armies and conduct them on the
field of battle, we may bid defiance to every earthly power.

WERE the colonies, when they had no arms, no military stores, no disciplined
army, no government, able to oppose the armies of Britain, when in their zenith
of glory? And may we not be animated to stand firm in our own defense now we
are well supplied with arms and military stores, now we have well disciplined
forces, officers and men inured to war, and a vigorous government which can
command the assistance of every state and employ the whole strength of the
nation for the public safety? Let Americans retain the patriotism and firmness
of seventysix and they have nothing to fear!

OUR preservation and prosperity as a nation, depend, under GOD, upon the
support of our confederation. United we are truly a powerful nation -- divided
we are weak. United we shall certainly stand -- divided we shall certainly
fall. The glorious issue of our war with Britain, proves what a small community
can do when the members of it go hand in hand. To this we must ascribe it, that
the citizens of Syracuse opposed the Athenians with success; that a few states
in the Netherlands withstood for thirty years the whole force of the Spanish
monarchy and finally gained their liberty; and that the inhabitants of
Switzerland emancipated themselves from the tyranny of Austria and supported
their independence

IT is most ardently to be wished that all the citizens of America, let them
live in the North or South, on the East or West side the Allegany, would
consider one another as BROTHERS, and the several states members of one
political whole. For this end would it not be advisable to avoid in private
conversation and in all public proceedings, every thing that looks like party,
and speak and act as though we neither knew nor admitted the existence of
parties, discordant opinions* oppositions of interest, or clashing prejudices
to prevail, in any part of the United States? Let the names Jacobin, Democrat,
Frenchman and United Irishman, as applied to our own citizens, be buried in
eternal oblivion; and let us recognize all orders and classes of men by the
honorable title of AMERICANS! From the happy crisis in our political prospects,
the party to which these opprobrious epithets have been applied are sinking
fast from public view; and if we do not contribute to their reanimation, by
trumping their importance, will, soon, be buried forever from our sight. Party
spirit lives by opposition. Sectaries in politics, as in religion, always
increase in consequence* the more they are opposed. Let them alone, cease to
speak concerning them, still be guarded against them, and they will die of
themselves.

CONSIDERING the several states as members of one political body, nothing which
effects the other states is to be considered by us as foreign or unimportant.
If they suffer, we suffer; if they are prospered, we have reason to rejoice.
Though a member only is wounded, the whole body feels the pain. When poison is
communicated to the most distant part it sickens the whole constitution. A
consideration that the other states have separate governments, and laws,
customs, and institutions in some respects different from our's is no reason
why we should consider them as foreign. They have united with us in forming and
adopting a constitution the most perfect in theory and equal in practice ever
produced by man. The business of the government established by this
constitution is to provide for the peace, safety and prosperity of the whole;
their laws are binding on every state and they sustain the same relation to
every one. Our government, therefore, is the same. And as our government is the
same, we of consequence, have one common interest and one character to support.
Having sworn obedience to the general government, we are bound by solemn oath
to seek the prosperity of the whole confederacy; and, in doing that, we
establish for ourselves the surest barrier, and lay the most permanent
foundation for lasting felicity.

OUR prosperity depends much on a general diffusion of political information.
The maxim of Tyrants. "The people's ignorance is the Rulers safety" has long
been exploded. Our administration shuns not the light of day nor seeks support
from the gloom of ignorance. As the private citizen depends on the public
magistrate, so the magistrate, in his turn, depends on the private citizen; and
the more and better informed the latter, the more safe is the former. Generally
speaking, if the people know what is right, they will judge right. Opposition
to the tax on Houses and Lands has decreased as the people became acquainted
with the reasons which Congress had for adopting that mode of taxation And it
is thought that, if gentlemen of abilities, who are in a situation to know the
debates of Congress, and the reasons which determine that respectable body in
their legislative proceedings, would take measures to enlighten the public
mind, by publishing through the United States, a fair statement of the reasons
for any particular law which may give offense to some, it would procure for
their laws a favorable reception in every part of the country.
Let them know the principles and design of a law, and, provided the law be
good, the ruler may be almost sure of their support.

IN every insurrection against good government, the majority are blinded and
deceived by the artifices of a few. And experience has ever proved that, the
better a people are acquainted with the nature and principles of civil liberty,
the more they know of the measures of government, and of the design of
particular laws, the more easily are they governed. And I will hazard the
opinion, that, if political information was defused through all classes of
people as it ought to be; if they were from the highest to the lowest
instructed in their duty, and in the measures of government, there never would
be another insurrection, nor any considerable number to join with any foreign
power, in opposition to the designs of government. Some men of abandoned
characters and ruined fortunes we must expect in every country -- men who have
no hope of promotion or emolument while things continue in peace. Men of this
character we cannot hope to reclaim by increasing the fund of public
information. Their knowledge and segacity render them the more dangerous
members of society. But, when the public mind is thoroughly enlightened, the
community will more easily discover their treacherous designs and be defended
against them. General information is, therefore, a principal pillar in our
political edifice. This enlarges the human genius, improves all the faculties
of the soul, and gives to the mind a discernment, an understanding, and
judgment adequate to all the labors and trials of life.

THAT Americans are capable of improving in all those arts and sciences, which
tend to increase the wealth and alleviate the labors of man, has been
abundantly proved. The contemptuous sneer of Buffon, that, America is
unfavorable to strength and brilliancy of genius, has been sufficiently
refuted. In philosophy she has produced a Franklin and Rittenhouse; in Poetry a
Barlow and Trumbull; in Law and Policy, an Adams and Ellsworth; and in the art
of war a Washington. The superiority of our artists has been acknowledged in
Europe. And, in spite of every thing which can be said by Buffon and others
against us, it must be granted, that America, comparing her age with that of
other nations, has produced the greatest number of learned men. Greece had been
settled 600 years before she produced a Homer. The Romans lived in Italy 700
years before they could boast of a Virgil, Horace and Cicero. And the English
nation had existed more than 800 years before they were honored with a Bacon,
Milton, Lock and Newton. But, two centuries have not yet elapsed since the
first settlements were made on these western shores. Judge then if America has
not been favorable to genius.

RAPID improvements have been made in agriculture since the settlement of the
country. The wilderness, in many places, has been converted into a garden and
the desert made to rejoice and blossom. New settlements are begun and
flourishing towns rising up, where but a little time since, dwelt the tawny
savage and wild beasts of the desert. Ontario's waves are now loaded with the
fruits of industry, and the shores of Erie fertilized by the hand of
cultivation. The Ohio now rejoices in the prosperity of her sons, and Tennessee
beholds, on each side her placid stream, a flourishing people. And we may with
pleasure anticipate the time as not far distant, when our settlements will be
extended from the remote shores of Huron and superior to the sultry climes of
Florida; and when the Missisippi shall receive the productions of a wide
extended and flourishing country, and conduct them down on her swelling tide to
be conveyed in ships to the most distant countries on the globe.

OUR commerce is already extensive and flourishing. Our ships now hail the
remote shores of Kamtschatka, traverse the widest oceans, and encompass the
globe; bringing home the manufactures of Europe, the rich productions of Asia,
and the treasures of both the Indies. The American merchants and seamen, now
vie with those of Europe, and, with equal dexterity and success, perform the
longest voyages. May agriculture ever be the strength and support, manufactures
the ornament and luster, and commerce the emolument and aggrandizement of
America. May her sons ever delight to till the soil, and to pursue with
industry, the arts and labors of life, and may temperance, frugality and
virtue, ever be the strength of their hearts and crown of their days.

WHILE on this day we offer our sacrifice at the altar of liberty; while we
rejoice in the possession of good government, and of internal peace, health and
prosperity, it becomes us to remember our suffering, bleeding brothers in
Europe. On the eastern continent, nation is fighting against nation, garments
are rolled in blood, and the confused noise of war, penetrates the abodes of
retirement and chills the mind with horror and dismay. What scenes of cruelty
are there exhibited! What perfidy and wickedness are practiced! How great has
been the destruction of the human species! Even now they are levying troops,
increasing their armies, and sharpening their swords, as though they were
beginning the war. All Europe is engaged. Hurried on by the most furious
passions, they go determined to strike a last and fatal blow. We leave them
with that eternal GOD, who takes up the nations as a very little thing, and
who can change their hearts, disappoint their expectations, and make all their
wrath and fightings terminate in good.

AND while we compare our situation with theirs, let us feel grateful to that
Omnipotent Being, who conducted our armies on the field of battle, and who led
us on through scenes of trouble and hardship, to the enjoyment of independence
and peace. As a people we have received much from him, and may we never forget
to praise him for his goodness.

TO enjoy the patronage of heaven, and to have our liberties permanent, and our
happiness lasting, the laws of moral obligation must be acknowledged and
observed. A people, abandoned in principle and practice, must be unhappy. Vice,
like a deadly consumption, enfeebles the nerves, impairs the strength, and
wastes the body of society; and wherever it prevails, will, inevitably, prove
fatal. To this it must be ascribed that the once mighty empires of Babylon and
Persia, of Greece and Rome, are now no more. Take warning then, O America, from
the calamities which have fallen on ancient nations, and avoid that fatal rock
on which they were ruined! Let wisdom and knowledge, let industry and
frugality, let benevolence and piety, be inscribed on all thy proceedings, and
thou shall be that happy people whose God is the LORD.

AS we contemplate our political prospects, and view the numerous sources of
emolument and felicity, which concentre in America, we see nothing wanting but
good morals: From the progress of vice, infidelity and atheism, we have much
reason to fear. And, perhaps, we cannot, in any other way, more faithfully
serve the interest of our country, than by vindicating the truth of
Christianity. The mind is lost in pleasing admiration, at a prospect of the
glory and beatitude with which America would rise to be chief among the
nations, were all her citizens the cordial friends of the immaculate JESUS.
This would heal every political division and wither the nerves of opposition.
This would make our Republic durable as the hills and firm as the earth itself.

AMERICANS! Do you wish to be prosperous and happy? Then fear the GOD, and love
and practice the religion of your Fathers. To enjoy their religion unmolested,
they left their native country, crossed the boisterous deep, and settled down
in this western world. May their descendants never undervalue those privileges
for which they endured persecution, the perils of the deep, and hardships of
the wilderness. Through the kindness of heaven, we are placed in a pleasant
fertile land, illuminated by the religion of the glorious Savior. Let us all
then bow, with one heart, at the scepter of his government, and acknowledge
King Jesus as our Lord and Sovereign. Let us walk in the light of his gospel,
during our appointed time, that we may hereafter inhabit the regions of
unclouded day, and be all of us forever happy in the LORD.

FINIS

