Mr. STODDARD's ORATION ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERCIAN INDEPENDENCE.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE CITIZENS of PORTLAND, AND THE SUPREME
JUDICIAL COURT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, ON THE Fourth day of July,
1799; BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN-INDEPENDENCE.

BY A. STODDARD.

ENEMIES IN WAR -- IN PEACE, FRIENDS.

Dec. Amer. Indep. PORTLAND: PRINTED AND SOLD BY E. A. JENKS. 1799.

THE following ORATION was delivered, and is published, at the request of a
respectable Committee of the town of Portland. Considering the temper of the
times, and the dangers to which we are exposed, the Author has avoided the
touches of rhetoric, and escaped the sallies of fancy: -- Argumentation -- the
establishment and illustration of sound political principles, and an exposition
of the deleterious nature of revolutionary policy, were the objects he had in
view. Accustomed to reflect on the nature and extent of our foreign relations,
and to watch their tendencies and vibrations, he has manifested considerable
confidence on Governmental subjects; and he has not, to his knowledge, made a
material assertion respecting them without a substantial document in his
possession to warrant it. Should the Author be so fortunate as to induce any
deluded citizen to relinquish his political errors and herecies, an important
object will be gained.

PORTLAND, JULY 4, 1799.
ORATION.
AMERICANS!
IT has hitherto been usual for orators, on occasions similar to the present,
to furnish labored dissertations on the nature of civil Government, and on the
origin of our political existence -- to entertain their hearers with animated
description of the progress of freedom, and with diversified pictures of public
peace and prosperity. But at a period, when Europe is afflicted with terrible
commotions, and exhibits a disgustful scene of Gothic barbarity and blood --
When America, and the world, seem devoted to the same contagious stamina of
revolution, a serious aspect is imposed on this anniversary, and demands rather
the exercise of deliberate judgment, than the spontaneous effusions of joy and
gratulation. Permit me then to touch lightly on the painful history of our
country -- more fully to investigate the causes of national disorders, and the
remedies necessary to mitigate their asperity -- to unfold and illustrate the
interest and policy of the American people, and the destructive tendency of
modern revolutionary sentiments. The method here, prescribed is consistent with
the portentous crisis of the times, and compatible with the practice of the
sires of antiquity, in the sanctuary of the GODS.

IT is a fixed principle in the economy of nature, that nations, like families,
must divide, and occupy separate portions of the globe. Excessive population,
and a dissimilarity of political and religious sentiments, not unfrequently
contribute to this end. Add to this -- mankind possess an invincible propensity
to emigration; they figure to themselves riches and pleasures in the desert
waste, and pastoral and romantic scenes, not to be found in populous cities,
nor in cultivated countries. Were it not for this propensity, nature would be
frustrated in the dispersion of her children -- in the birth and progress of
culture, and in the diffusion of the arts and sciences.

THIS remark is forcibly exemplified, in the discovery, settlement, and
progressive improvement of America. History furnishes us with no character
similar to that of our own. Most nations owe their origin to the conquests, or
to the accidental settlements of barbarians; the early events of whom are
either unknown, or inveloped in fable. The first emigrants to this country were
advanced in civilization, and were acquainted with the arts and conveniences of
life: They possessed a wakeful jealousy of arbitrary rule; always ready to
defend their rights -- cool, dispassionate, and brave. This character they
inherited as a legacy from the early inhabitants of Britain; whose sagacity and
exertion enabled them to set bounds to the dangerous prerogatives of the crown,
and to live in a state of freedom. What but this awakened such a formidable
opposition to the legions of imperial Rome? What but this established the great
charter of privileges in 1245 -- a transcript of the rights enjoyed under the
more ancient Saxon monarchs? What but this produced the religious reformation
in 1559 -- the celebrated petition of right in 1628, and ultimately, the
memorable revolution in 1688, at the accession of the House of Orange to the
throne?

BUT England, like all other countries, exhibits in her history, many periods
of weakness, and of cruelty -- especially when she sharpened the dagger, and
lighted the torch, of fanaticism; and when, with the rod of tyranny, she wasted
the human race. In some portions of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, she
was transformed into a slaughterhouse of heretics, and trembled with the
agonies of malefactors at the stake. We are accustomed to look with horror on
these brutal excesses of arbitrary power, and to stand astonished at the
patience and depravity of man. Some doubt the benevolence, and even the
existence of Deity; and they derive it from, and fortify it by, the prevalence
of physical and moral evil -- from the apparent disorders of nature, and from
the conflicts of nations: But these painful vicissitudes are not without a
salutary use in the Divine Government of the universe. Men of this temper heed
not the causes, nor trace the effects, of such awful, though wise and necessary,
dispensations of Providence. The meditated destruction of ROMULUS in his
cradle, founded the Roman republic. To the conquest and pillage of Europe by
the invincible CAESAR, we are indebted for civilization, and for a knowledge of
the arts and sciences. The American empire owes its origin to the sanguinary
tribunals of Britain, and its subsequent independence to the oppressive and
arbitrary measures of her councils.

GREAT BRITAIN has generally been celebrated for her political wisdom, and as
the careful nurse of manly sentiment and virtue -- yet we often find her under
the dominion of a crooked and disjointed policy, and disposed to establish the
reign of despotism. Early in the present century, measures were concerted to
deprive us of our rights. These rights were secured to us by various charters.
These charters were considered by England as errors in her policy; and she
resolved to impair them by a gradual, and almost imperceptible assumption of
authority over us. Hence our commerce in many instances was restricted, and in
others totally prohibited: Hence exorbitant excise and impost duties were
levied and collected with a greedy hand: Hence to cut down the pitch and tar
trees of our forests -- to manufacture steel, or to slit iron in our forges,
exposed us to heavy penalties: Hence the common law of the land, and the trial
by jury, were abolished, and our citizens obliged to answer to charges of a
criminal nature, before a foreign tribunal: And then, as a prelude to
hostilities on the one part, or to unconditional submission on the other, we
were insulted with this pointed declaration, that Great Britain had a right to
bind us in all cases whatsoever.

THIS tone of unwarranted authority, joined to repeated acts of aggression,
awakened the pride and fortitude of America. Memorable is that day in our
annals, when Lexington and Concord became the tombs of English glory; and
terrible to Britain was that day, when the heights of Charlestown were immersed
in the blood of her veteran sons. To detail the events of the Revolution, would
only be a trite display of historical erudition. We might excite a mixture of
pity and resentment at the wanton cruelties and depredations of an enemy -- and
a deluge of tears at the recollection of departed heroes. But the events of the
present day, of which we shall treat in the sequel, demand the suffrage of all
these passions. Permit me only to say, that time has, in a great measure,
closed the wounds, and repaired the ravages of war -- that our citizens, who
expired in the bed of honor, are set like stars of the first magnitude -- and
that to their memory a monument is erected, as durable as the pillars of time.

NO sooner had Great Britain yielded to the claims of America, than
difficulties of a political nature succeeded to those of war. The singular
genius of the American people required a form of Government, dissimilar to any
in existence. We had found that systems, drawn from abstract theory, (...) us
in their application to practice. The Confederation of the States was a
transcript of the Amphyctionic and Achean leagues of Greece; and, like them, it
contained the seeds of its own dissolution. The want of adequate powers in the
federal head, and the imbecility of our fiscal arrangements, were among its
most prominent defects. These primary errors in our policy, though extremely
alarming in their nature, tended to stimulate our patriotism. They convinced
us, that it is as difficult to imagine the operation of any political abstract
theory, spun from the brain of a speculative philosopher, as it is to discover
the qualities of a book by the title page, or the propensities of the heart by
the features of the face; and that nations, if they mean to be happy, must be
accommodated with systems of Government, adapted to their particular wants.
Systems of Government are not reducible, like those of morals, to any fixed
standard of right -- they grow out of the errors of society -- and their
energies must operate in proportion to the ignorance or knowledge -- the
ferocity or humanity of mankind. Speculative writers, therefore, on the subject
of Government, seldom derive their principles from actual experiment: They
forsake the path marked out by the hand of nature -- and place men in a
situation, in which they ought to exist, rather than contemplate them in the
sphere in which they actually move. Our present federal Government was founded
in a conviction of these truths. It has avoided all abstract theory; and as it
was the result of combined wisdom, drawn from the sober lessons of experience,
it may justly be styled a new experiment in legislation. Under it, our wounded
credit has been restored -- our revenue augmented beyond any former example; --
dignity and energy are attached to our public councils, and the utmost security
and freedom are afforded to the citizens.

BUT such is the economy of the wisest institutions, that very few have been
able to promise themselves any considerable duration. Some have been destroyed
by a contest for power -- some by the prevalence of ignorance and superstition,
and others (...) by the rage of occasional disorders in the human mind -- which
are not less fatal to nations than the plague to individuals. The world is at
this moment afflicted with an inveterate and singular disease -- malignant in
its nature -- contagious in its operation, and which constitutes a new article
in the vocabulary of national calamities. Effectually to resist its progress,
desperate remedies must be applied -- otherwise all legitimate Government will
receive an incurable wound, and every moral and religious sentiment be banished
from the human mind. We pretend not accurately to investigate its origin -- but
I beg leave to draw your attention to some of the most rational conjectures on
the subject.

AT the close of the last, and at the beginning of the present, century, a new
description of speculative philosophers, made a conspicuous figure in the elder
world. By them all Religion and Government were deemed the mere instruments of
tyrants -- designed to perpetuate their power, and to keep the people in the
chains of vassalage. By their inflammatory writings, always plausible, and
conceived with the nicest art, they enlisted the prejudices and passions of
mankind, and excited a spirit of uneasiness and revolt. Their great object was,
with the scythe of desolation, to equalize the world, and gradually to
establish the primeval state of man. To effect this delusive scheme, they aimed
to destroy the belief of a GOD -- to corrupt the public mind by their herecies
-- and to bring the Ministers of Religion, and the chief magistrates of
nations, into contempt. Not content with the diffusion of these principles
through the medium of labored volumes, periodical essays, and pamphlets, they
found means to exhibit them at theaters, and other public places, in all the
charms of eloquent diction. These may be considered, perhaps, as the remote
causes of the present disorders -- but the origin of a regular digested system
of revolution, grounded on the passions and vices of men, is of a more modern
date.

SUCH was the number of disorganizers and atheists in France and Germany, about
the middle of the present century, that they formed themselves into private
associations, and cemented their union by the most solemn oaths. These
societies had in them many men of literary talents -- a horde of pamphleteers
and punsters, and most of the influential editors of newspapers -- all of whom
were extremely dissolute in their characters -- devoid of any fixed and
permanent principles on the subjects of Government and Religion, and on whose
consciences atheistic and sanguinary notions, made no terrible impression. To
augment the number of their apostles and followers, and at the same time to
deceive the world as to the nature and extent of their principles, they assumed
the character of Masons. The existence of the societies of Illuminati has given
rise to much speculation Authors, although they agree as to the origin and
nature of them, have not been sufficiently explicit on one point; -- A cursory
perusal inculcates a belief (especially among the less informed part of the
community, and among men of suspicious tempers and strong prejudices) that the
masonic institution is pregnant with Atheistic and revolutionary sentiments.
The Rev. Dr. MORSE, a pillar of adamant in the temple of Federalism, has
imbibed this mistaken notion. The practice of Masons, and the principles they
inculcate, will best explain their detestation of Atheism and revolution: These
modern doctrines are directly opposed to their principles; -- and they will not
fail to resist their progress.
They resorted not to rebellion and arms, the usual weapons of political
changes, but confided wholly in the physical force of public opinion; and to
collect this physical force to a point, and to direct it to an object, they
eventually usurped the empire of learning -- became the proprietors of literary
journals, and other important sources of information -- foisted themselves into
the government of Colleges and Academies -- obtained an invincible control
over the courts of justice -- and, by a secret impulse, molded all the
measures of legislation. This secret and powerful influence, enabled them to
corrupt the integrity and morals of Europe by the propagation of their
political dogmas and atheistical creeds; and, in case of detection, to avoid
the punishment due to their crimes.

THESE surreptitious societies were awakened to the dictates of antecedent
philosophers and atheists. They aimed, by a cautious and powerful process, to
revive the pastoral and golden ages of antiquity; -- for they held that no true
happiness was to be acquired in civilized community -- nor unless free from the
restraints of Government, and the fetters of religion. No wonder that such
sentiments should flatter the prejudices of mankind -- excite the whirlwinds of
sedition, and draw vast multitudes into their fatal vortex. Every day witnessed
their deleterious effects, but nobody could penetrate their cause. The
contagion was universal -- it spread like the plague of old -- it operated on
the mind like a subtle poison on the body, and no remedy appeared to baffle the
malady.

SUCH was the increase of this contagion, and such the number and influence of
its devotees, that they eventually unmasked themselves more fully to the world.
At the commencement of the French Revolution, near 600 of these nocturnal clubs
existed in the bosoms of France and Germany. As this event was generated by the
silent operation of their principles on the public mind, its progress was
hastened and embittered by every possible exertion. The more effectually to
form, and to extend a destructive system of revolutionary war, and thereby to
reduce their preposterous theory to practice, a deputation from most of them
met in dark conclave at Paris, and organized themselves into a grand convention
of the lodges -- over which the DUKE OF ORLEANS presided, and in which the
celebrated MIRABEAU, and the present TALLEYRAND, sustained the two next offices
of rank. In this convention, the exact counterpart of the Alembic of hell,
dissertations on philosophy, and the modern rights of man, composed their
eloquent debates: Projects of Utopian felicity, the abolition of all society
and Government, and the utter extinction of every species of religion, were
openly discussed and concerted: The ambassadors of heaven were driven from
their alters, and either banished or destroyed -- monarchs precipitated from
their thrones, and either massacred or bound in fetters of iron. Add to this --
the Jacobin society in Paris, so famous in the history of the French
Revolution, was wholly composed of the members of this deputation; and hence
the origin of that detestable character, so odious in all countries, and which
is now considered as a reproach to human nature.

TO impute the disorders in Europe to the influence of these secret societies,
is a sentiment of recent date; and therefore the more liable to objection. But
the acquisition of their records, and other documents -- the testimony of
repentant brethren, and the apparent homage paid them by the National
Convention of France, establish the fact beyond the reach of doubt. Some of the
early decrees of this convention against religious institutions, were palpable
plagiaries from the homilies of these secret societies. They all, in the very
same language, denounced the holy bible as a system of riddles and
superstition: In the very same language, they all abolished the worship of GOD
-- the rites of the sanctuary -- and the observation of the Sabbath; and, in
the very same language, they all recommended Atheism as the established creed
of mankind. This affinity discovers itself in a vast variety of other interior
operations. We see it even in the geometrical divisions of France into
departments and cantons, and in the introduction of the new calendar, by which
a strange metamorphosis has happened in the several portions of the year -- for
they bear an exact resemblance to the mathematical grades established among the
associated clubs; -- they make a part of the same system of innovation, and
were necessary to its completion. This affinity also forms a conspicuous
feature in the exterior policy of France. The maxim of these societies -- "
that the END to be obtained sanctifies the MEANS necessary to it," has been
faithfully copied by the Terrible Republic in every stage of her eccentric
progress. " To divide and conquer" is the motto inscribed on every page of her
modern history. Her arms excite no unusual dread among nations. Before she aims
the blow, she creates internal disorder -- divides the people from their
Government; and then her purposes are easily effected by the bayonets of
legionary cutthroats. Who will not weep at the fate of Holland, Geneva,
Switzerland, and a great portion of Italy? They mistook the poison for the
honey -- became the dupes of a perfidious policy -- and then expired in agonies
at the feet of a directorial army. Prior to the disruption of French fraternity
among them, they were free and happy -- now they are slaves and miserable.
These once happy countries, not more fertile in animal and vegitable
productions, than in the works of taste and genius, are now filled with blood
and tears -- their cities and temples are dismantled -- their monuments of art
and labor are levelled with the dust -- their most precious memorials of
antiquity are transported to Paris, and there deposited to amuse the curiosity
of regicides, and mock-patriots -- their religion and Government have fallen
miserable victims to atheism and bondage; -- and these deluded republics are
now doomed to disclose a frightful image of barbarism, murder and desolation.

SUCH are the effects of revolutionary sentiments. And does the boasted
republic of Liberty and Equality exhibit a more pleasing picture? GOD in his
wrath has exposed her to strong delusions -- permitted her to be the scourge of
nations, and the instrument of her own destruction. A mild and pacific monarch,
the father of his people -- the hoary systems of national and municipal laws,
and the venerable institutions of religion and morality, have all been
destroyed by the philosophers of regenerated France. And what are the
substitutes? A prostituted Directory, whose bloody robes of office are an exact
index to the cruel and relentless purpose of their hearts; -- a constitution,
replete with absurdity, and founded on the modern rights of man -- calculated
to patronize ignorance and error at the expense of wisdom and truth -- to
banish able and upright men from the public councils, and to fill their places
with the worthless demagogues of faction; -- a legal sanction to atheism and
vice, and to the prevalence of blasphemous principles. The temples of the most
high, and the various walks of science, once filled with devotion, and with the
pupils of the arts, are now turned into military academies, and exhibit the
awful apparatus of death. Where once stood the stately harvest, the joy and
comfort of the peasant, now waves a forest of bayonets. The face of the earth,
instead of flowers and the blossoms of vegetation, is covered with the bones of
immolated citizens; and instead of pity at the terrible effusion of human
blood, each wanton butchery of thousands produces a decree from the Directory,
" that the armies of the Republic have deserved well of their country!" We turn
with disgust and horror from this picture of human wretchedness, and solicit
heaven in mercy to shield America from similar calamities.

IN France, under the monarchy, as well as under the republic, an invariable
disposition has existed to acquire an undue ascendancy over us; and this she
seemed to consider as no more than an equivalent for our debt of national
gratitude. Not till our Independence was fully guaranteed by the Convention of
Saratoga, could she be prevailed on to assist us in our revolutionary war; and
the assistance she finally afforded us was not intended to establish our
Independence, but to humble the pride of England. When the British Councils
signified their disposition for peace, and their readiness to relinquish all
claim of supremacy over us, France endeavored, by her insidious policy, to
prevent a suspension of hostilities, and the adjustment of national disputes.
By her diplomatic skill, she even induced Congress to instruct our Ministers
not to conclude a peace without her consent, nor without an agreement on her
part to the conditions of it. Her object was, if possible, to render this
country dependent on its ally; or if this project failed, to acquire an
exclusive right to our fisheries -- to some of our frontier posts, and to a
large proportion of our western territory. Unable to corrupt the integrity of
our Ministers, The vigilance of Messrs. ADAMS and JAY is here only meant Dr.
FRANKLIN gave his utmost support to the views of the French cabinet -- and why?
Let facts decide. When he entered into public life he possessed only a moderate
share of property. During the many years he resided in France, in quality of
minister, the expenses of his table were much above his salary: Indeed he lived
in great splendour in Paris* while Mr. ADAMS, in order to support himself by his
salary, was obliged to avoid expense, and for this purpose resided mostly in
the country. After all this, Dr. FRANKLIN left a princely fortune behind him at
his death! We wish not to blast the memory of the dead; -- these facts,
however, are necessary to explain his (...) conduct at the conclusion of the
peace in 1783.
she endeavored to elude their vigilance by a perfidious attempt secretly to
pursuade England to claim the surrender of these privileges to herself -- to
insist on the return of the banished tories -- on a restitution of their
confiscated property, and the total relinquishment of the Missisippi to the
King of Spain. In this subtle manouvre, her object was, either to get these
important advantages into the hands of England or Spain, or divided between
them; in which case she conceived herself able, by conquest or exchange,
eventually to obtain the possession of them. But the die was already cast. The
English cabinet, disgusted at the duplicity of a rival nation, instructed its
Minister to conclude a secret or separate peace; and our national interests
dictated to our Ministers the necessity of an immediate negotiation, without
the knowledge or concurrence of France. On this ground the treaty of 1783 was
concluded; and its conclusion afforded a temporary suspension to the intrigues
of the French councils.

ANTERIOR to this event, in 1778, was adopted the treaty between France and
America. As a reciprocity of benefits was the basis of the negotiation, it was
stipulated at the desire of the French Minister, " that free ships should make
free goods;" or, in other words, that the goods of an enemy on board of the
vessel of a friend, should not be liable to seizure and condemnation. The
operation of this principle was found convenient, and similar stipulations are
inserted in many modern treaties; and, as between the contracting parties, the
law of nations, relative to this point, is totally changed -- for by this law
the goods of an enemy, found in neutral bottoms, are deemed lawful prize. But
such is the extensive commerce, and maritime greatness of England, that to
govern herself by the more ancient rule, is strongly urged by her interest.
Hence the principle " that free ships shall make free goods," is excluded from
her policy, and the goods of an enemy, found by her cruisers in neutral
vessels, may be legally seized and condemned: Yet notwithstanding this, France
was bound to respect all treaty stipulations, and to permit our vessels to be
the carriers of the goods of an enemy. This, however, was found to operate
against the interest of the Terrible Republic, and she contrived pretexts to
infract her engagements. The property of belligerents on board of our vessels
was seized and condemned as lawful prize. She resorted to our treaty with
England in 1794, in justification of past excesses, as well as to authorize all
subsequent depredations; -- by the rage of which our lawful commerce has been
made the sport of licenced robbers -- our industrious seamen imprisoned, and
treated with indignity, and vast multitudes of them massacred in cool blood, by
the modern canibals of France. Her decrees on this subject, form an eccentric
and multifarious code; and, like those of the first legislator of Athens, are
written in blood. By one of them, all the provisions and military stores of our
own, bound to the port of a belligerent, and every species of property
belonging to an enemy, and found on board of our vessels, were declared lawful
prize. This is repugnant to the express stipulations of our treaty, and
contrary to the law of nations -- for by the one, the quality of the property
is to be determined by the quality of the bottoms, and the other permits
neutrals to furnish belligerents with these articles of commerce -- provided
blockaded ports, and places previously declared in a state of siege, draw no
immediate supplies from them. -- By a second, the cruisers of the republic were
authorized to observe toward neutrals the same treatment which they suffered
England to inflict. -- By a third, the mere SUSPICION of her cruisers, that our
vessels were laden with the property of an enemy, was declared good cause of
capture and condemnation -- unless the claimants were able to prove, that it
did NOT belong to a belligerent. To prove an allegation true, and to adduce
evidence of its falsity, are very opposite in their nature. Indeed, this decree
exposed our merchants to this alternative, either to abandon their property to
a gang of sea marauders, or to prove a negative before the sanguinary tribunals
of the republic -- a mode of process contrary to the maxims of every civilized
nation -- and an imposition not even practiced among savages. -- By a fourth,
the Directory has manifested to the world the neplus ultra of human depravity:
Our citizens taken on board of belligerent vessels, are deemed PIRATES; and are
not even permitted to adduce either terror or violence as any excuse for an
involuntary act. This decree, more bloody than the rescript of a NERO, evinces
the blackest turpitude of Directorial policy, and that the Terrible Republic is
now in the backward path to her ancient Gothicism. By numerous other decrees,
all predicated on the principle of plunder and rapine, every portion of our
extensive commerce has been prostrated; and as long as the spoil is divided
among the members of the Directory -- the several courts and agents of the
republic -- we can expect no mitigation of these outrageous excesses.

ADD to this -- the general policy of France is not confined to European
nations, and to her own nautical banditti, but it also excites and supports a
band of secret agents and precious friends in this country. What was the
conduct of the infamous GENET, (and he literally pursued his instructions) but
a tissue of misdemeanor, corruption, and treason? Did he not engage our
citizens to fight the nations with whom we were at peace? Did he not assume the
right of opening our ports to the reception of prizes, and of fiting out
privateers among us, to cruize against our friends? Did he not claim the
establishment of an independent and separate judiciary in the bosom of our
country? When informed by the President, that these practices were not
authorized by treaty -- that they were repugnant to the law of nations, and
infractions of our neutral duties -- did he not with studied insolence appeal
from the decision of that venerable magistrate to the opinion of the people?
Did he not establish secret and inflammable societies among us -- inflate them
with the poison of a Parisian mob -- excite the prejudices of the people
against their own Government -- and implant in the bosom of America, the
revolutionary dagger of Europe? Were not the diplomatic intrigues of his
successors in office, of a similar cast? Were not their labored manifestoes,
filled with acumen and invective, better calculated for a misguided people than
for the dispassionate Executive of the United States? Did they not infuse their
political mania into our public councils; -- and may not the existence of party
-- the tide of opposition to executive measures -- and that evident
predilection for French fraternity, be traced to the same polluted source? In
fine -- have not the Agents of France, rich in the esteem of the Directory, and
of our own defectious citizens, granted bribes to some, and to others favors
and protections? If this proud republic means to be just -- if universal
revolution be not her object -- why trample on all the forms prescribed among
nations, and reject our messengers of peace? Negotiation was not consistent
with the interest or character of France. She was well aware, that a scrutiny
of her conduct would impair her credit, and unmask her to the world in all her
ugliness and deformity. It was therefore her policy to create suspense -- and
to protract the moment when a definitive answer of reception or rejection
became necessary -- thereby to manifest the appearance of a pacific
disposition, and to enable her cruisers to augment their stock of plunder.
Probably the late farce about a new negotiation, owes its origin on the part of
France to the same principle, and will doubtless terminate in the same manner.
If her public councils are free from ministerial cupidity, why demand almost
three hundred thousand dollars for the private purses of the Directors? To pay
one cent for the privilege of stating our complaints, is abject slavery; and
sooner than America should feel the chains of tributary vassalage, may her
existence be blotted out from under the sun of Heaven!

THESE desultory remarks, my fellow-citizens, exhibit but a very imperfect
picture of the conduct and views of France. The measures of that republic for
most of the last eight years, have been so extraordinary in their nature, and
so rapid in their succession, that they appear more like the shades of a magic
lanthern, than the settled operations of any durable policy. Like the
corruscations of the northern lights, they diverge into a profusion of lines,
and emit no other rays than those of blood; and if the prospect of a peaceable
conclusion now and then breaks through the gloom, it results either from the
projected union of all mankind against them, or from the probability of their
own eventual explosion.

IT is a curious feature in the operation of our Government that, while danger
like a cloud thickens over us, measures of defense against France are urged and
pursued by one party, and against England measures of offense are as strongly
promoted by the other. This diversity of sentiment and exertion, at this
eventful crisis of liberty or bondage, must be imputed to the new political
light of France: We not only feel its influence -- but it is her boast -- an
engine with which she is almost sure to effect her purposes. What but this gave
birth to the propositions in our public councils for the suspension of all
commerce with England, and to the subsequent resolutions for the sequestration
of British property? What but this produced and invigorated the violent
opposition to the treaty of 1794, with that kingdom? This may be considered as
the last important struggle of a deadly faction; and the extraordinary manner
in which it was generated and conducted, excited a temporary delirium in the
public mind. It, however, verified the truth of an old observation, that sudden
and powerful impressions generally give a wrong bias to public opinion, and
that mature reflection will alone enable the great body of the people to
discover their real interests. This remark might be illustrated by many
examples. The treaties of Utrecht and Saville, in 1712 and 1729, created a
similar ferment in England. The doors of the parliament house were barricaded
by the enraged multitude -- the ministers who negociated them were pelted in
the streets, and burnt in effigy by an irritated populace -- yet their eventual
operation manifested their salutary tendency; and it is under these two very
treaties, in concert with the navigation act, that the English commerce has
increased to almost a monopoly.

CONVINCED that perfidy and aggression accumulated strength from patient
forbearance, America banished at last the dreams of confidence, and resorted to
a system of defense -- the origin of which may be traced in the rejection of
our ministers. To prevent the sacrifice of our unprotected seamen, and the
wanton pillage of our property, and at the same time to force the republic to
terms of accommodation, the treaty of 1778 was declared as no longer obligatory
-- all commercial intercourse with the French dominions was prohibited -- an
infant navy was established to convoy our merchantmen, and to capture the armed
cruisers of the republic -- our ports and harbors were fortified, and
garrisoned with troops for the common defense, and provision made for an
eventual army, equal to the exigency of the times.

INTERNAL security was also promoted by this system of defense. Our Government
adopted measures to restrain the influence of defectious aliens, and to curb
that mendax infamia from the press, which had corrupted public opinion --
excited an opposition to the laws, and stimulated rebellion. Perhaps a concise
analysis of some of these governmental measures may be expected at this time,
and be deemed compatible with the duties of the day.

THE Alien and Sedition bills have been attacked as unconstitutional and
oppressive: They have excited the complaints of defectious foreigners and
citizens, and the pointed disapprobation of the Legislatures of two States in
the Union.

THE Alien bill permits the President to order dangerous aliens to depart the
United States; and, in case of refusal, to cause them to be removed or
imprisoned. This act is said to be unconstitutional, because it adopts a
summary process, and deprives aliens of the right of trial by jury. These
objections necessarily pre-suppose, that removal implies punishment, and
consequently the actual commission of offenses; and hence this preposterous
conclusion is drawn, that punishments are authorized without the trial by jury.
A very simple mode of argument will refute every possible objection to this
act. In the first place, the constitution recognizes no principle as applicable
to aliens. In the next place, aliens are not parties to this instrument, and
therefore cannot claim the benefits of it. They possess not the rights of
citizens, and therefore a removal deprives them of none. The law very wisely
supposes many of them to entertain sentiments of a hostile nature against the
Government; and therefore to prevent the actual commission of offenses, it
authorizes their removal from the United States. Can this precautionary measure
be deemed rigorous or unconstitutional? Aliens are like travelers in a strange
land; they are exposed to the same inconveniences, and are equally limited in
their rights -- mere tenants at sufferance under the Government. No traveller
has a right to intrude himself into a strange family; and if permitted by the
laws of hospitality to refresh himself in it, he cannot claim a longer
indulgence than the family is willing to give -- particularly if he creates
disorders, or manifests a disposition to hostility, the family has a right to
rid itself of a troublesome guest. The United States are only a family on a
more extensive scale; they have a similar right to see, that the laws of
political hospitality are not infracted, and to expel suspicious and dangerous
itinerants from their jurisdiction. This is not a singular exercise of
authority -- every Government inherently possesses the right to exercise it --
and all Governments have exercised it on the eve of a war, or when the safety
of the public demanded it.

EQUALLY weak, and capable of refutation, are the arguments against the
Sedition Bill. To constitute an offense under that part of the act relative to
libellous publications, several requisites are necessary. The matter published
must be false, scandalous and malicious -- directly tend to defame the
President, or one of the branches of the federal Legislature -- and to bring
one or the other of them into contempt and disrepute. This clause is objected
to, as repugnant to that article of the constitution, which very wisely
provides, " that no law shall be made abridging the liberty of speech or of the
press." This sound maxim constituted one article in the political creed of our
ancestors -- and it has been in practice ever since the year 1694. This
practice, in a great measure regulated by various judicial decisions, and by
the concurrent opinion of learned sages, has given to these words a technical
operation -- a precise and definitive meaning -- which is, that no law shall be
made to prohibit publications. Were such a law in existence, the liberty of
speech and of the press, would be abridged -- but to punish the authors of
false and malicious libels, which tend to destroy the characters of public men
-- to disunite the people, and to bring the Government into contempt, is to
invigorate and to enlarge the boundary of its freedom. All crimes are founded
in the abuse of the liberty of action; and is it unconstitutional to restrain
this abuse by the imposition of adequate penalties? The same argument would
come with equal force from the mouths of robbers and traitors -- with equal
propriety they might complain of the abridgment of their liberty by the
infliction of criminal justice. Some pretend to argue that the Sedition Law, in
the punishment of libellers, creates a new crime in society. The fact is, that
this description of offenders were before punishable by the common law of the
land -- but as authors, by the common law, were not permitted to allege the
truth of libellous publications as an excuse, the act in question allows it to
be given in evidence; and this is one reason which induced Congress to pass it.
The common law also confided the nature and extent of the punishment to the
discretion of the Court -- but the Sedition Law defines it; and this is another
reason which prompted the federal Legislature to enact a statute on the
subject. Besides -- most of our state Constitutions contain clauses similar to
the one in our federal charter, " that no law shall be made abridging the
liberty of speech or of the press;" and yet all the state courts have
recognized the doctrine of libels -- and have, at their discretion, inflicted
penalties on the authors of libellous publications. It is therefore a curious
kind of argument, and pregnant with absurdity, to say, that the state courts
have a right to admit this common law principle, and at the same time to deny
its operation in the courts of the Union -- for the federal and local
constitutions contain the same prohibitory clause, and expressed in the very
same words.

THESE two Acts of Congress originated in the necessity of the times, and were
found highly expedient.

MOST of our domestic troubles for several years past -- our divisions both in
and out of our public councils, are very justly ascribed to the restless temper
of aliens; they have fomented and nourished discontents -- impaired public
confidence, and awakened treasonable practices. Many of them are fugitives of
justice; and the more securely to propagate their revolutionary sentiments --
the very momentum of their nature -- they have taken refuge in the United
States. So true is the sarcasm of a foreign satyrist, that in America, "every
scoundrel convict is a King!"

SEVERAL venal and prostituted presses have long labored among us with the most
detestable views. To support the liberty of the press, must base calumny and
lies be tolerated? Is this liberty infringed when the murderers of reputation,
and the propogators of rebellion and treason, are exposed to the rod of
punishment? Our Government, like every other of a representative nature,
derives its energy and support from public opinion; and when this fails, or
becomes corrupted, it either degenerates to a phantom, or is totally destroyed.
Public opinion, in this country, is formed and regulated by the presses. These
are the mirrors in which the people see and judge of the conduct of their
rulers. If therefore these important mediums of communication prove deceptive,
and are pregnant with inflammatory and revolutionary sentiments -- if they
sacrifice the most palpable truths to the most destructive falsehoods, and
thereby disseminate groundless jealousies, and weaken the hands of Government
-- is it not the duty of our political watchmen to punish aggressors in the
abuse of constitutional liberty? A deluge of the blackest calumny has for years
issued from some of our public papers, and eventually excited an irritation in
the public mind. The impression at first was hardly perceptible -- but the
continual dropping of the waterspout will in time wear away the most durable
substance. The President has been painted as a sullen tyrant -- the majorities
in Congress as the prostituted hirelings of the British cabinet, and the
fraternizing brotherhood of French partisans among us as the great pillars of
our insulted liberty, and as the saviors of our country. To these very
partisans we may charge all our political troubles. Their actions authorize the
high carnival of rebellion and of revolution, and serve to create a horde of
domiciliary tyrants and cutthroats in America: For, while our constituted
authorities have struggled to support a system of neutrality, they by a
repellant power, have aimed to draw us into a contest with England, and to
bring us under the yoke of Directorial despotism. Our policy and interest
dictate the necessity of peace -- but these proud sons of sedition, subservient
to the beck of the brutes and atheists of France, disseminate their licentious
and poisonous dogmas -- disaffect the public mind -- paralyze the exertions of
Government -- and patronize on the American stage the bloody tragedies of
Europe.

A DOCTRINE is prevalent, and dexterously propagated as the great palladium of
our liberty, that the people ought to keep alive the fire of republican
jealousy, and to watch with an eye of suspicion every measure of our
Government. This is constitutionally right to a certain extent -- but when they
imagine, that our Government naturally inclines to corruption, and to a
dangerous accumulation of power, they manifest inaccurate conceptions of its
structure and principles. No political truth is more evident than that foreign
Governments are pregnant with danger -- while the greatest danger to be
apprehended in America, is from the wicked disposition, and blind credulity, of
certain portions of the people. These contrary and opposite sources of danger
arise from the different natures of the several Governments. European
institutions are not composed of a delegation of power; -- the constituted
authorities are not responsible to the people for an abuse of trust; they
possess a distinct and separate interest from their constituents; and such is
the opulence and power of privileged orders, that the community is in a manner
controlled by them. This opulence and power, and this control, in America, are
wholly in the hands of the people. Our rulers, at very limited periods, return
to the walks of private life -- submit their conduct to the scrutiny of their
constituents, on the rectitude of which they rely for the continuance of public
suffrage -- and the burdens they impose on the community are equally felt by
themselves. If these remarks be just, it necessarily results, that the grand
pillar of foreign Governments, is POWER, and that the only foundation of our
own is PUBLIC CONFIDENCE. One other conclusion is equally obvious, that foreign
Governments possess a dangerous power, and that a similar power, in this
country, is wholly vested in the people* A well-constructed fortress is
sometimes impregnable -- but public opinion is as variable as the winds of
Heaven. These sentiments may possibly excite the surprise of some, and perhaps
others may consider them as a species of political blasphemy -- but the truth
of them is verified by the history of other nations, and by the constant
experience of our own.

OF all the calamities to which nations are exposed, those of war are the most
cruel and destructive. -- Yet, like many other evils in society, they must
rather be mitigated than expunged from the systems of human policy. We need not
here repeat the distinctions usually made by civilians between wars designated
by the terms just and unjust -- because they all agree, that if any may be
termed just, they are those of a defensive nature -- and because no other
description of war will ever be consistent either with our interest or policy.
If therefore America draws the sword, it will not be to plunder, nor to
conquer, nor to enslave and to inflict misery on the human race -- but to repel
aggravated aggressions, and to snatch our Independence from the meretricious
embraces of French fraternity, or to save it from the iron grasp of undisguised
and open enemies.

IF an invasion of our country take place, or if rebellion be excited by the
arts and intrigues of foreign cabinets, or by their secret and authorized
agents, we may anticipate a resistance adequate to the danger. The military
spirit manifested in all parts of the Union, affords a happy presage of
success. Every day brings tidings of additional corpse, who have voluntarily
tendered their services to our country; and the one in this town, and now
before us, is not the least respectable, nor the last to manifest American
patriotism. Let each individual member of it bear in mind, that in proportion
to the toils and dangers of the field, is the glory to be acquired; and that
the reward of essential services, in times of public hazard, is a harvest of
laurels. One prominent feature in the duty of soldiers, is to guard and to
protect the standard, round which they rally. The loss of it often exhibits the
want of courage; and to desert it, is absolute disgrace. Motives of a peculiar
nature concur to stamp the one attached to the FEDERAL VOLUNTEERS OF PORTLAND,
with additional value. The PORTLAND FEDERAL VOLUNTEERS, is a company composed
of the Youth of this town. Its Officers are commissioned, and its services
accepted, by the President of the United States, in conformity to the Act of
Congress, passed the 28th May, 1798. -- On the 25th of June, 1799, the Young
LADIES of the town presented the FEDERAL VOLUNTEERS with an elegant Standard.
-- This badge of female patriotism was accompanied with an Address at once
laconic and impressive. The ceremony on the part of the LADIES was conducted
with the greatest propriety; -- and the military evolutions of the day
reflected the highest honor on the VOLUNTEERS.
It is the workmanship of female hands; and the donation originated in female
patriotism. These circumstances will stimulate, fresh from the mint of military
honor, the brightest deeds of glory in its defense.

WERE men restricted to the weapons furnished them by nature, the concomitants
of war would be less dreadful. It is to the prostitution of their intelligent
faculties, and perhaps to their deadly hatred of each other, that we must
impute those terrible instruments of death, to which they always resort in the
settlement of national disputes, and frequently in the adjustment of private
injuries. They are the inventors of those dreadful engines -- from whose brazen
mouths issue frightful peals of thunder, and volumes of smoke and lightning --
whose ponderous messengers, swift-winged in air, drench fields in blood --
involve whole cities in flames and dust, and sink the proudest navies beneath
the wave. The ingenuity of mankind has, therefore, reduced war to a science --
in which personal prowess and bravery are poor substiutes for military
equipment and discipline. Hence it is our duty to acquire the theory of modern
war, and to be prepared to practice its lessons in the field.

BUT here let me pause -- While Europe, like some fiery volcano, trembles with
frightful and protracted eruptions, and the night-bird pays her devoirs over
hecatombs of slain, Peace, with her numerous blessings, is still predominant in
our country. The danger announced from the bosom of that low-hung cloud on the
margin of the east, decreases in proportion to the strength of our defensive
measures; and we trust that, on the face of this great empire, perpetual
tranquillity is stamped with the finger of heaven. Let us learn wisdom from the
calamities of war, and read the projected fate of America in those prominent
lessons, written in the blood of nations.

PROMOTE the progress of education among the people, and encourage the arts and
sciences. These are at once the ornaments and glory of a Republic. Hence will
proceed wise legislators, and good laws, and an unity of sentiment in the
public mind. Fortified with these ramparts, we may bid defiance to the thunders
of the most potent attack, and extort a pre-eminent respect from the world.

ALREADY our opulence and extent of country have attracted the notice of the
most distant nations. "Where rolls the sea on which our sails have not been
spread -- and where is the clime not enriched by the productions of our soil?"
The great fabric of our constitution and laws, founded in the patient
deliberation of an enlightened people, is considered by other nations as the
most perfect model of political wisdom and precision. Its pillars, composed of
the American virtues, will only moulder and fall in the prevalence of disunion
and corruption. Then suffer not the canker-worm of jealousy to weaken them, nor
let the proverb of old be verified, that the unusual prosperity of a nation
announces the period of its fall. The means of safety and happiness are within
ourselves. We have little to fear from the open violence of outward enemies:
Their secret influence, effected by their gold and insidious arts, is most to
be dreaded. Who is proof against the charms of opulence and power? Probity and
honor are sometimes purloined by the hand of Midas, and virtue and integrity
banished by corruption and pride: But, although a SUMNER, one of the brightest
ornaments of human nature, has been recently snatched from our local councils,
still we have an ADAMS to concert, and a WASHINGTON to execute, the measures of
national defense; and therefore we need not fear the arts of flattery, nor be
intimidated by the menaces of opposition.

IF our conduct be actuated by sound policy, and if we cling to our
constitution as the rock of our political salvation, we may safely calculate on
the events of futurity. The broad perspective of time is expanded to our view.
The margins of our interior waters are crowded with cities, and the spir^^ of
magnificent structures are buried in the clouds. The gloomy forests, once the
residence of savage beasts, and unexplored by human steps, now exhibit peaceful
mansions, and the plenteous fruits of culture. Our canvass whitens the Arctic
seas, and swells to the breezes of the torrid zone. Smiling peace, and roseate
health, establish their salutary reign; and the prospects of pleasure beyond
the grave, mitigate the terrors of dissolution.

O HAPPY -- thrice happy Country! -- Possessed of opulence and power -- May ^^y
happiness be perpetual!


