A FAREWELL DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT NORTH-COVENTRY, NOVEMBER 11, 1798. BY
ICHABOD L. SKINNER, LATE MINISTER OF THAT SOCIETY.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. 1799.

THIS Discourse, printed at the request of some of his friends, is humbly
dedicated to the Church and Society of North-Coventry, in testimony of esteem
and friendship, by him who was their pastor, and still remains their friend and
brother in our common Lord.

ICHABOD L. SKINNER.

A Farewell Discourse.
GALATIONS i.11, 12. I certify you brethren, that the Gospel which was preached
of me, is not after man -- but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.


ST. PAUL begins this epistle with a very interesting salutation, "Grace to you
and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself
a ransom for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world,
according to the will of God and our Father -- to whom be glory forever amen."
This introduction has particular reference to the occasion of his writing,
which was, to suggest to the Galatians that they had not kept the gospel of
Christ. "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
grace of Christ, unto another gospel." And also to call back their minds to the
simplicity, purity, and truth, of that gospel which had been delivered them by
Christ and his apostles. "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you than that we have preached, let him be accursed." He then makes
an appeal to his manner of preaching, in which without fear or flattery, he had
set forth the character, office, and atonement of Christ. "Do I now persuade
men, or God? Or do I seek to please men?" And further, he calls them to witness
that he had preached to them the true gospel -- "I certify you, brethren, that
the gospel which was preached of me is not after man -- but by the revelation
of Jesus Christ." How important is it, especially in this day of religious
darkness, that every minister of the gospel should be able to say he has
preached no other gospel, but that of Christ! That he has not received his
doctrines, from the commandments of men, nor framed his gospel, after the
rudiments of the world; but that he has learnt it after Christ! That he has not
shunned to declare the whole council of God. Alas! How much greater reason,
than the apostle, have they to say who is sufficient for these things!

The subject naturally leads us,

I. To recollect what we have received as the gospel, and where it is to be
found.

II. To enquire whether we have received the true gospel.

III. To show in what respects, this subject applies to us, and what use may be
made of the application.

I. What have we received as the gospel? and where is it to be found?

We have received the following things, as constituting that holy system of
faith, discipline, and practice, which is contained in the gospel of Christ.

1. The eternal existence, and infinite perfections, of one only living and
true God; who is the author of all things; the alone fountain of truth,
justice, mercy, and happiness. Whose character is exhibited to us in three
persons, the father, who is the source; the son, who is the minister; and the
holy ghost, who is the efficient of divine grace.

2. God made all things for his own glory, and the good of his creatures. These
are his ultimate ends; therefore, even the wrath of man, shall praise him; and
the greatest possible good, shall be the final issue of all his operations.

3. Man was created originally upright; but he has fallen from this state, on
the trial of our first parents, and lost communion with God; is prone to evil,
and from the necessity of his natural inclinations, grows up into a state of
sin; the full wages of which, is death temporal, spiritual, and eternal.

4. God has entered into a covenant with his son, to save man in a way of
grace, and on this purpose, Christ has come in the flesh -- has made an
atonement for sin -- explained the conditions of the covenant of grace; and
promised salvation to those who comply with them. We are therefore justified,
through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; who has honored the law of God, and
opened the way for the return of sinners, to the great author of life and
goodness, from whom they have departed; and in a manner, equally well adapted
to their situation, and to the honor of the universal governor. Therefore --

5. Evangelical faith, implies not only a belief in Christ, as the Messiah; but
a true repentance of sin; and a conversion to holiness, by a divine operation
of the spirit of God, in the means of grace -- producing in order, faith,
repentance, trust in God, love of Christ, and general, though not perfect
righteousness of character.

6. Though christians are not perfect in this life; yet all, who truly believe
in Christ, are sealed by virtue of the new covenant, unto eternal salvation;
and have the promise of God, that they shall not fall away, so as finally to
loose the blessings of redemption.

7. There will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the righteous and the
wicked, to a righteous judgment of God, where, each one will appear in his own
character, and answer for himself; and they will be sentenced respectively, to
everlasting misery, and everlasting happiness.

These are the principal doctrines, which we have received, as contained in the
gospel; laying the main stress, on the great atonement, the awful depravity and
spiritual death of unbelievers, and the absolute necessity of regeneration to
holiness, through faith, repentance, and sanctification.

With no less reverence, have we received the sabbath, and sacraments, as of
christian and apostolic institution. Believing, that the sabbath is to be
observed as holy time; devoted to the service of God, and the spiritual good of
our souls -- That baptism is to be received, as a sign, or seal of our covenant
relation to God, and the church -- that all baptized children, are branches or
members of the church; and are to be treated as such, until admitted to open
personal standing; by having taken their infant covenant vows upon themselves,
in a public profession, that they believe in Christ, and are his disciples.

That the Lord's supper, is a confirming, as baptism, is an initiatory seal, of
the christian covenant -- that it is designed to collect the followers of
Christ; to support their friendship, and quicken their graces: and that all,
who are in open, personal standing, in the church, have a right to partake of
it. That all baptized children, of suitable age, are to be called on, to own or
renounce, their faith in Christ, into whom they have been baptized; that they
may be dealt with accordingly, and that all who have named Christ, should
depart from iniquity, and feel the most solemn obligations, to watch over each
other, in the spirit of charity, communion, and discipline.

II. We are now led to enquire, whether we have received the true gospel.

From the great variety of opinions held by christians, it would seem, their
charity must be very widely extended; as there is no denomination, which is a
standard for all the rest -- consequently, that they ought to be suspicious of
themselves. Notwithstanding, we may doubtless, have satisfactory evidence, that
we have received the essential truth of the gospel; and perhaps may find, that
we have some advantage, in point of orthodoxy, over other denominations of
christians.

To prove that we have received the gospel, not only in its most essential
sense, but even its fairest form, several things will be distinctly mentioned.

1. We have taken no man, or body of men, for our guide. We derive all our
authority in discipline, the articles of our faith, and the rules of our
conduct, solely from the scriptures. And we have derived them, without the fear
of man, or the prejudice of opinion. With the scriptures open before us, we
have gone to the great fountain of light and grace, in prayer; and we trust, he
has given us some proper sense of his gospel.

2. The principal doctrines of our gospel, appear to be essential parts of the
christian scheme. They are like pillars, and foundation stones, in the
building, which removed, the superstructure must fall. They are such, as we
should expect would be plainly spoken of, and clearly marked, on the very face
of the gospel. Can we open our bibles, without meeting with the depravity of
man, the atonement of Christ, the necessity of regeneration, the resurrection
of the dead, and the judgment of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ?

Take away any of these doctrines; and see how the gospel will stand. If you
remove the atonement, in what will the gospel differ, from the morals of
Zoroaster, Socrates, or Seneca? except, that it is the best system of morality
which can be found? Remove this, and you deny the depravity of man, the
necessity of regeneration, and a future judgment.

The same may be said, of any other constituent part of the gospel. If you deny
depravity, you render regeneration unnecessary; and the atonement becomes
absurd -- deny regeneration; and Christ would be the minister of sin -- deny
the resurrection of the dead, and a future judgment; and religion will be
licentiousness; and the whole moral government of God will be destroyed. They
who hold these doctrines, and those necessarily attached to them, must be
essentially right. And if all others are considered as unessential opinions, in
which men agree, or differ, according to the prejudice of education, the
temperament of the passions, or the advantages of enquiry; we shall, perhaps,
stand so much the fairer chance, to receive the light of philosophy, while we
are solemnly impressed, with the awful mystery of the gospel; and may breathe
the spirit of benevolence and charity, while we are earnestly contending for
the faith, once delivered to the saints.

This may, in general, be said of the churches in this country. It is our
endeavor, to hold fast the essential truths of the gospel, with a charitable
and liberal temper, toward those who differ from us in the unessentials of
religion.

3. We, my brethren, in particular, have been careful to avoid extremes of
opinion, or practice, into which some have gone. In supporting the divine
sovereignty, we have not made God the author of sin. We have held the awful
depravity and death of the sinner, without denying the use of means. In terms
of communion, we have not suffered ourselves to be exalted, above the claims of
an imperfect, probationary, and militant church.

On the other hand, we have not denied the government of God. We have not made
Christ the mere minister of grace; by representing man, as working out his own
matter of justification. We have not separated the means and instruments of
grace, from their Almighty agent. Nor have we opened the bosom of the church,
to every intruder. It has been our endeavor, to gather into the church, the
sincere enquirers after truth, and the humble followers of Jesus Christ:
forming our judgment, on the rectitude of their lives, and the spirituality of
their conversation.

4. Another argument in our favor, my brethren, is the simplicity of our
scheme. This mark of truth, has always distinguished it, from the affectation
and obscurity of falsehood. Our system, without the corruptions of the beast,
the additions of the false prophet, or the deceitful workings of the dragon,
has been essentially the faith of the orthodox church, through all changes of
christianity -- the standard, from which erroneous dissenters, speculative
believers, metaphysical doctors, and assuming popes, have varied; and to which
the reformed have constantly returned. It is such, as to its plainness, purity,
and power, as the great divine teacher would inculcate -- such, as fishermen
could understand, and men of all capacities receive. It is a structure, which
in the light of eighteen hundred, discovers no disproportion, to the most
discerning eye. It shows, more clearly than ever, its divine original. It does
not, like the image of Nebuchadnezzar, manifest unsound materials; but with
pyramidal strength, it securely rears its lofty head to heaven; and bids
defiance to the rage of man, the arts of Satan, and the waste of time.

5. We cannot help mentioning, the tendency of our faith, to unite and
strengthen the church of Christ. It removes the first occasion for controversy
and dissension; by setting nonessentials in their proper place, and by
addressing itself to the plainest understanding. When the constituent parts of
the gospel, are heartily explained, and judiciously settled, all capacities may
understand it, and unite in it, who are not essentially defective in religious
experience.

My predecessor Rev. NATHAN STRONG.
was an eminently wise and good man, whose long, and successful labors, are
yet in blessed memory, with you who have been witnesses of his ministry. He was
well acquainted with the oil and composition of the sanctuary. He gave you the
gospel in its simplicity; without exciting you to controversy, or lulling you
into apathy. Adapting the great essential practical truths of religion, he
explained them without affectation, and held them without wavering. His
venerable example, I have, with short steps, and feeble exertions, endeavored
to follow. For these reasons, there has been a great harmony in the sentiments
of this church; which I pray God may continue, for your peace and love in the
Lord Jesus. May you neither degenerate into carelessness of what you believe
and profess; nor fall into contentions on circumstantial and speculative
subjects; as if Christ was to be divided, between Paul and Barnabas. How much
is Christ dishonored, by saying I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas. Alas! How far, from the proper spirit of those, who are all professedly
one in Christ Jesus; of whom the whole family, in heaven and earth, is named!

6. The last thing I shall mention, in confirmation of our gospel, is the
manifestation of its power in the conversion of sinners. The work of grace has
shown us, that the articles of our faith are from God. We find them deeply
impressed on the minds, of all those who are born again to a lively sense of
the truth, and of their need of Christ. They have been convinced of the evil of
sin. They have seen the value and wonder of the atonement. They have felt the
awful terrors of judgment upon the impenitent -- the justice of God in them;
and the necessity of being reconciled to him from a new heart and life. And
when they have been able to take hold of the new covenant, they have
evangelically repented of sin. They have admired the grace of the gospel; and
have expressed their joy in prayer, for divine assistance; and in praise to God
and the Lamb, for bringing salvation to a guilty world. We may add, the spirit
of the Lord who bears witness with our spirits, has taught us that our
gospel is the wisdom of God, and the power of God. Many of us, who were once
dead in trespasses and sins, hope we have been quickened in Christ Jesus, unto
that new, and holy life, without which no man shall see the Lord.

These are such strong and indubitable features of divine truth, as give us the
highest evidence, that we have received the gospel of Christ in simplicity.

Having considered what we have received as the gospel; and whether we have
received the true gospel, we proceed --

III. To enquire how this subject applies to us; and what use may be made of
the application.

Our situation, is similar to that of those mentioned in the text. I was called
by the providence of God, to preach the gospel to you, as the apostle had done
to the Galatians; and am now separated from you, as he was from them. I ought
to be able to call you to witness, "that the gospel which was preached of me,
is not after man -- but by the revelation of Jesus Christ." And you ought to be
able, to bear testimony for yourselves, that you have received it as it is in
Jesus. For if it solemnly concerns me, to know whether I have been faithful to
declare the whole counsel of God; the enquiry is equally interesting to you,
whether you have heard the will of God, and been careful to obey it.

Let us, therefore, more particularly attend to the use, which may be made of
this subject, in application to ourselves.

1. If this subject has convinced you, that your gospel is the truth, how
important is it, that you should preserve it from those innovations, which tend
to its corruption. Innovations there are, my brethren, which have this
tendency. You are already under censure, by those who affect a purer church.
Heresy and orthodoxy, I am sensible, are a mere vice versa, in the mouths of
different parties, like the meum and tuum of commerce. But you will feel the
necessity of standing on your guard, when you consider, that the charge of
heresy is one of those excitements, which the beast has used, to make the world
wonder after him. I sincerely hope, you will not become a prey; either to those
daring metaphysicians and presumptuous innovaters, whose object, like that of
French politicians, will be to revolutionize, or divide and ruin you; or to
those preying moralists, whose preaching would harden you into stone, or
convert you into disciples of "illuminated" morality.

2. This subject suggests to our minds, that state of man, which gives occasion
for preaching the gospel. The first notion of the gospel, carries the idea of
an awful depravity. If man was not in such a state, so great preparations for
his return to God, would not only be unnecessary; but they would be absurd, and
preposterous, as coming from infinite wisdom. It is because this truth is not
felt, that the preaching of the gospel, is an offense to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Greeks. A sense of our depravity, makes the gospel appear to
be the wisdom of God, and the power of God. If I have not inculcated this great
truth, I have neglected an essential part of the council of heaven -- You have
not yet been taught the occasion of Christ's coming. Or if I have preached this
doctrine, and you have not heard, you have had no sense of the holiness of the
law against which you have sinned. You have not learnt that the law is before
the gospel; nor felt that the wages of sin is death. Consequently, you have
seen no beauty in the gospel system, nor any need of the atonement of Christ.

3. We are led to consider, what is the design of the gospel. It is not merely
to show us our condition, as sinners, who have lost the communion and favor of
God: it carries a much nobler idea. By convincing man of sin, it designs to
display the character of God; who manifests himself, not only a being of
righteousness and truth, but of benevolence and mercy -- a being, who takes no
delight in afflicting his creatures, even with a sense of their own
wretchedness by sin. Whose love is such, that he has opened a way for sinners,
through the sacrifice of his own son; by whom the honor of the law is restored;
and means prepared, through which, by divine grace working in them, we might have
the spirit of adoption, and be able to use the natural language of children who
have never gone astray. "Our father who art in heaven; may thy kingdom come;
work in us that which is well pleasing in thy sight; and finally may we be
admitted into thy presence without spot, through the merits of the Lord Jesus, to
the praise of thy grace."

4. Hence we may see in what character, we are to receive the preachers of the
gospel. They are to be received; not as moralists; not as philosophical
reasoners; not as public orators and critics; but as servants of Jesus Christ,
sent, to make known the will of God in the mystery of grace -- who are to take
occasion from the terrors of the law, and the conviction of sin, to show the
coming and glory of Christ; and to lead sinners to embrace his gospel; that
they may honor, both the justice and mercy of God; in their return; and enjoy
him forever. Therefore says the great apostle, "We preach not ourselves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord, and ourselves your servants, for Jesus' sake."

If these things are true, how inconceivably solemn, is the preaching of the
gospel! The ministers of Christ should be able, in the language of St. Paul to
the Galatians, to call God to witness for them. -- "Behold, before God, I lie
not." They have committed to them, the unsearchable riches of Christ -- they
come to their hearers on an angels' errand; to tell them their situation; and
to show them what God has done in Christ for their salvation -- to convince
them of the irrecoverable loss of those that die impenitent; to make them flee
for their lives to Jesus Christ, as to an ark of safety, and city of refuge,
from the avenger of blood -- to persuade them, if possible, to lay hold on the
hope set before them, which, like an anchor entering within the vail, will
finally conduct them to the embraces of him, who is the author and finisher of
faith; and into the presence of God, where is fullness of joy.

How very far then, is that unruly, carping disposition, which is often
exercised toward ministers, from the spirit of serious and candid hearers of
the gospel! Ministers are, indeed, sinful and imperfect men; but God has seen
fit to commit this treasure unto earthen vessels, that the excellency of its
power, above what we should expect from such instruments, might be of him who
works all things, according to the counsel of his will. You remember the
words of our Savior to his apostles, "whosoever receives you, receives me,
and he that receives me receives him that sent me." Most people hear the
gospel as if it was not addressed to themselves, but to their neighbors; or
rather, as if the preacher was setting forth a scheme of salvation, for the
inhabitants of Jupiter or Saturn. They do not seem so much as to think, that he
is a messenger from God, to show them the danger of their situation, and call
them to repentance. How dreadful, my hearers, will be the situation of
unfaithful ministers, who have shunned to declare the whole counsel of God, and
suffered sinners to perish without warning! And how much less awful, will be
their condition, who have come to destruction, having despised privileges,
sinned against warnings, and trodden under foot the Son of God -- to whom,
after having rejected the gospel of peace, even with God, the fountain of
mercy, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.

5. The occasion and the subject unite, in calling our minds to that solemn
relation, which shortly subsisted between us, but now is no more.

Have I not preached to you the gospel of Christ, in plainness and solemnity?
Have I not dwelt on its most essential doctrines? Have I not shown you the
danger of continuing in sin; and the necessity of being born again to a new and
holy life? Have I not pointed out the last state of the impenitent -- that of
yourselves you cannot come to God; and if you could, that he could not receive
you without a Savior? In view of these truths, have I not led you to Christ,
as the only way, the truth, and the life -- as to an all-sufficient Savior,
the son of God, who is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God
through him? He has gone before us, through the sufferings of persecution, and
the agonies of death, to that resurrection, from the grave, which will shortly
present all his followers, with immortal glory, into the presence of his
father, and our father.

Let me ask you, my hearers, how you have improved these truths? If I have been
unfaithful, will it save you from giving your own account to God? But I am
permitted this day to call you to witness that I have preached to you the
gospel of Christ; and declared the counsel of God. By the mercy of God I have
one more opportunity, at least, to deliver my own soul; by warning you not to
put far away the evil day -- to repent of your sins -- to accept of Christ, and
turn unto God; while it is your accepted time, and your day of salvation. And I
must, by no means, forget so to warn you, and you must be careful so to
improve, what you have heard from me, that we may not be afraid to see each
others faces, among the many millions, who will shortly be assembled before the
bar of God, to hear their doom. God is witness to the truths you have now
heard, and to all you ever heard. He has given you a conscience of these
things, that he might not leave himself without witness of his justice, in
condemning those who will not obey his gospel. May you, who are yet impenitent,
be awakened before it is too late; and God is able to convince you of sin, of
righteousness, and judgment. If you are ever awakened you will see, that the
truths I have taught you are real, and interesting. Doubtless your consciences
now tell you I have spoken the truth. But hark! If the soft whispers of
conscience, even in those who are careless and secure are thus articulate, how
loud must be her thunders, to the awakened sinner, who stands in full view of
the law, at the very foot of Sinai in flames, and hears distinctly the Almighty
condemnation. -- Alas! Who will be able to endure the sentence of final
judgment, which will soon be passed, upon all those who know not God, and obey
not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

May we all find mercy in the day of the Lord Jesus. May the spirit of all
truth, guide us now we are separated. I ask an interest in your prayers, that
whether I continue in the work of the ministry, or not, God would lead me into
the path of wisdom, duty, and peace. My prevailing inclination has been not to
leave the ministry; although my reasons for it are weighty, as many of you are
sensible. May the Lord give you another pastor, more after his own heart, who
shall keep you from being scattered upon the mountains of Israel; and feed you
with the bread of life. The Lord forgive you, and bless you; and make us all so
happy, as to meet in that land of promise, whose rivers flow with perpetual
pleasure from the throne of God; and whose fruits are constant and unceasing.
Here the life of the saints is immortal -- society is perfect -- love and
righteousness exclude contention -- joys are unmingled with sorrows, and
friends are never separated.

That this may be our portion, may God grant, through him who has loved us and
given himself for us -- to him be glory, dominion, and praise. AMEN.


