THE GOODNESS OF GOD IN THE CONVERSION OF YOUTH.

THE GOODNESS OF GOD IN THE CONVERSION OF YOUTH: A SERMON ON THE DEATH OF
CHARLES I. S. HAZARD, Son of the late Alderman Hazard, who died of the late
Epidemic, aged 18 Years.

In which are introduced, An Account of his very early Enjoyment of the Grace
of GOD, and the Exercise of his Mind to the Period of his Death.

Transcribed from the Diary written with his own Hand.

By JOHN STANFORD, M. A.

Man comes forth as a flower and is cut down. JOB. NEW YORK: Printed by T. and
J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street.

-- 1799. --

TO THE Bereaved Mother of the late CHARLES I. S. HAZARD, AND To the Church
with whom he was a Member, The following Discourse Is affectionately addressed
By their Friend and Servant in the Gospel,

The AUTHOR.

THE GOODNESS OF GOD, etc.
PSALM cvi. I. Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good,
for his mercy endures for ever.
I HAVE chosen these words, as they are analogous to the last accents of our
departed young brother, C. HAZARD, and as they equally assist me with a
desirable subject for my present discourse.

Good is a term applied, in our text, to convey to us some idea of the
underived, self-existent excellence of JEHOVAH; constituting his infinite
blessedness, and forming the never-failing spring of happiness to all in
heaven, and to all on earth. Who can estimate the providential goodness of our
GOD to men? -- The whole earth is full of his goodness. Psm. xxxiii. 5. -- Like
the rays of the meridian sun, it diffuses natural light and blessedness to
every part of humanity. The air we breathe, the food we eat, the raiment we
wear; every personal and social enjoyment flows from the hand of our beneficent
Creator! " Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop
fatness. They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness; and the little hills
rejoice on every side. The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also
are covered over with corn: they shout for joy, they also sing." Psm. lxv. But
how great are " the riches of God's goodness" in the REDEMPTION of fallen,
wretched man, through the inestimably precious PERSON, RIGHTEOUSNESS,
ATONEMENT, and INTERCESSION of JESUS CHRIST, who, in his DIVINITY, is coequal,
in essential and underived goodness, with the FATHER; -- in his HUMANITY, is
the excellence of our human nature as first formed in Paradise, and pronounced
very good, -- and is also the MESSIAH, the CHANNEL through which all spiritual
goodness, grace, mercy, and glory flow to perishing man! -- Goodness, which
covers all our crimes; regenerates our depraved nature; supplies us in all the
exigencies of our life, and shall make us victorious in the territories of
death; -- it shall turn a final period to all our evils, and crown us with
felicity, as eternal and unchangeable as its own nature. O that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children
of men! Psm. cvii.

From these general reflections on the goodness of our God, as we are now met
to pay our last tribute of respect to the memory of the youngest brother in our
church, I shall attempt to address you --

I. On the goodness of God in the conversion of youth.

II. Name those who are bound to give thanks unto the Lord for such expressions
of his favor.

III. Illustrate the subject, by reciting to you some memoirs of the conversion
and experience of the youth whom God has removed from us by death. May my
present effort be accompanied with such a communication of God's special
goodness, that vain youth may remember their Creator; and, each advanced to
mature age, may praise the Lord for those instances of Divine beneficence,
which, in close succession, have followed us through all our fleeting days!

I. By the conversion of youth I do not mean that moral reformation which is
frequently produced by a religious education; by cultivation from pursuing the
round of arts; or, from the example of the best of men; although each of these
is valuable, and highly to be esteemed: Neither do I believe conversion to be
effected by the application of any external religious rite whatever; not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but OF GOD. John
i. 13. Mere civilized nature, is unregenerated nature still. The conversion of
a sinner is founded upon the regeneration of the soul by the God of all grace;
a work which is perfect in its nature, and never fails to turn the sinner out
of himself, from all vain and selfrighteous confidence, to the knowledge and
sensible enjoyment of God through the cross of Jesus, issuing in the glory of
its Almighty Author. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. 1 Pet. i. 3. The necessity
of conversion arises from the carnal mind being enmity against God; the soul,
dead in sin, having no hope, and without God in the world, and, of course,
incompetent to enjoy an holy God in blissful eternity. Therefore our Lord has
said, except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God. John iii. 3.
The youth who is the subject of God's converting goodness, is quickened in his
soul; turns from darkness to light, from the power of satan to the living God:
he feels, hears, sees, tastes, loves objects, the very reverse with which he
was conversant before; and thus he differs from his former self, in his
approach before God, and as he is in his temper and conduct before mankind. It
is necessary for me to say, that this work of conversion is not the mending or
repairing of old corrupt nature, but is the free gift of a new heart, (Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 26.) called the new man, (Col. iii. 10.) the hidden man of the heart, (1
Peter iii. 4.) and which lives in constant opposition to the corrupt body of
sin, the flesh lusting against the spirit; and this incessant conflict forms
the christian warfare till death shall forever close the scene. No man can lay
claim to vital christianity without knowing something of this experience; and
those who really do so unanimously confess, We are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. Ephesians. ii. 10. And although this workmanship of grace may be
opposed or obscured by sin, by devils, or by men; yet, we may say, I know that
whatsoever God does it shall be forever: nothing can be put to it, nor any
thing taken from it: and God does it that men should fear before him, (Ecc.
iii. 14.) else it would not be a good work of a good God! The Lord gives grace
and glory, (Psm. lxxxiv. 11.) and whom he justifies, them he also glorifieth.
Romans viii. 30. Happy youth, in whose breast God has begun this good work!
Whenever our eyes behold such, we may, with rapture, exclaim, in the spirit of
our text -- Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
for his mercy endures for ever!

That we may be more sensibly impressed with the goodness of God in the
conversion of youth, let us --

1. Bring more fully to our recollection the condition of man in his fallen
state, as accurately drawn by the pencil of truth in the sacred scriptures. The
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Genesis viii. 21. He goes
astray from the womb, speaking lies. Psm. lviii. 3. And a very little
acquaintance with human nature will convince us, that childhood and youth are
vanity. Ecc. xi. 10. The breast of youth is replete with the seeds of
corruption; their passions too often form fit fuel for the fire of temptation,
seldom failing to produce extreme sorrows in old age. Suffer me to say, my
young friends, the case, more or less, is your own; -- these scriptures form
your picture, drawn by your Creator's hand, whether you perceive your likeness
or not. O that God may be gracious to you this day; open your understanding to
know yourselves, that you may seek for happiness alone in his pardoning
goodness! Perhaps there never was a period when youths were more dissipated
than the present. Look around our city! How many young persons, instead of
pursuing the paths of virtue, roll in luxury, and rush into every avenue to
vice* Though dwarfs in general knowledge, they not only turn their backs with
cool indifference upon the public worship of God, I have been conversant with
the rising generation for many years, and in different climes, and I have
generally remarked, that a wilful neglect of the Lord's Day has been the avenue
to unnumbered vices. The day, by them neglected for worship, has been a snare
to unite them with dissipated companions; and insensibly to create in them the
baneful habits of indolence, pride, and extravagance: these never failing to
bring on those dishonest practices which are the disgrace of youth, the grief
of their connections, and the injury of society. Many brought to public ruin,
have, to my knowledge, dated their calamities from this evil. What then shall
be said of those parents, and masters of apprentices, who not only indulge
their youth in neglecting the Lord's Day, but set them the fatal example? To
me, that person who sets loose by the LORD's DAY, gives little proof of his
veneration of the LORD OF THE DAY, let him call himself a Christian of whatever
denomination he may.
but grow somewhat like champions in the cause of infidelity. In such a state
how many live! and in such a state, alas! how many have been cut down by the
late pestilence, as Job expresses it, while their bones were full of the sins
of their youth! Job xx. 11. That God should stop such thoughtless youths in
their career of sin; pluck them as brands from the burning; save them from
going down to the pit of destruction, and crown them with his smiles, is
certainly an high expression of the riches of his goodness, (Romans ii. 4.) and
fails not to make the most delightful impression upon every pious mind! O how
highly honored are some, who are converted to God's glory and service in the
morning of youth, when the Sun of Righteousness arises upon so very few, whose
gray hairs bend them to the tomb. Some such instance of God's converting youth
are left on record in the BIBLE, to perpetuate the memorial of God's goodness,
and to encourage the tender breast who pants for the Savior's love. JOSIAH,
born of king Amon, who was a wicked prince, did evil in the sight of the Lord,
established idolatry in Israel, and whose court could by no means be thought
favorable to cultivate piety in youth; yet, out of this black sink of
corruption God's goodness draws young Josiah. While in the eighth year of his
age, while he was yet young, Josiah began to seek God; and, in his twelfth
year, he so encountered the vile idolatry of his nation, that he broke down
their altars, burned their groves, demolished their images, and established the
worship of that gracious God, who had so distinguished him by his goodness in
early life. 2 Kings xviii. SAUL of TARSUS, a tent maker, yet of a liberal
education, received at the feet of Gamaliel, when a young man, was exceedingly
mad with rage against Christ and his followers; and, to feast his eyes on dying
Stephen, he took charge of the murderer's clothes, while they perpetrated the
horrid deed. Acts vii. 58. Yet this young man was not too far off for grace to
bring nigh; and of him was formed one of the most noble champions in the cause
of God; esteeming all things but dung and dross for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. Such astonishing changes does God's
converting goodness produce in the soul of man, whether young or old.

2. By penetrating the breast of the pious youth, we shall find that rich
assemblage of spiritual excellence which ennobles the soul, and far her
magnifies the exceeding riches of God's goodness in his conversion. In
conversion God leaves not the youth as he found him. The goodness of the Lord
is communicative; my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, says the
Lord. Jer. xxxi. 14. The youthful breast, once the seat of reigning corruption,
unbelief, lust, pride, malice, and every abomination which is offensive to God,
injurious to society, and calculated to drown the soul in perdition, is now, by
the regenerating grace of God, full of goodness. Romans xv. 14. Faith, truth,
hope, love, meekness, joy, peace, benevolence -- every sacred fruit he derives
from Christ, worthy of God, beneficial to society, and most admirably
gratifying to his own soul! every spiritual blessing, in its nature and
tendency, forming an absolute contrast to his native depravity! His pleasures
are rational, spiritual, divine, ennobling the soul, and raising it from its
sinful, fallen state. A consciousness of the divine presence, as his FATHER;
his union with CHRIST, in the grandeur of his person, in the completeness of
his salvation, and in the treasures of his grace: these form the solid basis on
which his happiness is founded, arising still higher and sublime, as he
advances to the verge of an endless state. The possession of this goodness
prompts his soul in secret and in public communion with God, in the meditation
of his heart, and in the exercises of his lips. To behold the prosperity of
ZION creates rapture in his breast; and to spend one day in her courts, is to
him infinitely better than a thousand elsewhere. The LAW of his Savior is more
precious to him than an abundance of gold and silver; regulating his thoughts
and actions in every department of life. In his pursuit after KNOWLEDGE, grace
ennobles the subjects of SCIENCE; incessantly enriching his mind with the most
exalted ideas of the majesty of God in his works of providence and redemption.
Thus, his studies being after Christ, instead of the student being spoiled
through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, and after the
rudiments of the world, he is rendered more virtuous in himself, and more
beneficial to mankind. Col. ii. 8. If the sentiment of Ovid be just, that to
have learned the liberal arts thoroughly, softens the manners, and operates as
an excellent corrector of ill nature, envy, and anger, we may certainly say
this, and infinitely more, of the converted youth, who, through the goodness of
God, hallows science at the foot of the cross! Such, with inconceivable
pleasure, may exclaim with Milton -- -- How charming I divine philosophy!
Not harsh, and crabbed, as dull fools suppose,
But musical, as is Apollo's lute,
And a perpetual feast of nectard sweets,
Where no crude surfeit reigns.


3. The magnanimity of the converted youth to combat the ILLS of life, on
principles of virtue and honor, is a farther proof of God's goodness toward
him. According to his years, his juvenile experience may not be very extensive;
yet, he learns something of human nature from the plague of his own heart, (1.
Kings viii. 38.) -- more from observations on the calamities of those around
him -- greater still from the BIBLE, which not only informs him that man is
born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, (Job v. 7) but presents him with a
general history of affliction in its variety of sources, process and periods,
as incident to the righteous and to the wicked. This knowledge assists the
youth to realize the path he may be designed to tread; and while too many
others, arising into public life, place their expectations for success on the
merit of their parents, the promises of their friends, or on their own
acquirement, he learns, It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any
confidence in man. Psm. cxviii. 8. That Savior who has delivered his soul
from death, he firmly believes will preserve his feet from falling, that he may
walk before God in the light of the living. Psm. lvi. 13. And he farther
concludes, that as God has graciously converted his soul unto himself, and
has promised an eternal weight of glory beyond the vale of death, so he will
certainly take charge of him through time, supply his wants out of the
treasures of his goodness, and make every ill subservient to his real
advantage. Romans viii. 28. From this rational, spiritual estimate, he sets off
on the arduous journey of life. Happy youth! O that our eyes beheld many such
in this day of vanity! Come, ye youths, fond of trusting in uncertain riches,
and whose confidence is placed upon your bosom friends, learn the uncertainty
of each, and taste and see that the Lord is gracious! Your possessions may
fail, your friends may forsake you, your life may fade as sudden as Hazzard's,
at the very morning of your day. Seek substantial happiness alone in that
Savior who is a friend that sticks closer than a brother; and who, for your
encouragement, has said, those that seek me early shall find me. Prove. viii.
17.

4. The last instance I shall name in which the goodness of God appears in the
conversion of youth, is a capacity and an opportunity to GLORIFY GOD, which is
seldom possessed by decrepid age. In early life the memory is retentive, the
imagination lively, and the animal spirits more vigorous, and less clogged with
cares, than at advanced age; and when these powers are employed on celestial
objects, they appear in their true luster, and issue in the manifestation of
the glory of the Lord! The TRUTH, as it is in Christ, being deeply laid in the
young man's conscience, by the s^^^^t of truth, sanctifies the mental powers,
and forms a (...) foundation, on which stands the fabric of profession,
uniformity and usefulness, and bids defiance to the blasts of error and
temptation, through successive periods, to old age. This observation, confirmed
in the experience of thousands, is admirably expressed by David: O God, thou
have ^aught me from my youth; and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works.
Now also, when I am old and grey-headed, O God, forsake me not, until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to
come. Psm. lxxi. 17, 18. Timothy's knowledge of God and the scriptures, from
his youth, enabled him to shine as a star among the Churches of Christ. 2. Tim.
iii. 15. Paul, the converted youth, lived to be Paul the aged; (Philem. ix.)
and the services of his life show the goodness of God toward him, the
opportunities he had of glorifying God, and of being useful to thousands.
Indulging reflections on the dangers of God's goodness in the conversion of
youth, I have frequently thought they were, probably, to ripen the soul for
immediate transmission to glory; which has been the case with an infinite
number of converted youth, besides our young brother Hazard -- Or, a
determination to show the all sufficiency of grace, in supporting the soul
under a long life of suffering, as those in the parable of the laborers called
at the third hour, bore the heat and burden of the day, and honored their
master by a succession of services -- Or, that the person converted in early
life should, from the fountain of his own experience, be rendered particularly
useful to the rising generation; which has been the employ of many whom God
has early called to the delightful work of the ministry.

Thus, whether we reflect on the conversion of youth from the corrupt mass of
nature -- the sublime treasures of grace communicated to his soul -- his
boldness to combat the ills of life -- or his opportunity to honor God and
promote the welfare of his fellow creatures, -- in each, in all of them, THE
GOODNESS OF GOD shines with admirable luster, and demands our most exalted
praise!

II. To name those PERSONS who are more immediately bound to give thanks for
the conversion of youth, was to form the next part of my discourse.

Of these, you will undoubtedly expect me to name their PARENTS. For parents,
as the fruit of their own bodies, to deliver a child into the world, whether
for good or ill, prosperity or adversity, honor or dishonor, heaven or hell, is
of infinitely greater moment than is generally considered. Sensible parents,
however, look with the most tender compassion upon their children, believing
them to be subjects of depravity and guilt, shapen in iniquity, and conceived
in sin; consequently they need pardoning and converting grace from the Author
of their being, without which their final end cannot be peace: for the Lord,
therefore, to meet the children of such parents, to mark them as his own, and
enrich them with his smiles, must afford them infinitely higher pleasures than
an ability to bestow upon them the wealth of nations, and calls forth their
grateful praise to God, for the greatness of his goodness. A foolish son is a
grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bear him; but whose loves
wisdom, rejoiceth his father. Prove. xvii. 25. xxix. 3. Such pleasures, the
widow of the late Alderman HAZARD enjoyed, when the Lord converted the soul of
her son unto himself, and enabled him to choose the path of truth. This
mitigated the sorrows of her widowhood, and aided her aged steps down the hill
of life; and, probably, she had anticipated her Charles's gentle hand should
wipe away her last cold tear in death! But, alas! her sky is overcast; the prop
on which she leaned is now removed; her son, in the zenith of his bloom, is
arrested by the putrid hand of pestilence, and now moulders in the dust! Weep,
ye fond parents! weep for her who, having sat many a dark year forlorn, now
mourns like Nain's widow, the loss of her only son! Luke vii. 13. Yet, she
sorrows not as those that have no hope; though parental tears bedew the turfed
grave, her heart, with secret joy, adores the Lord, who gave and had a right to
take away. Enough, her son sleeps in Jesus and though removed from her presence
to expire at a distant village, York-town, near Peekskill.
her sinking nature is relieved by the gladsome news --

His God sustained him in his final hour! Dr. YOUNG. YOUTHS, who are the happy
subjects of God's converting goodness, are alive to the expressions of the same
grace they behold conferred upon others, and need little invitation to praise
the Lord. Connections formed in early life are generally lasting, and
frequently yield inexpressible benefits; but when such union is founded upon a
mutual enjoyment of the love of Christ, it yields additional sweets. The pious
youth rejoices to see any enriched with converting grace; but when this favor
is bestowed upon those with whom he walked the paths of education, or to whom
he stands related by ties of nature, these give an higher relish to christian
fellowship, and bind their souls in heavenly chains, which neither time,
sorrow, distance, nor death can possibly destroy. Like SAUL and JONATHAN, who
were present in their lives, and in their death were not divided. 2 Samuel i. 23.
These observations are sensibly felt by many of us, who are in meridian of
life, and they bring to our remembrance the kindness of our youth, and the love
of our espousals unto Christ: the connection we then enjoyed with pious youth
gave us those delightful, spiritual pleasures which are charming, even in
reflection! Probably there are some young persons present who were in christian
intimacy with our departed young brother, and with whom you received your early
education. You rejoiced at his conversion; -- his public surrender of himself
to God is yet in your remembrance; -- his regular attendance on the worship of
God was your example and your pleasure; and the very solemn manner in which he
sat in tears at the table of his Lord, has left an abiding impression upon your
souls. To part with him so early; for him to be carried away by the putrid
stream of pestilence, at the very period when he was arising into usefulness;
must create painful sensations in your breast. Let us, however, learn
submission. He is removed far away from those sins and snares to which you are
left exposed; and now he rests secure beneath his Savior's smiles, and drinks
large draughts of bliss from the fountain head! You, too, may soon pass the
vale of death. Improve the departure of your young companion, as a stimulus to
urge your way in the paths of God; maintain your profession with honor, seek
more earnestly a Savior's precious love, guard more firmly against youthful
follies, and keep your heaven in view!

Yes, thou celestial-born! dear youth of grace,
The purchase of redeeming blood, the beir
Of bliss immortal, look beyond the stars,
Up to thy native home direct thine eyes;
While realizing Faith and steadfast Hope
Give thee rich foretastes of the joys above.
Lo! JESUS waits to place the immortal crown
Upon thy temples; ANGELS shall applaud
Thy conquest over the powers of sin and hell.
Then all your toils shall cease, your bliss begin,
And joy and triumph crown the happy day.
You shall possess immensity of bliss,
Unbounded as the wishes of your soul,
And lasting as its own immortal age!
FAWCET* If parents, and pious youth, are bound to celebrate the divine
goodness for early conversion, the MINISTERS and CHURCHES of Christ are
infinitely more so; for they are, or ought to be, more immediately concerned
for the salvation of men, and for the growing empire of the King of Grace. It
is confessed, that the hopes of a nation, in a very considerable degree, are
built upon the rising generation; and, in proportion to their virtues and
acquisitions, its prosperity is preserved and increased. Infinitely more so,
the visible church of Christ look to converted youth for a succession of
members; nor can they possess greater evidence of the Lord being in the midst
of them, than by the effusions of his Spirit upon their sons and their
daughters. These converted youths are hoped to bear the ark of the cause of
God, and to spread the banner of his truth, when our heads recline upon the lap
of earth. It was for this that David so pathetically addressed Solomon his son;
and Paul so importunately wrote to his beloved Timothy. And for this it is that
Zion pleads the fulfillment of that most inestimable promise: Instead of thy
fathers shall be thy children, whom thou may make princes in all the earth;
therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever. Psm. xlv. 16, 17.
These lambs, mingled with the flock, adorn the field of Zion, and fill our
hearts with more delight than nature's pastoral scenes! As a people, the
variety of our ages, and the diversity of our gifts and grace, prompt us to
unite with the ancient church. -- At our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruit, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved. Sol. Song vii.
13.

If Ministers and Churches unite in praising God for his goodness in the
conversion of youth, why should we think ANGELS to be silent on such memorable
occasions? The pages of inspiration inform us, that angels desire to look into
the wonders of man's redemption, (1 Pet. i. 12.) that they are all ministering
spirits sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs of salvation, (Heb.
i. 14.) and that there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one
sinner that repents. Luke xv. 10. I therefore presume to believe, that as
often as divine goodness converts a sinner, young or old, the pleasing event is
immediately known in the courts above. Thus, all in heaven, as well as all the
redeemed on earth, unite to praise the Lord for his goodness in the conversion
of youth! O that this occasion may be the happy mean, by which God may grant a
fresh display of his mercy, in converting unweary youth, and teach their hearts
and lips to bear a part in praising redeeming love

III. Agreeable to my design, I now proceed to illustrate the subject of my
discourse, by reciting to you some Memoirs of CHARLES I. S. HAZARD, as
transcribed from the papers written with his own hand, and by his mother
communicated to me for publication.

MEMORIAL OF GOD's GOODNESS TO CHARLES I. S. HAZARD.

MEMORIAL, etc.
I THINK it my duty to write the dealings of God with my soul ever since I can
remember, but not to be published while I live. I hope, by God's grace, to keep
a Journal, that it may encourage me the more to look to him as my Lord and my
God; and that I may see the many dangers I have been in, and the Lord's hand in
conducting me through this wide wilderness.

The first that I can remember of any thing, was at the death of my father;
being, at that time, seven years old. I then often thought how could there be a
God! I used to hear the minister say, "All men were sinners, and God would
punish them for their sins." Still I thought that there was no God; that I
should not die, because I was but a little child, and should live to be a man;
all children are good, and I am no sinner. These thoughts, common to many
children, attended me from month to month. As I grew older, I was more
conscious; I shall never forget the convictions I had at times when I went to
bed, on reflecting what I had done the day past, that I would not be so wicked,
and that I would do better on the morrow; for I now began to think there was a
God, and I knew I did offend him. My mother often told me there was a God, and
the necessity of his grace; but no sooner was I out with boys, than all was
forgotten; and, by the help of the wicked one, I was rushing headlong to
destruction as fast as time could carry me. At school, when twelve years old, I
would feel the weight of sin, and have those serious reflections, which
produced tears from my eyes; and when the boys asked me the cause of my
weeping, I would say, I was sick. My tutor frequently closed the business of
the school, on a Saturday, with a moral lecture from the scriptures, which, I
must own, was of great use to me, particularly on the character of Josiah;
Should the Author be spared, and Providence favor his wishes; he purposes to
publish twelve of those moral and entertaining Lectures, for the benefit of
Youth.
and when he would tell us of the consequence of swearing, gaming, lying,
disobedience to parents, Sabbath-breaking, etc. etc. it often cut me to the
very heart; however, these impressions soon wore away. By certain dreams, and
by the report of a comet having appeared, my convictions were increased, and I
began most earnestly to seek the Lord. I told my mind to one of my
school-fellows, and we both gave ourselves up to prayer and good conversation,
and our outward conduct was not as before, in roving and in breaking the
Sabbath. If any two could have merited any thing of God by our works, surely we
should have done it; and we went on in this pharisaic way for some months. But
the more I prayed and heard, the worse I grew; and I told my friend, that I
could not tell what was the matter, nor what to do; 'till, at last, Providence
was pleased to direct my way to my tutor for advice; and, after several visits,
I was enabled to lay my mind open to him, and thus, by inquiring of Zion's
watchman, I have been directed to the gates of Zion with my face thitherward

SECOND PAPER. Written in his 14th Year.
New York, Sept. 17, 1794.
WHEN the Lord was first pleased to illuminate my mind, I went under great
distress, whether the Lord would hear my cries and supplications; for I thought
that the Lord had kept me as the apple of his eye so many years, while I had
been provoking his most holy Majesty, who, in justice to me a sinner, might
have consigned me to everlasting misery. If he had, it would have been just;
for I felt myself condemned by his law. My mind was so distressed, that I was
afraid to approach the throne of grace. I recollected many precious promises
which I had heard and read; such as, I love them that love me, and those that
seek me early shall find me. Prove. xviii. 7. He that comes unto me, I will in
no wise cost out John vi. 37. By these promises I was led to prayer, and all my
heart's desire was, none but Christ! none but Christ! He was all I wanted, that
he might clothe me with the wedding garment of his righteousness, for I felt I
was naked, and could do nothing of myself without Christ. After this, the Lord
enabled me to say, I have found him whom my soul loves. Sol. Song ii. 4. This
was he for whom I was seeking, and he was to me the pearl of great price!

I once was much distressed, whether I was in the right way of life or no; and
it entered my mind, that I had heard people say, that some only fancied
religion, and professed to be christians, when they knew no more of its
goodness than a dumb beast. I thought I also was only making a profession; but,
how should I know it? I went to prayer, self-examination, and reading the
scriptures. By these I found I was in the right way. When I came to consider a
little, I found that it never could be fancy that gave me such a sense of my
guilty conscience, nor in the power of man to make me feel what I did; the Lord
it was, and glory be to his name*

By reading the scriptures, I found many precious promises for poor guilty
wretches to come to Christ, and to cast their burdens at the cross; for he
said, Matt. xi. 28 and 30. Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me: for I
am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke
is easy, and my burden is light. Isaiah i. 18, 19. gave me great encouragement
to press forward: Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool. Precious promise this! It made me rejoice
to think, that Christ gave such an invitation to sinners; and although my sins
were of a crimson dye, I was led to see, that the Lord was able to pardon them,
set me free, and give me to enjoy him for ever! One text which gave me
encouragement to fly to Christ for refuge was, Rev. xxii. 17. The spirit and
the bride say, Come. And let him that hears say, Come. And let him that is a
thirst, Come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. This
promise was to me valuable; for I think that I had such a desire for enjoying
Christ, that nothing else in this world would have satisfied me.

Some time after these enjoyments, I was brought very low on a bed of sickness;
a most painful disorder; but all the pain to me was nothing, for I felt the
privilege of a father to go to. I often said, the physician can do me no good
-- none but Christ! I could say with David, Though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me. Psm. xxiii. 4.
I was much exercised in prayer; I felt happy in having a Christ to pray to; I
enjoyed such a nearness to him, that I often wished to be with him; but I said,
not my will, but thine be done. Favored with a visit from my tutor in this
sickness, he recommended me to read the 12th of Isaiah, and second verse.
Behold God is my salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation. These very
words were the desire of my heart, and were my meditation day and night. I
trusted in him, and he was my strength and my song. By this sickness, I was led
to see that the Lord could call me when he pleased. There was one thing which
made me to rejoice; it was, that I had fought the Lord when he called -- not as
Felix said, "Go thy way; when I have a more convenient season, I will call for
thee." Acts xxiv. 25. If I had said as Felix, I think I should have been
miserable forever: but the Lord was pleased that it should not be so; he has
brought me thus far, and I can say with Abraham, Hitherto the Lord has helped
me. I have had many doubts and fears, whether I was the Lord's or no; but now I
have an humble hope, through the blood of Jesus, that I have an interest in
him; not for any worthiness in me, but through his blood, which he shed for
sinners upon the cross; and thus I think, that the Lord has made a happy change
in my soul through his grace. I hope, that while I live in this world of
affliction, I may fulfill all his will which he has revealed for his redeemed.

P. S. I hope if these lines should fall into any person's hand, that Christ
may bless them to the good of his soul. Amen.


Feb. 11, 1795. I thought it my duty to make confession of my faith in Christ,
in order to obey him in baptism. On the 19th I was publicly baptized, enjoying
much happiness in my dear Redeemer.

On May 31st was admitted a member in the Constitution of the Baptist Church in
Fair-street, and had that sweet communion at the Lord's table never to be
forgotten.



EXTRACTS FROM THE DIARY OF C. I. S. HAZARD.
My times are in thy hand. DAVID.
New York, November 27, 1796.
Lord's Day: arose in the morning with the presence of the Lord, and was very
happy in prayer, earnestly desiring a blessing upon the day. I found the
morning much mixed with the world, and a tempting devil striving to interrupt
me. Had some particular crosses in the world; and my mind was perplexed until
afternoon, when the Lord was pleased to give me a sight of himself, as my
Savior, and that he was as able to keep me as he had kept good king Josiah,
who was only twelve years old when the Lord enriched his soul with grace, and
made his heart tender and noble in his cause; trampling under foot all places
of idolatry, and building up the house of the Lord. 2 Kings xviii. Hearing of
these wonders of the Lord, made me to rejoice and say -- why me! why me!
Because thou have redeemed me, O Lord, my God! I felt nothing in me but what
was contrary to him who loved me, and gave himself for me; but, of a truth, I
desired to be gathered to my grave in peace. At the supper of the Lord I found
much nearness to him, and could rejoice and bless him for the rich provision he
has provided for his guest! O that I might live more honorably to my
profession, and stand more steadfast in the truth, that I may show I am not of
the world!

Dec. 18. The morning began with prayer, and ended so, yet with much coldness.
O that I had spent my time better! I would rather be in the uttermost parts of
the earth, than to live so always. I might have heard the word of God; but no,
says satan; no, says my wicked heart, there is hearing enough -- the weather is
cold -- better stay at home. O my soul! where art thou? Going back into the
world? Art thou slighting the worship and the promises of thy God? God forbid!
And may the God of all grace and glory grant, that I may not be left to myself,
to go where others go, and find no comfort there! Thou who know my heart,
and triest my reins, grant that I may enjoy thee more sensibly, and experience
thy love more upon my heart, that, in this lukewarm state of christians, I may
shine forth thy glory. Forbid, gracious God, that this year should drop its
curtain without a blessing for me; sooner let me cease to be, than to live
without thy presence and blessing upon me, and the church to which I belong!

Feb. 4, 1797. Enjoyed more of the presence of God the past week than I have
done for many weeks past. How happy is it for a christian to feel sensibly the
all sufficiency of Christ, who has cancelled all his guilt! O what a good
Savior is he! He hates putting away; he loves his people with an everlasting
love; my Savior, my portion! He is just such a Savior as I need; filthy as I
am, he loves me! Why? Because he has redeemed me. I felt most sensibly, at
his table, how unworthy I was to eat of his bread, and to drink of his wine;
but it was my privilege so to do. Keep me Lord, and I shall be kept.

28th. Enjoyed but little comfort in Christ. I seem to have gone astray; but
still desire to find the path that leads to everlasting happiness. O may the
love of God be shed abroad in my heart by faith! On attending Mr. Warner's
society, I enjoyed much satisfaction; it seemed as if the Lord was there
indeed: may he grant that it may be the birthplace of many souls, and their
numbers greatly increase!

March 12. Enjoyed more comfort in hearing the word of God explained than for
some time before; and I bless God that I can say, that I have not deceived
myself, for the foundation is sure, it is stronger than a rock. O how good is
it, now and then, for the christian to come at meal-time, like Ruth! Ruth ii.
14. Christ is solid food for the soul. May God grant that I may come often at
meal-time! I have found it to be better than gold; it satisfies the soul, and
makes it fat and flourishing. O that I could always be in the happy enjoyment
of this! it is what my soul delights.

May 1st. The past week I have experienced the severest trials I ever
underwent, inward and outward. Well might Job say, Why persecuteth thou me,
seeing the root of the matter is found in me. Job. xix. 28. A sermon on these
words from our minister suited my case well. I bless God for the affliction,
for its issue was good; it led me to prayer every time I had a spare moment to
go and pour out my complaint before him and pray, that the affliction may be
always rather than not enjoy the divine presence; and I desire to give God the
glory, that it made my communion with Jesus the sweeter. This Sabbath did not
appear in vain; for I felt the love of God shed abroad in my heart. O that I
might be always kept in such an humble state!

May 7th. Where am I? Yet out of hell! a spared monument of mercy. Where have
thou been wandering? Call to mind the past week. How has my time been employed?
Have I entirely forgot the Lord, who loves at all times! to forget him who
never forgot me, even on the cross, when it would have been thought his pains
were too great to think on me? Me! How then is it possible I should forget my
Jesus! O, no! I would now come unto thee; I do feel the wickedness of my heart
in departing from thee. Now, blessed Jesus, make me nigh by thy blood! I
determined not to enter the house of the Lord until he had manifested his love
to me. I was going out; I entered my closet again, and there wrestled with God
for a blessing, and that I might experience more hope and love in Christ's
death; and before I got off my knees, I felt my mind more composed, and I
thought, that "praying breath shall not be spent in vain." In the evening
service, I felt much comfort indeed, and I think it is truly said, and the king
came in to see his guest. Matt. xxii. 11. I saw him whom my soul loves; and I
was very much affected in the administration of the Lord's supper, to think he
had done so much for me, and I love him so little, and deny him so often: I
trust it was a time of love. Here, Lord, take my heart just as it is; wash it
in thy precious blood, and it shall be clean; and so let me walk in the world
that I may prove thy young disciple.

July 23. How happy is my soul after having taken its repose in the bosom of
Jesus; how happy, no tongue can express! Glory to God, that he has called me
by his grace! O how pleasant is it to walk in his ways, and to be kept as the
apple of his eye! I feel sensibly for poor sinners. O that I might, if it be
God's will, be the means, through grace, of persuading men of the terrors of
the Lord! I have felt a necessity for setting apart as much time as possible
for study, that if the Lord should be pleased to call me to the ministry, that
I may be a useful servant of Jesus Christ; that I might only preach Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

March 18, 1798. On review of the week past, I must say that I have enjoyed
much prayer, nor have I been so near to my God for two months part. O how good
is it to be found in the Lord's ways! This afternoon, how sweet the discourse!
and may God grant that it may be the means of bringing some soul to seek first
the kingdom of God and his righteousness! Glory be to thee, O God, that thou
have taught me in any measure to seek thy face, and may many more seek thee in
their youth!

31st. I felt myself very happy last week, in attending Mr. Warner's society
for prayer; and may God grant that all such meetings may be blessed for the
establishing many in the way! Many youths attend; the Lord bliss them, and
grant them many spiritual blessings! This morning, O how was my heart drawn out
in prayer to Jesus for a blessing upon my soul, my minister, and the church! In
approaching the table of the Lord, I realized the comfort and love there is in
living near to God. Grant me grace to keep the vows I have made to testify my
love to thee, by walking in thy ways, for thou Lord art my only hope and joy!

April 16th. This morning I was more earnest in prayer than for the week past,
and I trust it was in faith, believing the Lord would send a blessing to my
soul, and give me strength to persevere in his ways. The past week has not been
spent in so much meditation as I now could wish; yet, it is my mercy, my Lord
is the same; and may I never be ashamed to stand bold for the cause of my Lord
and Master! Lord bless the youth that come among us. Have thou no heart to
call? Why did thou teach me? Even because thou would; then Lord do thou
call some dear youth to thyself, and all the glory shall be thine!

May 12. Found much satisfaction in hearing the truth preached this day. O that
I had an heart of gratitude to thee, O God, who art the only portion of my
soul! Let me see my title clear to mansions in the sky! I am a prisoner of
hope, and thou have taken me from the terrible pit and miry clay. Glory to thee
for this rich grace toward me! This day was a good day to me, in writing the
first part of my life. O God, I would wish thee to choose my life -- the path --
the situation in life -- the death -- trusting only in my Savior's
righteousness for acceptance before thee.

July 29th. What must I say? am I cold, or warm, or hot in religion? Have I
lived the past week as a christian? Does not this day tell me I am out of the
road or not? My soul, have thou not often been engaged in private prayer on the
Lord's Day, and felt thy dependence on God? Glory to God! there is one day in
seven, which, by the aid of thy Spirit, I can bring to mind the past week.

August 5th. Sensibly I feel a craving desire for the welfare of Zion, and to
do her all the good I can. Lost some of the privileges the past week, otherwise
my mind has been much composed and happy in the enjoyment of my Lord. I could
not forget that I was to meet him at his own table on the evening, Lord's Day;
and now I have commemorated his dying love to me! Remember me! Remember me!
This is my duty; and so far as I have been enabled, by his Spirit, I have
remembered his dying words. O my soul! Realize what the Savior has done!
Consider the aggravations of thy sins, which caused thy Savior's sorrow: his
tears, his groans, and his burden! I felt happy at the table in having such a
Christ to go to.

This was his last communion season on earth.

On Friday, September 14th, when the pestilence raged in this city, CHARLES
HAZARD made a visit to his pious aunt at York-town, near Peek's-kill. On the
Saturday evening he was remarkably cheerful, and told his aunt, that he
proposed to spend the next day, being Sabbath, in private, for meditation and
prayer; but, before the morning light, he was violently seized by the fever,
and desired to have little said to him, but to enjoy his meditations. His aunt,
anxious to know the state of his soul, asked him certain questions; to which he
replied, "I am composed and resigned, and the Lord is too good to me!" His
disorder grew so violently malignant, and created that intense stupor, that he
was unable to say any thing more, or give any token of his state of mind, and
shortly put a period to his mortal life, aged eighteen years and six months.

CONCLUSION.
FROM the papers of CHARLES HAZARD, now read, you who are acquainted with the
scriptures, and with the power of God in the conversion of man, are to form
your own judgment on the reality of his personal religion, and the hope of his
now possessing eternal bliss. It is not my province, neither is it my wish, "to
canonize the dead;" yet, from my personal knowledge of the youth, I presume, in
christian charity, to believe there was hope in his end. It sensibly impresses
my breast, that God should have preserved my life, as a shattered tree in the
garden of the church so many years, and amidst so many severe storms of
affliction, while many youths of grace within the circle of my connections,
whose branches were covered with ^^^ssoms, and whose fruit, in all probability,
might have proved a rich benefit to society, should be cut down by death before
my eyes! It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

I feel a secret joy, that such of my young friends were preserved, by the arm
of my God, from falling into the strong tide of corruption and error, making
shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience, as thousands of others have done;
but were blessed with an abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

From the satisfaction derived from perusing the diary of CHARLES HAZARD, you
must be convinced of the propriety of those who fear God, keeping memorials of
his goodness to them in the several vicissitudes of their journey through life.
This is one way, by which, in the ages to come, God shows the exceeding riches
of his grace, in his kindness toward them through Christ Jesus. Ephesians. ii. 7.
The advantages of this practice are great to ourselves and to others. As in
water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. Prove. xxvii. 19. And,
in a diary, reading such a diversity of thoughts, temptations, sufferings,
hopes, fears, pleasures, pains, expressed by those whom we believe to be the
subjects of redeeming mercy, we are led to examine ourselves, derive comfort
from a similarity of case, and thus, though faint, yet pursuing. Should your
lives be prolonged to old age, you will find that such a Journal will form a
volume, in your own estimation, next in value to the Bible; and the perusal of
it will enable you, with Moses, to remember all the way in which the Lord your
God led you in this wilderness, to prove you. Deuteronomy. viii. 2. I cannot,
therefore, too much urge you, who are subjects of God's goodness in early life,
to copy after your departed young friend, in writing the daily or weekly
exercise of your hearts in your walk with God. The usual pleas against it are,
a barrenness of mind, great depravity of heart, many miscarriages in life,
little communion with God; and, were you to write, it would distress your own
mind to read it; and should it fall into other hands, they must needs judge
unfavourably of you: but let me tell you, if your hearts are right with God, if
you desire to perfect holiness in his fear, and to walk humbly and happily with
him, your recording these evils will tend to humble you in the dust, serve as
beacons, or way-marks, to your future conduct, and lead you to admire the
exceeding riches of God's sparing, pardoning goodness toward you. If you wait
until you are free from irregular thoughts, rising corruptions, fiery
temptations, and enjoy only the sweet uninterrupted vision of the Lamb, your
diary would be entirely different to any I have hitherto seen or heard of; and,
in my opinion, such perfect blessedness is the portion of those only who have
dropped their mortal clay, are free from sin, out of the reach of Satan's fiery
darts, and landed safe in immortal bliss! Still, as it is the christian's
privilege to walk in the light of God's countenance, Psm. lxxxix. 15. and, now
and then, to set under the shadow of the tree of life, shake its branches by
faith, and find its fruit sweet unto their taste, Sol. Song ii. 3. such seasons
of mercy are worth recording; and, when set in opposition to the black ground
of our own unworthiness, they may be esteemed as precious jewels, shining with
infinite brilliancy! Such seasons, likewise, never fail to stimulate our souls
in ^ervent prayer for a repetition of them; and, to conclude -- If now and then
a smile from Christ be sweet, that is quickly gone,
What will thy joys of vision be, that never will be done!


The AGED of this assembly have, no doubt, listened with some attention to what
has been said concerning the youth of eighteen, lately transmitted from us, by
death, to immortality. You, my aged sires, in the mean time, have exercised
some serious thoughts on yourselves; reflected in what manner your youthful
days were spent; and, notwithstanding, God has lengthened your lives to fifty,
-- to three score years and ten; whether you have experienced the blessedness
of God's converting goodness, and possess an hope full of immortality and
glory. Were a discourse to be pronounced on your future death, according to
your present state of sensibility, do you think there would be just grounds to
say an hundredth part in favor of your salvation, as has been justly said of
our departed youth? or, may the 22d chapter of Jeremiah and 21st verse be
directed as a keen arrow to your breast? I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity,
but thou said, I will not hear: this has been thy manner from thy youth, and
thou obeyedst not my voice, says the Lord. If so; if the favors of providence
have been bestowed upon you in vain; if the dictates of your conscience have
been crushed; if the declaration of God's word, the death of friends, and your
own repeated calamities, have left no salutary impressions upon you; painful
must be the reflection! To have stood all your long day, idle, Matt. xx. yet a
busy man -- a man of business; but one step between you and death, and not one
step nearer to the paradise of bliss! May conscious reflection, aided by the
death of our young friend, be the means, under God, of conveying those
impressions to your mind, unfelt by you before; and though passed on to your
eleventh hour, may you partake of those virtues which flow from the cross, and
leave a lasting testimony of your enjoyment of a complete salvation!

What can I advance to those youth, who were in intimacy with their departed
young friend, and who are far from treading the same religious path; or, are
sure of so peaceful an end? Were it possible for him, though high in the climes
of bliss, to direct his voice to you in this assembly, would not similar to
these be the accents of his lips: --

DEAREST YOUTH!

With whom I once partook of nature's clay, and mingled with the mortal throng
below, Then I often wept, while tears could flow, and poured forth my ardent
prayer for you; yes, for you, whose eager steps pursued vain pleasure's hopes
and aims, turning your giddy eyes and hearts away from a Savior's charms,
contemning all the glories of the heavenly world! Thus employed, when arrows,
dipped in pestilential poison, from death's well-strung bow, flew around, and
smote both young and old: I felt the smart, and, by the mandate of my God,
dropped my mortal flesh, and fled away to know the powers of the world immortal.
Now know I the pangs of death! I felt that tremendous stroke, which instant
severs the immortal soul from its kindred clay: The gulf of death, -- the
judgment seat, -- the horror of guilty souls beneath the pain of punishment, --
the bliss of heaven! -- At these, I often saw the libertine to laugh, and you,
with cool indifference, to turn away. These are no fictitious scenes* no airy
phantoms here; all are real, vast, and as solemn as a disembodied soul can
penetrate, or a holy, righteous God has power to display! Tremble then, O my
still loved youth, whom I left behind, exposed to every snare, and unprepared
for your final change! Soon must you follow me; and, sudden as the lightning
flash, plunge into the abyss of death, from whence there is no return. The land
of darkness, and the shadow of death; a land of darkness, as darkness itself;
and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as
darkness. Job viii. 21, 2^. To pass this vale, without the pardoning blood of
Christ, every pang that conscience can receive, every dart which Satan can
discharge, every terror which offended justice can command, must cease upon
your vitals, and attend you down the deeper pit of black despair! I escaped
alone by that lovely Savior's arm, which you disdain. While with you, on the
earthly ball, JESUS became my SHEPHERD and my FRIEND; he gathered me from my
evil course; he bore me on his breast amidst my greatest foes, and taught me to
believe, that when the doors of death should wide unfold for me, no evil should
I fear; calm and composed I should walk along the vale of death; his rod and
staff should be my stay, and his delightful smiles possess my soul. Psm. xxiii.
4. I proved his word more firm than adamantine rock; his presence was my stay;
the terrors of ghastly death vanished, and that common foe became my friendly
convoy to my Savior's arms! Now I see HIM as he is; my soul is absorbed
beneath his smiles; -- I love -- I praise -- I adore! Angels assist my lays.
Patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs; the innumerable multitude of redeemed
souls of every nation, language, kindred and tongue, unite in glorious vision,
and in endless praise to GOD, and the once slaughtered Lamb, now in the midst
of his august throne, and who makes his glories all their own! May some
attending angel on the church below, wing his way, and bear to me the happy
news of your conversion, to the Lord of life! Stand still -- think of me saved
from the depths of hell -- think of ghastly death, of heaven, and of endless
woe! Then learn IMMANUEL's power to save; incline your ear to his celestial
voice, which, when it calls in mercy, speaks an heaven of solid bliss into a
youthful soul. Then, O then, I Will wait the happy time, when death shall cut
your cord of life, and let you fly, to embrace my Savior and my God; clasp you
again to this my glowing breast, to join in pleasure, and in praise, and to
part no more!

ADDRESS TO DEITY FOR SUCCESS.
NOW, mighty God, thine arm reveal,
Thy saving grace impart;
These counsels and instructions seal
To every reader's heart.
We plant and water all in vain,
Unless thou do afford
The former and the latter rain,
According to thy word.
Success depends on thee alone;
To thee the praise was due,
When David, with his sling and stone,
The haughty champion slew.
So may this feeble effort prove
Successful through thy grace,
To turn abandoned youths to love
Thy name, and seek thy face.
Their minds inform, their hearts engage,
And win them to obey,
As they the unadorned page
Attentively survey.
With thee, my God, I leave the whole;
Now let thy mercy shine;
If I may gain one precious soul
The glory shall be thine.
Speak thou the all-commanding word,
Thy quickening Spirit give;
Thy voice alone, Almighty Lord,
Can make the dead to live.
With anxious heart and feeble hand
The gospel seed is sown;
And while it is scattered over the land,
O send thy blessing down.
O let some happy fruit appear,
To thy eternal praise;
This shall thy waiting servant cheer
Through his remaining days.

