THE ROMANCE OF REAL LIFE.

CHARACTER OF THE WORK.
The MONTHLY REVIEWERS, after quoting those parts of the Preface which sketch
out the design and object of this publication, add, "Such is the editor's
account of her undertaking; and it must be acknowledged, that she has succeeded
according to her wishes, the 'Romance of real Life' being a collection of
interesting and well authenticated facts.

"On looking into the original work, which consists of upwards of twenty
volumes, we find that many of these 'stories,' as the translator calls them,
are Trials and Cases in Law, and consequently they are not the object of
criticism. The few which are here selected, however, being stripped of the
judicial forms of proceedings, will no doubt meet with the approbation of those
persons who are fond of tracing the errors and wanderings of the human heart.
Some of the circumstances ^rded in them are really shocking and disgraceful to
our nature; and as the passions of men, in every age and in every country, are
nearly the same, it is to be hoped that the volumes The London edition was
printed in three volumes; the whole contents of which are given entire in this
single volume.
now before us may serve as bea^ons to warn the reader of his danger; and to
hinder him from striking on the rocks which others have been unable to shun."

MONTHLY REV. Vol. LXXVII. p. 328. THE ROMANCE OF REAL LIFE.

BY CHARLOTTE SMITH.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY J. CAREY, 16, CHESNUT-STREET. 1799.

PREFACE.
A LITERARY friend, whose opinion I greatly value, suggested to me the
possibility of producing a few little volumes, that might prove as attractive
as the most romantic fiction, and yet convey all the solid instruction of
genuine history. He affirmed, that the voluminous and ill-written French work,
entitled Les Causes Celebres, might furnish me with very ample materials for so
desirable a purpose.

He advised me to select such stories from this collection, as though
disfigured by the affectation and bad taste of the compiler, Guyor de Pitaval,
might lead us to form awful ideas of the force and danger of the human
passions. He wished me to consider myself ^s under no restriction, but that of
adhering ^o authenticated facts; and, by telling each story in my own way, to
render it as much as possible an interesting lesson of morality.

This hint appeared to me so captivating, that I began the attempt suggested,
with great pleasure; but soon became sensible of many difficulties I had to
encounter. The style of the original is frequently obscure; the facts are often
anticipated, and often repeated, in almost the same words, in different parts
of the story: they are also often interrupted by remarks, or by relations
wholly foreign to the subject, by which the attention is bewildered and the
interest weakened. I found, indeed, so many minute and unnecessary details, and
so much improper and ridiculous description, intermixed with the most pathetic
events, that I was sometimes on the point of relinquishing my undertaking.

Yet it occurred to me, that the reason which made the work difficult and
unpleasant for me to write, would render it, when ^shed, a desirable book to
those who may wish to obtain some idea of a celebrated publication, without
wading through the obscurities and extraneous matter of M. de Pitaval.

In the course of my work, I met with a new edition of my original, by M.
Richer. This gentleman tells his reader, that he has elucidated ^e difficulties
and obscurities of his predecessor; and I hoped to receive great assistance
from his labors: but I cannot say the production of M. Richer entirely answers
the promises of his preface. The style is certainly clearer, and the narrative
more distinct, but it is also less interesting; and in some instances he sets
forth the circumstances, and even the catastrophe, in a light very different
from that in which they are placed by M. de Pitaval. I have, however, let the
facts remain as related by him from whom I happened to select them, mentioning
only at the end of each story, the author I have followed.

It is probable, that some of these striking stories may have already found
their way to the English press; but, as I have been myself unable to find any
preceding translation of those I had selected, I may presume that, with most
English readers, my work will have the attraction of novelty.

I am aware, indeed, that it is a kind of work from which little same can arise
to its author; but I have not the false pride and delicacy to wish, that my
reader should suppose me uninfluenced by humbler motives to publication.

My ambition will be satisfied, if a number of candid readers allow, that, by
dint of some irksome labor, I have produced a little compilation, not
inelegant in it style; and, in the matter it contains, both interesting and
instructive.

CHARLOTTE SMITH.

THE MARCHIONESS DE GANGE.
IT has been asserted, that there is in human nature a propensity to every kind
of evil; and that persons of the best disposition, and most liberal education,
may find themselves in such situations as will, if their passions are suffered
to predominate, betray them into the most frightful excesses, into crimes which
cannot be related without horror.

Under the dominion of such dreadful passions the abbe and the chevalier de
Gange must have been, when they committed the inhuman cruelties which are the
subject of the following narrative.

The unfortunate victim of their malice and inhumanity, was the only daughter
of the sieur de Roussan of Avignon; and though her birth was not noble, the
splendid fortune she was to inherit from the sieur de Nocheres, her maternal
grandfather, made her to be considered as a desirable match by the first
nobility in the province. -- Mademoiselle de Chateaublanc (as she was ^sled
before her marriage), was not only a ^^ch heiress, but one of the loveliest
women in France; and the description that remains of her person, which paints
her as possessed of almost every perfection that adorns the female form,
corresponds with the miniature which is extant of her, drawn by Mignard, and
allowed to be one of his most exquisite performances.

With so much personal beauty, with a soft and compassionate heart, sense
rather solid than lively, a temper serene and gentle, and manners calculated to
adorn and enjoy society, she was married, at the age of thirteen, to the
marquis de Castillane, grandson of the duke de Villars. This young man was of
an illustrious family, handsome and well made, and had received an excellent
education, which heightened the good qualities be inherited from nature.

They were married in the year 1649, and the marquis soon afterward carried
his wife to court, where such a blazing star could not appear withoutattracting
universal admiration. -- She was immediately acknowledged the reigning beauty
of the season, and that gay and gallant monarch Louis the fourteenth, was
himself sensible of her uncommon attractions -- admiration of so flattering a
nature as would have intoxicated any other young person. -- At some of those
magnificent spectacles that were then given at court, the king chose madame de
Castillane for his partner in dancing -- where her elegant dress, which was
most fortunately chosen, and the grace with which she performed, gave new
luster to her charming face and figure. -- She was less known at court by the
name of the marchioness de Castillane than by that of the beautiful Provencal.

In the midst of this dissipated circle, so dangerous to a very young person,
the fair madame de Castillane continued perfectly to possess her reason; and to
those with whom she was intimate declared, that she felt the emptiness and
fallacy of the pleasures with which she was surrounded, and that they afforded
her no real satisfaction. -- It is not to be supposed, however, that envy would
wholly spare a woman so universally admired. Some adventures of gallantry were
attributed to her, which those who knew her best, declared to be totally void
of foundation; and, as no better proof was ever offered of their reality than
the scandal of the day, it is probable they were the inventions of malice and
disappointment, always ready to raise, against superior excellence, reports,
which idleness and folly are as ready to propagate.

Surrounded with gaieties and luxuries; admired by those who saw her, beloved
by those who knew her, madame de Castillane continued some time at court. And
there she heard the melancholy account of the loss of the galley in which her
husband some short time before had embarked, who being overtaken by a storm on
the coast of Sicily, perished, together with all who were on board. --
Sincerely afflicted at his death, she retired to the house of a friend, madame
d'Ampus, till the regulation of her affairs obliged her to return to Avignon.

When she arrived at her native place, neither the pleasures of liberty, which
she might now enjoy, being a widow in the earliest bloom of youth, nor the
effect that her charms (which received new splendor from the dark contrast of
her weeds) had on all who beheld her, could engage her to continue in the world
-- and she retired for a considerable time to a convent, where she permitted
none to see her but her particular friends, or such as had business with her
relative to her estate.

But as soon as the severe confinement to which she thought it right to
conform, during the first year of her widowhood, began to relax, through the
solicitation of her friends, a crowd of lovers surrounded her -- and among the
most conspicuous, was the young marquis de Gange. His person was not less a
model of manly beauty, than that of the marchioness de Castillane of female
grace and loveliness. His fortune was perfectly suitable, and his rank
illustrious, being baron de Languedoc, marquis de Gange, and governor of St.
Andre.

-- His manners were extremely engaging, and his age did not much exceed twenty
-- and so well did the exterior qualities of these young persons appear to
correspond, that it slruck all who know them, that they were designed by Heaven
for each other. -- Madame de Castillane, insensible of every other passion,
soon felt and returned that of monsieur de Gange. This second marriage took
place in 1658, and the world applauded a union, which seemed so likely to
secure the happiness of both parties. But however in outward advantages they
appeared to agree, their souls were very different. Proud, fierce, capricious,
obstinate, and gloomy, how little the marquis de Gange resembled her, with whom
his destiny was united! For some time, however, after their marriage, he
concealed, under the fond attentions of the lover and the bridegroom, that
unhappy temper, and those unpleasant manners, that afterward appeared in the
husband -- and the beautiful marchioness, who was herself all truth and
mildness, never suspected him to be otherwise than he then appeared. -- Alas!
to these halcyon days succeeded others, in which the ardour of his passion
being abated, he no longer thought it worth his while to disguise his
disposition. En^ui and disgust insensibly took possession of the marquis, who
began to mix again with the societies he had quitted on his marriage -- and the
marchioness, being left to follow her own amusements, turned to be again the
admiration of the crowds she had deserted for him; but it was merely for
amusement she did so; and not with any design of engaging in affairs of
gallantry. -- She never seriously listened to any of her admirers; but, as soon
as she perceived an attachment forming, that was likely to create any real
uneasiness, she either wholly excluded such pretenders from her society; or, if
she admitted them to it, received them with so much coolness, that the vainest
among them soon found they had nothing to hope. -- But though her conduct was
perfectly innocent, the marquis (conscious perhaps of the inequality of their
minds) beheld it with jealousy and mistrust. His temper, naturally morose and
vindictive, was much disposed to suspicion; and his humor became every day
more teasing and disagreeable to his wife -- Yet, as a jealous husband is in
France an object of ridicule, and as he could find nothing in the conduct of
madame de Gange, on which to found any real complaint, he constrained himself
as much as he could, and suffered the uneasiness of his mind to appear only in
the invincible ill temper with which he received his wife -- by which, if she
had really had the inclinations he suspected her of, he would only have
accelerated the evil he so greatly dreaded.

Such was his situation of mind, when his two brothers, the abbe and the
chevalier de Gange, came to reside at his house. The elder of them, who was
called the abbe de Gauge, possessed an uncommon share of understanding, with
the malice and cunning of a fiend. Violent, proud, and ambitious, he studied to
govern every one about him; in which, from his superior abilities, he usually
succeeded too well. Having neither principles of honor or sentiments of
humanity, no considerations, no laws, either divine or human, could prevent his
carrying any point on which he had once resolved. Yet this diabolical spirit he
had art enough to conceal, with the profoundest dissimulation, and could assume
the appearance of the most amiable, benevolent, and honest man in the world,
while his heart was the receptacle of every vice that disgraces human nature.
He was not in orders, but took the equivocal title of abbe, as being the most
favorable to the indulgence of his licentious passions. The chevalier, whose
understanding w^ below mediocrity, seemed born only to be directed by others;
and the abbe, without his perceiving it, governed him entirely. Over the
marquis also the abbe acquired the same ascendancy. His estate and his family
were soon given up to the management of this assiduous brother; who left him
the name of master, but enjoyed all the power. The uncommon charms of the
marchioness (...) Gange made an immediate and deep impression on the heart of
this bad man; nor did the consideration of her being his brother's wife deter
him a moment from forming designs upon her honor. Scorning to put any
restraint on his inclinations, however unwarrantable, he determined to attempt
seducing madame de Gange; and for this purpose, knowing the influence of
gratitude on such a heart as hers, he began by endeavoring to oblige her. He
saw how uneasily she lived with his brother, who fatigued her incessantly with
jealousy and ill-humour -- and the first use he made of his power over the
marquis was, to induce him to alter his conduct toward his wife: of whom the
abbe spoke so advantageously, that his jealousy began to give place to those
sentiments of esteem and tenderness which he had at first felt for her. The
marchioness, sensible of this change in her husband's behavior, gave way to
the natural goodness and sweetness of her disposition, and forgot the harsh
treatment she had lately suffered; treatment which was on the point of changing
her former attachment into a settled coldness, if not aversion. The abbe,
however, did not intend that madame de Gange should enjoy the satisfaction she
received from her husband's returning affection, without knowing to whom she
owed it. As soon as an opportunity offered, he took care to tell her, that the
marquis's present attention and kindnes^, was ^usequence of what he had said in
her favor -- and he gave her at the same time to understand, that the heart of
his brother was so entirely in his hands, that her treatment must depend wholly
on him. Disgusted at such a declaration, the marchioness answered coolly, that
she thanked him. The abbe was a good deal disappointed at the reception she
gave him on this occasion. He had flattered himself that she would have
accepted with more vivacity his proffered services, and that, by first engaging
her gratitude, he should in time create in her breast warmer sentiments in his
favor. But though a man of abilities, such as he possessed, who determines to
make himself agreeable, and has such continual opportunities of doing so, is
above all others the most dangerous object a young woman can encounter, it
happened that the dislike, even bordering on antipathy, which madame de Gange
had conceived, on the first sight of the abbe, was an invincible obstacle to
his designs. Her manner toward him was civil, bnt so cold and distant, that he
could very seldom find an occasion to speak to her apart. And after some time,
as he saw she studied to avoid him, and that all his assiduities made no
impression on her, he determined to speak plainly, and to acknowledge his
passion, in terms that she could not misunderstand.

The marchioness had engaged herself to pass some days at the country residence
of a friend. -- Thither the abbe followed her, and as his conversation was
extremely agreeable, he was received with pleasure by the whole party. -- He
was usually the life of whatever company he was in, and now he exerted himself
to the utmost, and was more brilliant and entertaining than ever. A hunting
party being proposed, at which every gentleman was to attend on a lady, the
abbe offered himself to escort madame de Gange; which she accepted, with her
usual cool civility, as a matter of perfect indifference. -- As soon as the
company began to disperse in the woods, the abbe, who now saw the opportunity
at hand that he had so long wished for, led madame de Gange into the most
unfrequented spot he could find, and then, with very little preface, made the
confession he had meditated -- but so abruptly, and with expressions so strong
and ardent, that they inspired madame de Gange with terror rather than pity --
who turning pale with surprise and anger, could not immediately form any reply;
while the abbe continued to declare himself with such violence of manner, and
in terms so unequivocal, that she could not doubt of his being very much in
earnest -- and she saw, that to endeavor to laugh it off, us she would have
done such a declaration from a less resolute lover, would have availed her
nothing; assuming, therefore, an air more reserved than before, she said -- I
will not, monsieur Pabbe, affect to misunderstand you -- but you must know how
I ought to receive such a confession as you have presumed to make. Ask your own
heart, sir, ask your own conscience, what decency and duty should urge me to
say to you -- and spare me the pain of holding a farther conversation on so
odious a subject. -- The manner in which she pronounced these words, made them
infinitely more mortifying to the abbe, than the words themselves. Stung to the
soul, his dissimulation entirely forsook him, and he fiercely answered -- Know
you not, madam, when you brave my vengeance thus, that your fate is entirely in
my hands? Have you forgotten that it is in my power to make you the most
miserable of women -- and that I will do so if you refuse to listen to me? In
declining to return my passion, you risk having your life embittered by the
severest trials. Love me, madam, suffer me at least to hope that you will, and
(...) my power shall be dedicated to your hap^ness and tranquillity. The
marchioness, (...) making an effort to command her indignation, replied -- As
you affect to love, learn now to esteem me. Be assured, monsieur l'abbe, that
the dread of those evils worse than death, shall never induce me to commit a
wicked action. -- But, added she, as if to mortify him still more; if I were
indeed capable of such weakness, you are the last man on earth who could
influence me to be guilty of it. So saying, she rejoined her company, leaving
the abbe overwhelmed with rage and confusion. His pride so severely humbl^d,
his love hopeless, irritated him almost to madness; and, incapable with all his
art of commanding his temper, while his heart was corroded by such uneasy
sensations, he took a fullen leave of the lady of the house, and returned in
the evening to Avignon; nobody but madam de Gange being able to guess the cause
of this sudden access of ill-humour, which all his complaisance and
dissimulation did not enable him a moment to disguise.

While the abbe became every day more odious in the eyes of madame de Gange,
and while she carefully avoided any other communication with him, than the most
distant politeness required, her husband's younger ^ther, the chevalier,
appeared to her in a ve^ ^fferent light. Without possessing an un^tanding equal
to either of the others, his ^nners were softer, and his temper seemed ^ore
equal and amiable; and though madame de Gange felt no other sentiments for him
than those of friendship, which their alliance authorized, yet she grew
insensibly fond of his company, and found great relief in opening her heart
freely to him, on all her domestic uneasiness; while the comparison she could
not avoid making, between his gentle attentions and the turbulent and insolent
passion with which the abbe had dared to trouble her, never failed to be
greatly in his favor. But unhappily the chevalier, equally susceptible of the
power of beauty, could not be continually with her, and receive marks of her
esteem, without feeling the same passion rising in his bosom. The regard she
testified for him on all occasions, and the pleasure she took in his society,
inspired him with hopes, that she was very far from meaning to give. The abbe
soon saw the situation of his brother's heart, and saw it with inexpressible
rage and anguish. He determined to watch them narrowly; but having done so for
some time, all his malice did not enable him to discover any one circumstance,
that was at all inconsistent with the purest virtue, on the part of madame de
Gange. Though he was irritated to distraction, by the partiality she so
avowedly showed the chevalier, yet he wished to try whether it was to him only
that her virtue was impregnable; and he determined to speak to the chevalier,
and to engage him to push his good fortune. For this purpose, he took the first
opportunity of their being alone, to say to him -- Brother, we are both in love
with the marchioness; if you can make yourself acceptable, I will withdraw my
pretensions, and shall be satisfied to rejoice in your happiness; but if you
fail, I expect you will have the generosity to acknowledge it, und give me
leave, in my turn, to try my fortune. I trust that we are so much united, that
we shall not be embroiled about a woman. The chevalier, who was a dupe to this
pretended generosity, protested, that, rather than give his brother, the abbe,
any unasiness, he would endeavor to conquer his passion. "No," said the abbe,
if I see you happy, I shall be content. My friendship is yet dearer to me than
my love. They embraced on the strength of this convention, and the chevalier
agreed immediately to open the siege. In consequence of which, though he never
had the courage to declare himself in such direct terms as the abbe had done,
he threw so much passion into his eyes and manner, and redoubled his
assiduities in a way so much warmer than mere brotherly sentiments would have
inspired, that madame de Gange could not ^istake their source; and soon found
it necessary to avoid his company, as much as she had till then sought it. But
as she perceived, that this alteration in her conduct, marked as it was, did
not sufficiently discourage him, she sometimes mingled in her conversation the
most poignant raillery, on the mistakes the chevalier often made in company:
and though she was naturally very candid, and wished to palliate or conceal
such errors, she made use of this method to let the chevalier see how
contemptible he appeared to her, and by that means to deprive him of all the
hopes her kindness had made him entertain; and perhaps to this severity she
owed the cruel revenge he harbored against her, since nothing is so likely to
pique such a man and to irritate him beyond forgiveness, as to let him see he
is contemned and despised, for weakness of which he is conscious. Certain it
is, that the chevalier was, by this means, not only cured of hi^ presumption,
but his love for his sister-in-(...) ^as changed into the bitterest and most
(...) hatred.

As soon as (...) chevalier acknowleged that he gave up (...) pursuit as
hopeless the abbe returned to the charge. He found that cementing the union
between his brother, the marquis, and madame, had procured him none of the
advantages he expected from the gratitude of the latter, and he determined to
try the effect of an opposite conduct, and to inspire the marquis with
jealousy, to which he was naturally inclined. For this purpose he affected to
remark, that madame de Gange had lately taken particular delight in associating
with a certain party, among whom was a young man of a most engaging person and
manners; and in fact, madame de Gange was fond of his society, and frequen^ly
conversed with him, but always in (...) ^th people of rank and reputation, and
with that purity of heart, which, feeling itself incapable of ill, never
imagines it can be suspected of it. Such an object, however, as this young man,
was exactly fitted to promote the designs of the abbe; and he represented her
partiality in such a light to the marquis, that he became inflamed with the
most furious jealousy, and, forgetting the common forms of decency, he not only
perpetually insulted his wife with language the most affronting and injurious,
but proceeded to greater enormities; while the abbe, continually pouring oil on
the flam^ the situation of the unhappy madame de ^ge became every day more
insupportable. But she made no attempt to undeceive her husband, as to the
motive of his brothers' conduct, foreseeing, that whatever she could say would
be totally fruitless.

The abbe having suffered her to continue for some time under the sufferings he
had himself occasioned, determined again to attempt moving her in favor of
himself. She so cautiously avoided any interview with him, that it was not
without great difficulty he ^ound an opportunity of speaking to her alone. At
length he contrived to join her in the garden, "Well, madam," said he,
attempting to take her hand -- are we always to be enemies? Why do you oblige
me to make you unhappy, when you know I would sacrifice my life to your
satisfaction. By what you have lately experienced, you find I did nor
exaggerate my power, when I told you it depended on me, to make you the most
unhappy of women: and you know that you may, on certain terms, engage me to use
that power only to contribute to your felicity. -- Madame de Gange heard him
without interruption, and, as soon as he had concluded his harangue, she cast
on him a look expressive of the most profound contempt, and walked from him
without deigning to reply; leaving the abbe more enraged and mortified than
before.

It was about this time that the marchioness de Gange, and several persons who
were with her, eat of some cream in which arsenic had been infused, but in so
small quantity, that the oily nature of the vehicle, in which it was
administered, prevented its having the ill effect that had been intended. On
this occasion, a prediction, that had been made to her some years before, at
Paris, returned to her remembrance: -- an astrologer, whom it was the fashion
to consult, assured her she would die a violent death; and though she had too
much sense to give much credit to the vain and fallacious science of
divination, she could not, on this event, forbear speaking of the prediction
that had been made. The affair of the (...) cream made for some time a great
(...) ^ignon; but, as the marchioness was (...) to forbear speaking of it, it
was soon forgotten, like all other wonders of the day. -- Soon after this, her
grandfather, the sieur de Nocheres, died, and she came into possession of a
very large fortune, which he left to her sole use and disposal. The marquis now
thought it necessary again to alter his behavior, and to treat with respect a
woman who had so much in her power. The abbe was the forwardest to advise him
to assume the semblance of his former affection, since he saw that he could
himself gain nothing, but that his family might lose a great deal by contrary
behavior. As to the chevalier, he was a mere cipher, whom the abbe directed as
he pleased. But the change was too great, at this time, to deceive madame de
Gange. Whatever their professions were, she believed their hearts were still
the same, and that their present complaisance she owed entirely to her
acquisition of fortune, and her power of disposing of it. As the affairs of
this wealthy succession were likely to occupy a great deal of their time, and
to prevent their going to Gange so much as they used to do, the marquis
designed passing ^ome months there, in order to regulate the business of that
estate, that no inconvenience might arise from his future absence. He proposed
to the marchioness to accompany him thither; to which, with her usual
sweetness, she (...) though she had a decided and in^ (...) tipathy to the
place. On this (...) she felt a particular repugnancy, and presentiments of
such melancholy import, as determined her before she went to make a will, by
which she declared madame de Roussan, her mother, her sole heir, for life, to
all her fortune, with liberty to give it, at her death, to either of the
children which she (the marchionese de Gange) had by the marquis. One was a
son, then about six years old; and the other a daughter, about five: and
mistrusting, perhaps, her own ^irmness, she went before a magistrate at
A^ignon, and declared that the testament she ^igned in his presence was her
real meaning, and that any subsequent one should be con^idered as extorted from
her, and be of no effect; and the signed a declaration to that purpose, as
strong as could be drawn up. It was easy to see, from the purport of this will,
that the treatment she had received from the marquis had made a deep impression
on her heart, for his name was not mentioned. As soon as she had confirmed this
disposition of her effects, by the most authentic and certain precautions, she
prepared for her journey to ^he chateau de Gange, though with so strong (...)
persuasion that she should return no more, that she took a solemn and affecting
farewell of all her friends, who, with tears, heard her ^xpress the
unaccountable prejudice she had ^ouceived, that she was bidding than an eter^l
adieu^

Under the same mournful idea, she distriu^^^ several sums of money among the
con^ents at Avignon; particularly, she gave a sum ^o the recollects, beseechin^
them to say mass for her, and to pray that she might not die without receiving
the holy sacraments; and so earnestly did she recommend herself to their
prayers, that see seemed convinced her death was inevitable.

What shall we say to these presentiments, so frequent in history? how account
for the unseen hand, which, while it warns the victims of their fate, seems to
take from them, the power of avoiding it? Such was the conviction of his death
that haunted Henry the 4th, before he was assassinated by Ravaillac. -- Such
the strange signs that preceded the death of the duke of Guise, at Blo^s; and
innumerable othe^s, related in the histories of all nations.
Under such impressions, however, madame de Gange began her journey to the
chateau de Gange; situated nineteen leagues from Avignon; where, on her
arrival, she was received by the dowager marchioness de Gange, the marquis's
mother, with every demonstration of esteem and affection. This lady, who was of
a character uncommonly amiable, and had a very superior understanding, was
charmed with her daughter-in-law, and on this and every other occasion had
behaved to her with the greatest politeness and regard. Her usual residence was
at Montpellier, but she now came to pass some time with her son, and
endeavored to contribute, as much as possible, to make her residence at Gange
agreeable to the young marchioness. The marquis himself, as well as the abbe
and the chevalier, seemed also to strive, by their present kindness and
attention, to make her forget every impropriety in their former behavior, and
left nothing undone that they thought would convince her that their hearts were
entirely changed. -- The most insinuating manners, the most delicate
attentions, were employed to persuade madame de Gange of their sincerity; and
the abbe and chevalier, as if convinced that their presumtuous attachment had
justly incurred the displeasure of the marchioness, now appeared no longer as
importunate lovers, but as tender friends; and they assumed this character with
so much ease, that she, who was the most candid and sincere of women, forget
insensibly the dislike she had conceived, and lived with them on a footing of
unreserved friendship and intimacy; flattering herself that her future life
would be tranquil, and even happy. After the whole family had continued
together for some time, the dowager madame de Gange returned to Montpellier,
and the marquis said he was obliged by business to return to Avignon. But
before he went, there is reason to believe he held a long consultation with his
brothers; which contributed but too much to the tragical event that so soon
followed his departure.

The dowager marchioness and her eldest son being gone, madame de Gange found
herself alone with two persons who were in fact her greatest enemies, but who
hid their enmity under such refined hypocrisy, that she not only believed them
entirely cured of their former dishonorable thoughts of her, but that they had
been converted by her conduct to a just sense of what they owed her and her
husband. A^ soon as the abbe saw that his dissimulation had on her soft and
ingenious mind all the effect he had hoped for, he contrived, under pretense of
consulting only her happiness, to mention to her the will the had made at
Avignon, which he besought her to alter, representing to her, that while such a
will remained in force, the world, as well as the marquis her husband, would
believe, that she still harbored anger and resentment against him; and that,
as he was determined to live with her for the future in the most perfect
harmony, it was her part to convince him, by revoking that will, that she no
longer remembered their former disagreements. Madame de Gange, whose heart was
formed for affection and forgiveness, could ^ot resist these reasons; she
consented to make a new will, in which she gave every thing to her husband. The
abbe either did not know of the declaration she had signed at Avignon, or did
not believe it would invalidate a subsequent act. Certain it is, that he did
not ask her to revoke that act; but having, as he thought, secured her property
to his family, he prepared to execute the infamous design he had formed; and,
by his influence with the infatuated chevalier, he forced him to enter into all
his views, and even to keep pace with him in the most atrocious crimes. -- Some
time in May, 1667, madame de Gange, being slightly indisposed, sent to the
apothecary of the place for a medicine she had occasion to take; but when it
came, it was so black and thick, that she found her aversion to it invincible,
and refused to swallow it. She contented herself with taking some pills she had
by her. It is more than probable, that the abbe and the chevalier had mixed
poison in this medicine; for, as they did not know, for some hours, that the
marchioness had not taken it, they sent in the course of the morning several
times, to the door of her chamber, to enquire how she did; undoubtedly
expecting, with impatience, to hear, that the potion had the effect they
intended; but being undeceived, as to her having drank it, they formed the
diabolical resolution of destroying, at all events, the unfortunate object of
their malignity.

Madame de Gange, who found it necessary to keep her bed all day, invited
several ladies of the neighborhood to come and pass the afternoon with her,
and, though she was not quite well, she never appeared more interesting or
entertaining. The abbe and the chevalier, who were admitted to join the party,
seemed unusually absent and melancholy, particularly the chevalier, whom the
marchioness laughingly attacked on his absence of mind, and at length obliged
him to return her raillery. The abbe, though he also seemed much more reserved
than usual, failed not to enliven the conversation by some of those agreeable
sallies, for which he was so remarkable. But still there was in the behavior
of them both, something that the company remarked as extraordinary. Neither of
them partook of a collation that was served up to the ladies, of which madame
de Gange not only did the honors with her usual graceful ease, but also eat
heartily. When it was over, the ladies took their leave; the abbe attended them
to the door, but the chevalier remained sitting by the bed side, buried in
thought, and with a countenance so gloomy, as very much puzzled the
marchioness, who knew not how to account for it. The dreadful mystery was soon
cleared up, on the return of the abbe into the room. She saw him enter in about
ten minutes, holding in one hand a pistol, and in the other a glass filled with
a black liquid. Fury and distraction was in his eyes; his hair seemed bristled
on his head, and his features were con^ulsed with passion. No description can
do justice to the terror his whole figure inspired. He fastened the door, and
advancing some pa^s toward the bed where the affrighted marchioness lay, he
stopped us if to contemplate his victim, and, fixing on her his glaring eyes,
which seemed forced out of their sockets by the rage that possessed him, he
continued for above a minute to stand staring on her with a petrifying look, as
if to announce to her all the horrors of her fate! -- On the other side of her
appeared the chevalier; his countenance as expressive of the rage that consumed
him, as was his brother's, but the expression was different, and when he drew
his sword, some saint hope arose in the marchioness, that he drew it to defend
her; but she did not long continue in that error. These two wratches, with the
hearts and intentions of demons, came close to her bed, and the abbe, with a
hollow, but determined voice, said, -- Now, madam, you are to die -- choose
whether it shall be by sword, pistol, or poison. -- "To die!"exclaimed madame
de Gange -- Good God! what have I done? how have I deserved this excess of
cruelty? and why are you to be my judge and executioner? -- Finding that
remonstrance seemed to aggravate his fury, she addressed herself to the
chevalier, and, turning on him her lovely eyes, she cried -- Ah! my dear
brother, are you too armed against me? is it possible that you can have the
heart to become my murderer? and does all my kindness and regard for you
deserve no other return? (She had often lent him sums of money of her own, and
only a few days before given him a draught for five hundred livres.) But far
from being softened by this pathetic address, it seemed to redouble his rage
against her, and, with a countenance and voice yet more terrible, he cried, Our
resolution is taken, madam -- you must die -- choose therefore the means, for
we can hesitate no longer. -- If the fact were not well authenticated, it could
not be believed that two young men, on whom the beauty of madame de Gange had
had such an effect, should now harden their hearts against her, pleading with
all that beauty, and with the most moving remonstrances, for her life, and
determine to dip their hands in her blood: but so it was! -- and, while the
abbe held the pistol to her head, and the chevalier his sword to her heart, she
took out of the abbe's other hand the poison, and, finding there was no remedy,
swallowed it. The nature of it was so corrosive, that some of it falling on her
breast turned the skin quite black, and her lips were also burnt and parched by
drinking it. Not content with having made her swallow the liquid, the chevalier
took a silver bodkin, and collecting the dregs, that remained on the sides and
at the bottom of the glass, he put them on its edge, and insisted on her
swallowing that also, using expressions of indecency and brutality which
embittered his cruelty. The unhappy marchioness obeyed; but though she took
this last destructive mixture into her mouth, she did not swallow it, but held
it there till she had an opportunity, unperceived, to conceal it in the
bed-clothes. But, as she had now swallowed more than enough to destroy her, she
exclaimed, in a voice of the mo^ piercing anguish, My death is now inevitable;
in the name of God, then, I implor^ you to have mercy on my soul! -- do no
deprive me of my existence here and here after, but send me a confessor, that I
man die like a christian. They then went out carefully securing the door after
them; and seeking the priest of the parish, who was entirely devoted to them,
ordered him to confes^ madame de Gange. It is astonishing, that i^ the midst of
such a complication of horrors madame de Gange still possessed herself, tha^
her presence of mind did not for a mome^^ forsake her, and that her resolution
and re^^^lection enabled her to make strong efforts (ala^ how fruitlessly!) to
preserve her life. N^ sooner had the inhuman brothers shut the door, than she
determined to attempt her escape; and putting on a taffeta petticoat, the only
garment she had at hand, she ran to the window of her chamber, which looked
into the courtyard of the castle, to throw hersel^ out of it, though it was
twenty-two feet from the ground. At the instant that she was abo^^ to
precipitate herself from this height, t^^ priest opened the door of her room,
and see^n what she was going to do, endeavored t^ prevent her. Had she thrown
herself directly down, she would probably have dashed he^ head or her breast
against the stones, but he snatched at her petticoat, and caught it with such
force, that a piece of it remained in his hand; and the turn this gave to her
whole body, so broke her fall, that she came to the ground with her feet first,
which were terribly cut by the stones. The wicked priest, who was entirely
devoted to the service of the abbe and the chevalier, seeing she had reached
the ground without being materially hurt, threw at her a very heavy pitcher of
water, which stood in the window next to that from whence she had jumped; and
which, if it had fallen on her head, must have certainly killed her; but it
fell within two or three inches of her. The first thought that occurred to her,
as soon as she reached the ground, was to endeavor to discharge the poison
that she had swallowed: for this purpose she took one of the tresses of her
long hair, and put it as far as she could down her throat; the expedient
succeeded, and she brought up the noxious mixture, together with what she had
eaten, and then attempted to make her way out of the enclosure where she was;
but every door was fastened. She then went toward the stables; they were shut
also; and she now despaired of escaping before her cruel assassins could reach
her. At length she saw a groom, " -- Oh friend!" cried she, save my life -- I
am poisoned -- let me go through the stables, that I may receive help before it
is too late. The man, moved by her situation, took her in his arm^ and carried
her through his stables into the road, where he put her under the care of some
women who were passing by.

The priest, in the meantime, hastened to the abbe and the chevalier, to inform
them of her escape; and they resolved not to leave their work imperfect. While
she ran wildly along, imploring succor from every one she met, they pursued
her, crying out that she was delirious in a fever, and had escaped from her
attendants. The people, who beheld her almost without clothes, her feet naked
and bleeding, her hair dishevelled, and running along she knew not where, were
easily persuaded that she was indeed out of her senses. At length, as she
reached the door of the sieur des Prats, about three hundred yards from the
cheateau, the chevalier overtook her; and forcing her into the house with him,
shut the door, while the abbe remained on the outside with a pistol in his
hand, protesting that he would kill the first person that offered to approach,
for that he would not suffer his sister-in-law, in the situ, ation she then
was, to become a spectacle to strangers. His real design was to prevent her
receiving any assistance that might counteract the effect of the poison. The
sieur des Prats (...) absent, but his wife was at home, in company with several
friends: among these ladies, the unfortunate marchioness wildly rushed,
beseeching them to save her, ^d exclaimed that she had just been poisoned. ^he
chevalier protested to them, that she was ^erely delirious; but while he
traversed the ^om in great agitation, these women crowded ^und her, and as she
still continued to cry ^t, "I am poisoned, I am poisoned!" one of ^em gave her
a box of orvietan, a counter ^^ison, of which she swallowed several pie^^s; and
another presented her with a glass (...) water; but so great was the inhumanity
of ^e chevalier, that, just as she was raising it her burning lips, he dashed
it out of her and, and, addressing himself to the ladies, sought them not to
attend to the incohe^t ravings of madame de Gange; adding ^t he should be
obliged to them, if they ^^uld leave her wholly to his care, as she ^s unfit,
in her present situation, to be with (...) but her own family. The marchioness
^w conceived a hope of being able to pre^l on the chevalier to have mercy on
her, (...), in that hope, she desired to be left alone moment with him: the
ladies at her re^est retired to another room; and then ^^dame de Gange,
throwing herself on her ^ees before the chevalier, cried -- My dear brother,
will nothing prevail on you to revoke the cruel vow you have made to destroy
me? will nothing excite your pity? Suppose I were an unhappy stranger, who
reduced to the most dreadful extremity came to implore your pity! -- you would
surely, as a gentleman, as a man, defend and protect such a stranger; and is
your heart shut only against me? I will engage, by the most solemn oath, to
represent what has hitherto happened just as you will dictate -- I will forget
it -- and, if I have deserved your hatred by the least injury, I will submit to
any acknowledgment, any punishment you please. But in God's name, my dear
brother, have compassion on me! pity me, my dear brother, pity me! and do not
precipitate a death, which is perhaps already inevitable. This supplication,
enforced with all the touching energy of despair, all the persuasive eloquence
of beauty, only irritated the cruelty of the monster to whom it was addressed:
he took a short sword which he wore, and, using it as a dagger, stabbed the
marchioness twice with it in her breast. She flew from him, and called for
help: he pursued her, and gave her five other blows on the back; and having
snapped his sword; left the broken end in her shoulder. As he now thought he
had concluded this bloody scene, he quitted the room, and going hastily to the
door, he said to the abbe, who was waiting there, Come, abbe, we must be gone,
the business is done. -- By this time the ladies were returned to the room
where madame de Gange lay weltering in her blood, and to all appearance,
breathing her last. Her blood ran from her in streams; her respiration was
short and ^aborious; but, as she was not actually dead, they thought it
possible yet to assist her; and one of them went to the window, and called out
for a surgeon to be immediately sent for. -- On hearing which, the abbe found
their work was yet incomplete: whereupon, he rushed like a demoniac into the
room, and, approaching the dying victim on the floor, snapped his pistol close
to her breast; but it missed fire; and at the same instant madame de Brunel,
one of the ladies present, seized his arm and turned the pistol aside. The
enraged abbe, seeing this blow which he thought so effectual, defeated, gave
madame Brunel a violent stroke with his fist, and then attempted to stun the
marchioness with the end of his pistol; but the women now all pressed round
him, overwhelmed him with blows, and driving him in spite of all his efforts to
the door, they thrust him out and shut it upon him. They then returned to the
unhappy lady; and one of them, who knew something of ^urgery, staunched the
blood, and took from her shoulder the end of the sword, encouraged by madame de
Gange herself, who, weak and fainting as she was, besought her to put her knee
against her she alter to force out the broken weapon. By this idme a surgeon
arrived, who dressed her wounds, none of which he thought would be fatal; the
chevalier, in his confusion, not having struck her where his (...) have been
mortal. She was put to bed, and hopes were entertained that she might yet
survive. In the mean time the two assassins, taking advantage of the night,
fled from the scene of their cruelty. It was nine o'clock in the evening when
they set out together for Aberas, another estate of the marquiss's, about a
league from Gange. There they remained some time, considering what they should
next do; and the reproaches they made each other, for not having completed
their infamous undertaking, rose at length to such a height, that they were
ready to draw their swords on each other. They talked of returning to Gange,
there to finish their sacrifice; but they recollected is was improbable they
should ga^n access to her; that they should certainly be taken; and that
therefore it was wiser to consult their own safety.

The horrid event was soon spread throughout the country. All the neighboring
nobility came to offer their services to madame de Gange, and the consuls of
the district waited on her to offer her a guard, which the accept^d, and which
was placed round the house of the sieur des Prats, where she remained. The
baron de Tressan, grand provost, endeavored to overtake the assassins, but
they had already reached the coast and embarked at a port called the Gra^ de
Pa^aval, near Aqd^. A physician and surgeon were sent for from M^^^pe^lier to
attend the marchioness, and every possible assistance and convenience provided
for her.

The marquis de Gange was at Avignon when the news of this bloody catastrophe
reached him; and though there is little doubt but that he had agreed with his
brothers, and even that the design originated with him, yet it is probable that
he expected they would have completed their undertaking by the certain but
silent mode of poison, and not in a manner so open and undisguised. As soon as
he learned the particulars, he affected the utmost concern and distress, and
protested he would revenge the cruel treatment his wife had received from his
brothers, by putting them to death with his own hands. In a word, he rather
over-acted his part at first, in some respects; for it was remarked that,
instead of setting out immediately for Gange, he deferred his departure for
four and twenty hours, though it should seem that not a moment would have been
lost by a man who really loved a wife, sosiuated as was madame de Gange. It
appeared also very extraordinary, that to the friends he saw at Avignon after
he received the intelligence, he never mentioned what had happened, though it
is so natural for a person under the pressure of a new affliction to speak of
it to every body, and to think of nothing else. When the marquis arrived at
Gange, a monk announced his being there to ^he marchioness, and she received
him with all the tenderness and regard that the most beloved husband could have
expected; she only gently reproached him for having left her in the power of
his cruel brother. The great judge of hearts, only knows what passed in that of
the marquis. If he was indeed accessory to her murder, which there was great
room to believe, this reception, so kind and forgiving, must have been one of
the most cruel punishments he could undergo: he ^ad the art, however, to
compose his countenance, and not to betray, in his behavior, the emotions
which must have torn his heart with remorse and anguish.

Such was the delicate sensibility of madame de Gange, that recollecting, after
some time, that she had perhaps hurt him by her reproaches in regard to his
brother, she apologized to him, and entreated him to impute whatever she had
said not to any want of affection for him, but to the extremity of her
sufferings, which extorted such complaints from her; and she held out her hand
to him in token of perfect amity, and with a sweetness peculiar to herself.
This excess of goodness, which one would imagine must have been a new
punishment to the marquis, only renewed his hopes of availing himself of her
affection, to secure the fortune of the dying victim. He desired her to revoke
the act, by which she had confirmed her first will made at Avignon; and to
confirm that which she had made since at the instigation of the abbe, which the
vice-legate, in consequence of the deed beforementioned, had refused to
register. But she firmly and positively protested against making any
alteration; and it is believed, that this attempt of the marquis's persuaded
her that he had had but too great a share in the dreadful resolution of taking
away her life, though she did not show her suspicions by any change in her
behavior. Certain it is, that those about her, whose notions of the marquis's
guilt were before very strong, were by this ill-timed and improper request
confirmed in their evil opinion of him. As he found how fixed madame de Gange
was in her determination, he forbore to renew the discourse, but continued
assiduously to attend on her every day, at the house of the sieur des Prats,
where she still remained, not being judged in a situation to reach Montpellier,
though she earnestly desired it.

Her mother, madame de Roussan, and some of her relations from Avignon, arrived
at Gange the day after the marquis. Madame de Roussan, who had no doubt of the
marquis's guilt, was astonished to find him attending on her daughter, and to
see them on good terms. Persuaded as she was, that he was the original
projector of the infamous scheme to destroy her daughter, she could not with
any patience endure to see him with her; her blood seemed to reco^l at the
sight of him; and, as she was unable to conceal or conquer the aversion she
felt for him, she returned in three days to Avignon, notwithstanding all her
daughter's endeavors to prevail on her to stay.

Nothing could be more affecting than the pious sentiments of madame de Gange,
who declared, that she sincerely forgave her murderers, and prayed to God to
forgive them, and to accept her prayers for their salvation. As there were
sometimes faint hopes of her recovery, but oftener total despair of it, she
desired to receive the sacrament. What was her astonishment, when she behe^^ it
presented by Perette, the same priest who had been employed to assist in her
assassination! Dreading least even under the form of the sacred wafer, poison
might be again administered, she insisted on the priest's partaking it with
her; he consented; and then in the most solemn manner she called God to
witness, while she received the hostie, that she forgave her murderers, and all
who had abetted their crime.

It was with perfect indifference she heard those praises of her beauty, which
all who now saw her could not help giving it; for never in the most brilliant
health, and surrounded with all the means of happiness, did her charms appear
to greater advantage, and never perhaps were they so interesting. Her eyes had
sometimes all their dazzling luster, at others, that soft langour which added
to, rather than diminished their attractions. Her complexion retained all its
delicacy; and her sentiments and conversation were calculated to inspire all
who saw her with regret, that such an assemblage of perfections was sinking
into an early grave!

Her son, of whom she was passionately fond, was constantly at her bedside; and
as she knew that nothing was so likely to make a deep and indelible impression
on his tender mind, as the sight of his dying mother, and hearing the advice
she should give, she employed almost all the hours she did not pass in
religious exercises, in endeavoring to impress on his memory maxims of
charity, piety, and forgiveness, while her own conduct gave the purest example
of their practice. Above all, she sought to call away his thoughts from those
ideas of vengeance, which, young as he was, arose in his mind toward the cruel
wretches who had destroyed his mother. -- The parliament of Toulouse nominated
monsieur de Catalan, consellor of the parliament, as a commissioner to
interrogate madame de Gange; he arrived on the third of June, but she was then
too ill to see him, however the next day he was admitted to her apartment, and
was shut up with her alone for some time, when he forgot nothing that was
likely to clear up the horrid story, into which he was ^^^missioned to enquire.
When he had (...) such notes as he thought proper, she ment^^^^^ to him her
earnest desire to be removed from Gange, where the dreadful ideas of the scene
she had passed through were ever before her eyes, and where she had several
reasons to fear for her safety. Monsieur de Catalan assured her, that he would
take care she should be removed as soon as possible -- but it was too late; for
after passing a night, in which she suffered inexpressible torments, the next
day, June the fifth, her complaints seemed to recur with new violence; and
about four o'clock that evening she breathed her last, surrounded by her
friends, who were drowned in tears; and who were so much affected by her death,
that for many years afterward they felt as lively a sorrow whenever it
recurred to them, as they did when they saw her expire.

Thus died the marchioness (...) Gange, in the noon of life; whose virtu^ and
beauty made her the pride and glory of her sex. Dreadful, that she should thus
fall the victim of avarice and revenge!

On opening her body, it was found that her death had not been occasioned by
the wound she received, but by the poison, which had burnt the coats of her
stomach, and turned her brain quite black; such was the corrosive quality of
the potion she had swallowed that though it did not all remain in her stomach,
it is astonishing that her constitution could so long resist its effects. But
nature, who had adorned her person with so many charms, had given her also an
excellent habit of body, as if she had meant to have lent long so fair a
spectacle to the world. Indeed the length of time she struggled with the deadly
consequences of the poison, and her voice and look, which were little impaired,
gave hopes, from time to time ^he might have recovered. As soon as she was
dead, monsieur de Catalan ordered the marquis, who was still at Gange, to be
arrested. He said (...) his design was to pursue by law the assassins of his
wife; however the magistrate put his seal on the chateau, and ordered him to be
carried to the prison of Montpellier; where, though it was night when he
arrived, the windows and the streets were filled with spectators, and the
populace, who, as well as those of superior rank, were convinced of his guilt,
received him with groans, hisses, and imprecations.

Madame de Roussan, the mother of madame de Gange, took possession of her
daughter's estates, and loudly declared her resolution of avenging her death on
the marquis and his execrable brothers. She published a memorial against him,
which, as it is only a repetition of the foregoing facts, need not be here
noticed -- except that in one she accuses the marquis of having once beat her
daughter, and shut her up in a kind of tower for several days, where she was
seized with a disorder resembling an apoplexy. The marquis de Gange gave to
this memorial a very short answer, of which this is the sense: -- He says, that
having the misfortune to have two brothers who have taken away the life of his
wife, of a wife he tenderly loved, he, in completion of his unhappiness, is
accused of being one of the accomplices. Overwhelmed and confounded by a
destiny so severe, his innocence has not the power to manifest itself; all he
can say is, that on supposition only can he be thought guilty, and that much of
what has been said against him is founded on calumny. Such is the story of the
marchioness's being poisoned in cream, and of the ill treatment she is supposed
to have received. And as to his being a party concerned in the murder, it is
founded merely on conjecture, and without any shadow of proof. He therefore
appeals to the justice and equity of the judge, against this slight and merely
presumptive evidence.

The popular clamor continued loud against the three brothers; but the judges,
after repeated examinations of the marquis, could find no proof against him,
that could justify their condemning him to capital punishment. Yet they could
not by any means acquit him. On the 21st of August, they pronounced sentence
that the abbe and the chevalier de Gange should be broken alive on the wheel;
the marquis degraded from his nobility and banished the kingdom for ever, and
his fortune confiscated to the use of the king; and the priest Peret te, after
being deprived of his office by the ecclesiastical power, was condemned to the
galleys for life. The ladies of Montpellier, who resented the assassination of
madame de Gange, as if every one of them had lost a sister, murmured extremely
at the inadequate punishment of the marquis; which was perhaps the reason that,
some time afterward, the marquis de la Douze, accused of poisoning his wife,
was condemned to capital punishment, though there was only strong presumptive
evidence against him. -- Let us now see what became of the murderers; for there
is little doubt but that the marquis may be reckoned among them; since, instead
of pursuing his brothers, to revenge the death of his wife, he rejoined them,
it should seem, in perfect friendship. He and the chevalier offered themselves
together to serve the republic of Venice, who were then at war with the Turks.
The republic accepted their services, and sent them to the island of Archipel
(formerly Crete), where they signalized themselves by their courage: till the
chevalier was killed by the bursting of a bomb; and the marquis survived him
only a few days, being blown up by a mine that the besieged sprung in the
outworks; a death too glorious for two wretches stained with so infamous a
crime. The priest Perette was chained to go to the galleys, but died on the
road.

The history of the abbe, who was the most atrocious criminal, is longer. He
took refuge in Holland, and got by some means or other a recommendation to the
count de la Lip, sovereign of the Vi^ne, a country two leagues from Utrecht,
where he changed his name and embraced the protestant religion. The count, to
whose conversation he was admitted, found his understanding highly cultivated,
and his manners elegant and refined, which induced him to entrust him with the
education of his eldest son, then about nine or ten years old. The abbe, by the
pains he took with his pupil, and the noble sentiments with which he inspired
him, made him a most accomplished youth, and gained for himself the esteem of
the count and countess de la Lip, He carefully concealed his birth, and
suffered it to be believed, that his origin was obscure and mean. He became
every day more and more in favor with his patrons; who had such an opinion of
his judgment and capacity, that they consulted him on all occasions. It
happened that a number of French protestants, who had quitted their country on
account of their religion, were desirous about this time of settling in the
Viane, and asked permission of the sieur de la Fare, the chief justice of the
country, to build houses there; who told them they must obtain it of the count
de la Lip, to procure which he advised them to address themselves to their
countryman, the sieur de la Martelliere (which was the name the abbe went by);
but he, fearing that if a body of French refugees were suffered to settle
there, he should be known either by them of some of their connections,
persuaded the count to refuse his permission; and, in short, he entirely
governed the count and his whole family; yet his heart was a prey to remorse
and vexation, Notwithstanding which, he paid his addresses to a young lady
nearly related to the countess, under whose protection she was, and inspired
her with a mutual passion; which soon became known to the countess, who, though
she had a great regard for de la Martelliere, could by no means think of
suffering him to form an alliance with her relation, and therefore told the
young lady, that though both the count and herself highly esteemed de la
Martelliere, and meant to reward him generously for his services to their son,
yet that they never would hear of her uniting herself with a man of obscure,
and perhaps of scandalous birth, and that she must therefore think of it no
more. The young lady, however, was not to be intimidated or persuaded; but
immediately communicated to her lover the countess's objection to his birth;
which occasioned his taking the most absurd resolution that ever entered the
head of a man of sense. He thought that in discovering his real situation, he
should remove the obstacle to his wishes; taking therefore an opportunity of
being alone with the countess, he threw himself at her feet, and told her, that
since the supposed obscurity of his birth made him be thought unworthy the
honor to which he aspired, he was going to declare to her highness a secret of
the utmost importance to his life -- that he was not a wandering adventurer of
mean origin, but that unhappy abbe de Gange, whose name was unfortunately but
too well known, and whose crime had ever since pursued him with remorse and
sorrow. The countess was so shocked at this declaration, that she flew from him
in terror and confusion, and often declared, that every time she thought of the
wretch who dared to make it, her blood ran cold to her heart. Thunderstruck to
find that the man to whom they had entrusted the education of their son, was a
murderer of the blackest die, the count and countess deliberated, at first,
whether they should not seize him, and send him to France, to receive the
punishment due to his crimes -- he owed his safety, however, to the entreaties
of the young prince, his pupil, but was ordered instantly to quit the count's
territories, and never again to dare to appear in any part of them.

This order he was forced to obey, and he then went to Amsterdam, where he
taught languages some time for his support. The young lady of whom he was
enamoured followed him, and was secretly married to him; and his pupil, the
young count, generously contributed to their support, till her fortune came
into their possession. His good conduct obtained his admission into the
protestant consistory, and he died some time afterward in that religion, well
respected. One of his intimate acquaintance, to whom he had sometimes spoken of
his former life, said, that he complained often of horrors of mind, and that he
fancied he continually saw before him madame de Gange, such as she appeared
when he stood before her with a pistol in his hand and saw her drink the
poison. It is not for us to judge how far his subsequent repentance, and the
remorse that pursued him, might expiate his dreadful crime -- or what suffering
may hereafter be reserved for the horrid monster, who seems to have escaped in
this world, the punishment due to his atrocious villainy!

[This is from Guyot de Pitaval's relation. That made by Richer, relates the
death of the marquis de Gange very differently, and says, that he was suffered
to return to France, where he resided many years with his son -- still detested
for the share he was supposed to have in his wife's murder; and suspected of
the most vicious inclinations to the last period of his life.]

THE DESERTED DAUGHTER.
AMONG the many miseries that the unrestrained passions or prejudices of
parents bring on their unfortunate offspring, none is more singular, or worthy
of compassion, than such as resemble the calamities which the subject of this
history sustained.

Joachim Cognot, a physician, residing at Bar sur Seine, married, when in his
sixtieth year, Mary Nassier, a woman of reputable parents, then about
twenty-nine years old. They had several children, who all died very soon after
their birth, except Claude Cognot, who was the last born before a temporary
separation of the parents. Doctor Cognot, supposing he should find more
business at Fontenay, in Poitou, removed thither, as it should seem, to try his
success, and did not, from considerations of prudence, remove his family till
he saw a probability of his expectations ^eing answered. He continued there
near twelve months, and then, finding his progress proportioned to his hopes,
he sent for his wife, whom he had not seen during his residence at Fontenay.
Seven months after madame Cognot rejoined her husband she was delivered of a
daughter, who is the subject of this history.

The doctor, already disposed to suspect his wife's fidelity, and perhaps
having heard something of her conduct, during his absence, that displeased him,
imagined that this infant had no right to call him father, or to share with his
son, of whom he was passionately fond, the fortune he now saw a probability of
raising. The injurious thoughts he conceived of his wife, he kept however
secret, and the little girl was baptized in the usual form, and registered as
the daughter of Joachim Cognot, and Mary Nessier, his wife. She was put out to
nurse; and about eighteen months afterward, the doctor, whose fame as a
physician increased, removed to Paris, and was soon established there in good
practice.

The unfortunate victim of his jealousy, or of his wife's indiscretion, was
left behind at Fontenay -- and Cognot though he had, in consequence of his
removal, a fair opportunity of concealing this child, whom he was determined to
consider as a disgrace to himself, and an intruder on the property of his son.
For this purpose he ordered her to be sent to Paris by a common carrier; whom
he met, and took her, immediately on her arrival, to the Orsine, in the
Fauxbourg St. Marceau, where lived a woman named Frances Fremont, the wife of a
locksmith, called John Boutet, with whom he agreed to take the little girl at
four livres a month. He paid a month's advance, gave the woman a piece of green
serge to clothe the child, told her her Christian name was Mary, but that she
need not enquire her surname, and that she was something less than three years
old.

The mother of the infant thus abandoned, had been forced, through dread of her
husband, and perhaps the terror of being exposed, to agree to this cruel
concealment; but her heart revolted against it, and, after a struggle of some
months between her fear and her affection, she at length went privately to see
her daughter. On entering the house, she enquired of the woman, whether she had
not taken a little girl to nurse? The woman answered that she had, and then,
looking in the face of madame Cognot, she was struck with the likeness between
her and the child, and exclaimed -- "You, madame, are certainly this little
girl's mother."

Madame Cognot answered, in confusion, that she was not; but her heart refused
to confirm her denial and unable to conceal what she felt, she embraced the
child, and burst into a passion of tears. She quitted, however, the house as
soon as she could recover herself, and, apprehending the effects of her
husband's anger if she went thither again, she wholly forebore to see her
daughter, and in lavishing on her son all her tenderness, endeavored to forget
the deserted infant who had a right to share it; but Heaven, as if to punish
the cruelty and injustice, of which she and her husband had been guilty, took
from them this beloved son. This stroke did not bring back the heart of madame
Cognot to a sense of her duty; the only use she made of it seems to have been,
that of immediately prevailing on her husband to sign a deed, in which they
agreed, that the survivor of them should possess the whole property which
Cognot had accumulated.

In the mean time, the woman who nursed the little girl, took great care of
her, though she was no longer paid. The child was of an amiable temper, and had
so good an understanding, and a person so agreeable, that she interested every
body in her favor, but particularly her nurse, who loved her as her own child,
and, though she was very poor, never murmured at the burden which had been
imposed upon her. Till at length, sickness having disabled her and her husband,
she sell into such extreme indigence, that she could no longer provide for her
nurseling the absolute necessaries of life; she therefore determined, though
with the utmost reluctance, to put her into the hospital, till she was old
enough to earn her subsistence in a service, or till a more favorable hour
should arrive to herself, when she hoped again to be in condition to procure
food and raiment for the unfortunate infant which she so tenderly loved.

Time however passed away, and the deserted girl continued in the hospital;
where, notwithstanding the meanness and poverty of her condition, the
understanding she had received from nature unfolded itself, and her gentleness
and propriety of manners procured her the esteem of all who approached her.
When she was almost fourteen years old, and qualified for a service, her nurse
took her from the hospital, and put her, at very low wages, to be a servant to
a writing-master; where, while she earned her bread by hard labor, and was
employed in the most servile offices, doctor Cognot and his wife enjoyed
affluence and prosperity beyond what they had formerly dared to hope. His
practice had very much increased, and he was appointed physician to Margaret de
Valois, then queen of France; yet, persuaded that this poor girl was not his
own, he determined not to let her benefit by his success, though he had no
longer any child who would have been injured by her participation. Sudden
prosperity which too often hardens the heart, had made that of madame Cognot
callous even to the tender sentiments of maternal pity and affection. Occupied
by her unexpected good fortune, and by avaricious projects to (...) it, in case
of her husband's death, she had accustomed herself to conquer her feeling for
her daughte^ till she no longer felt at all. It happened, ^oon after Mary had
been sent to service that her nurse had occasion to visit an acquaintance in
the Fauxbourg St. Germain. As she stood at the door talking with this friend,
she saw doctor Cognot pass along the street; and though she had only seen him
once before, and fourteen years had elapsed since, his figure, which was very
remarkable, was so deeply engraven on her memory, that she immediately
recollected him -- "Look," said she to her acquaintance, "look at that little
old man who is passing by. It is the same man who, fourteen years ago, brought
poor little Mary to me -- Can you tell me who he is?" -- To this the other
woman replied, that she knew him well; that he lived at an house but a few
doors from thence, and his ^^me was the sieur Cognot, a physician in good
practice.

The woman, Frances Fremont, determined to avail herself of this discovery, and
soon learned that he attended the sick of a neighboring convent. There she
waited for him; and, as he left the door, she approached him, and said -- Sir,
it is now near fourteen years since you brought to me a little girl to nurse --
will you not now take her back, and pay me for the time I have kept her? The
doctor, who was at first very much struck by this unexpected application, soon
recovered his presence of mind, and told Frances Fremont that the child was not
his, but belonged to the man who was with him: he inquired, however, where she
was? and, being told that she was servant to a writing-master near the great
steps of La --, and that she was then ill with a fever, he took a direction to
her, and promised to see her; which he did.

This discovery he immediately communicated to his wife; who, on hearing her
daughter's situation, could not forbear feeling again that she was a mother,
and that she wished to have her child rescued from the melancholy destiny to
which she had been so long abandoned. Frances Fremont was not disposed to let
these good dispositions languish for want of reminding the parents of their
duty. She called upon them in a few days, and desired to be paid for her
trouble, and the food and clothes she had provided for the little girl. The
doctor bid her bring the girl thither, which she did the next day; and on her
being introduced to madame Cognot, the latter still affecting to conceal her
real situation, began to enquire of Frances Fremont, what where her
qualifications and what wages she expected; as if she intended hiring her as a
servant; to which Fremont answered, that she had not brought her thither to get
her a service, but to be paid for the many years during which she had kept her,
and to restore her to ^er parent^ then looking steadily on madame Cognot, she
exclaimed, -- You, madam, are the same lady who came to see Mary once, and wept
over her, and I know you are her mother. It was agreed that Mary should, for
the present, remain with doctor Cognot; but to people so avaricious it was less
easy to determined to pay Fremont the long arrear due to her. They put her off
from time to time, till her patience being exhausted, and her necessities
pressing, she determined to apply to a lawyer; and doctor Cognot was summoned
to appear before the bailiff of St. Germain.

Alarmed at this measure, and perceiving that if he suffered a suit against him
to go on, the whole transaction, which he was so desirous to conceal, would be
discovered; he thought it better to satisfy Fremont, and yet to conceal the
birth of his daughter. For this purpose he caused a deed to be drawn up by a
notary, to this effect: -- That whereas he was sued by Frances Fremont for a
certain sum due to her, for the care and board of an infant called Mary, for
the space of fourteen years, which child was not his, but belonged to the man
whom he acknowledged to have been with; and as he might be thought in some
measure accessory to the expense brought on Frances Fremont, though it was
merely by accident that it happened, yet he did agree, through motives of
charity, to take the said Mary into his service, and to pay the sum of four
hundred livres to the said Francis Fremont, on condition of having no further
trouble on the subject. This deed was signed properly, and Mary was established
in the house of her parents. At first she appeared there as a servant; but a
servant whom her master and mistress could not resolve to treat as such. Her
sole employment was working in the room with madame Cognot, keeping her keys,
and doing such little easy offices as might be required of a daughter. She
dined at their table, was dressed better than a servant, and money was given
her for which she was not expected to account. Still, however, she was not to
be considered as any other than a stranger; and she was told that she was the
daughter of a person called Croissant, and was called Mary Croissant* while the
acquaintance of madame Cognot, who observed the great likeness between her and
this girl, concluded she was her niece, or some very near relation^. But the
old doctor, who never lost the persuasion of his wife's infidelity (whether
real or supposed), continued ever to look on her as a servant, whose uncommon
merit (which made an impression even on him) could not efface the prejudice he
had conceived against her birth. Under the conviction of her illegitimacy, he
made his will anew, and, confirming the former act between him and his wife,
which left the survivor in possession of the bulk of his fortune, he gave to
Mary Croissant, whom he called his servant, the sum of six hundred divres as a
legacy; and two years after making this will he died, at the age of eighty-six.

When he was dead, and his widow secured in the possession of his effects, she
continued to observe the same conduct toward her daughter, and, making a kind
of compromise between her avarice and her affection, still kept her with her,
but still refused to acknowledge her as her daughter; because in that case she
must have shared the property she now exclusively enjoyed.

Some time after a suitable match offering with Augustus de Seine, a man
established in a reputable profession, she married her, under the name of Mary
Croissant, her god-daughter. In this, as in every other part of her conduct,
she seemed to unveil the mystery she endeavored to conceal; doing too much for
her if it was only an orphan taken out of charity, as she pretended, and too
little if it was her daughter. It happened that Marie de Seine (as she should
now be called, in consequence of her marriage), was one day assisting her
mother to look over and arrange some papers of the old doctor's. In doing so
she cast her eye on a letter from her mother to him, in which were these words,
-- I recommend our children to your care: Attend to our little Mary, and see
her often: I am busy making clothes for her. Mary had before had suspicions of
the truth; on the perusal of this letter, conviction flashed upon her; but her
mother coming into the room from whence she had been a moment absent; she tried
to conceal the letter in her pocket. The mother, however, instantly
recollecting what it was, insisted on her returning it, which she for some time
tried to evade: but her mother's commands being peremptory, she yielded to give
up the letter which had taught her to know to whom she belonged; but she said,
with tears, to her mother, Ah, madam, I am your daughter; I am the little Mary
of whom you here speak so affectionately; why would you continue to disown me?
I conjure you not to persist in being so cruel to me; but restore me to the
place I have a right to, and you will not find me ungratetful. -- This pathetic
remonstrance had its effect on the heart of madame Cognot; she owned that she
was her mother, and declared she would take proper measures to enable her to
own her as such, without disgrace; for she represented to her, that to do it
suddenly, and without preparing her friends, would occasion many ill-natured
reflections and much inconvenience; and, she added, that a monk of the order of
St. Francis, whom she had consulted, had told her, that she was not in
conscience obliged to own her; but that she must nevertheless support her as
her daughter, and give her her fortune at her decease. With a promise of being
soon properly restored to her right, the young woman was for some time content,
as she was every day in hopes that her mother would find the opportunity she
pretended to wait for; but she had soon the mortification to find, that other
views occupied her, and that to do justice to her daughter was farther than
ever from her intention. A man called Nicholas Coquant, who was without any
property, and had a great number of children, was introduced to the widow
Cognot; he soon found the means of gaining her good opinion; she married him,
and from that period though only of stifling the claims of her unfortunate
daughter, and enriching the family on which she now had placed all her
affections.

Her daughter, who saw all the fatal consequence of this new connection,
conjured her by all that was just, by every consideration o^ affection and
honor, to re-establish her in he^ rights, before she made this imprudent
marriage. But madame Cognot was not to b^ moved by her tears and entreaties.
The marriage took place, and her solicitations were renewed afterward, though
there was then little prospect of their success. Wearied at length with their
ineffectual efforts, and despairing to move the implacable heart of her mother,
she determined, in vindication of her own and her childrens' rights, to have
recourse to law; though it was with extreme reluctance she was driven to take
such a resolutions -- Madame Cognot being now again summoned before the bailiff
of St. Germain, had recourse to all the chicane of the law. She was obliged
however to undergo an examination^^ in the course of which a perpetual contest
between her avarice, her fear of detection, and her consciousness of the truth,
evidently appeared. On being asked if she had not a daughter born at Fontenay
de Compte, called Mary, and in what year? she answered, that she had, but the
year she could not remember. On being farther asked, what was become of her?
she said, the child was put to nurse with the wife of a baker; and that four or
five months afterward, on her return from a journey to Bar fur Seine, where
she had passed some time, her husband informed her that the child was dead; and
that she never enquired any more about it. On being questioned, how she came to
receive the plaintiff into her house, and to place her in a rank so different
from servitude? she replied, that in returning home one day, she found at her
house two women and a little girl; and that her husband said to her, these
women have brought a little girl to be your servant, who will be very faithful.
That she asked Fremont, one of the women, how much wages she was to give her?
who answered, that wages were no object; that she thereupon detained her in her
service, and that the girl had lived with her from that time till she settled
her in her marriage. Many other contradictory and incoherent answers plainly
evinced the difficulty of concealing the truth. This appeared so clearly to the
bailiff of St. Germain, that he gave sentence; wherein he ordered madame
Coquant to receive and acknowledge Mary Cognot, the wife of Augustus de Seine,
as her daughter; and condemned her to pay twenty-four louis as costs; to divide
all the property of the deceased Joachim Cognot with her daughter; to whom
liberty was also given to sue for the arrears and profits received since his
death.

From this sentence madame Coquant appealed to the parliament; a provision of
four hundred livres was allowed to Mary de Seine, to enable her to carry on the
suit; they both underwent an examination; and the suit went on in the usual
forms.

But madame Coquant having found that her daughter had been put into the
hospital by her nurse, contrived to get access to the book, where all the
children received into that asylum, are registered. She found the name of her
daughter written there; but simply as Mary the daughter of --, a blank being
left after the incomplete name. This blank she contrived to have filled up, so
that the register ran thus -- Mary Boutet, a foundling; suckled by the wife of
John Boutet, deceased.

When the cause came on, monsieur de Maitre, counsel for Mary de Seine,
recapitulated the events of her life with great precision and exactness, -- he
proved all the facts here related incontrovertibly; and as to the register of
the hospital, he made the alteration clearly appear, as well as the falsehood
it asserted. For Frances Fremont the wife of John Boutet, whose name had been
inserted, had never had a child, and of course could not have suckled a
foundling; whom in fact she never saw till she was three years old.

The defense set up by the mother and her husband was so feeble, and the
legitimacy of Mary de Seine was proved so much to the satisfaction of the
court, that a definitive sentence was obtained in savor of her and her
children; whereby the gift of Joachim Cognot to his wife was annulled -- half
the effects left by him at his death was awarded to his daughter, after
deducting half his funeral expenses, the provision made for his wife on her
marriage, and his legacies. -- Nicholas Coquant and his wife were to bear the
costs; and forbidden to damage, conceal, or dissipate the residue of the
effects of Joachim Cognot, which, after the death of the mother, were to
descend to the daughter and her children.

By this equitable decision the unnatural parent was punished for her avarice
and cruelty; the hitherto unhappy young woman reinstated in the rank to which
she had an undoubted right; and the injury done her by the jealous suspicions
of one of her parents, or the unguarded conduct of the other, was repaid by the
justice of her country. She appears to have merited her good fortune, and to
have been an instance that the force of natural good sense and a virtuous
disposition can alone counteract all the disadvantages of birth, and all the
influence of a mean or neglected education. While her story may serve to guard
the mother, who respects the peace of her children, from being guilty of
indiscretions which may raise, in jealous and suspicious minds, opinions and
prejudices, so fatal to the innocent objects on which the punishment of guilt,
or of imprudence, too frequently falls.

[From Guyot de Pitaval.] LA PIVARDIERE.
LOUIS de la Pivardiere, sieur du Bouchet, was a gentleman of a very ancient
family, but being a younger brother, and his family having lost much of its
former opulence in the convulsions that had agitated the kingdom, his fortune
was hardly enough to support him with decency, in the province of which he was
a native; and it must have been inconsiderable indeed, if the small possessions
of the woman he married, induced him to unite himself with her, for they did
not amount to above a thousand livres a year; and she had the five children of
her former husband to maintain; being the widow of the sieur de Menou, and
about five and thirty years of age. Her income arose from the estate and
cha^eau of Nerbonne, where she resided; and whither, on this marriage with her,
monsieur de la Pivardiere went to reside also.

In 1689, on the arriere band being called out, the sieur de la Pivardiere
served as lord of Nerbonne, which he possessed in right of his wife, and
obtained a lieutenancy in a regiment of dragoons. This absence was probably
equally agreeable to monsieur and madame de la Pivardiere, for they had long
lived very uneasy together. On his return their dissentions increased; for the
tongue of malice had been very busy with the fame of the lady. The prior of a
neighboring monastery had been too assiduous in his attentions to madame de
Pivardiere; and though there was a chapel in the castle of Nerbonne, where his
duty obliged him to say mass every Saturday, the neighborhood would not allow
that to be a sufficient reason for his passing almost every day there, on a
footing of familiarity with madame de la Pivardiere, which might be very
innocent, but could hardly fail of being (...) otherwise. The observations
which (...) Intimacy had excited, in a place, where people having little to
engage their attention, are obliged (...) much of it on their neighbors, were
(...) communicated to the husband on his re^^^^ and increased the disgust he
had conceived toward his wife. But disdaining to appear ^ealous of the honor
of a woman whom he had probably never loved, and now thoroughly disliked, he
determined to quit his house again, and leave her to the society of the prior,
or whoever else she preferred. After a short stay therefore at Nerbonne, he
took his horse, and for some time wandered from one town to another, till
chance led him to Auxerre, where, in strolling on the ramparts of the town, he
saw a party of girls dancing: one of them was uncommonly pretty, and La
Pivardiere followed her home, where he found that she was the daughter of a
hussier An inferior post in the law or police, something re^ the bailiffs or
sheriffs officers.
, who who kept a little alehouse in the suburbs, where his widow still lived.
Access to an inhabitant of such a place was not difficult; La Pivardiere took a
lodging in the house, and boarded with the widow, under the name of Du Bouchet.
But he soon found that the object of his wishes, though of humble fortune, had
principles too strict to listen to him, on any other terms than those of
honor, and that he must marry her or quit her. After a short struggle with his
pride, and his apprehensions of detection, love got the better of both. He
determined to forget that he was born a gentleman, and, as far as he could, to
obliterate the remembrance of his name, and (what he was (...) desirous of
burying in oblivion) his ma^^^^^^ with madame de Menou. He took upon (...) the
charge vacant by the ^ecent death of the girl's father, married her, and
became, jointly with her mother, keeper of the alehouse, where they all
resided. He lived for some months perfectly happy with his new wife, who became
pregnant; a circumstance that probably made La Pivardiere think more steadily
of fixing his present establishment on the securest basis it would admit. He
determined to go back to Nerbonne, to receive what money was due from the
tenants, and to return with it as soon as possible to his new family at
Auxerre. On his arrival at the chateau of Nerbonne, he found the prior with
madame de Pivardiere; of which, being wholly occupied by the purpose of his
jourdey, he took no notice. Se received him with extreme coldness; and, as he
told her he was just come from his regiment, to which he must immediately
return, she was more desirous of procuring him the money he wanted, to hasten
his departure, than anxious to make his stay agreeable. As soon a^ he had
collected all the money he could, he returned impatiently to Auxerre, where his
young wife soon after lay in. The second, third, and fourth year, (...) every
one of which she brought him a child, Le Pivardierre made the same journey,
(...) the same view of obtaining money, and without scruple took from his
former wife and his child (for he had at least one daughter by her) their
subsistence, to support his new connections, and his increasing family.

Though this commerce had been carried on for four years without discovery, it
could not always continue concealed. Madame (...) Pivardiere was at length
informed, that (...) husband lived with another woman; but though she had
gained this informations, she was ignorant of the name and residence of this
person, so carefully had m. de la Pivardiere eluded the eyes of curiosity, in
his various tours to Nerbonne.

The fourth of these journies, however, was less fortunate than the preceding
three. Just before he arrived at his chateau, his wife had received the
intelligence of his infidelity, and knew how to account for his yearly visit,
which she found was not to obtain money to support his rank in the army, but to
bestow on another family. Though already estranged from him, the mortifying
assurance of his preference of another, was too painful to her vanity, and she
determined not to conceal the bitterness and anger which she felt. It happened
that he arrived at Nerbonne on the fete of Notre Dame, in the month of August;
on occasion of which festival madame de la Pivardiere had entertained a party
of friends at dinner, among whom her constant attendant, the prior of Mezaray,
was not forgotten. They were yet in the height of their social entertainment
when La Pivardiere entered, about sunset. The company received him with great
marks of respect, and the prior was particularly polite, and affected the
greatest satisfaction at his return. (...) madame (...) Pivardiere looked so
coldly (...) him, and (...) his enquiries with so fullen and discontented an
air, that the company began to grow uneasy, and one of the ladies said aside to
m. de la Pivardiere, Is it thus that a husband is received, after so long an
absence? To which he answered, I am, indeed, her husband, but her affections
are another's. The party soon after broke up, and left monsieur and madame de
la Pivardiere alone. She remained some time with him, but was obstinately
silent; and when she arose, and went to her chamber, he followed her, and
insisted on knowing the reason of such a reception. Go (said she, in an angry
tone), go ask of the woman you live with, and to whom you pretend to be
married, the reason of my rage and indignation. All la Pivardiere could say, to
erase the idea of his having another wife, only irritated madame de la
Pivardiere; who, though she was totally indifferent to her husband, was stung
to the soul at the thoughts of a rival. After some fruitless attempts to
appease her, she flung from him, saying, that he should soon see whether he
should with impunity insult and rob her. The husband, despairing to reconcile
her, left her, and retired to a room prepared for him. But, alarmed at her
threats, which he imagined meant that she would have him arrested, and punished
for bigamy (which one of the servants, who (...) in her confidence, assured him
she intended and not choosing again to ^^pose himself to the fury of an enraged
wom^^ he arose before break of day, and taking his gun with him, and a dog who
always followed him, set out on foot for Auxerre. He had lamed his horse in
coming from thence, and had been obliged to lead it by the bridle for some
miles; he therefore thought it best to leave the horse behind him: and, as it
was in the month of August, and he had little occasion for a cloak, which would
he thought encumber him too much, he left that, together with his pistols, in
his chamber.

The next morning monsieur de la Pivardiere was missed, and no one knew whither
he was gone; his horse, his cloak, and his pistols being left, made an
extraordinary impression on the neighbors; and, after a few days, a report
obtained, that his wife, assisted by the prior of Mezaray, had caused him to be
assassinated. By degrees the rumor increased among the common people, who lov^
(...) terrible and the mavelous, and at (...) it grew so loud, that justice
aff^^^ (...) ^^liged to notice it. Madame de (...) informed of the storm that
was gathering, secured (...) best of her furniture and effects, and retired to
the house of madame d'Auneuil, her friend, where she waited the event of the
proceedings, which the officers of justice now began. One of them arrived at
Nerbonne, where he examined fifteen witnesses. Two servants, who were more
immediately employed about the apartments, were taken into custody. They both,
on being interrogated, owned that monsieur de la Pivardiere had been
assassinated. The first, who was called Margaret Mercier, and who was her
mistress's god-daughter, and a great favorite with her, declared that she had
sent every body away, who was likely to prevent the murder, and had introduced
two servants of the prior of Mezeray into her master's bedchamber, who had
killed him; to which she added several circumstances which seemed to confirm
the truth of her story. The other maidservant, named Catharine le Moine,
corroborated this account; and what appeared yet more convincing, the daughter
of de la Pivardiere, a girl about eight or nine years old, said, that in the
night she was alarmed by hearing her father's voice, who cried, -- "Oh my God,
have mercy upon me!"

In these accounts they all firmly persisted; and the neighbors declared that
they remembered (...) heard the report of a gun or pistol (...) might. --
Margaret Mercier being taken dangerously ill, and being about to receive the
last sacraments, again protested that all she had said was true, and that the
prior had himself assisted, and had given the final blow which deprived de la
Pivardiere of his life.

On receiving these depositions, the officers of justice, of whom the judge of
Chatillon was chief, ordered madame de la Pivardere to be prosecuted; and, as
the prior of Mezeray was included in the accusation, a like order was issued
against him. The judge of Chatillon was said to be the inveterate enemy of the
prior de Mezaray; and, from the circumstances that attended the affair, it
seems probable that that enmity was the cause of all the measures which were
taken, to fix on the prior a share of a crime which had not been committed, and
that the evidence given by the two maids, was in consequence of the rewards
offered them by this officer, who wished to gratify, under the cloak of
justice, his private hatred and revenge.

The circumstance of madame de la Pivardiere's quitting her house, seemed to be
a strong argument of her guilt. As soon as she was gone, the lieutenant of the
police went thither to examine the chateau; and in his account he asserted,
among many other particulars, which seemed to confirm the assassination, that
blood was found on the floor of the room where de la Pivardiere had slept.
Madame de la Pivardiere then went to Paris, where she laid before a superior
court, an account of the prosecution that had been commenced against her, and
desired that cognizance might be taken of it, by its being referred to an
officer of the law more impartial than him who had instituted the process. Her
request was granted, and the judge of Remorentin was directed to investigate
the whole.

In the mean time madame de la Pivardiere assiduously employed (...) in
endeavors to discover the place of her husband's retreat. She traced him, by
persons who had met him on the ro^^ as far as Auxerre; but there they lost all
intelligence. They therefore began to enquire narrowly into the probability of
his being in that town, and with some difficulty discovered him keeping a
little public house, and under the name of Du Bouchet, acting as a h^^ssier. He
soon found that agents from his wife were in pursuit of him; and, fearing that
she was now about to have him confined for bigamy, he fled from his house; but
his pursuers overtook him at Flavigny, and quieted his fears on that account by
informing him that he had nothing to apprehend from his wife at present, in
regard to his liberty, for that his appearance was absolutely necessary to save
her life. He no sooner learned this, than, forgetting all their animosity, he
hastened to clear her from the imputation of so horrid a crime. His second wife
generously encouraged him to this exertion; and, far from resenting the injury
he had done her by a feigned marriage, or wishing to destroy her rival, she was
anxiously desirous of saving her from the fatal consequence of a false
accusation.

De la Pivardiere went before a notary at Auxerre, where he signed a
declaration of his being living and in health. He wrote also to his wife and to
his brother, who in their answers informed him his presence was absolutely
necessary at Nerbonne. Thither, therefore, he went, and found his chateau
plundered of every thing: the best of his effects his wife had removed, to
secure them; the rest, as she had foreseen, were the prey of the officers of
justice.

He presented himself before the judge of Remorentin, and desired that the
authenticity of his appearance might be testified by the proper persons, and
that he would accompany him to Nerbonne. On their arrival, the inhabitants of
the village, the tenants and neighbors of La Pivardiere, signed the
testimonial of his being alive; he went from thence to the little town of
Jeumaloches and being desirous to show himself as publicly as possible, he
entered the church just as vespers began on St. Anthony's day, who being the
^utelary saint of the parish, and of the church, it was on that occasion very
much crowded. Had the most frightful spectre entered, it could hardly have
caused a greater alarm, or more sudden surprise; for so much pains had been
taken to persuade the people of the death of la Pivardiere, that they could
hardly believe he was living, though they saw him before them.

But notwithstanding the undoubted certainty of his being alive, such was the
singular power lodged in the hands of the provincial judges in France, and such
the abuse often made of it, that the judge of Chatillon still carried on the
prosecution; the suspension of the prior of Mezaray was continued, and his
benefices for the time remained under confiscation. To ruin him, seems to have
been the sole reason for so extraordinary and so absurd a procedure, as that
which still attempted to establish proof of the death of a man, who was living
and present.

The two servants were confined in the prison of Chatillon, where this
magistrate had them entirely in his power, and where his offers of reward and
threats of punishment were all employed to bring them to his purpose. The judge
of Remorentin took de la Pivardiere to these women; who, being now consummate
in perjury, alleged that the person they at present saw, pretending to be
monsieur de la Pivardiere, their master, was an impostor, whom they knew not.
But the judge of Chatillon, apprehending that they would not have strength of
mind long to persist in a falsehood so glaring, forbade the judge of Remorentin
and la Pivardiere admission to the prison; and he ordered de la Pivardiere to
be stopped, that he might be examined. -- La Pivardiere was by no means
inclined to put himself in the power of a man, who had gone such lengths to
prove him dead; he was besides apprehensive, that the affair of his having two
wives would be productive of fatal consequence, from which, if he were once in
custody, he could not escape. For these reasons, he refused to obey the order
of the judge of Chatillon, and went from thence with the judge of Remorentin,
who afterward accompanied him to all his relations, to those who were present
when he arrived at the chateau of Nerbonne, the night of his supposed
assassination; to his two sisters, nuns in the Ursul^ne convent at Valence; and
his person was by all these people acknowledged and identified. Having taken
all th^se methods to clear his wife from the imputation against her, and
remained three weeks with her and his relations, he concluded that he should
have no more trouble with this extraordinary affair.

But the judge of Chatillon would not so easily relinquish the prey he held
with the strong grasp of authority. He found, that as he had gone so far, the
boldest steps only could carry him on. He arrested the prior of Mezaray, put
irons on his legs, and threw him into the prison of Chatillon; and began a suit
against the judge of Remorentin, for interfering in his district; and at length
obtained an arret against his future proceedings.

After various appeals and evasions, which, as the principal facts are known,
it would be tedious and uninteresting to recapitulate, the cause was heard
before the parliament of the province. The judge of Chatillon died before it
came on; and his heirs, ashamed probably of a transaction that would throw
infamy on his memory, petitioned for leave to withdraw; but de la Pivardiere,
and the prior of Mezaray, now insisted on its being brought to an issue. It was
heard accordingly. No damages were allowed de la Pivardiere for all the injury
he had sustained, as the judge was supposed to have proceeded originally on
good grounds. But Margaret Mercier, the principal witness, who had perjured
herself in three or four instances, was to make the amend honorable, by
standing in a sheet at the door of the church of Chatillon, holding a torch in
her hand; and there, on her knees, and in an audible voice, to acknowledge that
she had borne false witness, for which she asked pardon of God and the injured
parties; afterward she was to be whipped, burned with a hot iron, and banished
the province for ever.

Madame de la Pivardiere, the prior of Mezaray, and his servants, were declared
innocent, and discharged from any future trouble.

This affair terminated, de la Pivardiere could not determine to reside with
his wife, whose attachment to the prior he still remembered -- nor would he now
return to his imaginary wife and her children, unless to bid them an eternal
adieu. -- The duke de Feuillade, whose distant relation he was, gave him an
employment, such as we now call an office in the revenue; in exercising which,
he was killed in a skirmish with a party of smugglers. Not long afterward,
madame de la Pivardiere was found dead in her bed; and his second wife married
another person.

The prior of Mezaray lived to a very advanced age, and long survived those
whose connections with him had been so fatal to their repose.

[From Guyot de Pitaval.] THE CONTESTED MARRIAGE.
COURTIN de Villiers, a young officer of a noble family, being in garrison at
Metz, became acquainted with, madame Geoffroi, who having been left a widow,
while yet in the earliest bloom of youth, resided there with the mother of her
deceased husband. De Villiers, who was at first attracted by the beauty of the
young widow, found the charms of her understanding, and the sweetness of her
temper, equal to the perfections of her person. He found also, that all hopes
of forming with her a connection of gallantry, were rashly entertained; and
that his addresses must be open, and authorized by the laws of honor. The
longer his acquaintance continued, the more impossible he found it to quit her;
but he knew he must not hope for the consent of his father and mother; yet,
flattering himself, that if he were actually married he should obtain their
pardon, and his insurmountable passion urging him to hazard the trial, he,
prevailed on madame Geoffroi, who was not insensible of his merit or his
affection, to consent to a union, which it was not possible for them to
celebrate in France with the usual forms. Her father was yet living, and had
not been consulted; and the parents of de Villiers, he was sure, would refuse
their consent, without which, as he was but two-and-twenty, and the lady only
three months older, they could not be married according to law. The mother of
her first husband, with whom madame Geoffroi resided, moved by the
importunities of Villiers, and the wishes of her daughter, consented to assist
at, and to conceal the marriage* but as no priest dared solemnize it at Metz,
they were still embarrassed with difficulties, that seemed unsurmountable, till
the almoner of the regiment to which Villiers belonged told them, he could
marry them in Lorraine, that country being then under the government of its own
princes, and the laws in force there, in regard to marriage, did not require
the consent of parents to the marriage of minors.

The almoner therefore was sent into Lorraine, with the secrecy his scheme
required. Thither he was followed by Villiers and the fair widow; and as soon
as they were married they returned to Metz, equally happy in their union, and
not doubting its legality; after the precautions they had taken. Madame
Villiers, about ten months afterward, was delivered of a son; an event which,
while it increased the happiness of her husband, made him reflect with anxiety
on the disadvantage under which this beloved infant might lie, from the
clandestine manner of its parents' marriage. Not daring to baptize it by his
own name, he called it Tincour de Virilles, an anagram on the name of Courtin
de Villiers.

As soon as his wife was well enough to allow him to quit her, Villiers, who
grew more uneasy every day for the fate of his son, went to Paris. He there
addressed himself to the sieur de Lalande, the father of madame Villiers, and
besought, in the most affecting manner, his approbation of their marriage; but
he found only anger and indignation, which embittered the absolute refusal he
received. To add to his unhappiness, his father and mother were by this, time
informed of his connection, and he heard that they had not only passed an act,
which dis-inherited him, if he did not immediately relinquish his wife, but had
commenced a suit against her for seduction, and having made a pretended
marriage with a minor.

Their first measure was, to petition for leave to collect information. It was
obtained, and the wife of Villiers was summoned to appear. She appealed against
the summons, and procured an arret, in the name of the widow Geoffroi, which
delayed any further proceedings for some time. In the mean time Villiers, and
every friend he could interest on his behalf, tried, by entreaties and
supplications, to prevail on his parents to ratify by their consent a union on
which the happiness of their son depended. But it was in vain he endeavored to
move them by tears and prayers; in vain his friends interceded for him, with
remonstrance and exhortation: his parents were inexorable; and, hoping that
time and possession, which so often cure excessive passions, would, before many
months were elapsed, make their son as anxious to break his connection as he now
was to confirm it, they persevered in those measures, by which they hoped to
render the marriage abortive, and the child illegitimate. While they were
prosecuting these measures, Villiers and his family were reduced to the
cruelest exigence. His allowance had been withdrawn, and he had no longer money
to support his rank in his regiment, or to procure his wife and his child the
necessaries they required. The expenses of the suit filled up the measure of
those inconveniences to which they were exposed; and when he found that his
father would furnish him with nothing till he disowned his marriage, he was
obliged, rather than see those he so tenderly loved subject to the distress of
poverty, to agree to say whatever they would have him, and even to procure a
certificate, which on being delivered to the minister It does not appear how
the sieur de Villier's marriage could interest this minister.
of the war department, monsieur Chamillard, he received a sum of money, with
which he determined to wait his majority, and then to endeavor to have his
marriage confirmed, or at least to try whether his parents could then prevent
his renewing an engagement, in which only the satisfaction of his life
consisted.

As soon as that period arrived, he produced to a notary the certificate of his
marriage; he had by this time prevailed on the sieur Lalande, his wife's
father, not only to forgive the indiscretion she had been guilty of, but to
enter warmly into their mutual interest, and endeavor to secure a marriage,
which could not be dissolved, without covering with dishonor a daughter of
whom he was deservedly fond. Villiers now signified to his parents, that he was
determined to maintain the validity of his marriage: whereupon they again
applied to have it set aside, as being wholly illegal.

Their son, at the same time, presented to the same tribunal a request, that if
his marriage was found good, it might be legally established. The parents
opposed it, and in their opposition were sustained by the whole power and
interest of the families allied to that of Villiers, who became almost all
parties. The sieur Dupin, who was appointed to act for the infant born of this
contested marriage, demanded, that if the first marriage, should be declared
null, his ward should nevertheless be declared legitimate, in consequence of
the second; or fully established in all the claims of his birth, if it should
be confirmed. In this state the contending parties brought the cause on an
hearings; and the sieur Guyot de Chesne undertook the pleadings for the father
and mother of Villiers.

Pleading of Guyot de Chesne, no behalf of the (...) Villiers the elde^, and
his wife, against their son's marriage.
He defended the importance of the paternal authority, as well as the force of
those laws which the young m. de Villiers had violated, by entering into
engagements expressly forbidden. He said that his clients believed that their
honor required them to oppose a marriage, which was degrading to their son and
injurious to his family; since he was of illustrious rank; and the woman with
whom he desired to ally himself, greatly inferior to him. Men of high birth
should carefully guard against their children's forming alliances with those
beneath them, and should preserve untainted the honorable blood they derive
from a long line of ancestors. But in fact, the connection which captain de
Villiers had formed with the widow Geoffroi, had as yet thrown no blemish on
his exalted birth, for it was no marriage. That therefore being out of the
question, all that remained was to know, whether, nowithstanding his being no
longer a minor, be could now contract a marriage, to which his parents were
determined never to consent.

To prove that the marriage was not only illegal in itself, but that the very
certificate was a forgery, he said it was signed by the priest, with a title
which exists not in ^^e church; and the place of celebration, which at the
first writing of the certificate had been omitted, had been afterward
interlined. Besides, the defense set up was in the name of the widow Geoffroi;
which name she should certainly not have continued, while conscious she was the
wife of De Villiers. The young man had, moreover, given to the minister,
Chamillard, an assurance in writing that he was not married, and had repeated
the same in letters to his mother. And if he afterward affirmed what he had so
repeatedly denied, it could be imputed only to the influence which the sieur
Lalande, with whom he now lived, had acquired over him, and of his love for the
widow, who employed all her art, and all her charms, to retain him in the
setters she had forged for him. Why, if the parties were conscious that they
were married, did they baptize the child, born of the marriage, by a fictitious
name? and not suffer it to bear that of either of its parents? The proofs that
the intended marriage was invalid, being thus indisputable, it remained to be
known whether the son of an illustrious family, connected with the noblest
houses in the kingdom, could, without the consent of his parents, ally himself
with the daughter of an obscure man, who, from a very low station, had by dint
of long service obtained the rank of brigadier; and, though it could not be
denied, that his wife, who was of the house of Balletrier, in Artois, was the
daughter of a very ancient family, yet the nobility of his wife could not
conceal or amend his own low origin.

Besides the inequality of birth, the inequality of fortune was also great,
between the widow Geoffroi and captain de Villiers. The sieur Lalande, her
father, boasted, it is true, of an income of twenty-five thousand livres a
year; but when he was asked to name the estates, or source, from whence this
revenue arose, he brought no proof that he really possessed it. In the contract
of marriage made between his daughter and monsieur Geoffroi, her first husband,
he had agreed to give her a portion of twenty-five thousand livres; but they
did not appear ever to have been, paid. Yet she possessed nothing else, or any
security that her father would give her a share of his fortune, wherever it
lay. It was said that the mother of monsieur Geoffroi meant to make her her
heir; but of this there was no certainty: as to the jointure of a thousand
livres a year, which she was paid from the property of her first husband, it
was not only trifling in itself, but terminated with her life. -- Captain de
Villiers, though his parents had three other children, another son and two
daughters, was yet to be considered as heir to the greater part of his father's
property, amounting to above four hundred thousand livres; his brother being in
the order of Malta, and his two sisters having only very small portions, if
they did not (as they probably would) take the veil. The disparity therefore
between his fortune, and that of the widow Geoffroi, was evidently so great,
that his parents thought they had on that account, as well as on that of the
inequality of birth, a right steadily to oppose the confirmation or renewal of
a match, so ruinous to the interest of their son, and so disagreeable to
themselves. But were not their objections to the marriage so numerous, and so
invincible, from these reasons, the seduction which had been practiced on their
son, was a circumstance, in itself sufficient to make them determine, never to
consent to his marrying a woman capable of such practice. Her mother-in-law had
assisted her, and her father had joined in the unjustifiable means that had
been used to fascinate his judgment and subvert his understanding -- whence he
had become, not only estranged from his family, but careless of the evil with
which he was threatened; that of being disinherited and disowned by a justly^
offended father. And though the parents, and their relations, could not
positively affirm that the widow Geoffroi was a woman of loose character, yet a
widow of her age, encouraging the visits of officers in garrison, could
certainly not be thought entirely blameless; and as she was older than the
chevalier Villiers, who had just left the bosom of his family, there was every
appearance, that very dishonorable means had been used to obtain his
affections; means, which amounted to the crime of seduction, and which
therefore rendered her incapable of being received as his wife, and even liable
to punishment. That, however, the sieur de Villiers and his family did not
insist on; they only desired that the chevalier Villers might for ever be
separated from her, and restored to his family. And as to the child, who must
at all events be considered as the natural son of the chevalier Villiers, he
might be acknowledged as such, if the chevalier chose to acknowledge him; but
cannot be received into society, or into the family of Villiers, in any other
rank.

These pleadings for the sieur de Villiers and his family, against the
marriage, being finished, monsieur Blaru undertook the defense of madame
Geoffroi and her infant son. Pleadings of the sieur Blaru, on behalf of the
defendant Geoffroi, and her son.
He said, that if ever a marriage was made perfectly consonant to reason, it was
that which was now attempted to be broken, by the unreasonable ambition and
unjust prejudices, of the sieur de Villiers; though reason, justice, and, above
all, the situation of the child, demanded its confirmation. That it was in vain
the adverse parties asserted that the celebration of the marriage was merely
suppositious, and affected to bring the mistake in the certificate, and the
interlineations, as proofs. The first was a mere error, originating in the
ignorance of the person who wrote it; and the second only an omission. Had it
been a forgery, more care would have been taken to avoid defects. It was
objected, that this certificate had not been produced till the parties were out
of their minority. But this was occasioned by the fear of their being parted
forever by the power of the sieur de Villiers, if they had braved his authority
before the laws in some degree had emancipated his son. For the same reason,
the wife of the chevalier de Villiers, had answered her summons in the name of
the widow Geoffroi. And if the chevalier de Villers had denied his marriage, it
was through the pressing exigence to which he was reduced; when his father no
longer allowed him money, and he could not either support his wife and his
child, or furnish himself with necessaries for the campaign, on which his duty
obliged him to serve. On reference to the letters and papers, wherein he had
disowned his marriage, it appeared that he had said only that "he was not
married at Paris;" which was in fact true, and by this equivocation he had
obtained the money, without which he must have suffered both in his love and in
his honor; and though an equivocation was certainly derogatory to his
sentiments of rectitude, yet necessity, from which there (...) defense, had
obliged him to break through (...), which he had till then respected.

The same motives had obliged him to baptize (...) child by a fictitious name,
under which (...) he had concealed the letters of his (...) that by a slight
transposition they forme^ (...) de Villiers. In this innocent deception (...),
who was confined at the time, (...). But admitting that the marriage (...)
between the chevalier de Villiers, and (...) Lalande the widow of the sieur
Geoffroi, was invalid, because it was celebrated while they were both minors,
without the consent of the parents of either, and not by the curate of the
parish to which either of them belonged the question now is, whether, as they
have both attained their majority, (...) may not be legally united, the
opposition of (...) p^rents of the chevalier Villiers notwithstanding.

The first reason they alleged for this opposition was the inequality of birth
between the (...), in endeavoring to prove which, they (...) relative to the
sieur de La^^^^^. This gentleman was originally of a good family in England;
and, though he could not from thence be accounted noble in France, yet he had
obtained a certificate of his rank from the king of England, in consequence of
which the king of France had granted him letters of nobility. His father had
from them (...) taken the title of seigneur de Lalande, which his elder brother
now possessed, together with several estates belonging to the family. But were
it true that the nobility of the sieur de Lalande was merely personal; as it
must have been acquired by (...) and meritorious service in the army, it (...)
be esteemed more honorable for him, and reflect greater credit on his family;
as it had raised him undoubtedly to a rank which entitled him to (...) himself
gentleman, for he was a knight of St. Louis, governor of the citadel of Metz,
and a brigadier in the army.

Their second plea, that of disparity of fortune, was equally ill-founded. The
sieur de Lalande was possessed of several estates; his wife was of an
illustrious family in Artois, and by the death of her relations she now
possessed, in her right, the estates of the family, to the amount of more than
ten thousand livres a year; besides which, the sieur de Lelande possessed other
property, which made the whole of his income above twenty-five thousand livres:
and if the sieur de Villiers would agree to let the cause be concluded by the
union of the young people, on condition that he should produce for his daughter
a sum equal to what the sieur de Villiers would immediately give his son, he
was content to abide by the issue. In this part of his pleading, the counselor
Blaru addressed himself to madame de Villiers, mother of the chevalier, who was
in court: "Do you hear, madam," said he the offer I make, and do you understand
that I am authorized by my client to propose these terms to you? The lady
remaining silent, he repeated this proposal; to which no answer being given, he
said, that he apprehended his client, so far from being very much inferior to
the sieur Villiers in point of fortune, was really in a condition to wish to be
put to this proof, which his adversary could not venture to accept.

The third objection, brought by the sieur de Villiers against the daughter of
his client, was founded on reflections on her conduct, equally injurious and
unjust, since the adverse party knew it was so irreproachable, that, though
they had employed every possible method to discover some indiscretion, some
error, none could be produced against her; they were therefore forced to
content themselves with remote hints and groundless presumptions; but, as the
honor of a woman, and above all of a young and beautiful woman in her
situation, is the most delicate, and most easily blemished, he determined to
wipe off the stain these cruel, though remote hint^ might leave, by producing
testimony of her conduct. He then proved by witnesses, that not only during her
first marriage and widowhood, her character had been unimpeached,
notwithstanding her youth, and the uncommon attractions of her person; but that
since she had been connected with the chevalier de Villiers, it had been so
irreproachable, that malice itself had never dared to throw on it the slightest
reflection. The best proof, that the chevalier himself was as much attached to
her from the conviction of her virtue and goodness, as by her personal beauty,
was, the eagerness with which he sought to confirm, or to renew, a marriage
which he preferred to all the satisfaction a great fortune could bestow; and
was content to be cut off from his family, and lose his inheritance, rather
than abandon a wife so worthy of his tenderness and constancy. Had not the
excellent character and numerous virtues of his wife secured the heart her
eminent beauty first attracted, it was probable, that a young man, after a
three years marriage, would willingly avail himself of the opportunity he now
had to recover his liberty, and reconcile himself to his father. The conduct of
the chevalier de Villiers was the best eulogy on the merit of his wife.

The charge of seduction, the most dangerous of all the allegations against
Julie de Lalande, the widow of the sieur Geoffroi, alone remained to be
controverted. The plaintiffs had asserted, that being a widow, and older than
the chevalier de Villiers, and being besides assisted in her enterprise by her
father, and her late husband's mother, she had artfully inveigled the chevalier
into a clandestine marriage; who was, from his inexperience and youth, liable
to fall into the snare. But the facts were here greatly misrepresented. In
regard to age, the chevalier was only three months younger than madame
Geoffroi; and in point of experience, it is inconceivable that a young man, who
had been two years a mousquetaire, as long aid de camp to marshal Bouff^ers,
and three years a captain of horse, should be without knowledge of the world,
and unable to discover the artful practices of the defendants, had any such
been used; yet he is represented as a novice, without judgment, and incapable
of conducting himself.

And why should madame Geoffroi wish to engage the chevalier Villiers, had not
a mutual affection bound them to each other? She lived easy and respected with
her mother-in-law; she was young, beautiful, and consequently much followed and
admired, and had among her lovers several of established fortune, and of higher
rank; with whom she would not have experienced the inconveniences and
persecutions to which her present union had exposed her. Her prospects of
fortune from her father were at least equal to those of the chevalier de
Villiers; and, being born a gentlewoman, she might justly aspire to an union
wish a man of family; why, therefore, should the chevalier Villiers be an
object to her, and what should attach her to him, but that disinterested and
sincere affection, which induce her to prefer him to the rest of mankind, and
even to her own peace and convenience? -- The charge of seduction, brought
against the sieur de Lalande, her father, was equally groundless. He was at
first ignorant of the marriage; and, when he was informed of it, expressed what
he really felt, anger and indignation, foreseeing all the ill consequences of
such an indiscreet connection. But the honor of his daughter, and the welfare
of his grandson obliged him, since the thing was done, to receive his daughter,
and to endeavor to have her marriage confirmed. He is accused of keeping the
chevalier de Villiers always with him, and by that means depriving him of the
freedom of choice. That assertion is contradicted by the notorious fact of the
chevalier's having made two campaigns since his marriage, when he was many
months absent from his wife and her family. On his return to winter at home, he
presented himself at his father's house; he was refused admission; it was then
natural for him to go where his wife and child were, and to make his abode with
the sieur de Lalande. In fact, he had, during his minority, neither home or
support but with his wife; since he attained his majority, he had removed from
the house of his wife's father: the idea therefore, of his being under guidance
or influence, was wholly unfounded. It was also said, that the sieur de Lalande
had impressed ^^ars on the mind of the chevalier de Villier^. He did indeed
fear -- but what? -- he feared to become perjured and faithless; to act against
his conscience, against the laws of nature and humanity; against the peace and
honor of a virtuous and innocent woman, and a child who claimed all his
tenderness and protection. -- These crimes he certainly was afraid to commit;
and the fear of such guilt was so great, that he lost the lesser fear of being
disinherited, though the consequence were to be the loss of a splendid fortune,
and, what he valued more, his father's favor. However flattering it would be
to him to possess both, he could not do it by an act which would make him
guilty and unworthy in his own eyes, and in those of every man of honor; his
hope therefore was, that in his profession he might acquire that fortune which
he would not owe to perjury and injustice, and that his sword would be the
means of repairing the injustice of his father: and, if he must choose between
possessing unstained the honor of his wife, his child, and himself, though in
the lowest indigence; or of forfeiting it all to become the heir to his
father's fortune, and to be restored to his favor; he preferred poverty,
endured from principle, to affluence, so dearly brought, and which he never
could enjoy with the approbation of his own heart. -- It has been asserted that
there is no law which permits a child to marry without the consent, or in
direct ^position to the will of a parent; but the common right of humanity
surely say, that when a person has attained a certain age, he (...) liberty to
choose for himself. Madame (...), the mother of the chevalier, des^ to succeed
in her suit by the direct means of (...) and justice, was known to have (...)
the judges, and to have exerted (...) influence to obtain their surfrage. In
the towns in France, where parliaments were held, it was very usual to see the
judges walking to the courts, with ladies, related to persons whose causes are
coming on, or who are interested in the decision, at^^^^^ing them on each side,
(...) dressed.
Madame de V^lliers hoped by these methods ^are a prohibition of be the
marriage, at least for some time, if it could not be entirely prevented. But
would it be just to keep the chevalier and his wife yet longer in suspense?
Surely not; and particularly as the chevalier was again called by his
profession into the (...). He might fall; and his wife would (...) ^^^^^noured,
his child deprived of his (...) would in such circumstances, be (...) fear^^^s
for himself, he would go (...) reluctance to his duty, when he foresaw that any
accident be falling him would involve in extreme misery those he loved
infinitely more, and whose welfare he ought above all things to secure. In the
soldier he could not lose the father and the husband; and while he exposed his
life for his country the laws of that country should guard the honor and the
peace of the sacred pledges he had left, and for whom he had a right to claim
protection. The sieur Blara here ends his pleadings for the defendants.


When the pleadings on behalf of the sieur de Lalande and his daughter were
finished, the force of what had been advanced on both sides was thus collected
by the celebrated monsieur le Nain, Solicitor general for that court.
advocate general.

He said, the first question was, whether the form of marriage had subsisted?
Notwithstanding the error in the certificate, he doubted not but it had; but
being defective in the requisite forms, in the place where it was contracted,
and in the consent of the parents on both sides, it was undoubtedly null and of
no effect.

The point therefore to be decided was, whether, under the present
circumstances, his parents still refusing their consent, the chevalier de
Villiers being major, might marry Julie de Lalande, the widow of the sieur
Geoffroi?

Can the opposition of the parents prevent (...) the age when the law (...) to
contract it? -- It may, in some cases: as when a son would contract a marriage
with an infamous person, If any one of a family had suffered on the seassold,
it rendered every branch of that family infamous for ever.
who would bring disgrace on the posterity of illustrious ancestors. But that
is not here intended: the sieur de Lalande was a gentleman, if not by descent
by his personal merit and eminent services, and his family at least
unblemished, if not noble. The difference of fortune no well founded cause of
opposition. If it were, it is here out of the question, as the sieur de Lalande
is willing to make that of his daughter equal to whatever the sieur de Villiers
will give his son -- If Julie de Lalande had been guilty of any irregularities
of conduct, either previous or subsequent to her connection with the chevalier
de Villiers, such conduct might render effectual the opposition of his parents;
but no such fact has appeared; on the contrary, strong testimonies of her
virtue and rectitude have been produced. If, however, seduction could be proved
on the part of the lady, it is a crime so heinous, that the parents would be
justified in their refusal to consent to the marriage, and the law would
maintain them in it; but nothing had been alleged which could fix that
imputation on her. Between two persons so nearly of the same age, love was the
seducer of both; and with a person so calculated to inspire it, with temper and
talents so likely to fix it, there was no need of seduction. But her father,
the sieur de Lalande, was not equally clear from this charge; for though it
appeared that he was not at Metz when the connection began, yet it was clear,
that as soon as he was apprised of his daughter's situation, he tried by every
means in his power to make the chevalier de Villiers adhere to his engagements.
In doing so he had acted like a father anxious for the honor of his child. But
there still was an appearance of constraint; the chevalier had lived with him
during his minority; and immediately on its expiration, and before he could be
said to be out of the influence of the sieur de Lalande, this cause had come
on. For these reasons, the solicitor general proposed, that the chevalier de
Villiers should be obliged to return to his family for a certain time, in order
that it should be entirely out of the power of the sieur de Lalande to affect
his judgment; after which, if he still persisted in using his right to marry
Julia de Lalande, it should not be denied him. In regard to the danger he might
incur in the ensuing campaign, as he had already returned safe, it was probable
he might do so again; at least the hazard must be incurred, where the rights of
paternal authority, and the good order of society, were in question. Though the
solicitor general seemed by this speech to act as a moderator, it appears
probable, from the close of it, that he was influenced by the parents of the
chevalier de Villiers; who hoped if he could detach their son from the family
of his wife, they should prevail on him to give up a connection so contrary to
their views -- But the judges were not, in their sentence, guided by the
opinion of the solicitor general. Their sentence was to this effect -- That the
marriage contracted between the chevalier Villiers, and the widow Geoffroi, was
null and invalid; but that she was cleared from all charge of seduction; and
that he was at liberty, being now of age, to contract marriage with her, due
regard being paid to the requisite forms; and the parents must withdraw their
opposition.

The relation of this cause appears defective; not only in the confused manner
in which the parties are indiscriminately called the sieur de Villiers, without
duly distinguishing the father from the son, but in the obscurity of the
recital, which says, that the sieur de Villiers (who, for distinction sake, is
here called the chevalier) was married at the age of twenty-two -- and, after
three years, claimed, as he was major, his right to affirm or to renew his
marriage. He could then be only twenty-five. Yet the laws of France fix the
majority of a woman at twenty-five; and that of a man at thirty years old --
till which time they cannot marry without the consent of both their parents.

This and some other inaccuracies and contradictions have been as much as
possible remedied, without altering the facts: and the repetitions and verbiage
of the pleadings, reduced.

[This cause is one of those related by Richer.] THE BEGGAR OF VERNON.
ON the 6th of May 1640, Jane Vachero^ was married to Lancelot le Moine, a
notary of the Chatelet at Paris; in 1645, Lancelot le Moine made his will, in
which he named his wife the sole guardian of his three sons, Peter, James, and
Louis, and died in January 1649. His will was confirmed by the senate of the
Chatelet. The mother became guardian of the boys, to whom she gave such an
education as was suitable to their circumstances. She sent them to such schools
as instruct children in reading, writing, and the rudiments of the Latin
tongue. She had several farms in the neighborhood of Vernon; and, as there
were considerable arrears of rent due from her tenants, and other affairs which
required her presence, she went thither in September 1654, carrying her
youngest son, Louis, with her, and leaving the other two, Peter, who was about
fourteen, and James, who was about ten, under the care of her mother and a
female servant. While their mother was absent, these two boys, weary of
restraint, ran away, no one knew whithe^, accompanied by the sons of another
tradesman named Coutard. The children of Coutard were met with by an extempt of
the grand provost, who brought them back to their father; but of the children
of madame le Moine, no intelligence could be gained. The unhappy mother,
overwhelmed with grief and consternation, flew from place to place, entreating
every body she met to assist her in finding her children. Wherever she went the
idea of her lost boys followed her; and to find them appeared the first wish of
her heart. In this disposition she passed one day by the Hotel Dieu, and
observed fitting on the steps, a beggar, whom she had often seen asking
charity, in the same place. His child was with him, and a likeness between this
child and her second son, James le Moine, immediately struck her. She
approached and examined the lad more nearly, and found that though there was
some resemblance, he was not so very like her son as she had at first imagined.
She gave some relief to the beggar, and besought him to enquire, wherever he
went, for her children: she described the marks by which they might be known,
and again entreating the mendicant to attend to her request, she left him with
tears, after having received from him hopes, that in the course of his
wandering he might meet with the objects of her search. Some months passed, and
every enquiry this wretched mother had made was yet of no avail: she therefore
went to a commissary, in May 1655, and having informed him of the circumstances
of her loss, desired such assistance as the civil power could give her.

In the month of July following, business obliged her to go again to Vernon,
where she little expected to become an object of public detestation and hatred,
on account of those children, whose flight had almost broken her heart. On
Sunday the 25th of that month, the beggar, whose name was John Monrousseau,
whom she had seen on the steps of the Hotel Dieu, entered the town of Vernon
with his boy. He placed himself, as usual, in the great church to ask alms, and
the resemblance between this child and James le Moine, struck a number of
people who saw him, and they, as is usual in such cases, communicated their
ideas to others. It was asserted, however, that it originated with the sieur
Mordant, lieutenant general of the police for that town and the sieur Louis,
procureur du roy; and that vengeance rather than justice, influenced their
proceedings, madame le Moine having refused to sell them some parcels of land;
which lay contiguous to theirs, and which they were very desirous of
possessing. However that was a notion that the little beggar was James le
Moine, became universal Madame le Moine was considered as a cruel and unnatural
mother, who had, in concert with the pauper Monrousseau, agreed to condemn one
of her children to misery and want, for the sake of aggrandizing the youngest,
who was supposed to be her favorite. The crowd eagerly caught the news, and a
sort of tumult ensued as the gate of the town, where the mendicant stood with
his child. There the procur^^ du roy appeared, and, it is said, rather excited
the indignation of the people, than attempted, as he ought to have done, to
educe them to reason. Monrousseau, the pauper, was seized and hurried before
the judge, who, without hearing him, in a very illegal manner sent him to
prison, ordered irons to be put on his fee^, and that his son should be taken
from him and sent to the hospital. At the same time the magistrate issued an
order for the arrest of madame le Moine. One of the officers was dispatched for
her, accompanied by a guard. They brought the unfortunate woman by force
through an immense crowd, who lined the streets, quite from her own house to
that of the judge; and these people overwhelmed her with abuse, and loaded her
with reproaches, such as only the most da^^^gand desperate crimes could
deserve. When she arrived before the judge, she was confronted with the beggar,
who (...) all that has been before mentioned, of (...) seen madame le Moine o^
the steps of the Ho^el Dieu; but he asserted that the child was not here is but
his own, by his wife Jane le Blond, the widow of a shoemaker. He related all
the particulars of his wife's death, and what had since happened to him. This
examination being over, the child of the beggar was brought in, and confronted
with madame le Moine. The child said the was his mother. She remained a whole
day shut up in the apartment of the judge, who used, it is said, every menace
and every art to force her to acknowledge that the little beggar was her son,
James le Moine. She continued, however, firm in her refusal to assert an
untruth, and, as soon as she was dismissed, she took the earliest opportunity
to fly from her persecutors, and returned to Paris. But to such a pitch had the
fury of the populace by this time risen, that as soon as they heard she was
^lown, they entered her house, and broke to pieces her glasses, and furniture
of every kind; and had she remained there, she would, in all probability, have
become herself the victim of their rage. A suit was now commenced. The
procureur du roy directed Claude le Moine, the nearest relation of the children
of the deceased Lancelot le Moine, to name a guardian for the supposed child;
and on the 21st of August the judge gave sentence, that the child should have a
provision assigned him of an hundred livres. Madame le Moine appealed, and
obtained a sentence, whereby all proceedings were stopped till the cause could
be heard before the parliament of Paris. But Vernon being in the jurisdiction
of the parliament of Normandy, the judge would not attend to the decree, but
proceeded to force from the tenants of madame le Moine, the sum he had awarded
as a support for the supposed Jame le Moine, her son. In hopes of stopping
these proceedings, she obtained a new arret, and served it on the lieutenant
and procureur, in the public capacity, as well as by their private names; but
they refused to acknowledge the authority of the parliament of Paris. A contest
now arose between these two jurisdictions, the parliaments of Paris and of
Normandy; which obliged the parties to have recourse to the source of power,
and carry the cause before the privy council.

Monrousseau and his child were conducted to Paris, and sent to fort I'Eveque;
there they were interrogated by monsieur de Lamoignon: before him the boy
acknowledged Monrousseau for his father. The cause was now directed, by the
privy council, to be heard and examined by the parliament of Paris. Eight days
after this last sentence of the privy council Peter le Moine, the eldest of the
children who had left their mother, returned. The youngest of her three sons
(Louis, who had remained with her) was dead, and the disconsolate mother
received her eldest son as a gift from Heaven; but her transports, on seeing
him so unexpectedly restored to her, were checked, when she found that she
should behold her second son no more. Peter gave his mother an account of his
unhappy travels. He told her, that when he and his brother ran away, they went
to Vernon, and from thence to St. Waast, where they were obliged, having no
money, to ask charity; a gentleman, named Montaud, saw by their manner that
they were children of some creditable person: he took them to his house, and
kept them twelve days, during which time the youngest of them, James le Moine,
sickened and died; and Peter produced a certificate, signed by the curate, and
the monks called the brothers of charity, signifying that his brother was
buried in the burying-ground belonging to the church of St. Waast.

This certificate was also signed by monsieur Montaud, and several inhabitants
of the parish. Peter, after his brother was dead, left the protection of
monsieur Montaud, and had since been a wandering beggar, suffering all the
miseries of extreme poverty: till he determined to return, like another
prodigal, to the bosom of his mother, who received him as the father in
scripture received his repentant son. At length the cause was brought to a
hearing, and mr. Pousset de Montauban pleaded in behalf of the widow of
Lancelot le Moine. Pleading of Pousset de Montauban, of the widow le Moine.


After opening the cause, he proceeded to accuse the judge and procureur of
Vernon, of being the cause of the accusation made against madame le Moine; and
of many illegal proceedings throughout the affair. They had confined madame le
Moine a whole day without any authority, and by irritating the populace against
her, had obliged her to fly like a criminal, from a place where her life was
endangered. He proceeded to prove the marriage of his client, the birth of her
children, the flight of the two elder, and the distress into which their loss
threw their mother; -- the means she took to recover them; her application to
the police for their assistance, witnessed by eight persons, which evinced a
sincere desire in madame le Moine to recover her sons. He proved, by Gabriel
Alexander, a writing-master, that both Peter and James le Moine could read and
write; the boy who was now produced as James le Moine could do neither; but was
buried in that profound ignorance, in which those in his unhappy station live.
He produced, on the evidence of Peter le Moine, proof that James le Moine, his
brother, was dead; and the certificate of his interement put it beyond a doubt.

He then went on to examine the evidence of Monr^^sseau the pauper: What did
that say? It gave a clear account of his wandering life. His wife Jane le
Blond, the widow of a shoemaker, lay-in of twins, a boy and at girl, at
Mondidier; but these children died three days after their birth. They then (the
pauper and his wi^e) went to Neuville, where they earned a precarious
subsistence by working in guardens, or in the woods; and there the woman was
again delivered of twins, a boy and a girl, but the boy only survived; whose
baptismal register was produced. The man (Monrousseau) and his wife, afterward
went into the Limous^n being reduced to extreme poverty, and to the necessity
of begging, they returned, after some time, toward Neuville; but on the way
the woman was taken ill, and was sent to the Hotel Dieu at Tours, where she
died. Monrousseau and his boy then proceeded to Paris; he related his being
spoken to on the steps of the Hotel Dieu by madame le Moine, who had lost her
two children, and he repeated the conversation he had with her. Monsieur de
Montauban then produced the examination of the little beggar. He said that
James Monrousseau was his father; he related the death of his mother in the
Hotel Dieu at Tours; he said that he had always been accustomed to beg with his
father, and that he could neither read nor write. When he was asked whether he
would always beg with his father, he answered yes, that he (...), for he could
not leave his father. These sentiments proved that he was the son of
Monrousseau. He preferred his father, though poor and destitute of the means of
supporting him, to the supposed mother, though rich, and surrounded with
conveniences. The miseries of cold, hunger and nakedness, to which he was
born, were become habitual to him, and with his father he was content to share
them. Here the voice of nature spoke. The interrogatory and answers of madame
le Moine were next produced: anxious as she was to recover her children, her
heart refused to acknowledge the suppositious one; she felt no emotion to
persuade her that it was her son. A slight resemblance at first attracted her
toward the little beggar, but on a nearer inspection she found him not to be
her son. She shed tears at the bitter recollection of her lost child, and
entreated Monrousseau, the pauper, to enquire for him and his brother;
supposing it likely, that in traveling from place to place, he might meet
them. A resemblance there certainly was between the child madame le Moine had
lost, and the child of the pauper Monrousseau, since it had struck madame le
Moine herself; but because this boy had hair and eyes of the same color, and
some likeness in features, it did not therefore follow that the beggar was
James le Moine. In fact, their ages by no means correspond. The son of
Monrousseau was proved to be not more than eight years old; whereas the son of
madame le Moine would have been, had he been living, in his twelth year. Had
James Monronsseau then stolen the son of madame le Moine, as beggars have been
known to do? Had he taken him to excite the pity of the charitable, by
interesting their feelings? No, it was his own son, who has been accustomed to
beg with him from his earliest infancy.

The people of Vernon had conceived a notion, that this is the child of madame
le Moine; but why? -- The likeness at first gave the idea, which the magistrate
encouraged. The common people love wonders; a discovery of this sort is exactly
suited to their taste; and when fire is once laid to the train of popular
prejudice and enthusiasm, who shall say where it will stop? The magistrate, to
gratify a pique against the widow le Moine, endeavored to force her to
acknowledge a child not her own; and would have torn from the mendicant, the
only blessing he had, a child whom he had brought up, and who assisted him to
gain his miserable subsistence. -- Then, addressing himself to the parliament,
monsieur de Montauban exclaimed, Gentlemen, punish these iniquitous judges --
give back the child to his father -- let the unhappy mother deplore at liberty
the death of the child we cannot restore to her. She has sought her son -- she
has found him in the grave -- ^^ver again shall she behold him; but let not her
grief be embittered with the sight of a phantom, raised up in his place. To the
poor man, his son is every thing. It is on him alone he can depend for bread in
his old age. -- In concluding, he demanded that the proceedings of the judges
of Vernon should be annulled; that the child should be restored to his former
situation, and that the lieutenant general of the police of Vernon, and the
procureur du roy, should be condemned to pay all the costs and damages, with
interest.

Pleadings of -- Foureroy, for John Monrousseau.
Monsieur de Foureroy, pleaded for John Monrousseau. He related his history;
that he was the son of a stone-cutter, and, when a boy, was employed to keep
sheep; that he afterward became a soldier, and being in garrison at Bapaume,
married the widow of a shoemaker. He then related all that monsieur de
Montauban had before gone through, of the subsequent life of James Monrousseau.
This man did not abandon his child, though left to him an helpless infant, and
without a mother. The tenderness of the father prevailed over the
inconveniences of his situation. He nursed, he protected his son; he shared
with him the miserable morsel obtained from charity, and as he grew bigger, he
became more and more attached to him; neither could live without the other.
Here monsieur Foureroy related every circumstance of his being spoken to on the
steps of the Hotel Dieu by madame le Moine, and brought down the history of his
^ife to the time when he was seized by order of the magistrates of Vernon, and
committed in irons to prison. Though the little Monrousseau had said, on being
confronted with madame le Moine, that she was his mother, yet it was easy to
imagine that he had been tutored to do so, by the persons in whose hands he
was; for since he had left them, he had constantly persisted in affirming that
Monrousseau, the mendicant, was his father, and that he had never known any
other. When he was asked at Paris, whether madame le Moine was his mother, he
answered, that he wished he had so rich a mother; but that madame le Moine was
not; that his mother died at Tours. More than forty relations of the family of
le Moine deposed, that the child now shown them was not either of those which
madame le Moine had lost; added to which, the eldest of those children was
returned, and had brought proof of his brother's death. Many testimonies were
produced of the joy that madame le Moine expressed at the sight of her eldest
son, and no reason could be given why she would not with equal pleasure have
received the second, who was equally dear to her; for why should she refuse to
obey the voice of nature in one instance and not in the other? -- why should
she disclaim the little Monrousseau, if he were really her son? -- The great
warmth with which mess^s. Mordant and Louis, the lieutenant general and
procureur (...) roy, took up this affair, was very remarkable; they themselves
became prosecutors, and heard witnesses. Monsieur Mordant was at the trouble
and expense of sending him to Bois Gerome, one of madame le Moine's farms,
endeavoring to make her tenants and others acknowledge him for James le Moine,
and all this at his own expense, pretending to undertake it all, and to
disburse money for the sake of justice only, when in reality his zeal, far from
being produced by so commendable a motive, was occasioned by his unjustifiable
thirst of vengeance, and his desire to distress and harrass a woman who had
offended him.

Monsieur Foureroy concluded, by demanding that the imprisonment of his client
Monrousseau, the beggar, should be declared illegal, his examination erased,
and his son restored to him; finally, that messieurs Louis Mordant, and Claude
Louis, the magistrates acting against him, should be condemned to pay all the
damages and costs, with interest.

Pleadings of Billain for the magistrates of Vernon.
Monsieur Billain then spoke on behalf of the lieutenant general Mordant, and
monsieur Robert pleaded for the child. The former endeavored to prove that his
client had undertaken the affair with no other view than to do justice to an
unfortunate child, abandoned and disowned by an unnatural mother; that the
voice of the people, and no observation of his own, had first obliged him to
take cognizance of this extraordinary affair; that numbers, who saw the child,
knew and acknowledged him to be James le Moine, and they insisted on the
mendicant's being carried before the lieutenant particulier, who was
cousin-german to the deceased Lancelot le Moine, and who as a magistrate, and
a near relation of the injured parties, had sent the pauper Monrousseau to
prison. Numberless persons asserted, that the child was not the son of the
beggar, but the one who had eloped from the widow le Moine; the beggar
prevaricated and contradicted himself; and the most zealous of the people
insisted that the affair should be fully investigated. Twenty witnesses
declared their belief, that the child in question was the child of the widow le
Moine. ^nn^ Pourvandine, who nursed James le Moine for three year, affirmed him
to be the same; and testified also, that when she enquired of his mother after
him, she was forbidden by her to mention his name. Mary Queron, servant to the
widow Crette, a relation of madame le Moine's, at whose house she lodged, at
various times, for five or six years, said she knew by his eyes, his hair, his
features, and his voice, that this was the same James le Moine who used to
accompany his mother. Two other women deposed to the same effect and Francis
Varlot, a tailor, who had made him a coat, gave the same evide^^e; so also did
Catherine Timbert, and Magdalen Couturien, two relations of the family. A
stonger evidence even than these, was obtained from William Aubert, a surgeon,
who knew him by the scar formed by a wound, which he himself had dressed.
Notwithstanding all this evdience, the sieur Mordant determined to act with
candor, and took the child to the house where the mother lodged, and where
every thing appeared familiar to him. The same thing happened at Bois Gerome,
the farm belonging to the widow le Moine. He knew his way thither, knew the
farmer, and was known by him. With all these testimonies in favor of his being
really James le Moine, and with the voice of the people so loudly demanding
justice for him, what could monsieur Mordant do otherwise than he did. He
ordered further information to be taken on the affair; and that the nearest
relation James le Moine should be made a party, to sue his mother for a
maintenance for him, while the cause was depending.

Monsieur Robert then pleaded for the child. He represented Monrousseau, the
beggar, as one of those vagabonds in whom extreme poverty, occasioned by
idleness and vice, had almost obliterated the traces of humanity: living by
imposition, they scruple not to decoy away, and maim, the children of others:
to such a wretch it would cost nothing t^ ^eceive a suppositious child. He then
repeated the contradictory answers and prevarications of Monrousseau; insisted
on that strong circumstance of the boy's calling madame le Moine his mother; on
the evidence of the surgeon, who had dressed his wound; and on the knowledge
the child had of persons, he had seen, and places where he had been with his
mother. He then attacked the authenticity of the evidence that went to prove
the death of James le Moine. The certificate, produced by Peter le Moine, the
eldest brother, proved indeed that some child was at that time interred; but it
by no means proved that the child was the identical James le Moine: it might be
any other child, since they who assisted at the interment did not know him. The
certificate itself was defective, and without date; and Peter, the eldest son,
from motives of avarice, or from being directed by his mother, might have
attempted to establish the death of James le Moine, which never happened.
Monsieur Robert then demanded, in the conclusion, that the boy should be
declared the legitimate son of the deceased Lancelot le Moine, by his wife
Jane Vacherot; that the acts of the magistrates of Vernon should be confirmed;
and Monrousseau, the pauper, proceeded against according to law.

After these pleadings were finished, monsieur Bignon, the advocate-general,
summoned up the evidence on both sides, with the ^^^most ability and
impartiality; in consequence of which judgment was given to this effect. --
That the judges of Vernon should not be prosecuted -- that James Monrousseau
should be declared innocent; and his son be restored to him, and directed to
obey him as his father -- and that the provision assigned to him, out of the
effects of Jane Vacherot, widow of Lancelot le Moine, should be restored to
her -- and the suit be finally terminated.

[From Guyot de Pitaval.] THE COUNT DE ST. GERAN.
THE marshal de St. Geran, of the noble house of De la Guiche, was first
married to mademoiselle de Tournon, by whom he had a son, Claude de la Guiche,
count de St. Geran; and a daughter, married to the marquis de Bouille. His
second was Susannah aux Epaules, the widow of the count de Lonquenay, to whom
she had borne a daughter, Susannah de Lonquenay. This marriage between the
marshal de St. Geran and madame de Lo^quenay produced another. The count his
son married mademoiselle de Lonquenay, the daughter of his mother-in-law, which
marriage took place at Rouen, in 1619. The young count was about eighteen, and
the lady between thirteen and fourteen; and the extreme youth of the parties
made their friends think it expedient for the count to travel into Italy, where
he continued ^ear two years.

The marshal de St. Geran, during the thirteen years he survived this marriage,
saw with regret that it produced no children and to his death which happened in
1632, he lamented that this branch of the noble house of which he was the
principal, was likely to be extinct in his son. He left, by his second lady,
two daughters.

On his decease, the count de St. Geran succeeded him in his government of the
Bourbonnois; and the king gave him the ribands of those orders with which his
father had been honored.

For many years after this period the count and countess of St. Geran continued
without children; but at length, in 1640, the countess became pregnant; a
circumstance that gave the greatest joy to her mother, the marshaless, and to
all who were attached to the family of de la Guiche. This pleasing expectation
was however in some risk of being disappointed, by a fall which the countess
had in her seventh month. On this occasion all the ladies related to the
family, women of the first ^ank attended repeatedly on the countess de St.
Geran; and they had the satisfaction to find, that, by care the ill effects of
the accident she had met with were prevented, and that she was likely to go on
safely till the time of her delivery. The count, however, engageda (...) and
midwife to be at hand till that pe^^^^; and the (...) herself arrived at the
(...) the expected hour; and brought with her as presents the most superb linen
and necessaries she could purchase, for the infant so ardently desired.

But at the castle of St. Geran were also two persons, who, influenced by the
most cruel avarice, contrived to render all their preparations useless; to
deprive the parents of the object of their tender solicitude, and frustrate the
hopes of those who were interested in beholding an heir to the virtues and
estate of the count de St. Geran, The marchioness de Bouille was sister, by the
same mother, to the count; she had been early married to the marquis de
Bouille, who was seventy years of age. The disparity of their years was
probably the real occasion of their parting, not long after their marriage;
^^^ugh the marchioness pretended many causes of complaint against him. They had
now lived separate some time, and madame de Bouille usually resided with her
brother; she was young, lively and agreeable; and had her brother died without
children, would have been heiress to all the extensive possessions of the
family of de la Guiche. The castle of St. Geran was an asylum also to the
marquis de St. Maixant, a man whose address and talents found a patron in the
count de St. Geran, who in the misfortunes of the marquis seemed to have
forgotten his crimes and his errors. It is astonishing that m. de St. Geran
should suffer my consideration to induce him to (...) man of so abandoned a
character as St. Maixant; who had been accused of having occasioned the death
of his wife, in hopes of marrying another woman, the life of whose husband he
had also attempted. He had been suspected of coining, and other atrocious
actions, for some of which he had fallen into the hands of justice; but he
escaped from the marechausse of Auvergne, and had found security in the
protection of count de St. Geran. The marquis St. Maixant concealed the basest
disposition, and most abandoned principles, under elegant manners and agreeable
talents. His person too was handsome, and his address insinuating; and less
exterior advantages than he possessed, would probably have been sufficient to
recommend him to the notice of madame de Bouille. Accustomed to avail himself
of every advantage, he soon saw those which might accrue by a connection with
her. He saw that the great age of her husband made it improbable, that the
obstacle of her being already married would be long in his way; and perhaps
depended on his knowledge of shortening the lives of those who obstructed his
views. That impediment once removed, he found that he might become the husband
of madame de Bouille, who but for the expected infant was heiress to property
which would not only restore his ruined fortune, but raise him to a rank that
would by its splendour vanish his crimes, or even give eclat to his vices. With
these hopes, and with talents calculated to please, he soon possessed himself
of the heart of the marchioness; and her conscience became wholly at his
disposal. They passed whole hours together alone, and in their long evening
walks in the park, they found opportunities enough to contrive the schemes that
were to gratify their avarice, and their love.

The midwife, Louisa Goillard, the two women immediately attending the person
of the countess St. Geran, who were sisters of the name of Quinet; and the
maitre d'hotel, called Beaulieu; were engaged by St. Maixant and madame de
Bouille in this cruel conspiracy, and, by dint of presents, and promises of
boundlese reward, entered into the inhuman design of robbing the count and
countess of their child. On the 16th of August, madame de St. Geran, being at
mass in the chapel of the castle, was seized with the pains of labor. She was
carried to her chamber, and the marshaless dressed her head herself, and put
her to bed, while the greatest part of the family anxiously waited for the
event. But the sharp and violent pains with which the countess was tormented,
gave them the utmost reason to fear her strength would fail before the birth of
child. The host was brought out to procure the favou^ (...) Heaven, and prayers
were offered up in the churches for the safe delivery of the countess, whose
danger continued to be very alarming. The marshaless, her mother, madame
Saligni, sister of the deceased marshal, his two daughters by his last wife
(one about fifteen, the other younger), the count de St. Geran, madame de
Bouille, and St. Maixan^, were all attending in her chamber; the weather was
very hot, and madame de Bouille, affecting great tenderness and anxiety,
represented, and with great appearance of reason, that so many persons in the
room could not fail to increase the heat of the air and of course the faintness
of the patient. She therefore besought the marshaless to order every body to
retire; and, that nobody might think such an order unkind, that she would
herself set the example. To this the marshaless consented, madame de Bouille
undertaking to stay with the countess, and give from time to time information
of the situation she was in to the rest of the family. For two hours after they
quitted the apartment, the sufferings of the countess were so acute, that the
midwife declared she would inevitably sink under it, if some rest could not be
procured. She gave her therefore to drink a mixture she had prepared, which
threw her almost immediately into total insensibility; and in that state she
continued till the next morning. During the night the count and the marshaless
sent continually to the door to enquire after her; and the intelligence which
was always given by madame de Bouille was, that all was going on well. The
domestics were not suffered to enter the room, but received the answers at the
door; where it was observed that St. Maixant continually attended, with those
marks of solicitude and uneasiness so natural to the state of mind he must have
been in, while the success of his execrable plot was precarious. The
unfortunate countess, now left in the hands of the cruel woman whose interest
it was to deprive her of her child, was delivered of a son, while totally
unconscious of his birth, the draught given her by the midwife having reduced
her to a state so nearly resembling death, that she no longer knew what befell
her. As soon as the infant was born, the midwife prepared to destroy him, by
crushing his head; but she was prevented, either by madame de Bouille, who
could not resolve to murder the innocent creature, or by Beaulieu, the maitre
d'hotel, who was now in the room, and who might have received orders from St.
Maixant, or perhaps be influenced by humanity to spare the life of the victim,
whom they were determined to rob of every thing else: however that was, the
poor little creature was not rescued from the hands of the midwife, till she
had injured the skull; a deep mark on which, left by her barbarous hands, the
young count bore as long as he lived.

The unhappy child, thus abandoned to the mercy of this inhuman confederacy, no
sooner saw the light than he was torn from his mother, who, senseless and
surrounded by the shades of death, could not plead for him, or save him by her
tears or her entreaties. They put him into a little basket, wrapped in a linen
^oller, but not dressed or even washed. Beaulieu took the basket, and hiding it
under his cloak, carried it down stairs to a private door that opened to the
fosse of the castle; from thence he crossed the terrace and the bridge, and
made his way through a private part of the park, all the keys of which he kept.
He then mounted a swift horse, and rode to Escherolles, a village three miles
from St. Geran, where he stopped at the house of Claude Gautier, whose wife
gave suck. He entreated the woman to give the breast to the infant he carried,
which she did; but not daring to remain long in the neighborhood of the
castle, he continued his journey immediately, and crossing the river Allier,
dismounted with his helpless charge at the house of another man named Boucard,
whose wife also gave suck to the child; after which, entering A^vergne, he
pursued his way; but the heat was excessive, and the horse so fatigued, that he
could with difficulty get him on. The poor babe by this time had suffered so
much, that Beaulieu was apprehensive for his life; and meeting with a wagon,
driven by Paul Boiton, a common carrier, who used the road from A^g^eperce to
Riom, he agreed with this man to carry the child to a certain distance in his
wagon; and getting in himself took it in his arms, and tied his horse behind.
As they went along, the carrier entered into discourse with him; and, in the
course of their conversation, Beaulieu told the carrier that he was so careful
of the child because he belonged to the noblest family of the Bourbonnois. This
conveyance brought him to the village of Che; and the mistress of the house
where it stopped suckled the infant, and, seeing the miserable condition it was
in, heated some water and washed it; after which Beaulieu took it again, and,
getting into the wagon, was set down near Riom, where he paid the waggoner,
and gave him a false direction where to find him: then remounting his horse,
and passing by the abbey of Lavoine, he arrived at the village of Descoutoux,
which is among the mountains near Thiers, and where the marchioness de Bouille
had a seat, where she sometimes passed a few weeks. Here Beaulieu put the
infant ^o nurse, with Gabriella Moiniot, to whom he paid a mouth beforehand;
but as he refused to tell her the names of its parents, or where she should
send news of her foster child, this woman would not keep it, and returned it to
B^ulieu after seven or eight days. The noise this circumstance made, and the
clamor of the nurse, prevented any other woman from taking it, and rendered it
unsafe to let it remain in the village. It seems very strange that Beaulieu,
who appears to have been a confidential servant of the count, and entrusted
with the keys and care of the castle or St. Geran, should at this period absent
himself for so long a time, without (...) suspected of having some
extraordinary reason.
Beaulieu therefore again mounted his horse, and taking the high road toward
Burgundy, entered the great woods, at the foot of the mountains, and his
progress could be traced no farther.

The detail of this journey was substantiated by the evidence of the carrier,
and the various women who had suckled the child. We will now relate what
happened at the castle of St. Geran, and then return to trace the subsequent
fate of the stolen infant.

In the morning the countess de St. Geran slowly recovered her recollection,
and enquired eagerly for her child, being convinced, from the situation in
which she found herself, that she had been delivered. The midwife and madame de
Bouille protested that she had not; and the former told her, that, since she
had passed the time when the moon was favorable, and as her pains had left
her, she would not be brought to bed till the next change of the moon. The
countess, who had the most convincing proofs that the birth had already taken
place, could not be pacified; she wept, she implored them to tell her what was
become of her child; but they hardened their hearts against her tears and
anxiety, and continued to endeavor to persuade her, that her delivery was only
delayed. The midwife artfully declared, that such delays very frequently
occurred in her practice; and by her arguments gained the belief of the
marshaless, who the more easily credited the assertion, as she recollected that
with one of her children she had gone six weeks, after having all the symptoms
of an immediate delivery. The mention of a circumstance so favorable to their
project, was eagerly caught at, and incessantly repeated by madame de Bouille
and her confidants. But the countess could not be persuaded, but that she had
lost her child. She felt too great an alteration to doubt for a moment of the
fact; and her anguish was not to be described, when she found the whole family
persisted in refusing to believe her, and to look forward to a future day for
the birth of the infant so ardently desired. The midwife obstinately insisted
on the truth of her assertion, the countess as determinately adhered to hers,
and her tears and despair appeared so dangerous to the confederates, that the
midwife, fearful that nature and truth would unveil the cruel mystery,
endeavored to put an end to the life of the countess. After some days, she
persuaded her, that if she were to go into a carriage, and be driven over rough
ground, it would bring on the labor. The countess, who was weak and exhausted,
would not consent to undergo this fatiguing and dangerous experiment; but the
count and the marshaless besought her to attempt it. To satisfy them she
consented, all unable as she was, and being carried to her coach, was violently
driven over ploughed grounds, and along the roughest roads that could be chosen
in the neighborhood of St. Geran. After undergoing this cruel experiment for
two hours, she was brought home, fainting, and put again into her bed, whence
her inhuman persecutors hoped she would arise no more. But the strength of her
constitution prevented her sinking under the means used to deprive her of life.
She began, though very slowly, to recover her health; but the conviction of her
having lost her infant was every day strengthened. Nobody suspected such a
crime as had been committed; and at length as time advanced, and no delivery
took place, every one began to suppose she had been deceived, as has so often
happened to others, by symptoms resembling pregnancy, and by so much wishing to
find it so. This opinion gained universal belief; but the countess was not to
be so argued out of her senses -- till, finding that nobody attended to her
complaints, but imputed them to her fondness for an illusion so flattering to
her wishes, she tried to cease speaking of what was deeply engraven on her
heart, and, since she saw no remedy, to forbear to complain: -- still however
persuaded that she had borne a child, her grief and melancholy often got the
better of her resolution not to afflict the count by renewing the memory of
their disappointment; but, after some months had elapsed, these bursts of
affliction became less violent; till a singular circumstance again awakened the
recollection of what had happened, together with suspicion of its cause. While
this interval passed, we will return to trace the fate of the child thus vainly
lamented by its mother.

Beaulieu had a brother, who had been a fencing-master at Paris, and who died,
about two years before this period, in great poverty, leaving his wife, the
daughter of an actor, whose name was Mary Pigoreau, in wretched circumstances:
to the care of this woman Beaulieu determined to give the child, who was very
glad to undertake it; two thousand livres being left in the hands of de
Raguenet, a grocer, at Paris, which he was from time to time to pay her,
without knowing, or probably ^^quiring, for what.

La Pigoreau bought for the infant, every necessary that is furnished for a
child of fashion, and took the greatest care of him. She procured him a nurse
at Jorcy en Brie, whose name was Paillard, and with whom she was intimate. This
woman, after suckling him a short time, was taken ill, and gave notice to La
Pigoreau, that she might get another nurse; la Pigorea^ expressed her concern
to her, saying it was a pity she lost so good a chance o^ making her fortune,
for that the little boy belonged to a great nobleman, who one day or other
would reward those who brought him up. As another nurse, however, was to be
found, la Pigoreau put him to a woman in the same village, who was lately a
widow, and whose name was Sequin. To this woman she also said, that he was the
son of a great lord, who was able to make her a rich woman. In consequence of
this report, and of the woman's being regularly paid every month, great care
was taken of the young count; who was at the age of eighteen months, fetched by
la Pigoreau from this wet-nurse, and weaned. La Pigoreau had been mother of two
sons, the eldest called Anthony, the youngest, born after his father's death,
called Henry, who used when only a few months old. Had this youngest son been
living, he would have been three years older than the young count; but when la
Pigoreau brought him to her house, she pretended he was her last child, Henry,
by this means redoubling the mystery or his birth, and putting an end to all
enquiries -- for, that nobody might remark the age of the child, who knew that
her youngest by her husband must be much older, she discharged her lodgings,
took leave of her acquaintance, as if going into the country, and went to
another part of Paris, where she produced the little count as her youngest son.

Whether it was by agreement between La Pigoreau and Beaulieu, or whether the
money was no longer so punctually paid, which made her weary of her charge, is
uncertain; but at two years and a half old she carried the child to Beaulieu,
who was then at Paris with the count and countess, saying, that she was no
longer able to maintain both her children, and that as Beaulieu was their
father's brother, and having so good a place, was in a situation to help her,
he must take the youngest. To this Beaulieu agreed, and asked leave of his lord
and lady (who were extremely kind to him) to take the child into the Hotel de
St. Geran. The countess told him he was welcome, but at the same time
represented to him how little he could afford to burden himself with any
additional charge, who had five children of his own. His wife, too, was
extremely chagrined, to find he meant to undertake to provide for his nephew;
but he answered, that if his lord and lady would suffer the little boy to be at
their hotel, he would be very little expense to him; and the count and countess
with their usual goodness, consented to indulge him. La Pigoreau had often been
heard to say, she was in no pain about the fate of her youngest son, who was
sure of being provided for; some of her neighbors therefore represented to
her, that since she was certain of an establishment for one of them, she had
better avail herself of it for Anthony, the eldest, who was a plain coarse boy,
and keep Henry with her, whose beauty would always be a recommendation; to
which she answered, that she could not act otherwise than as she had
determined; which was to send Henry to his uncle.

The child therefore was brought to the Hotel de St. Geran, just as the
countess and her suite were getting into the carriages, which were to carry
them from Paris to Moulins; she bid them put the little (...) in^o the coach
behind hers, where her women were; his supposed uncle led him along in order to
do so, near the countess, who was stepping into her own coach. The brilliancy
of his complexion, his fine light hair, hi^ blue eyes, and the general beauty
of his innocent face, which had something that appeared to her particularly
interesting, struck her; she stopped, looked earnestly on him; and, as if drawn
toward him by an irresistible sympathy, took him in her arms -- Good God,
cried she, Beaulieu! what a lovely child is this nephew of yours! he shall not
go in the other coach -- put him into mine -- I never saw so sweet a creature,
-- The m^^tre d'hotel obeyed his lady; and the little count, who was called
Henry Beaulieu, and believed to be the son of a fencing-master, and the nephew
of her servant, was thus returned to his unconscious parents. -- When they
arrived at the end of their journey, the countess, who had ^ever ceased
admiring and ^aressi^^, Henry, could not determine to part with him: she
ordered him to remain in her own apartments, and to be attended by her own
women; and her attachment to him hourly increased. The count was almost as fond
of him as his lady; and the little boy, as if attracted toward them by the
force of blood, was never so happy as when they allowed him to play round them,
and return their fondness. In all his little distresses he sought shelter in
their arms, and every hour their mutual affection increased. The countess often
looked on him till her eyes were filled with tears, and she would sigh and say
-- Alas! had the dear babe lived, whom I thought to have called mine, it would
have been just the age of this, and perhaps as lovely and as engaging!

The marquis de St. Maixant, and the marchioness de Bouille were very much
alarmed, when they found that Beaulieu had placed the child so near his
parents; yet they dared not use any means to separate them, as their
interference in such an affair would only have awaked those suspicions they
were so desirous of evading.

Beaulieu, who had been seduced by hopes of suddenly enriching his family by
the rewards promised him, which a long course of service could do but slowly,
now saw the fallacy of those visionary prospects with which he had been misled,
and remorse of conscience pursued him, from which he found no respite. To
reveal the crime he had committed, would have been the most immediate remedy;
but the fear of St. Maixant, and the dread of his master's resentment,
prevented this from time to time; though the anguish of his soul would not
suffer him to remain wholly silent. He was sometimes heard to say, that the
honor and the life of madame de Bouille were in his hands; sometimes, that the
count and countess had more reason to love little Henry than they were aware
of; and to his confessor he proposed this question -- Whether a man, having
assisted to secret a child from its parents, was exculpated from guilt, if he
afterward restored their child to them as the child of a stranger, and did not
reveal the mystery? It is probable that the answer given by the confessor did
not calm those scruples, which still seemed to hang heavy on Beaulieu's heart,
since he often appeared under great agitation and absence of mind; and once,
when a person at Moulins congratulated him on the affection which his lord and
lady showed to his nephew, he hastily answered, that it was natural enough, for
that he was nearly related to them. These words, and many others of the same
tendency, seemed to escape him in spite of himself, and perhaps were the result
of the perpetual combat between his conscience and his fear.

St. Maixant, who lived in continual dread of detection, now began to
apprehend, that, long ere he should be able to reap the fruits of his crime,
the remorse of Beaulieu would not only render it ineffectual, but plunge him
into all the horrors of those punishments he had so well deserved. He was not
of a temper, after having gone so far, to leave any thing undone, and therefore
determined to take away by poison the life of the man who daily subjected his
to hazard. Beaulieu fell into a disorder, which put an end to his life in a few
days; but which first seemed to have affected his reason. He raved of the
injury he had done his lord and lady, and besought them to forgive him: while
they, supposing him delirious, fearful of hastening his death by enquiry, and
besides suspecting nothing of the real meaning of his words, endeavored only
to have him kept calm; and he died without revealing the secret which burdened
his heart.

The little Henry, notwithstanding the death of his supposed uncle, still
continued to be the favorite of the count and countess, who procured for him
masters of all sorts, and attended themselves to the cultivation of his
understanding and the regulation of his morals. When he was seven years old,
they dressed him in a silk vest of the color of their livery, and called him
their little page; in which quality he continued to serve them till the secret
of his birth was discovered.

The speeches of Beaulieu did not fail of being remembered; the strange
circumstances which attended the countess's illness, when she believed herself
pregnant; and the stories told by the nurses; all these things had made their
impression, and numberless reports ran among the common people. By degrees they
made their way to higher circles, and at length reached the count and countess
de St. Geran.

About the same time, the count being ill, went to Vichi, where the midwife
then lived, to drink the waters. The countess, and the marchioness de Bouille,
attended him; and the former one day unexpectedly entering an apartment where
madame de Bouille was, saw her in close conference with the midwife. The
countess asked with an air of surprise, what they we^^ ^alking of? Madame de
Bouille, who could neither conceal her confusion, or evade the question,
answered, that dame Louisa was praising her brother, the count; and saying how
good he was, not to bear her any ill will. And why? (said the countess,
addressing the old woman) have you any reason to suppose he should be
displeased with you? -- I -- I -- feared, madame, said she, that my lord might
-- might have disliked me, and blamed me for what passed when your ladyship was
thought to be in labor. The confused looks of them both, and the strangeness
of this answer, struck madame de St. Geran; however she commanded herself, and
let the conversation drop for that time. But the marchioness, whose guilt made
her tremble at shadows, saw, or fancied she saw, anger and indignation in t^
countess's manner; and, finding the dread of a discovery grow e^^ry day more
insupportable, she made some p^etence to quit her brother, and retired to her
own house at Lavoine.

The miseries of conscious guilt had long since taught her, how much (...)
satisfaction she had sacrificed to the chimerical hope of marrying the artful
and unworthy man who had won her heart. The two Quinets, the women who were in
the countes's service when she was delivered, and who were in the secret, she
had taken to wait on herself, and had shown them for some time great favor;
but, as the leagues of the wicked are ea^ dissolved, these women, who knew how
much their mistress was in their power, grew by degrees so insolent, that die
marchioness was obliged to dismiss them, but not till the elder had threatened,
and almost proceeded to strike her. Though she sent them from her house, she
was still obliged, from time to time, to renew the purchase of their secrecy,
by sums of money; and yet lived in constant horror of their divulging the
mystery, which she now feared could not be long concealed.

The reports that continually were repeated to the countess, and the
circumstance of the conference held between madame de Bouille and the midwife,
at length determined her to apply to justice for an order to arrest the
midwife, and oblige her to speak. After several consultations between the
count, the countess, and the marshaless, they agreed first to examine the woman
themselves, with as little noise as possible; they therefore sent for her to
St. Geran, where they questioned her closely. They found that she prevaricated,
and contradicted herself; and in her looks and answers there appeared so much
of guilt and confusion, that they no longer doubted of her having com^^ted some
great crime, but whether it was the murder or the concealment of their infant,
they could not yet tell; they heard however enough to make them adhere to their
resolution of arresting the midwife; but they dismissed her for that time,
without any marks of anger, that she might not be alarmed, and escape, as she
would probably have done, had she supposed that the count would carry his
enquiry farther. Immediately afterward, they laid the complaint before the
vice senechal of Moulins; upon which the midwife was taken into custody, and
examined before that magistrate.

She confessed that the countess the St. Geran had really been delivered of a
child, but said it was a daughter, still-born, and that she had buried it under
a stone step of the gra^ary in the (...) yard. The magistrate, accompanied by a
physician and surgeon, wen-to the place, but they found neither the stone the
woman described, or any place at all resembling it. They examined, very
narrowly, every spot that could answer the description, however r^motely, but
found no trace of the removal of earth, or the least probability of the
interment pretended to have been made. An interment for which no reason could
be assigned; for if the countess had indeed been delivered of a still-born
child, no motive whatever could have induced the midwife or the assistants to
have concealed it.

The marshaless, enraged at the midwife's prevarication, and convinced beyond a
doubt of her guilt, declared that she deserved death, and determined to leave
no effort untried to bring her to justice.

In pursuance of this determination, proper officers of the law proceeded
against the midwife, Louisa Goillard. On her second examination, she said that
the countess de St. Geran had not been delivered; in the third examination,
that she had brought forth a mole -- and in a fourth, that she had borne a son,
which had been secreted by Beaulieu, and carried away in a basket: And in the
fifth, when she was put to the bar, and again closely interrogated, she said,
that it was through fear only she had been driven to say that the countess had
borne a child; for there was no child. In the course of these examinations she
never accused, or even mentioned the names of, the marchioness de Bouille or
St. Maixant.

But as soon as she found herself arrested, she sent her son to madame de
Bouille, to inform her of what had happened. Terror and consternation
immediately overwhelmed her she the moment at hand, which she had so long
dreaded; yet still hoping to evade its consequences, she sent a man, named La
Forresterie, who served her as an upper domestic, to the lieutenant general of
the police, whom she had formerly employed, and who had, she knew a particular
enmity to her brother, the count de St. Geran. She desired he would advise her
how to assist Goillard the midwife, without appearing in it. He recommended it
to her, to stop the proceedings by obtaining an arret. The marchioness sent
therefore to her attorney, ordering him to do this in the name of William
Goillard, the son of the woman; and that he might obey this order with
alacrity, she sent him a sum of money. The attorney obtained the arret, and by
that means a short suspension of the procedures. The respite however was of
little use, for the arret was, on application from the other party, almost
immediately annulled, and the cause wept on.

La Forresterie was afterward sent by his lady to the two Quine^s, to whom he
carried money. These women, grown more rapacious as the danger increased,
desired La Forresterie to tell madame de Bouille that they had already had
considerable offers of reward, if they would tell what they knew -- that the
countess de St. Geran had offered to take them back, and to place them in a
more advantageous situation than before -- that a capuchin friar had been
tampering with them, in hopes of getting their secret from them, in confession,
and by dint of very large offers which the countess had commissioned him to
make; but they artfully added, that while madame de Bouille continued their
friend, they could not resolve to discover what might be so prejudicial to her.
They put into the hands of La Forresterie a paper, in which was written
twenty-five questions which the capuchin had desired them to answer; and they
begged that madame de Bouille would dictate their answers against his return.
-- Some time after, La Forresterie quitting madame de Bouille in disgust, she
threatened that if ever he dared reveal all this, she would have him
assassinated. But dreading the evidence of the Quinets, and finding how little
their secrecy could be depended upon, she determined to engage them again, to
be near her, and to purchase their silence at any price. For this purpose she
gave the eldest a portion of twelve thousand livres, and married her to De
Lisle, her maitre d'hotel; and the youngest she took as her femme de chamber.
It is probable that continual anxiety and remorse, together with the failure of
her project of marriage (for St. Maixant was now again imprisoned, either for
his former crimes, or some more recent one), threw her into a state of
despondency, and hastened her death, for she lived not long after. But the suit
was supported by persons, who, though not equally guilty, were equally
interested in the suppression of the heir to the family of De la Guiche. After
her death, La Forresterie appeared, and made oath of the agency in which she
had employed him. -- The marquis de St. Maixant, the original contriver of this
iniquitous plan, had now again involved himself in affairs, for which he was
confined in the Conciergerie at Paris; so little to be depended on is the
success of the abandoned and profligate, whatever abilities they possess.
Madame de Bouille, though her husband had been some time dead, had relinquished
all thoughts of marrying her paramour -- and, by several circumstances which
appeared in the evidence, he seems to have connected himself with others, and
to have given himself up to a course of debauchery; which probably showed the
marchioness, that the point she had hazarded so much to obtain, was likely to
embitter her life with all the miseries of guilt, without even its transitory
pleasures, St. Maixant being now a close prisoner, was attended by a page,
named Prudent Berger, in whom he had confidence. In the many hours of
melancholy and despondency, which he passed in his confinement, he related to
this young man many of the transaction? of his past life, and at length told
him of the suppression of the child born to the count and countess de St.
Geran, who was, he said, still alive. The page very naturally said to him -- I
wonder, sir, since you have so many things on your mind, which distrub you,
that you do not discharge your conscience of all uneasiness, relative to this
child, by restoring him to his parents. -- To which St. Maixant answered --
That I intend to do -- A capuchin friar, to whom I owned in confession that I
had taken away the heir of a great house, the grandson of a marshal of France,
from the midst of his family, has told me, that he cannot give me absolution
till. I restore him. -- St. Maixant soon afterward obtained, by the kindness
of the jailer, a greater degree of liberty, and was permitted to go out
^ttended by one of the keepers. He took this page with him to the lodgings of
La Pigoreau, where the little Henry, then about seven years old, was sometimes
suffered to go on a visit to his pretended mother. There St. Maixant showed him
to the page, and said to him, Observe well this child, that if you should be
hereafter called upon, you may identify him: and he owned afterward to the
page, that the child he had seen, remarkable for his beauty, and particularly
so for his fine light hair and blue eyes, was the little boy whom he had taken
from his parents, the count and countess de St. Geran. Very soon after this,
the marquis de St. Maixant was seized with his last illness; when his situation
became desperate, a priest attended him to administer the sacraments. To this
priest he said with difficulty, that he could not receive them till he had
revealed a secret relative to the count and countess de St. Geran; but hardly
had he proceeded so far in his confession before the agonies of death seized
him; and he left the world without making the only reparation now in his power
for atrocious crime -- so dangerous is it to defer till tomorrow, what
conscience requires us do today.

By the death of St. Maixant and madame de Bouille, the two principal actors
were withdrawn from the scene. But the duchess de Ventadour and the countese de
Lude now became the adverse parties, whose rank and affluence made them
infinitely more formidable. The first of these ladies was the surviving
daughter of the marshal de St. Geran, by madame de Longuenay, his second wife
and was consequently sister to the count by the father, and to the countest by
the mother -- and thus heiress to them both. The countess de Lude was the
daughter to the marchioness de Bouill^, and claimed her share of the
inheritance of the marshal de St. Geran, in right of her mother.

Enabled, by their fortune and their power, to contract whatever measures were
taken by the count and countess de St. Geran, to establish the proof of the
birth of their son, they undertook to support La Pigoreau, who was now to
substantiate her right to the little Henry, whom she undertook to prove was
actually her son. She had not, however, voluntarily become a party, but was
first comprehended in the accusation by the proceedings of justice. Alarmed at
the attack, which threatened the worst consequences, and flattering herself
that through the protection of the duchess de Ventadour, and the countess de
Lude, she might not only escape punishment, but obtain a provision, as a reward
for the good offices she could do them, she readily enlisted herself in their
service, and, instead of shrinking from the enquiry, as a criminal, who shared
the guilt of the original perpetrators, she prepared boldly to appear as the
injured person, and to insist on her maternal rights being restored to her.

The adverse party thus strengthened, the cause went on with new vigor. The
count de St. Geran had obtained a sentence of punishment against Louisa
Goillard, the midwife. The infliction of it was stopped by an arret obtained by
the duchess de Ventadour and madame de Lude; though the name of La Pigoreau
only appeared, and these ladies affected to have no connection with her.

While preparations were making for a new trial, the midwife died, without
having confessed her guilt, Her son, however, being now no longer apprehensive
of seeing his mother brought to the scaffold, voluntarily declared that he
would reveal the truths her danger had before obliged him to smother. He said
that his mother had repeatedly told him, that she had delivered the countess de
St. Geran of a son, who had been carried away by Beaulieu, through the
contrivance of St. Maxiant and madame de Bouille; and the little boy who now
lived at the hotel de St. Geran, under the name of Henry Beaulieu, was the
child so secreted. He added, that since the death of the marchioness de
Bouille, his mother had been supported by money with which the duchess de
Ventadour and madame de Lude had supplied her, and that they had paid the
lawyers who undertook her defense.

In this state were (...) proofs, w^^^ the trial came to a hearing. (...) The
coun^^^ (...) la Pigoreau endeavored ^^ply by ^^^^uence, the de^^^^^ of their
(...) They (...) it was highly improbab^e a woman situated like La Pigoreau,
who had not where withal to supply herself and her eldest son with the
necessaries of life, should thus claim another child, to share her poverty and
distress, if she did not feel her maternal affection more forcible than even
her indigence, and desire to have her son restored to her, though she had no
prospect for him and herself but poverty and obscurity. They pleaded, that the
countess de St. Geran, attracted by the beauty of the boy, and extremely
desirous of having an heir, had dressed up a detail, for which there was no
foundation originally, but her chimerical ideas, and at length raised an idol,
to whom she wished to sacrifice the interests of the true heirs of the family.
They insisted on the doubtful proof of her having borne a child. The
equivocation of the midwife made her evidence of no avail; and it was
remarkable, that when the countess de St. Geran was in labor of an infant,
whose birth was of such consequence to an illustrious and ancient family, that
nobody should be present, who would swear to the fact of the birth; and above
all, that the marshaless, who was so particularly interested in the event, and
who from her age and experience, as well as her affection, ought to have
attended, was not only out of the room at the time, but after all appearance of
pregnancy had ceased, was content to let the enquiry drop, and to allow that
the whole was a visionary hope originating in the a^ent wishes of the countess.
A circumstance that could hardly have happened, had the marshaless been
thoroughly persuaded that the countess was really pregnant; for in that case
she would have undoubtedly insisted on a close enquiry than ever appears to
have been made. -- This is the most forcible part of the pleadings of one of
the counsel -- Another said, that it might perhaps be thought unnatural, that a
mother, in circumstances so humble as those of La Pigoreau, should wish to
deprive her son of the brilliant fortune offered him, as supposed heir to a
great and powerful nobleman, and compel him to return to a participation of
that misery and indigence to which he was born; but that her maternal love was
so strong that she could not resolve to lose her son, even to see him count de
St. Geran; and were it weaker, her conscience would prevent her suffering him
to usurp honors and riches to which he had no right. As to the resemblance
which the boy was allowed to bear to the count de St. Geran, this he said was
no proof, since two persons frequently are very like each other, who yet are
not related.

Thus went the pleadings on behalf of the maternity of La Pigoreau; but the
ladies de Ventadour and de Lude, whether they were ashamed of appearing
publicly as the supporters of a woman of such a character as la Pigoreau, or
whether they thought that by varying the plea, they should distract the
attention of the judges, and throw yet deeper obscurity on the truth,
determined to make their advances in a new ground; and, while they with one
hand privately supported la Pigoreau, with the other they held up a false light
to mislead and confound the enquiries of that justice they affected to demand.
-- When first La Pigoreau took the young count, she was afraid of having him
baptized, left it should occasion enquiries into his birth; but after some
time, she contrived to have him privately christened at St. John's en Grieve;
and the register was in these words: -- On the 7th of March, 1642, was baptized
Bernard --, the son of -- and of -- the godfather being Maur Marmion, sweeper
and servant in the church; and the godmother, Jane Chevalier, the widow of
Peter Thibou.

When the counsel for the count and countess de St. Geran had proved that this
register was made of the baptism of the infant brought to the church by La
Pigoreau, it appeared that it could not relate to her youngest son, Henry, who
was born three years before. It must therefore belong to some other child.

Whereupon the counsel for the ladies de Ventadour and de Lude endeavored to
prove, that it was the baptismal register of one Bernard, the illegitimate son
of a dancing master at Paris, whose subsequent life they pretended to trace.

The death of Henry Beaulieu, the youngest son of La Pigoreau, which they
apprehended would be proved, and the certainty that proof could be brought of
his being born three years before the child in question, were probably the
reasons, that induced them to have recourse to a new subterfuge. And in the
course of the evidence it appeared, that though the register of the interment
of Henry Beaulieu could not be found, yet that Pigoreau had said to many people
(previous to her producing the little count as her own) that her youngest son
was dead. But afterward, when she determined to call this child hers, she
destroyed every memorial of the age as well as the death of the son, whose
place she assigned to the stolen child.

After various appeals, and all the chicane of the French law had been exerted
to create delays, which carried on the suit till the year 1657, a hearing was
again had, which lasted seven days. An arret was given by the judge, monsieur
de Mesmes, which ordered that the ladies de Ventadour and de Lude should
withdraw from being parties in the cause, because, during the lives of the
count and countess de St. Geran, their claim was dormant, and they had no right
to dispute a succession which was not yet open -- and La Pigoreau was ordered
not to leave Paris, on pain of being declared guilty. This arret still left the
matter as undecided as before. And the ladies de Ventadour and de Lude, now
acting only through La Pigoreau, directed her to renew the suit, by a
requisition to the court, that all the persons who were present at the
pretended delivery of the countess should be examined. This the court granted;
but at the same time ordered, that in three days La Pigoreau should surrender
herself a prisoner at the Conciergerie. This order appeared so alarming to La
Pigoreau, that after considering some time, whether it were better to wait the
event of the suit, which if she gained would make her fortue, but which, if she
lost it, would hazard her life, she determined on the safest method, and,
leaving her patronesses to carry it on as well as they could, she fled into
Holland, and was no more heard of.

Her flight was a cruel blow to the interests of the duchess de Ventadour and
the countess de Lude; but irritated rather than discouraged, they continued to
sustain the suit and the count went into the Bourbonnois, to collect and bring
to Paris all the witnesses who were thought likely to throw new light on the
affair. La Pigoreau was declared contumacious, and there was now every
probability of an immediate termination in ^^vour of the legitimacy of the
young count. While the count de St. Geran was occupied in procuring such
testimonies as might contribute to this desirable end, the king, and the queen
mother, in their progress from Lions to Paris, stopped at his castle. The care
of paying properly his duty to them, wholly possessed him during their stay, in
which interval he had the satisfaction of presenting his son to his sovereign,
under the title of the count de la Palice, and of seeing him received as heir
to his titles and estate. But this was the last pleasure this unfortunate
father enjoyed. The fatigue of the entertainments made for the king, and
probably anxiety about his cause, which was unavoidably delayed by his absence
from the seat of justice, affected the count's health. A fever seized him,
which, after an illness of eight days, put an end to his life. He carried with
him to the grave, the unhappy reflection of not having been able to establish
his son in his inheritance: but in a will made during his illness, he solemnly
adjured the countess to persevere in the process; and named monsieur de la
Barriere, intendant of the Bourbonnois, and the sieur Vialet, treasurer of
France, his executors, to whom he gave the like charge. He died on the 31st of
January, 1659, giving with his last breath his blessing to his son, and begging
of Heaven to restore him to the right of his ancestors.

The countess had no sooner paid the last duties to his remains, and dried the
tears of unavailing regret, than she prepared to fulfill his injunctions, with
all the anxious zeal inspired by her tenderness for her son, added to her
ardent desire of obeying the dying directions of her husband.

The duchess de Ventadour and the countess de Lude, were now, by the death of
the count de St. Geran, put in situations to claim their inheritence, and again
to become parties; the proceedings therefore recommenced, on both sides, with
infinitely more ardour than before.

The two ladies left nothing untried, to prove that the supposed birth of a
child to the countess de St. Geran, was a fallacy; their counsel particularly
insisted on the improbability of her having been delivered without knowing it,
and the little likelihood there was that a child of such consequence could be
stolen from the house of his parents in the instant of his birth. But the
countess de St. Geran had so successfully exerted herself, and had collected
such a body of presumptive evidence, the substance of whose depositions has
been already related, that the duchess de Ventadour and madame de Lude found,
that neither their address or their riches could support them, against the
force of truth; and though they contrived to lengthen the suit for three years
longer, final judgment was at last given against them, to this effect:

"That, notwithstanding the letters of inheritance which had been granted to
Mary de la Guiche, duchess dowager of Ventadour, sister by the half blood of
Claude de la Guiche, count de St. Geran; and to Eleonore da Bouille, niece of
the said count de St. Geran -- they should now desist from any farther claim to
his estate and effects; and they were forbidden to molest or disturb in his
possessions Bernard de la Guiche, the son of the said count, by Susanna de
Longuenay, his wife; who was declared his sole heir, and ordered to assume the
arms and honors of count de St. Geran. -- Mary la Pigoreau, as accomplice in
the concealment of the heir, was condemned to be hanged, if she could be found;
if not, to be hung in effigy, and all her goods confiscated."

Thus, after a process of many years, and an immense expense, the young count
saw himself rescued from obscurity, and restored to his mother, as well as to
his fortune and his rank.

He married Claudia Frances Magdalane de Varignies, the only daughter of
Francis de Montevilla; but had no male heir; this branch therefore of the house
of De la Guiche became extinct at his death, which happened in his fifty-fifth
year.

[This is from Guyot de Pitaval.] MADAME TIQUET.
MADEMOISEILLE AN GELLICA NICOLA CARLIER was the daughter of a bookseller of
Metz; who left her, at the age of fifteen, to the care of an aunt. The fortune
he posessed amounted to more than a million of livres, which were to be equally
divided between his daughter and a son, who was a few years younger. With this
sum, which in that country, and at that period, secured affluence to its
possessor, mademoiselle Carlier would probably have had many lovers; but as,
added to this advantage, her person was uncommonly beautiful, her admirers were
innumerable. To the charms of a very lovely face were joined a figure above the
middling height, extremely well formed, and receiving peculiar ^ustre from that
air of dignity, which commands respect, while it inspires admiration. Nor had
nature been lavish only in adorning her person; her understanding was extremely
quick, and of masculine ^^^ness: a good heart only remained, to constitute a
perfect character; but here is was, unhappily so much otherwise, that it
converted her other qualifications into misfortunes, and was the cause of her
wretched catastrophe.

Those who observed her nearly, even during her earliest years, saw evident
symptoms of that malignant and violent spirit, that unbounded appetite for
pleasure, and that revengeful and undaunted disposition, which being never
checked in her infancy, soon acquired a fatal ascendancy, and at length stifled
all sentiments of reason and humanity. Young, rich, and beautiful as
mademoiselle Carlier was, offers of marriage multiplied around her: among the
most assiduous of her lovers, was monsieur Tiquet, a counselor of parliament;
but as he had nothing in his person or address likely to prejudices young
woman, in his favor, he was for some time coldly received. Despairing of being
able to make an impression on the niece by his personal merit, he determined to
secure the good offic^s of the aunt; and, going at once to the (...), he
presented ^er with a purse of four thousand livres; after which she became
(...) devoted to him; and he soon saw that his liberality would answer all his
hopes.

The aunt ^ailed not to point out to her (...) the advantage she would gain by
marrying the (...) Tiquet, who could give her degree of rank, to which, from
her birth, she had no claim. She dwelt on the riches and generosity of this
persevering lover: whose continual presents seemed to confirm all she advanced
in his praise. But mademoiselle Carlier still hesitated between him and others
of her lovers, whose persons and ages were preferable in her eyes, till a
diamond bouquet, presented by Tiquet, determined the event in his favor: from
the magnificence of the present judging of his riches; and from her aunt's
report, of his good qualities, she, without farther attention either to his
real character or fortune, became his wife.

The two first years of this marriage produced a son and a daughter; and madame
Tiquet, if not extremely attached to her husband, lived at least without
showing any marked dislike to him: but she was immersed in dissipation; and her
expenses were at length so excessive, that Tiquet found it absolutely necessary
to open to her the real state of his fortune; when, to her inexpressible
mortification, she ^ound that she had married a man with very little property,
and (...) was embarrassed with debts, which he, had no means of paying, but
with her money. Disgust and rage took possession of her at this unwelcome
discovery; and, to add to the antipathy she began to conceive against her
hu^band, she commenced acquaintance, about the same time, with the (...)
Mo^ge^^g^, a captain in the guards, whose person and manners were such as
formed the most decided contrast to those of the sieur Tiquet. The uncommon
attractions of madame Tiquet made an immediate and deep impression on this
young officer; and when the attentions of the lover were added to his fine
figure and seducing manners, he became an object before whom the unsubstantial
virtue of madame Tiquet gave way. She was not only sensible of a violent
passion for Mongeorge, but hated her husband for resembling him so little. And
when the barrier was once broken down, she scrupled not to give a loose to the
most debasing and shameful intrigues. Mongeorge, however, was the object of her
real attachment; and she contrived to save appearances in regard to others,
with so much art, that she continued to be admitted into the best companies. As
a connection, such as subsisted between madame Tiquet and Mongeorge, has long
found too much indulgence in the dissolute manners of the French, nobody seemed
to be much offended at their mutual partiality, but the husband. The jealousy
of monsieur Tiquet, which did not much sweeten a temper originally very bad,
proved so troublesome to his wife, that she could no longer keep terms of
decency with him; her hatred was imbittered still farther on a closer insight
into the condition of his fortune, which he was now reluctantly obliged to give
her; for his creditors, whose number had greatly increased by the expensive
presents he had made during his courtship, grew so clamorous, that he could not
continue to conceal the urgency or extent of their demands. As she was very
much alarmed by this derangement, so contrary to the expectations with which
she had married, she applied to the proper court for a separation of their
effects which was granted her, but though she had thus secured her fortune from
farther depredation, her hatred to her husband augmented every day.

Since she had known Mongeorge, with whom she fancied she ought to have been
united, she detested her husband, for having on false pretenses betrayed her
into a marriage, for which she had no inclination, and which had put an eternal
barrier between her and the man she loved. Embittered by this mortifying idea,
the jealousy and ill-humour of her husband grew insupportable; and, by
continually irritating a temper naturally violent, proud, and malignant, at
length produced the dreadful resolution of relieving herself by procuring his
death. When she had once formed this, d^sign, it appeared every hour more easy
to execute; and she thought it better to hazard the guilt, and the infamy that
must attend detection, than to continue to live with a man who made her
existence miserable. It was not long before she found wretches willing to
undertake the execution of her design. A man, named Cattelain, one of the
lowest of the people; and another, who was her porter, agreed to assassinate
Tiquet, on his return home through the streets. To these ruffians she gave a
large sum of money; and they engaged in the plot others, who laid in wait for
the unfortunate Tiquet, as he passed near his own door; but though several
shots were fired at him he escaped unhurt. This disappointment, and perhaps
some remains of remorse, put by the intended assassination for that time.
Madame Tiquet gave each of her horrid agents other sums of money, as the price
of their secrecy, telling them that she would now think no more of gratifying
her vengeance; and assuring them, that the least breach of her confidence would
cost them their lives. Tiquet had probably suspicions of his wife's evil
intentions, and saw with mistrust and indignation her familiarity with the
porter; whom he also suspected of letting in Mongeorge of a night: he therefore
discharged this favored servant, and took the keys himself. Of an evening
nobody could enter or quit the house, but by applying to him; and when he went
out, as he usually did at night, to sup with his friends, where he often
continued very late, he took the key with him; and on his return to go to bed,
he placed it under his bolster. As madame Tiquet had a separate apartment they
never met but at ^able, where both observed a melancholy silence. Many months
p^ssed, after the first attempt, before madame Tiquet determined on another;
but at length she resolved to try poison: for this purpose she contrived to
mingle some very noxious ingredient in a basin of broth, which was prepared for
her husband; but this being given to his valet-de-chambre to carry to his
master, the man, either from something he had seen, or from the smell of the
broth, was convinced it was poisoned; he therefore affected to make a false
step, and threw down the basin. Being afraid of remaining in a house where such
scenes were passing, he desired to be dismissed, and when he was so, repeated
every where what had happened.

Having again failed of her purpose, madame Tiquet was obliged to continue to
conceal in her own breast the rage and hatred which consumed her; and it was
near three years after her first attempt before she resolved on, or at least
found means to execute, the third. But, no longer able to command her
inveterate inclination to evil, she had recourse once more to the discarded
porter, whom she exhorted to p^^^^re more determined and skilful assistants
(...) he had hired before. The night was fixed, and madame Tiquet thought only
of composing her (...), and concealing (...) ^^^^tation of her mind. She went
out is (...), and in the (...) in at the (...) Aunoy's, where large and (...)
company were assembled; something singular appeared in her behavior, and one
of the party asked her whence she came, and what was the cause of the emotion
which was evident in her manner? -- "I have been," said she, "for two hours in
company with the devil." "How!" exclaimed madame d'Aunoy, "with the devil! you
have been engaged then in a very discreditable conversation." "When I say with
the devil," replied madame Tiquet, "I mean only with a female astrologer, who I
believe deals with him, for she knows every thing, and can predict future
events." "And what has she told you?" enquired madame d'Aunoy. "Nothing but
what is very pleasant," returned madame Tiquet; "she has assured me, that in
two months I shall be out of the power of my enemies, and perfectly happy; but
you may judge from thence, madam, that her science is not in^allible, for, as I
shall certainly never be happy during the life of monsieur Tiquet, and he is in
too good a state of health for me to expect so speedy a deliverance from him, I
am afraid the fortuneteller is mistaken." -- Whether madame Tiquet had been
with such a person, or whether she spoke thus from the impossibility of being
wholly silent while such an event impended cannot now be known: she soon
reassumed her usual composure, staid some time with the company at madame
d'Aunoy's, and then went ^ome, where madame de Senonville, one of her most
intimate friends, waited her return. Though the hour now approached which was
to consummate her guilt, and deprive her husband of life, she had so far
conquered her feelings as to appear to madame de Senonville quite unembarrassed
and cheerful. They continued in conversation till it was very late; for madame
de Senonville, willing to pique and incommode Tiquet, intended to stay till he
should be come home, and gone to bed, that she might oblige him to get up again
to let her out at the street-door, which he would suffer nobody but himself to
unlock. Tiquet supped that night with madame de Villemur, whose house was near
his own: he staid there, as was his custom, very late, when about the usual
hour of his return home, his servants, who were waiting for him, to come in and
go to bed, heard several reports of firearms in the street; they ran out, and
found their master wounded and bleeding on the ground; they took him up with an
intention of carrying him into his house, but he had strength enough to refuse
going thither, and directed them to take him to the house of madame de
Villemur, which he had just left. As soon as madame Tiquet knew where he was,
she went thither; but he ordered the people about him to prevent her entering
the room he was in, and to oblige her to return home. Surgeons were sent for to
examine his wounds; they found he had received three; but none of them were
mortal, though one was very near the heart, so near, that the surgeons asserted
it must inevitably have been struck, if the fear which had seized him on the
first fire had not caused his heart to contract itself; -- how far this is
founded on possibility, the skilful in the formation of the human body only can
judge.

As soon as the news of this assassination reached the police, the commissary
of that quarter of the town attended monsieur Tiquet, to collect information:
he enquired of him whom he thought likely to have thus attempted his life? --
who were his enemies? "I have no enemies," answered Tiquet, "but my wife."
Though madame Tiquet was apprized of this answer, and of the suspicions that
were universally entertained of her guilt, she had by this time acquired so
perfect a command over herself, that she appeared with all the serenity that
conscious innocence could have given her. As Tiquet was in no danger, she did
not affect to confine herself to her house on his account, but went out as
usual; and the very next evening waited again on the countess d'Aunoy. The
conversation of the company who were there turned naturally on the event of the
preceding evening. -- Madame d'Aunoy asked, "if mr. Tiquet could not possibly
guess at those who had attempted his life?" -- "Ah! madame," answered madame
Tiquet, "if he could, he would not name them. You cannot be ignorant that he
throws the odium on me, and wishes it to be believed! -- It is I, who am in my
turn assassinated" This she uttered with the utmost composure, though she could
not but read in the look of the company, that they all believed her husband was
right; and madame d'Aunoy said to her, that the porter ought to he secured. The
opinion of her guilt now so universally prevailed, that it was determined to
arrest her; on her return home, notice was given her that she would be
committed to prison, and, she was advised to save herself by slight; but,
relying on the steadiness of her agents, whom yet she thought, were not known,
and believing her resolute and calm behavior would convince the world of her
innocence, she refused to listen to this advice. The same notice and the same
remonstrance was repeated by several persons who were attached to her, for
seven or eight days, but she continued still to believe herself in no danger.
On the eighth day a theatin monk came hastily into her room, and protested to
her, that she would be lost irrecoverably, if she did not instantly disguise
herself, and fly: He brought her a woollen robe like his own, and besought her
to put it on, and go down into the court, where the sedan chair which had
conveyed him waited, and the men had orders to carry the chair to a particular
place, where she would find a chaise and past-horses, with persons who might be
depended upon, to conduct her to Calais; from whence she might get an immediate
passage to England. The infatuated woman still refused: she told the theatin,
that, it was for the guilty to fly, and not for her, Who was conscious of her
own innocence; that she knew her husband was the author of the infamous calumny
which accused her of the attempt against him; and that he was even pleased with
an, event, by which he hoped to frighten her away, in order to seize on her
fortune; but she was determined, to disappoint him, by not leaving her house,
be the consequence as it might. She thanked and dismissed the theatin, and
resolutely awaited the arrival of the officers of justice, trusting to the
measures she had taken to prevent the discovery of the second attempt; and
having long since lost all apprehensions of the consequences of the first.

The next day after her refusal of the theatin's assistance, madame de
Senonville, her friend, came to see her, and when she was about to take her
leave, madams Tiquet said to her, "I beg you will stay a little longer with me;
I expect to be arrested and carried to prison every moment, and I wish not be
alone when it happens." She had hardly finished the sentence when the officers
of the police arrive^ the sieur Deffita, lieutenant criminal, (...) at their
head, who entered the apartment of madame Tiquet, and told her she was his
prisoner: she answered, without any symptoms of terror or surprise, "You need
not, sir, have come so numerously attended; I have no intention to resist or
escape." She then desired him to affix his seal to her cabinets, drawers, and
doors, to secure her effects; and seeing her son, a child of eight years old,
whom she loved passionately, extremely terrified at what had happened, she
reassured him, by telling him that she should soon come back to him -- gave him
money that he might amuse himself, and by the tranquillity of her manner
persuaded him to be composed; she then bid adieu to madame de Senonville, and
got into the coach with the lieutenant criminal, with as much coolness and
unconcern as if she had been going to pay visits: in going along she, observed
the same ^anquil behavior, and did not seem at all terrified at the guards who
surrounded her, or at being carried through the streets like a criminal; she
even bowed to persons of her acquaintance who passed the coach. On seeing the
walls of the Cha^elet, she changed color, but soon recovered herself, and
seemed determined to brave the horrors that were preparing for her. There were,
however, no proofs of madame Tiquet's delinquency, in regard to the last
attempt on her husband's life; and she (...) perhaps have escaped, if
Cattelain, the man she had employed the first time, in conjunction with the
porter, had not voluntarily surrendered himself, and declared that, three years
before, she had hired him, by means of the porter, to destroy Tiquet; the
porter was thereupon taken into custody; and on, the examination of these two
men, the guilt of madame Tiquet, in the first of these attempts, appeared so
clear, that she was tried, and condemned to be beheaded; the porter was ordered
to be hanged; and Cattelain sent to the galleys for life. As soon as sentence
was passed, Tiquet, who was r^^overed of his wounds, went to Versailles with
his two children, and threw himself at the feet of the king, -- "Sire," said
he, "I implore your clemency for my wife, these innocent children implore it
for their mother; be not more severe than Heaven, who is willing to pardon the
repentant sinner; and which, having prevented her consummating the crime, will
readily forgive the intention. Your majesty is less offended than I am, and
surely will listen to mercy! -- The crime, however great, is expiated by the
repentance of madame Tiquet, and by the dread of an ignominious punishment.
Pardon her then, s^re, and do not overwhelm these unfortunate children with the
shame and disgrace which must be their portion, if their mother dies on the
scaffold." The king appeared inexorable; and Tiquet, finding his application
for her life not likely to avail, then asked his majesty to grant to him the
fortune which was confiscated; this he obtained; but the king observed, that
the second request of Tiquet's had entirely destroyed the merit of the first.

The brother of madame Tiquet, who was an officer in the guards, and the
chevalier Mongeorge, made every possible attempt to save her: the brother
applied to persons of high rank, and engaged them to intercede for his sister;
Mongeorge was equally earnest with his friends, and they solicited his majesty
so warmly, that his resolution seemed to give way; and he would perhaps have
granted the life of madame Tiquet, under certain conditions, had not the
archbishop of Paris interfered: he represented to the king, that the ears of
the grand penitentiary of Paris were continually shocked with the confessions,
of women, who acknowledged their having attempted the lives of their husbands;
and that, to put a stop to such enormities, which had lately increased to an
astonishing degree, it was absolutely necessary to make an example of madame
Tiquet. In consequence of this remonstrance, she was ordered for execution.
(...) ^he mean time she had no notice given her ^f her sentence. The curate of
St. Sulpice, however, had attended her, and endeavored to inspire her with a
sense of her condition, and to awaken those sentiments of religion and
repentance it seemed to make so necessary; but he did not greatly succeed in
his pious missio^^.

On the day fixed for her execution, the lieutenant criminal sent guards to
fetch her to the chamber, where she was to undergo the question; she was even
then ignorant of what was decided, and as she went, asked if her business was
never to be concluded? Being brought, however, into the presence of the
lieutenant criminal, he read the ^arret to her: while it was reading, the eyes
of all present were fixed on her, to observe what effect this terrible
certainty would have on her. No symptoms of fear or concern appeared, not even
the slighted change of complexion. The lieutenant criminal then attempted to
awaken her sensibility, by representing, in the darkest colors, the horrors of
that abyss of infamy and disgrace into which she was fallen. Madame Tiquet
answered, that the most humiliating circumstance that had yet happened to her,
was, seeing herself debased and degraded before him, whom she had been used to
behold at her feet, the humblest of her slaves (the lieutenant criminal,
Deffita, had been one of her lovers). "As to the rest, sir," said she "the day
that terminates my life, will also terminate my misery: I do not fear death, at
least I shall meet it with resolution: you have seen me hear my sentence
without any marks of fear; and you will see me with equal courage go to the
scaffold." The lieutenant criminal exhorted her to own her guilt, and to (...)
her accomplices, that she might spare herself the agonies of torture, which she
must otherwise undergo. She declared that she had no confession to make: but
after the first pot of water, A species of torture, but of the nature of which
we are happily unacquainted in this country.
she began to consider that her obstinacy would avail nothing, but would expose
her to great personal sufferings, she therefore recanted, and owned all she had
done to put an end to her husband's life. She was asked whether the chevalier
de Mongeorge was accessory to, or acquainted with her intentions? She answered,
"Ah, no! I took care never to give him the slightest intimation of it, knowings
that had he thought me capable of such an attempt, I should have lost his
affection forever."

The curate of St. Sulpice now attended, to prepare her for the last dreadful
scene* she opposed some of his reasoning with her usual acuteness, and then,
either to shorten the scene, or because she had long since hardened herself
against all belief, and thought nothing that related to religion worth
contending about, she seemed to be convinced by his arguments, and to be ready
to die like a Christian. She besought the curate to intercede with her husband
for his forgiveness, and to assure him that she died under a return of those
sentiments of regard, which she had known for him during the first years of
their marriage. The moment now arrived when she was put into a cart, together
with the porter, her accomplice, and a confessor, to be carried to the Gr^ve.
So great a concourse of people was hardly ever seen in the streets of Paris, as
was now assembled to behold t^ is extraordinary woman go to die: many perished
by being tramp^^d or crushed to death in the crowd. She appeared dressed in
white, her beauty undiminished, though she was now in her forty-second year:
the graceful ^ignity of her figure was conspicuous even in this dreadful
situation; and for some time she ^ontinued undauntedly surveying the multitude;
but at length the idea of being thus a public spectacle seemed to strike a
shock to her; she pulled her hood over her face to conceal the emotions of her
soul; but, on the confessor's representing to her, that she should suffer this
shame and mortification, as helping to expiate her crime, she again uncovered
her face, and exposed it to the view of the spectators, with a firm and calm
confidence. As the cart went on, she addressed herself to the porter, and
desired his forgiveness, for having been the means of bringing him to an
ignominious death: the man, in his turn, besought her to pardon him, for having
by his confession contributed to her condemnation: they exchanged forgiveness,
and mutually besought (...) other to die a Christian death. When s^e arrived at
the place of execution, a violent storm occasioned considerable delay; while
she was obliged to wait, she saw before her eyes, the dreadful apparatus of
death, and the mourning coach which was to carry away her body; but she still
preserved her firmness. As soon as the storm abated, the porter was led to
execution: his fate she bitterly deplored, but seemed quite regardless of her
own. Being now to mount the scaffold herself, she gave her hand to the
executioner, that he might assist her; and before she did so, she kissed it, as
a mark of civility. When she was on the scaffold the kissed the block, put her
hair and head-dress in order, and placed herself the attitude for decapitation,
with the ease of an actres^ who had long studied a part on the stage, and with
as little concern as if she had been ^cting it only. This calmness, and the air
of grandeur which so eminently distinguished the su^^^r, terrified the
executioner; he struck her twice without severing the head from the body, which
he completed only at the third stroke; when it fell, a loud and universal groan
was heard from the surrounding multitude; those who were about the scaffold,
being almost every body of the court and town, who could procure a place. The
head was l^ft some time on the scaffold, as a melancholy spectacle, and a
fearful example; and those who saw it closely, said, that even the ho^ors of a
violent death had not robbed it of its beauty.

While this tragical scene was passing at Paris, Mongeorge was at Versailles,
where he hid himself in the park, filled with sorrow for the death of a woman
whom he at once detested and loved. When he attended the king at night, as his
duty obliged him to do, his majesty told him he was very glad to hear madame
Tiquet had so entirely acquitted him of all participation of her guilt, "though
I," said the king, "never a moment suspected you." Mongeorge thanked his
majesty for his goodness, and took that opportunity of soliciting leave of
absence for eight months, which he obtained; and employed the time in
traveling to other countries, in hopes of dissipating that uneasiness and
regret, which he found he should be unable to conquer, while he remained in
those scenes which had witnessed his long attachment to madame Tiquet.

[From Guyot de Pitaval.] ANGLADE.
THE count of Montgomery rented part of an hotel in the Rue Royale, at Paris.
The ground floor and first floor were occupied by him; the second and third by
the sieur d'Anglade. The count and countess de Montgomery had an establishment
suitable to their rank; they kept an almoner, and several male and female
servants, and their horses and equipage were numerous in proportion."
Monsieurd' Anglade (who was a gentleman, though of inferior rank to the count)
and his wife lived with less splendour, but yet with elegance and decency
suitable to their situation in life. They had a carriage, and were admitted
into the best companies, where probably d'Anglade increased his income by play;
but, on the strictest enquiry, it did not appear that any dishonorable actions
could be imputed to him. The count and countess de Montgomery lived on a
footing of neighbourly civility with monsieur and madame d'Anglade; and,
without being very intimate, were always ways on friendly terms. Some time in
September, 1687, the count and countess proposed passing a few days at
Villebousin, one of their country houses: they informed monsieur and madame
d'Anglade of their design, and invited them to be of the party. They accepted
it; but the evening before they were to go, they for some reason or other
(probably because madame d'Anglade was not very well begged leave to decline
the honor, and the count and countess set out without them; leaving in their
lodgings one of the countess's women, four girls whom she employed to work for
her in embroidery, and a boy who was kept to help the footman. They took with
them the priest, Francis Gagnard, who was their almoner, and all their other
servants.

The count pretended that a strange presentiment of i^pending evil hung over
him, and determined him to return to Paris a day sooner than he intended.
Certain it is, that instead of staying till Thursday, as they proposed, they
came back on Wednesday evening. On their coming to their hotel a few moments
before their servants (who followed them on horseback), they observed that the
door of a room on the ground floor, where their menservants slep^, was a-jar,
though the almoner, (...) always kept the key, had double locked it when he
went away. Monsieur d'Anglade, who was out when they came home, returned to his
lodging about eleven o'clock; bringing with him two friends, with whom he had
supped at the president Roberts's. On entering, he was told that the count and
countess were returned, at which, it is said, he appeared much surprised.
However, he went into the apartment where they were, to pay his compliments.
They desired him to sit down, and sent to beg madame, d'Anglade would join
them; she did so, and they passed some time in conversation, after which they
parted. The next morning the count de Montgomery discovered that the lock of
his strong box had been opened by a false key, from whence had been taken
thirteen small sacks, each containing a thousand livres in silver; eleven
thousand five hundred livres in gold, being double pistoles; and an hundred
louis d'ors of a new coinage, called au^ ^^^don, together with a pearl necklace
(...) four thousand livres.

The count, as soon as he made this ^^^very, went to the police and preferred
his complaint, describing the sums taken from him, and species in which those
sums were. The lieutenant of the police went directly to the hotel; where, from
circumstances, it clearly appeared, that the robbery must have been committed
by some one who belonged to ^he house. Monsieur and madame d'Anglade earnestly
desired to have their apartments and their servants examined; and, from some
observations he then made, or some prejudice he had before entertained against
monsieur and madame d'Anglade, the lieutenant of the police seems to have
conceived the most disadvantageous opinion of them, and to have been so far
prepossessed with an idea of their guilt, that he did not sufficiently
investigate the looks and the conduct of others. In pursuance, however, of
their desire to have their rooms searched, he followed them thither, and looked
narrowly into their drawers, closets, and boxes; unmade the beds, and searched
the matrasses and the paillasses. Straw, closely stuffed into a coarse cloth,
in form of a bed, which is placed under the (...).
On the floor they themselves inhabited, nothing was found: he then proposed
ascending to the attic story, to which monsieur d'Anglade readily consented.
Madame d'Anglade excused herself from attending, saying that she was ill and
weak. However her husband went up with the officer of justice, and all was
readily submitted to his inspection. In looking into an old trunk, filled with
clothes, remnants and parchments, he found a rouleau of seventy louis d'ors au
cordon, wrapped in a printed paper, which printed paper was a genealogical table,
which the count said was his.

This seems to have been the circumstance which so far confirmed the before
groundless and slight suspicions of the lieutenant of the police, that it
occasioned the ruin of these unfortunate people.

As soon as these seventy louis were brought to light, the count de Montgomery
insisted upon it that they were his; though, as they were in common
circulation, it was as impossible for him to swear to them as to any other
coin. He declared, however, that he had no doubt but that monsieur and madame
d'Anglade had robbed him; and said that he would answer for the honesty of all
his own people; and that on this occasion he could not but recollect that the
sieur Grimaudet, who had before occupied this hotel, which monsieur d'Anglade
had inhabited at the same time, had lost a valuable, piece of plate. It was,
therefore, the count said, very probable that d'Anglade had been guilty of both
the robberies, which had happened in the same place while he inhabited it.

On this rouseau of seventy louis d'ors, the lieutenant of the police seized.
He bid monsieur d'Anglade count them; he did to, but, terrified at the
imputation of guilt, and of the said consequence which in France often followed
the imputation only, his hand trembled as he did it; he was sensible of it, and
said "I tremble." This emotion, so natural even to innocence, appeared in the
eyes of the (...) and the lieutenant, a co^^oboration of a(...) guilt. After
this examination they de^ to the ground floor, where the almoner, the page, and
the valor de chamber were accustomed to sleep together, in a small room. Madame
d'Anglade desired the officer of the police to remark, that the door of this
apartment had been left open, and that the valet de chamber, probably knew why;
of whom therefore enquiry should be made. Nothing was more natural than this
observation, yet to minds already prepossessed with an opinion of the guilt of
Anglade and his wife, this remark seemed to confirm it; when in a corner of
this room, where the wall formed a little recess, five of the sack were
discovered, which the count had lost; in each of which was a thousand livres;
and a sixth, from which upwards of two hundred had been taken. After this, no
farther enquiry was made, nor any of the servants examined, The guilt of
monsieur and madame d'Anglade was ascertained, in the opinion of the lieutenant
of the police and the court, do Montgomery: and on no stronger grounds than the
circumstance of finding the seventy louis (...) the emotion shown by d'Anglade
while he counted them and the remark made by his wife, were these unfortunate
people committed to prison* Their effects were seized. Monsieur d'Anglade was
thrown into a ^^^geon in the Chatelat; and his wife, who was with child, and
her little girl, about four years old were sent to fort IN E^^que* while the
(...) orders were given that no person whatever should be admitted to speak to
them. The prosecution now commenced, and the lieutenant of the police, who had
committed the unhappy man, was to be his judge. D'Anglade appealed, and
attempted to institute a suit against him, and make him a party, in order to
prevent his being competent to give judgment; but this attempt failed, and
served only to add personal animosity to the prejudice this officer had before
taken up against Anglade. Witnesses were examined; but, far from their being
heard with impartiality, their evidence was twisted to the purposes of those,
who desired to prove guilty the man they were determined to believe so. The
almoner, Francis Gagnard, who was the really guilty person, was among those
whose evidence was now, admitted against Anglade; and this wretch had
effrontery enough to conceal the emotions of his soul, and to perform a mass,
which the count ordered to be said at St. Esprit, for the discovery of the
culprits.

The lieutenant of the police, elate with his triumph over the miserable
prisoner, pushed on the prosecution with all the avidity which malice and
revenge could inspire, in a vindictive spirit. In spite, however, of all he
could do, the proofs against d'Anglade were still insufficient, therefore he
determined to have him put to the torture, in hopes of bringing him to confess
the crime. Anglade appealed, but the parliament confirmed the order, and the
poor man underwent the question ordinary and extraordinary; when
notwithstanding his acute sufferings, he continued firmly to protest his
innocence; till covered with wounds, his limbs dislocated, and his mind
enduring yet more than his body, he was carried back to his dungeon. Disgrace
and ruin overwhelmed him; his fortune and effects were sold for less than a
tenth of their value, as is always the case where law presses with its iron
hand; his character was blasted, his health was ruined. Not naturally robust,
and always accustomed not only to the comforts, but the elegancies of life, a
long confinement in a noisome and unwholesome dungeon had reduced him to the
lowest state of weakness. In such a situation he was dragged forth to torture,
and then plunged again into the damp and dark cavern from whence he came --
without food, medicine, or assistance of any kind; though it is usual for those
who suffer the torture to have medicinal help and refreshment after it. This
excess of severity could be imputed only to the malignant influence of the
officer of justice, in whose power he now was.

From the same influence it happened, that though the sieur Anglade, amidst the
most dreadful pains, had steadily protested his innocence -- and though the
evidence against him was extremely defective -- sentence was given to this
effect: -- That Anglade should be condemned to serve in the galleys for nine
years; that his wife should, for the like term, be banished from Paris, and its
jurisdiction; that they should pay three thousand livres, reparation to the
count d'Montgomery as damages, and make restitution of twenty-five thousand six
hundred and seventy-three livres, and either return the pearl necklace or pay
four thousand livres more. From this sum the five thousand seven hundred and
eighty livres, found in the sacks in the servants' room, were to be deducted,
together with the seventy louis d'ors found in the box, of which the officer of
justice had taken possession, and also a double Spanish pistole, and seventeen
louis d'ors, found on the person of Anglade, which was his own money.

Severe as this sentence was, and founded on such slight presumption, it was
put immediately into execution. Anglade whose constitution was already sinking
under the heavy pressure of his misfortunes, whose l^mbs were contracted by the
dampness of his prison, and who had undergone the most excruciating tortures,
was sent to the tower of Montgomery, there to remain, without assistance or
consolation, till the convicts condemned to the galleys were ready to go. He
was then chained with them; a situation how dreadful! for a gentleman, whose
sensibility of mind was extreme, and who had never suffered the least hardship
or difficulty till then; when her was plunged at once into the lowest a^^ss of
misery, chained among felons, and condemned to the most hopeless confinement
and the severest labor, without any support, but what he could procure from
the pity of those who saw him; for of his own he had now nothing! Yet, dreadful
as these evils were, he supported them with that patient firmness which nothing
but conscious innocence could have produced. Reduced to the extreme of human
wretchedness, he felt not for himself; but when he reflected on the situation
of his wife, and his infant daughter, his fortitude forsook him. A fever had,
from his first confinement, preyed on his frame; its progress grew more rapid,
and he felt his death inevitable; when the galley-slaves were collected to
depart, he besought leave to see his wife, and to give his last blessing to his
child -- but it was denied him! -- He submitted, and prepared to go; but being
too weak to stand, he was put into a wagon, whence he was lifted of a night,
when they stopped, and laid on straw, in a barn or out-house, and the next
morning carried again between two men to the wagon to continue his journey. In
this manner, and believing every hour would be his last, the unhappy man
arrived at Marseiles. It was asserted, but for the honor of human nature
should not be believed, that the count de Montgomery pressed his departure,
notwithstanding the deplorable condition he was in, and even waited on the road
to see him pass, and enjoy the horrid spectacle of his sufferings. The unhappy
wife of this injured man had not been treated with more humanity. She had been
dragged to prison, separate from that of her husband, and confined in a
dungeon. She was with child, and the terror she had undergone occasioned her to
miscarry. Long fainting fits succeeded; and she had no help but that of her
little girl, who, young as she was, endeavored to recall her dying mother by
bathing her temples; and by making her smell to bread dipped in wine. But as she
believed every fainting fit would be her last, she implored the jailor to allow
her a confessor: after much delay he sent one; and by his means the poor woman
received succor and sustenance: but while she slowly gathered strength, her
little girl grew ill. The noisome damps, the want of proper food, and of fresh
air, overcame, the tender name of the poor child; and then it was that the
distraction and despair of the mother was at its height. In the middle of a
rigorous winter they were in a cavern, where no air could enter, and where the
damps only lined the wall; a little charcoal in an earthen pot, was all the
fire they had; and the smoke was so offensive and dangerous, that it increased
rather than diminished their sufferings. In this dismal place the mother saw
her child sinking under a disease, for which she had no remedies. Cold sweats
accompanied it, and she had neither clean linen for her, or fire to warm her;
and, as even their food depended on charity, and they were not allowed to see
any body, they had no relief but what the priest from time to time procured
them. At length; and as a great favor, they were removed to a place less damp,
to which there was a little window; but the window was stopped, and the fumes
in the charcoal were as noxious here as in the cavern they had left. Here they
remained, however (providence having prolonged their lives) for four or five
months. -- Monsieur d'Anglade, not being in a condition to be chained to the
oar, was sent to the hospital of the convicts of Marseilles; his disease still
preyed on the poor remains of a ruined constitution, but his sufferings were
lengthened out beyond what his weakness seemed to promise. It was ^ear four
months after his arrival at Marseilles that, being totally exhausted, he felt
his last moments approach, and desired to receive the sacraments: before they
were administered to him, he solemnly declared, at he hoped to be received into
the presence of the searcher of hearts, that (...) was innocent of the crime
laid to his cha^^^^ that he forgave his inexorable prosecutor and his partial
judge, and felt no other regret in quitting the world, than that of leaving his
wife and his child exposed to the miseries of poverty, and the disgrace of his
imputed crime: but he trusted his vindication to God, who had, he said, lent
him fortitude to endure the sufferings he had not deserved: and then, after
having received the eucharist with piety and composure, he expired; a martyr to
unjust suspicion, and hasty or malicious judgment.

He had been dead only a few weeks, when several persons, who had known him,
received anonymous letters: the letters signified, that the person who wrote
them, was on the point of hiding himself in a convent for the rest of his life;
but before he did so, his conscience obliged him to inform whom it might
concern, that the sieur Anglade was innocent of the robbery committed in the
apartments of the count de Montgomery; that the perpetrators were one ^^^^cent
Belestre, the son of a tanner of Man's, and a priest named Gagnard, a native
also of Man's, who had been the count's almoner. The (...) added, that a woman
of the name of de la Comble could give light into the whole affair. One of
these letters was sent to the countess de Montgomery, who however had not
generosity enough to show it; but the sieur Loysillon, and some others who had
received at the same time the same the guilt on those who were really culpable,
kind of letters, determined to enquire into the affair: while the friends of
the count de Montgomery, who began to apprehend that he would be disagreeably
situated, if his prosecution of d'Anglade shouldt (...) found unjust, preten^ed
to discover the th^se letters were dictated by madame d'Anglade; who hoped by
this artifice to deliver her husband's memory from the odium which rested on
it, and herself and her child from the dungeon in which they were still
confined. -- An enquiry was set on Foot after Belestre and Gagnard, who had
some time before quitted the count's service. It was found that Belestre was a
consummate villain, who had in the early part of his life been engaged in an
assassination, for which he was obliged to fly from his native place; that he
had been a soldier, had killed his sergeant in a quarrel, and deserted; then
returning to his own country, had been a wandering vagabond, going by different
names, and practicing every species of roguery; that he had sometimes been a
beggar, and sometimes a bully, about the streets of Paris, but always much
acquainted and connected with Gagnard, his countryman: and that suddenly, from
the lowest indigence, he had appeared to be in affluence; had bought himself
rich clothes, had shown various sums of money, and had purchased an estate near
Man's, for which he had paid between nine and ten thousand livres.

Gagnard, who was the son of the jailer of Man's, had come to Paris without
either clothes or money, and had subsisted on charity, or by saying masses at
St. Esprit, by which he hardly gained enough to keep him alive; when the count
de Montgomery took him. It was impossible what he got in his service, as wages,
could enrich him: yet, immediately after quitting it, he was seen clothed
neatly in his clerical habit; his expenses for his entertainments were
excessive; he had plenty of money in his pocket; and had taken a woman out of
the street, whom he had established in handsome lodgings, and clothed with
gre^^^^ profusion of finery. These observations alone had they been made in
time, were sufficient (...) have opened the way to a discovery, which might
have saved the life, and redeemed the honor of the unfortunate d'Anglade. Late
as it was, justice was now ready to overtake them, and the hand of Providence
itself seemed to asisst. Gagnard being in a tavern, in the street St. Andre des
Ares, was present at a quarrel wherein a man was killed; he was sent to prison,
with the rest of the people in the house; and about the same time, a man who
had been robbed and cheated by Belestre near three years before, met him,
watched him to his lodgings, and put him into the hands of the marechaussee.
These two wretches being thus in the hands of justice, for other crimes,
underwent an examination relative to the robbery of the count de Montgomery:
they betrayed themselves by inconsistent answers. Their accomplices were
apprehended: and the whole affair now appeared so clear, that it was only
astonishing how the criminals could ever have been mistaken. -- The guardians
of Constantia Guillemot^ the daughter of d'Anglade, now desired to of admitted
parties in the suit, on behalf of their ward; that the guilt of Belestre and
Gagnard might be proved, and the memory of monsieur d'Anglade, and the
character of his widow, justified; as well as that she might, by fixing the
guilt on those who were really culpable, obtain restitution of her father's
effects, and ^^meds from the count de Montgomery. She became through her
guardians, prosecutrix of (...) two villains the principal witness against whom
was a man called the abbe de Fontpierre who had belonged to the also
association thieves of which Belestre was a members. This man ^id, that he had
written the anonymous let^^^s which led to the discovery for that, after (...)
death of d'Anglade, his conscience reproched him with being privy to so
eno^^^^^ a crime. He swore that Belestre had ^^tained from Gagnard the
impressions of the count's keys in wax, by which means he had (...) made that
opened the locks. He said, (...) soon after the condemnation of d'Auglade to
the galleys, he was in a room adjoining to (...) where Belestre and Gagnard
were drinking (...); that he heard the former say to (...), "Come, my friend,
let us drink and (...) ourselves, while this fine fellow, this (...) d'Anglade,
is at the galleys." To (...) replied, with a sigh, "Poor (...) cannot help
being sorry for him; he was a good kind of a man, and was always very civil and
obliging to me." Belestre then exclaimed with a laugh, "Sorry! what sorry for a
man who has secured us from suspicion, and made our fortune!" Much other
discourse of the same kind he repeated. -- And de la Comble deposed, that
Belestre had shown her great sums of money, and a beautiful pearl necklace; and
when she asked him where he got all this? he answered, that he won it at play.
These and many other circumstances related by this woman, confirmed his guilt
beyond a doubt. In his pocket were found a gazette of Holland, in which he had
(it was supposed) caused it to be inserted, that the men who had been guilty of
the robbery for which the sieur d'Anglade had been condemed, were executed for
some other crime at Orleans -- hoping by this means to stop any farther
enquiry. A letter was also found on him from Gagnard, which advised him of the
rumors which were spread from the anonymous letters; and desiring him to find
some means to quiet or get rid of the abbe Fontpierr^.

The proof of the criminality of these two men being fully established, they
were condemned to death; and, being previously made to undergo the question
ordinary and extraordinary, they confessed, Gignard upon the rack, and Belestre
at the place of (...) they had committed the (...) declared that if the (...)
pressed him with (...) glade and his wife were taken up, he was in such
confusion, he should have confessed all.

These infamous men having suffered the punishment of their crime, Constantia
Guillemot d'Anglade continued to prosecute the suit against the count de
Montgomery, for the unjust accusation he had made; who endeavored by the
chicane which his fortune gave him the power to command, to evade the
restitution: at length, after a very long process, the court decided -- that
the count de Montgomery should restore to the widow and daughter of d'Anglade,
the sum which their effects, and all the property that was seized, had produced
-- and that he should further pay them a certain sum, as amends for the damages
and injuries they had sustained -- and that their condemnation should be
erased, and their honors restored; which, though it was all the reparation
that could now be made them, could not bind up the incurable wounds they had
suffered in this unjust and ^r^el prosecution.

Mademoiselle d'Anglade, whose destiny excited universal commiseration was
taken into the protection of some generous persons about the court, who raised
for her a subscrip^^^^ which ^^lenght am^^^ted to an hundred thousand livers;
which, together with (...) res^^tution of her father's effects, made (...) and
some provision for her; and she was ^^^^iaged to monsieur des Essarts, a
coun^^^ parliament.

G. Pitaval.] THE PRETENDED MARTIN GUERRE.
NOTHING is more astonishing than the infinite variety of the human face, in
which there is such a prodigious difference of complexion and features; and
where a difference of expression is almost always observed, even in those whose
features and complexion are very much alike. Lopez de Vega somewhere says, that
nature, sometimes weary of varying her works, copies herself and produces two
persons perfectly resembling each other. Such must have been the similitude
between the two men who are the subjects of the following detail. History
mentions several celebrated impostors, who, taking advantage of a likeness to
some other person, have usurped their stations or their fortunes: but there is
perhaps no instance of an imposture so long and so successfully carried on, as
that which is here related.

Martin Guerre was born in Biscaye, of parents who were somewhat above the rank
of peasants, and who appear to have supported themselves by the cultivation of
their own land. It is probable, that in that part of Europe very early
marriages are usual among all ranks of people; since this man, then only eleven
years old, was (in 1539) married to Bertrande de Rols, nearly of the same age
as himself. For nine or ten years they were without children; at length about
the end of that period, they had a son born, who was called Sunsei; and soon
after, Martin Guerre having given some offense to his father, absented himself
from home to avoid his displeasure. And whether he found unexpected pleasure in
the variety afforded by the wandering life he embraced, or whether he had
conceived any disgust at some part of his wife's conduct, or was satiated with
her society; from whatever cause it was, he continued the travel from place to
place, and for some years his family knew not what was become of him.

Though is has often happened that a wife (especially if young and handsome, as
was Bertrande de Rols at that time) has thought that such neglect and desertion
on the part of her husband, has justified her forming other attachments; it
does not appear that any charge of that nature was made against Bertrande de
Rols: nor, for some years after her husband left her, did the smallest
suspicion of infidelity, or even indiscretion, arise against her. At length a
man appeared personating her absent husband, and in face, and figure so nearly
resembling him, that the four sisters of Martin Guerre immediately acknowledged
him to be their brother; Pierre Guerre, the uncle of Martin, as his nephew;
and, in general, the relations on both sides believed that it was himself.
Besides the very strong resemblance, he made himself known to Bertrande de Rols
by the relation of particulars known only to her and Martin Guerre her husband;
and even enquired for certain articles of clothes, which he said he had on his
departure deposited in places where they were found: circumstances thaf
probably dissipated any doubt which might have arisen in the mind of Bertrande
de Rols. Be that however as it might, she received him as her husbands, and as
such he continued to ^^ve ^^id her near three years, during which time she had
two children by him, one of which died soon after its birth. He also in this
period sold, as Martim Guerre, several parcels of land belonging to him. No
mention being made of the parents of Martin Guerre, after he less his home, it
is probable they died while he was absent. Though the impostor had thoroughly
studied his part it seems almost incredible that Bertrande de Rols should have
been deceived.

Those who thought ill of her, affirmed, that she was too much attached to the
impostor to wish the deception detected; and that she willingly shut her eyes
against conviction. But as she seems to have been of a timid temper, and
perhaps of a weak understanding it is, not impossible that she might at first
have been imposed upon by the strong resemblance ^he impostor bore to her
husband, and by the knowledge he had of the most secret transactions of the
life of Martin Guerre, and that afterward, when doubts arose in her mind, she
might fear to enquire into the truth, till forced to do so by the relations of
her real husband. These relations, particularly his uncle Pierre Guerre,
pretended, after above two years, to discover, that the man who had been
received by them as Martin Guerre, was an impostor, and they insisted on
Bertrande de Rols joining in a prosecution of him with whom she now lived as
her husband. That timidity of spirit, which had probably prevented her own
suspicions of his identity from appearing, made her now give way, with equal
facility, to the impetuous resentment of the family. She therefore agreed to
appoint Pierre Guerre to act in her behalf, and to lay before the seat of
justice her complaint against the man who had usurped the name, rights, and
effects of Martin Guerre, her husband.

This man, brought before the judges of Rieux, lamented the unequalled hardship
of his destiny. He said, that the suit commenced against him, by which it was
intended to rob him of his property and his life, was set on foot at the
instigation and by the intrigues of Pierre Guerre his uncle, and two of his
sons-in-law, who, in hopes of continuing to manage his patrimony, which
amounted to seven or eight thousand livres, had prevailed on his wife to engage
in the wicked scheme of making him believed to be an impostor. He then entered
into a detail of what had happened to him since he absented himself. He said he
had carried arms some years for the king of France, his sovereign; after which
he went into the Spanish army; till eagerly wishing to see his wife, his child,
and his friends, he had determined to come home; where, on his arrival, he was
immediately acknowledged by the very man, Pierre Guerre, who was now so forward
in prosecuting him, through he must necessarily have been much (...) since he
went away, an almost beardless youth; having been exposed to much hardship and
change of climate, which, together with the effect of time, must have made a
considerable difference in his face and person. (...) alleged that Pierre
Guerre had for some time pursued him with the cruelest animosity, for no other
reason but because he had insisted on his (Pierre Guerre) delivering a fair
account of the administration of his farm and effect during his absence, which
he was (...) unable or unwilling to do. That, as a (...) of his malignity, he
could bring witnesses, who saw him (Piere Guerre) not long before, strike his
nephew, Martin Guerre, to the ground with an iron bar; with which he would have
repeated his blow, and probably have killed him, if his wife, by throwing
herself between them, had not shielded him from his fury. -- He demanded to be
confronted with his wife, who would, he said, be found incapable of stifling
the truth, in the absence of those who had influenced her weak mind to join in
the prosecution. He desired that his uncle, Pierre Guerre, and his other
accusers, should be prevented from having access to her, that she might not
have her understanding perverted, by the arts of those, who had so evident an
interest in his destruction.

He then underwent an examination, in which, to all the questions put to him,
on the life and connections of Martin Guerre, he answered most exactly. The
time and place of his birth; the most particular events, relative to his
father, mother, brothers, sister and all others of his family; the year and day
on which he was married to Bertrande de Rols, whose relations he described with
equal precision. He named the persons who were present at his marriage, and the
clothes they wore, the priest who married them, and an infinite number of
trifling circumstances, all of which were found to be true. He spoke also of
the birth and baptism of Sanxi Guerre, the son of Mar^n Guerre; why he quitted
his habitation, who he met on the way, and the discourse he held with several
persons whom he named. He gave an account of the cities through which he had
passed, in France and Spain, and the persons with whom he had resided and
conversed in both kingdoms. And, to remove every doubt of his veracity, he
named persons, to whom reference might be had, who would confirm all he had
asserted; and, when these people were applied to, they actually did confirm all
he had advanced.

Bertrande de Rols was next examined. Her answers agreed perfectly with those
of her supposed husband, in all the circumstances wherein they were mutually
concerned; and of an hundred and fifty witnenesses, who were afterward
questioned, near sorty swore, that the man now imprisoned on supposition of
having usurped the name and station of Martin Guerre, was actually Martin
Guerre himself, and that they knew him to be the same with whom they had been
acquainted from their infancy, not only by the general similitude of his person
now, to what it was th^n, but also by certain scars and marks which he had
acquired when a child, and which time had not effaced.

Other witnesses being called, on behalf of the prosecutors, swore as
positively, that the man whom they now saw, and who had so long passed for
Martin Guerre, was one Arnaud du Tilk, commonly called Pansette, native of
Sagias, whom they had known from his cradle.

Sixty other witnesses, on being shown the prisoner, declared that they dated
not decide, whether he was Martin Guerre or no, so very strong was the
resemblance.

The accused obtained an order from the court, that Bertrande de Rols should be
kept a part from Pierre Guerre and his associates. But at the same time the
judges named a commission to go to Artiques, the place of Martin Guerre's
residence, and to Sagias, the place from whence Arnaud du Tilk was said to
come; that all particulars might be collected relative to them both, which
might throw light on so mysterious an affair.

They directed also, that the accused should be compared with Sa^xi Guerre, the
son; and with the four sisters of Martin Guerre. The result was, that Sanxi did
not at all resemble him; but the likeness between him and the four women was
striking and indsputable. This appeared a strong circumstance in his favor; --
a child as often resembles his mother as his father; and at that early period
of life, the features are sometimes so little formed, as ^o give no decided
likeness to any part of a family: whereas the resemblance between the prisoner
and the four sisters of Martin Guerre, who were women nearly of the same age,
and supposed to be born of the same parents, seemed a convincing proof of his
identity.

But after examining many other witnesses, and investigating numberless proofs,
the judges decided, that the prisoner was not Martin Guerre, but Arnaud du Tilk
of Sagias; and he was accordingly condemned.

He appealed against this sentence to the parliament of Toulouse; and that
court thought it necessary more fully to investigate an affair so full of
difficulty and obscurity. The party calling himself Martin Guerre was summoned
to appear, with Bertrande de Rols, and his other accusers. The man maintained
so steady a countenance, and answered in a manner so unembarrassed and
ingenuous, that the judges began to believe he was the real Martin Guerre; and
the more so, as they saw in the deportment of Pierre Guerre the uncle, and
Bertrande de Rols, a confusion and hesitation, which they imputed to the
consciousness of their guilt.

Directions were given for a new commission, to renew all the enquiries, and to
hear the witnesses again.

But this renewed investigation, instead of unveiling the mystery, served only
to wrap it in ten-fold obscurity. Of thirty witnesses who were now heard for
the second time, nine or ten declared that the prisoner was Martin Guerre, whom
they had long known; eight as positively declared he was Arnaud du Tilk; and
the rest, after having long deliberated, protested, that they could not charge
their consciences with an oath, in a matter wherein, from the extreme
resemblance between Martin Guerre and Arnaud du Tilk, they were unable to
pronounce positively to their satisfaction.

On collecting the whole evidence brought by the accusers, against the
prisoner, it appeared, that, in the whole, the deposition of forty-five
witnesses went to prove that he was Arnaud du Tilk, and among them some had
deservedly great weight. The first was Carbon Ba^reau, uncle by the mother's
side to Arnaud du Tilk, who acknowledged him to be his nephew, and seeing him a
prisoner, wept bitterly, and deplored the unhappy destiny of a person so nearly
allied to him. -- The shoemaker who made shoes for Martin Guerre, swore that
the measure of his foot was of twelve inches, and that of the prisoner was only
nine. Another person deposed that Martin Guerre understood the science of
defense, of which the prisoner was ignorant, -- Almost all the witnesses who
affirmed that the prisoner was an impostor, agreed in describing the true
Martin Guerre to be taller, and of a darker complexion; his body and legs
thinner; that be stooped, carried his head low, and had a round back; that his
nose was large and somewhat flat, his chin sharp and turned up in the m^ddle,
and that his under lip ^ung down. Arnaud du Tilk, which they said was the true
name of the man before them, was shorter and s^outer; not so flat-nosed, or
round-backed: but they owned, that the scars and marks he had upon him, were
exactly the same as those they remembered on Martin Guerre. -- Jean Espagnol,
who kept a public-house at --, deposed positively, that the prisoner discovered
himself to him, and desired he would not mention the secret he trusted him
with, which was, that Martin Guerre had given him all his property. --
Valentine -- deposed, that he met Arnaud du Tilk, the prisoner, who finding
himself known, desired the deponent not to betray him; and gave him, at the
same time, two handkerchiefs to be delivered to his brother John du Tilk. --
Two other witnesses said, that a soldier of Rochefort passing through Artiques,
was surprised to find the prisoner then living there as Martin Guerre, and
loudly asserted, that he knew Martin Guerre well, who was actually in Flanders,
where he had been obliged to replace with a wooden leg, the leg he had lost at
the battle of St. Laurent, before St. Quintin. It was also remarked, that
Martin Guerre, being a native of Biscaye, spoke the Basque, which differs very
materially from the French and Gasco^ languages; whereas the prisoner knew only
a few words of it, which he often unnceessarily introduced into his discourse
to conceal his general ignorance of what he would be thought to understand. --
Several witnesses deposed, that Arnaud du Tilk, had, from his earliest years,
been abandoned to every kind of vice; that he was an atheist, a blasphemer, and
guilty of fraud and theft; whence it followed, that he was capable of
committing the crime he was now charged with.

The strength, however, of this body of evidence seemed very much diminished by
what followed, in favor of his being the person whose name he assumed.

Upwards of thirty persons, who had known Martin Guerre from his infancy,
declared that the prisoner was the man. Among these witnesses, those whose
depositions seemed the most convincing, were the four sisters of Martin Guerre;
and the husbands of the two who were married corroborated their evidence. Other
persons, who had been present at the marriage ceremony between Martin Guerre
and Bertrande de Rols, deposed, that this was the same person who was then
married. As proofs of his identity, they swore to several marks about his
person, which on examination, were all found on the person of the prisoner.

It seemed to be generally acknowledged, that when the prisoner arrived at
Artiques, he spoke to every one he met, who knew Martin Guerre, calling them by
their names. That some of these, not immediately recollecting him, he told them
he was their old acquaintance, Martin Guerre, and reminded them of
conversations and events that had formerly happened, and of places where they
had been, and parties made in his company, twelve, fourteen, or twenry years
back. And to Bertrande de Rols he mentioned several circumstances, which could
be known only to her and Martin Guerre her husband.

Other depositions went to prove, that Pierre Guerre, the uncle, had declared
hi^ resolution to ruin the prisoner at all events; and had endeavored to make
his whole family enter into a combination to gratify his revenge. To procure
money to carry on the suit, he had applied to one Jean Loze of Pal^os, who had
refused to advance it, saying, he would not contribute to the ruin of his
relation. They added, that it was generally believed at Artiques, that
Bertrande de Rols was terrified into joining in this prosecution, by the
threats of Pierre Guerre, and of her mother, who was now the wife of Pierre
Guerre; and that she did not willingly carry it on; believing that the prisoner
was really her husband. The depositions of the four sisters of Martin Guerre,
and their great resemblance to the prisoner, was a strong circumstance in his
favor. Those who saw them together affirmed, that a more striking likeness was
impossible; they had the same features, complexion, and cast of countenance.

When, in the course of the examinations, the prisoner was confronted with
Bertrande de Rols, he conjured her, by all that was sacred, to a knowledge the
truth; he told her that his fate ^epended upon her, and that he was content it
should do so; since if she with a safe conscienc^ could swear, that he was not
Martin Guerre her husband, he would consent to undergo the most cruel
punishment. To this she answered, that she neither would swear or believe that
he was not Martin Guerre. It was acknowledged, that before she was incluced, by
the threats of Pierre Guerre, and her mother, to institute a suit against the
prisoner, she had lived with him above three years without ever appearing to
doubt of his being really Martin Guerre, her husband; and, when doubts arose
with others, she expressed herself with great asperity against those who
mentioned those doubts before her, saying, that surely she must know her
husband, better than any one else could; that she would punish those who dared
to propagate so scandalous a falsehood.

It also appeared, that she had often complained of the tyranny of Pierre
Guerre and her mother, who had, she said, forced her, against her inclinations,
to enter into the process against the prisoner, and had threatened, if she did
not, to turn her out of the house (...) lived in, and otherwise to pr^secute
(...). It was proved, that, at the (...) of Pierre Guerre, one Jean
d'Escorneb^u^ had before accused the prisoner of a crime, for which he had been
imprisoned; and, while he was so, that Pierre Guerre and his wife (the mother
of Bertrande de Rols) incessantly besieged her to consent to prosecute him for
pretending to be Martin Guerre, which she then refused; and when, after some
time, he was released from prison, on the charge, which Jean d'Efcornebeuf had
brought against him, being found false, Bertrande de Rols received him with
every demonstration of affection; notwithstanding which, immediately
afterward, Pierre Guerre obliged her to become a party in the suit against him.

Thus stood the evidence on both sides of this remarkable question, and it
seems that the judges were on the point of deciding in favor of the prisoner;
when the real Martin Guerre suddenly appeared. He came from Spain, and had a
wooden leg, as the soldier had asserted. Immediately on his arrival, he
presented a memorial to the court, desiring leave to plead his cause, and to
bring proofs of his identity.

An order was accordingly made for his examination, and that he should be
confronted with Bertrande de Rols, and with the four sisters, whose evidence
had been the strongest in favor of the prisoner. He was then examined, in the
same manner as the prisoner had been before, and on the same particulars; and
his answers were not found so clear and exact as those of his representative.

They were then confronted. The man accused of being an impostor treated Martin
Guerre as a rogue and a cheat, dressed up by the artifices of Pierre Guerre,
the uncle; and declared that he would content to be hanged, if he did not
prove, to the satisfaction of the court, that the man, who now pretended to be
Martin Guerre, was a more machine, taught to act his part by his enemies. He
then questioned his adversary on several circumstances, which, if he was Martin
Guerre, he ought to have known. His answers were confused and unsatisfactory.

The commissioners then taking the last man apart interrogated him on several
new points, to which neither of them had before answered; his answers were
found to correspond with the truth. Then taking apart the first pretender, they
put the same questions to him; and, to ten or twelve of those questions, he
answered as exactly as his opponent.

The four sisters, and the husbands of the two who were married, were then
ordered to appear, together with Pierre Guerre, the brothers of Arnaud du Tilk,
and as many as could be ^ound of the former witnesses.

They appeared accordingly, except the brothers of Arnaud du Tilk, who escaped,
that they might not be obliged to give their (...) against him.

(...) of Martin Guerre was (...) before the commissioners, and shown he two
persons, who both asserted that they were her brother. After a moment's
consideration, she burst into tears, and embraced the real Martin Guerre; and,
addressing herself to the commissioners, said, This is indeed my brother; I
acknowledge that that wicked impostor has deceived me. Martin Guerre embraced
her, and wept also. The three other sisters, in their turns, acknowledged him
with tears, and besought his forgiveness of their error.

The husbands of the married sisters did the same; and those witnesses, who had
sworn most positively that the first of these men was Martin Guerre, now, on
seeing him with the real Martin Guerre, owned they had been in an error.

Bertrande de Rols, the wife, was then ordered to approach; who no sooner
beheld her husband, than, wild with confusion and terror, trembling, and in
tears, she ^an to him, embraced him, and implored his pardon for the fault she
had committed, in receiving as her husband an infamous impostor. She said, that
she had been drawn into so great an error, by the prepossession of her
sister-in-law; and that the great desire she had to find her husband, had
assisted to deceive her; while the knowledge the impostor possessed, of the
most secret transactions of her li^e (circumstances which she th^ught could be
known only to herself, and Martin (...) had for some time completed the
deception; but that, when at length suspicions arose in her mind, she made
every effort to assure herself of the truth; and, as soon as she was fully
aware of the deceit, had appealed to justice, to deliver her from the impostor,
who had so cruelly betrayed her into a crime she must forever lament -- a
crime, which had inspired her with so much horror, that she had inc^ssantly
wished for death to put an end to her torments; and that religion only had
withheld her from finishing with her own Lands, a life that was become
insupportable.

Her beauty (for she is described as being very handsome) and her tears
affected every body, except her husband; who, though he appeared so moved with
the tenderness and affection of his sisters, was insensible of the penitence
and humility of his wife, whom he repulsed with rage and indignation, pushed
(...) rudely from him, and bid her not play the hypocrite. He added, that she
could not have been so long deceived, but pretended to be so, because she
preferred the deceiver to her duty and honor; and fiercely told her, that all
his ^^^fortunes were owing to her, who ^ould never have mistaken Arnaud du
(...) husband with whom she had (...) and that though (...) others, nothing
(...) attachment to (...) traitor, could have reconciled her to the treason.
The court interfered, to persuade Martin Guerre to pardon his wife; but it was
a length of time only that abated his severity toward her.

The imposture being now clearly proved, sentence was given against Arnaud du
Tilk; that he should be hanged, and his body reduced to ashes. The daughter,
however, that he had by Bertrande de Rols, was not to be declared illegitimate,
but was, on account of the good faith of the mother, who was ignorant of the
imposture, to possess whatever had really belonged to Arnaud du Tilk.

The court deliberated, whether Martin Guerre and Bertrande de Rols were not
liable to some punishment; the latter for adultery, and the former, for having,
by his desertion and neglect of his wife, occasioned it, and for having served
in the Spanish army. But, as the crime committed by the woman was through
ignorance, and as the man did not designedly betray her into it, they were not
deemed objects of public justice. In regard to the charge against Martin
Guerre, that he had served against his king, it appeared that he had not
voluntarily done so; but that having been reduced to servitude, he had been
hired by the cardinal de --, and afterward by the cardinal's brother, whom he
had followed into Flanders, and (...) waited on him at the battle of St.
Laurent, where, being obliged to ^ight by the side of his ^^^ter, he had lost a
leg; a loss that seemed a sufficient punishment of his crime.

Arnaud du Tilk, being now under condemnation, made a full confession of his
crimes. He said, that being a soldier, and returning from the camp in Picardy,
he was met by some of Martin Guerre's intimate friends, by whom he was mistaken
for him, and who were not without difficulty undeceived; that he thence
conceived the idea of taking advantage of the resemblance; and that afterward,
making an acquaintance with Martin Guerre himself, he got from him those
partic^^^rs, that knowledge of the most secret (...) of his life, which had
served so (...) to impose on Bertrande de Rols, (...) the family of Martin
Guerre.

(...) brought to the place of execution, (...) of the man he had injured,
(...) his confessions, and died (...) the mercy of God, and (...) of Martin
Guerre, his wife, and (...) whom he had offended.

[From Guyot de Pitaval.] THE MARRIED NUN.
THE sieur d'Antail had by his first wife two daughters, Louisa, and Henrietta.
As he was possessed of an affluent fortune, and fond of his children, he spared
no expense in their education. The youngest had nothing remarkable in her
person; but Louisa, the eldest, was extremely beautiful; and the charms of her
figure were equalled by the elegant acquirements, which the care of her father,
and an understanding naturally quick, had given her the means of obtaining.
Beauty, which has too often been fatal to its possessor, proved the source of
the most deplorable misfortunes to Louisa. She lost her mother when she was
about thirteen or fourteen; and her father soon after married again. His wife,
madame de Valmor^^ had a son about eighteen, of whom she was extravagantly
fond. The young man could not live under the same roof with Louisa, without
feeling the effect of her (...), he became madly in love with her; but the
formidable rivals, who surrounded his mistress, made him despair of availing
himself of the opportunities which his near connections gave him; he
particularly apprehended the success of the sieur Pradelle, a lieutenant in the
guards, who he fancied was more favored by Louisa than any of her lovers. The
sieur Pradelle saw, with equal uneasiness, the constant access that young de
Valmorin enjoyed, by living in the house of monsieur d'Antail, and he dreaded
that the facility of conversing, and even the authority of her father and her
mother-in-law, might throw Louisa into his arms. She did not express any
partiality to de Valmorin; but she was not without coquetry, and could not
resist the pleasure of hearing herself flattered by several admirers at the
same time; yet Pradelle seemed to have the preference. Pradelle, however,
thought he had so much to fear from the advantages of constant intercourse
which his rival possessed, that he determined to carry her off, before de
Valmorin should have made too deep an impression on her heart. He took his
measures accordingly; but not so secretly as to escape the observation of de
Valmorin, who found means to render his project abortive. Rage and resentment
took possession of the heart of Pradelle, when he found that his rival had
counteracted him: he affronted him publicly, and gave a challenge, which de
Valmorin accepted. The father of Louisa and his wife, the mother of de
Valmorin, being informed of what had passed, and of the impending duel between
the rivals, took the necessary precautions to prevent their encounter. But the
mother continued under the cruelest alarms for the safety of her son: she
foresaw, that though she had for that time saved him from the hazard into which
he would have thrown himself, she could not always secure him from the
vengeance of a rival, who declared that nothing should prevent his attacking
any man, who pretended to Louisa. She had already represented to her son, that
even if his affairs permitted him to marry the object of his affection, he
could not hope for happiness with a woman, whose singular beauty would be a
perpetual source of jealousy and uneasiness, and whose gaiety of temper seemed
too likely to encourage those whom her charms might attract. De Valmorin, who
was of a warm and determined temper, would hear nothing his mother could say to
dissuade him from his attachment to Louisa. His passion grew daily more
violent, and his mother more unhappy. At length the resolved, as the only way
to secure her son from the pernicious effects of those charms ^e every day saw
with new ad^^ration, to endeavor to get her daughter-^^-law sent into a
convent. But on the first ^^^tion of such a project, she found it received with
so much resentment by Louisa, that she saw all her influence with her husband
must be exerted to conquer the repugnance of his daughter: she therefore
represented to him, that the repose and honor of his family required the
seclusion of Louisa, whose beauty, though by no means in its meridian had
already occasioned him so much trouble and uneasiness; uneasiness, from which
he could never be exempt, even if his daughter was married, since there was but
too much reason to believe, that jealousy, on the part of the husband of a
person so uncommonly lovely, would make her life uneasy to herself and fatal to
others; and that if any sinister event was the consequence, he could never
forgive himself, for not having placed her where the influence of her charms
could no longer effect the tranquillity of his days, or the reputation of his
family. It is probable that mademoiselle Louisa, whose temper seems to have
been warm, and who was, perhaps, conscious of the power of beauty, had given
some offense to her mother-in-law, which, added to her fear for her son,
determined her to carry her point, however cruel and unjust. Her husband, whom
she entirely governed, had forgotten, in this second marriage, the attachment
he once had to the children of the first; and he had no longer any will but
that of his wife; or any eyes to see, but as she directed. She failed not to
prejudice him so much against his eldest daughter, that when he found her
aversion to going into a convent could not be conquered by persuasion, he told
her, in a manner that showed how much he was in earnest, that by a certain day
she must resolve either to enter as a novice, with an intention to take the
vows, or he would force her into the house of the Magdalenettes, This th^^at
could only be executed in France, where fathers could then dispose of their
children as they pleased.
among the unhappy women who are destined to pass their days in tears and
penitence, for their past errors. This menace was terrible; and Louisa saw but
too evidently, that her fate was determined; and that she must resolve on
taking the veil, if she would escape a more deplorable destiny; she therefore
consented to enter into the convent of St. Claire, in the Fauxbourg Marceau. A
woman, named madame du Fresne, was employed to negociate this matter between
her and her parents, Father Caussin, a priest, who was witness to the aversion
Louisa had to the lot she was driven to accept, said to this madame du Fresne,
"You will be the occasion of eternal perdition to that poor girl, by forcing
her to embrace the life of a nun, to which you see she has a decided
antipathy." To this remonstrance du Fresne replied, "It is better that she
should hazard perdition in a convent, than, by remaining in the world, become
the cause of the perdition of many others, whom her beauty would involve in the
most fatal crimes." It was evident that the unfortunate Louisa was to be the
victim of her step-mother's apprehensions, and of her hatred, occasioned by
those extraordinary perfections of form, which are too apt to excite envy and
ill-humour in women, even after they have ceased to value themselves on outward
advantages. Not content with the success of her project hitherto, madame
d'Antail did not even seek to soften the horrors of perpetual confinement, by
allowing her daughter-in-law the alleviations of affluence: they would give her
no more than six hundred livres on her entrance; the nuns refused to receive
her unless she had more. On this occasion the unfortunate victim wrote thus to
madame du Fresne, who was again employed between her and her parents: "I know,
madam, that six hundred livres are enough for those who can execute the duties
of the life into which they enter; but as it is impossible for me ever to do
so, and as the community are already sensible that I never can perform what is
expected of the generality, and must have many exemptions, they refuse to
receive me, unless I bring a greater sum: I beseech you therefore, madam,
intercede with my father to have some consideration for his child; and to pay
for me what is required." After long solicitation this was granted: the father
paid the sum which the community insisted on; and Louisa, who saw no remedy,
took the veil, and after her noviciate was passed, as the disposition of her
persecutors remained unchanged at the end of that time, she took the vow, with
a courage inspired by her high spirit, but with an heart still attached to a
world, of which she was designed to be one of the brightest ornaments. But
whatever outward resolution she had shown, and whatever pains were taken by the
mother-in-law and her party to make this step appear voluntary, Louisa had
found means to declare her aversion in a legal form. Before she took the vows,
she had a protest drawn up against it, which she delivered to father Favier, a
cordelier, confessor and superior of the community; and immediately after the
ceremony she repeated the protest in form a second time, and gave it to the
same person. For three or four years Louisa dragged on a melan^^oly and
reluctant life in the monastery, without attempting to free herself from the
engagements into which she had been forced. In the mean time her sister,
Henrietta d'Antail, was married to the sieur Nicholas le Vacher; and in the
marriage contract her father had named her his sole heiress. Avarice was the
most predominant feature in the sieur le Vacher's character; and he saw with
jealousy and mistrust the increasing power that his father-in-law suffered his
wife to have over him. She had a son of her own, for whom le Vacher believed
she was robbing her husband of his property, and sending away and secreting his
effects among her friends, to secure them for her own and her son's use, to the
prejudice of his daughter Henrietta. On examining more narrowly into the truth
of his conjectures, he discovered that three articles of plate, amounting
together to the sum of twenty-eight thousand livres, had certainly disappeared.
He thought it therefore time to put an end to proceedings so injurious to his
interest; and for that purpose he presented to the proper law-office, a
requisition, in which he sat forth, that his wife's father had lost his sight,
and that his understanding war, so much impaired, that he was no longer in a
condition to manage (...) affairs, which were consequently in a (...) that
could end only in his total (...) administration of them was not put (...)
hands. He obtained an order (...) he desired; of which he had not been (...)
before the sieur d'Antail got it revoked. (...) Vacher, who found his
father-in-law (...) extremely at the measure he had taken, (...) not oppose the
revocation; but though the (...) man was again master of this own (...), the
attempt Le Vacher had made was not to be forgiven: he solem^^^ (...) never
would pardon it* (...) his rage, and discord and (...) hatred were sown between
(...). While this scene was passing, (...) ^ound the convent every day mo^^
(...) dreadful: her temper became (...) hopelessness of her situation; she
could not command herself enough to feel any relief in the society of the nuns;
and the duties of religion she was unable to perform: the only consolation she
found, was in the company of the sieur Cousturier, a counselor, who, visiting
a relation in the convent, had seen Louisa, and, struck with the wonderful
beauty which the religious habit could not conceal, had cultivated an
acquaintance with her. He frequently visited her at the grate, where she told
him the cruel persecutions she had undergone from the hatred of her
stepmother; the reluctance with which she continued in the monastery, and the
precaution she had taken to protest against the vows she had been constrained
to make. Cousturier consoled her, by affording her hopes that the protest would
give her the means of recovering her liberty: he advised her to continue to
express the same coldness for the duties of her profession, and the same
aversion to the company of the nuns; to commit no act that might serve as a
ratification of her extorted engagement; and he told her, that, if she waited
patiently, under these precautions, he flattered himself the time might come
when her chains would be broken.

Some months after the commencement of her acquaintance with Cousturier, the
hospital at Lagny was to be put under the government of the cordeliers: "Louisa
d'Antail obtained the appointment of superior to this branch of the community,
and removed thither with great satsfaction, not only because her high spirit
made the rigorous subordination to which she was subject in the convent very
disagreeable to her, but because she could enjoy, together with more power,
more liberty in her new abode. The nuns, in whom her disinclination to the
service of the cloister, and the coldness of her manner toward them, had
occasioned a great dislike, saw her departure with pleasure. Before she took
possession of her new establishment, she had the precaution to renew the
protest against her original vows, by an act, wherein she declared that she not
only considered them as extorted and nugatory but that she did not mean to
confirm them by her present removal, or by any subsequent act, and that she
always reserved a right to avail herself of her first protest whenever she
should see occasion.

The new community at Lagny were desirous of being considered as subject only
to the authority of the cordeliers, who are the superior branch of the claires;
and to be wholly exempt from the jurisdiction of the archbishop of Paris: the
prelate defended his right, and a lawsuit was likely to be the consequence.
The sieur le Vachor, whose avarice made him attentive to the most minute
circumstances, knew enough of his sister-in-law's disposition, to apprehend,
that she would avail herself of the protest she had made, to renounce her vows,
if ever it should be in her power. Her conversations with Cousturier gave him
sensible uneasiness. A young man could hardly see her without being sensible of
her attractions, and Cousturier was amiable, handsome, and possessed a fortune
equal to what Louisa might have a claim to, if she was disengaged from her
cloister. -- To add to his apprehensions in regard to this acquaintance, he was
aware that Cousturier had studied, and was versed in the laws which relate to
monastic vows, and knew in what cases they could be dissolved. To complete his
uneasiness, he learned that Louisa was to be removed to Lagny; where, being no
longer under the direction of the abbess, nor restrained by the observations of
the numerous members of the community, she would no longer be obliged to give
an account of her actions; but might entertain Cousturier as long and as often
as she pleased, in the parlour of the hospital, having no other interruption
than the duties of her office.

Notwithstanding this degree of liberty, Louisa knew that great care was
necessary, to prevent the imputation of an improper connection between her and
Cousturier; on the least surmise of which, she foresaw that she should no
longer be suffered to see him at all, but should be forced back to the
monastery, and so closely confined, that she should have no chance of ever
seeing those who might contribute to the recovery of her liberty. -- For this
reason she failed not to be cautious; and, as Cousturier was now obliged to
travel six leagues for the pleasure of seeing her, their interviews were less
frequent, and were managed with the utmost attention to propriety; but Le
Vacher, whose interest it was to put an end to them entirely, employed
emissaries to propagate reports injurious to the character of the order; and he
so effectually disseminated his scandalous stories, that the principals of the
order at length heard them; and in addition to these falsities, he alleged that
the dispute between the archbishop and the cordeliers, relative to the
jurisdiction of the hospital of Lagny, originated in the p^^de and independent
spirit of mademoiselle d'Antail; who thought that under the government of the
cordeliers, who are not very strict, she should be more at liberty to indulge
her inclinations, than under that of the archbishop. Havi^g given these
malicious stories time to make their way, and being sure they had all the
effect he expected, he solicited, and soon obtained, an order to remove Louisa
d'Antail from the superiorship of Lagny, and to confine her, with great
strictness, in the convent where she had taken the veil. All this passed
immediately after La Vacher had ob^^ined an interdiction against his
father-in-law, which had taken the management of his estate out of his hands.

The fair nun, who found that monsieur d'Antail, her father, was enraged at the
conduct of Le Vacher, thought it a proper opportunity to attempt shaking off
the yoke, under which she had now suffered seven years. She hoped that monsieur
d'Antail and his wife, irritated against Henrietta's husband, ^ould again
restore her to that share of their affection, which she had never deserved to
lose; and that, in order to put her in a situation to recover her part of that
fortune, which they now saw would be unworthily bestowed on the avaricious Le
Vacher, they would acknowledge, before a court of justice, the means they had
taken to force her into engagements so contrary to her inclinations. In this
hope she was not disappointed. On her applying to them, and declaring that she
should make an attempt to break through those engagements, which she never
could fulfill, they promised to give her all the assistance they could toward
dissolving her vows, and enabling her to marry the sieur Cousturier; who was in
every respect a suitable match for her; and to whom she was now tenderly
attached. The pity he had sh^wn for her misfortunes had first engaged her
gratitude; his merit and perseverance had now created a warmer sentiment. He
had long been her only consolation, and to pass the rest of her life with him
would, she thought, give new value to the emancipation she hoped to procure.

Monsieur d'Antail and his wife, Adriana de Valmorin, joined in the
representation she made to the court of Rome, of the force under which she was
obliged to take the vows. While they waited an answer, she left the convent,
and they received her into their house. The pope's answer was to the following
effect: -- That the petitioner should return into the convent, to wait the
event of a summons, made to all the parties who were interested in the
abolition of her vows; and, if no cause was shown by those parties, sufficient
to make the proper court at Paris confirm her religious engagements, they were
to be dissolved, and she would be permitted to marry. -- The persons interested
were, her relations and the community of nuns to which she had belonged. The
community, by the^^ ^bbess, declared their willingness to release from her
engagements a person who had never performed the functions which those
engagements required, and who had always shown the utmost distaste and aversion
to their society. They therefore declared, that they wished to be relieved from
a member, who lived so uneasily among them. Monsieur d'Antail protesed in form,
that his (...), through the apprehension she had entert^^^^d for her son's
safety, had persuaded him to ^^rce his daughter into a convent. He ow^^d he had
threatened her with in^amy, impri^onment, and even death if she refused. But at
his age he could no longer think of persisting in the cruel restraint that had
been put upon her inclinations, and he desired she might be released. His wife
joined in this act. And, after a full hearing, it was determined, that all the
parties interested having agreed in desiring the dissolution of the vows made
by Louisa dAntail, against which she had entered a protest, both before and
after she was constrained to take them, that they should now be dissolved, and
that she be permitted to marry. Le Vacher however demanded an hearing and to
become a party; but monsieur d'Antail protested against it; and Le Vacher's
motives seemed so ungenerous, that his efforts were overruled. The decree
which permitted Louisa d'Antail to marry was affirmed by a new sentence, which,
notwithstanding the appeal of Le Vacher, restored her to her fortune and her
freedom. In consequence of which, the banns of marriage between Francis
Cousturier and Louisa d'Antail were immediately published in the church of St
Opportune, her parish, and a contract of marcurate of St. Opportune, as he had
the consent of the father, declared that he should proceed notwithstanding, and
gave his permisriage was drawn up, wherein the sieur d'Antail gave her the
share of his fortune and effects, to which she was entitled. The sieur le
Vacher, however, determining, if possible, (...) prevent the marriage, forb^de
the banns. The (...) to another curate to celebrate the marriage. Le Vacher,
disappointed in this hope, had now recourse to the grand vicar; who took not
the least notice of his application. He appealed also to the court (...)
archbishop; but, as the opposition of (...) husband did not seem to have weight
enough to counteract the consent and wishes of the father, the marriage was
celebrated in due form; and, within twelve months afterward, Louisa became
mother of a son. But she had the mortification to find that the prosecutions of
Le Vacher were not at an end. He recommenced a suit, in which he endeavored to
make it appear that the dissolution of Louisa's vows had been illegally
obtained; and this he hoped to prove, since there is a law, which says, that
monastic vows, if made above five years, cannot in any case, or on any pretense
whatsoever, be annulled; and it was near seven years from the time of Louisa's
taking the veil, before she applied to the court of Rome. On this ground the
cause was brought before the parliament of Paris. Where, notwithstanding the
eloquence of monsieur Gualtier, an eminent pleader, and ^everal cases in point
being produced, the parliament, apprehensive that if some tmie were not
certainly fixed, after which religious vows ^ould become irrevocable, the
fortunes of families could never be ascertained; and that (...) would occasion
perpetual attempts of nuns and priests to return into the world, to the
annihilation of good order, both in monasteries and families; adjudged, that
Louisa d'Antail had been released from her engagements contrary to law. Her
marriage was declared illegal, and her child illegitimate, and she was ordered
to return immediately to her convent. The distress and anguish occasioned by
this inhuman decree can be better imagined than described. Determined, however,
to make one struggle, before she was torn away from connections so dear to her,
and buried forever in a situation infinitely worse than death, Louisa and her
husband appealed from this sentence to the privy council. The council referred
an investigation of the whole to the parliament of Metz; where, after a long
contest, the final decision was such, as every friend to the rights of humanity
must hear with pleasure. The vows taken by Louisa were declared null; her
marriege was confirmed, and her children restored to their rights. Thus, after
part of her life had been passed under the most unjust and distressing
persecution, she was at liberty to enjoy the rest of it wi^h an husband and
children deservedly and fondly beloved. While Le Vacher was justly punished for
his unseeing avarice.

[From Riche^.] THE MARRIAGE OF THE DUKE OF GUISE.
IT is unnecessary here to enter into the history of the family of the duke of
Guise, the parti^ular^ of which are so well known. Charles de Lorraine, the
eldest son of Henry the celebrated duke of Guise, who was assassinated in the
cas^^^ of Blois, by the order of Henry the third of France, was made prisoner
on the same day, and confined in the castle of Tours; from whence he escaped in
August 1591, and rejoined the faction, called the league, whose violence had so
long desolated France; and who, after the death of Henry the third, opposed
that excellent monarch and amiable man Henry the fourth. When this league was
broken, by his having become "the conqueror of his own," he generously forgave,
and even took into his favor the duke of Maine, who had been its ^eader; whose
nephew, the young duke of Guise, was received at court at the same time, and
e^trusted with the government of Provence. After the assassination of Henry the
great, the duke of Guise still held some places of trust under his son Louis
the thirteenth; but the house of Guise was so much the object of envy and
suspicion, on account of its former power, and the illustrious men it had
produced, that great care was taken not to raise it again too high by honors
and emoluments: and at length, cardinal Richelieu grew so dissatisfied with the
duke of Guise, that he oblig^d him to quit France. He retired to Florence, and
died in the Sienois in 1640, leaving several children by his wife Henrietta
Catharine de Joyeuse, only daughter of Henry de Joyeuse, marechal of France,
and widow of Henry de Bourbon, duke de Montpensier. His son, Henry de Lorraine,
born in 1514, became (by the death of his eldest brother) duke of Guise. He
seemed to inherit the spirit, as well as the personal perfections of his
grandfather, the celebrated duke of Guise. His figure and his exploits, which
were those of an hero of romance, made him very acceptable to the ladie^; while
his inconstancy and pe^^idy pu^ished many of them for their pa^tiality. He had
been originally designed for the church, and possessed, by a ^ort of
ecclesiastical succession peculiar to the house of Guise, the archbishopric of
Rheims, and some of the riche^^ ^bbies in the kingdom; though he had never
taken any degree or vow, to (...) himself for those (...). ^is first (...), who
was his (...), and who was afterward married to the palatine of the Rhine.
Cardinal de Richelieu, who foresaw that a marriage between this lady and the
duke of Guise would be prejudicial to the interests of France, divided them, by
putting her into a convent, from whence, however, she escaped, and when the
duke of Guise joined the party of the count de So^ssons (which party, under
pretense of delivering the kingdom from the administration of the cardinal,
covered more dangerous projects) she found means to follow him, in man's
apparel and overtook him at Colo^^^. But the duke, either really apprehensive
for her safety, or perhaps cured of his love by the rash fondness of his
mistress, refused to let her continue with him, and insisted on her returning
to Paris; under pretense that his te^derness would not allow him to let her
hazard her person, among the dangers and inconveniences to which the service he
was upon exposed him.

The duke now entered with his usual impetuosity into the conspiracy, which
took, a very alarming form, and was sanctioned by the specious name of "The
league formed to preserve the peace of Christendom." As archbishop of Rheims he
was the first spiritual peer, and as duke of Guise, the most (...) emporal peer
of France; but these (...) he broke through, and was declared general of the
armies of the league.

The king prosecuted him for rebellion; and by an arret he was declared guilty
of treason, sentenced to be beheaded, and his effects con^iscated; which
sentence was executed on him in eff^gy a few days afterward, and all his
property seized by the crown.

The duke went to Brussels, where he took upon him the command of the troops,
which were sent thither by the emperor and the king of Spain. There he found
his aunt, the duchess of Chevreuse, who had been obliged to quit France for her
intrigues against car^^^^^ Richelieu; and at her house he became acquainted
with the countess de Bossu, a young and beautiful widow, whose vivacity and
personal attractions were more than sufficient to inflame a heart so
susceptible of the power of beauty as was that of the duke of ^^ise.

The anecdotes of that time give an account of their acquaintance and its
consequence; which is perhaps somewhat heightened by the lively imagination of
the writers, who, to bring truth nearer to romance, have embellished it with
their own coloring. However, as there are no other accounts of the
commencement of this connection, it must be related in their manner.

The duke of Guise having often seen the countess of Bossu at the house of the
duchess of Chevreuse, was equally charmed by her beauty, and (...) with her
vivacity. The lady, on her part, thought such a conquest as that of the
handsomest and most accomplished man in Europe, deserved all her attention, and
that she might forgive herself even some unusual advances to secure it. These,
however, she conducted with so much art, that the duke grew every day more in
love; and when madame de Bossu thought he was enough so to refuse her nothing,
she spoke to him of marriage; to which the duke answered that he desired
nothing so much as to unite his destiny with hers: but if madame de Bossu had
known more of his real character, she might have perceived, that he would not
thus readily have entered into engagements, had he thought them binding; and
that he only wished to amuse himself during his exile. She knew enough to doubt
the performance of his promise; but, flattered by the hope of seeing in her
fetters him for whom so many vainly sighed, she pretended to be the dupe of his
ready profession, while she in fact meditated how to make him hers. With this
view, as it was now the finest part of the year, she made a party to go to a
beautiful seat she had, a league from Brussels, where she contrived to amuse
the duke for some days, with every thing she thought agreeable to him. The
duke, flattered by her attention, spoke to her more passionately than he had
yet done; to which the countess answered, that if he was sincere in his
professions, if his love was as great as he pretended, he would hasten the
completion of their marriage. The duke protested there was nothing he so
ardently desired as to be united for ever with so amiable a person. Madame de
Bossu, who was in hopes she should bring him to that declaration, then told
him, he might immediately convince her of his veracity, and secure the
happiness he seemed so much to desire, for that she had a priest and a notary
ready, who would instantly perform the ceremonies. The duke, who certainly did
not believe the marriage under such circumstances would be binding to him,
consented with as much apparent satisfaction as if he had been sincere.
Manselle, the almoner of the army, was called in, who gave them a dispensation,
for want of the proper banns, and then the nuptial benediction. The next day
the duke re^urned to Brussels, leaving the countess de Bossu extremely happy,
at being, as she imagined, duchess of Guise, and wife to the most charming man
of the age.

Whatever care had been taken to keep this transaction secret, it became in a
few weeks the conversation of Brussels; the duke d'^^^euf, and the duchess de
Chevreuse, both spoke to the duke upon it in a style of severity he was by no
means disposed to bear. His respect for his aunt, madame d'Chevreuse, made him
listen to her reproaches with some appearance of patience; but his firey temper
could ill brook the remonstrance of the duke d'Elbeuf, whom he answered in
terms so full of rage and indignation, that a challenge passed between them;
and they were prevented fighting, only by the interposition of the archduke.

Extremely irritated to think that any one should dare to pry into and blame
his actions, he determined to show how little he considered their
disapprobation, by bringing madame de Bossu home to his house, and owning her
as his wife; which at first he meant not to do, and had even prevailed on her
to conceal their marriage, by representing to her that it would be necessary
for him to try to reconcile his family to the match before he acknowledged it.
The author of the life of Sylvia de Moliere, ^^^^tes the means by which the
marriage ^^st became publicly known; but there seems to be much of fiction in
the account, and it was probably fabricated by the romance-writers of the day.
It asserts, that the duke of Guise and the countess of Bossu felt toward each
other that kind of sympathy, which informed each of the presence or approach of
the other, when they had no other means of knowing it; and that this singular
presentiment betrayed their connection, on the following occasion. The count de
* * * * * had long been in love with madame de Bossu, and pursued her wherever
she went, with an ardour which her coldness and even rudeness to him could not
diminish. The duke of Guise, whose superior merit did not preserve him from
jealousy, saw these assiduiti^s continued toward his wife with uneasiness, and
he determined to know whether his absence would ^^ke any change in the
behavior of madame de Bossu toward her im^^^^^nate admirer. Great rejoicings
were about this time made at Brussels, for the birth of a prince of Spain; and,
among other entertainments, the^^ was to be a grand ball at the countess of
S^^^acroix's: several noblemen purposed to go thither masked, and dressed in
fantastic habits; but the duke of Guise, affecting great concern that he could
not be of the party, took leave of his friends, and of madame de Bossu, and
went out of town, saying, he had affairs which would detain him three or four
days, As soon, h^^ever, as night came he returned, and, having with great
secrecy provided himself with an Indian habit, he mingled, without being
remarked, with the party in masks, and entered the ball-room; he there beheld
madame de Bossu, with the count sitting by her, as usual; but ^ he had no tune
to make any remarks on her ^ehaviour, for he had not been many minute near her,
before madame de Bossu felt the motion she always experienced on the approach
of her husband, and, trusting rather to a sensation that had never deceived
her, than to all he had told her of his journey, she arose to seek him among
the disguised noblemen, and immedia^^ly knew him, though he had taken the
utmost pains to after his appearance; the transports they mutually discovered,
and which they found it impossible to stifle, divulged the secret of their
marriage. -- "I have seen,"says the author of this narration, "(...) original
letter of the duke of Guise, upon this extraordinary instance of the sympathy
between him and his wife; it was one of the most charming and interesting
letters I ever read: he even complained of the excess of his happiness,"
foreseeing, perhaps, that it was too great to last. In fact, a very few months
afterwars he made his peace with the king, and returned to France; and though
he for some time continued to write to madame de Bossu, he engaged in other
attachments; and at length thought of her no more, unless it was to contrive
means to break the ties which bound them to each other.

At first, the unfortunate madame de Bossu flattered herself, from the
frequency and tenor of the letters she received from the duke, that she should
share with him his prosperity, as she had done his adversity; during which she
had advanced many sums of money for him, and extremely distressed herself. The
duchess dowager of Guise, who had other views for her son, used ever artifice
to prevent her being received in France. But madame de Bossu, fearless of the
danger she incurred, determined at all events to see her husband, trusting that
all his former tenderness would return when he beheld her: she was particularly
induced to hope this from a letter she had received, in which he protested to
her, that he was incapable of infidelity; that his honor and his conscience,
as well as his inclination, attached him to her; and he only lamented, that the
contagion of his misfortunes had reached her, whom he loved more than life; but
she might assure herself death only should separate them. Her courage was
strengthened by a letter so flattering to her hopes: she determined to disguise
herself, and set out for France; and, traveling with equal expedition and
secrecy, she threw herself into his ^rms, before, he knew she was on her
journey. He received her with kindness; but his mother was no sooner apprized
of her arrival, than she went to the queen, from whom she obtained an order for
madame de Bossu to quit the dominions of France instantly. This order was
signified to her, and enforced by the remonstrance of the duke of Guise; who
told her, that all his endeavors and entreati^s would be ineffectual to
preserve her from insult, and even from personal danger, if she did not comply
with it. Under such circumstances, the unfortunate countess was obliged to
submit, and returned brokenhearted to her mother. The duke, giving himself up
to intrigue, and to the warmth of his ungovernable temper, soon after got into
a quarrel with the count de Coligni: they fought in the midst of the court, and
the duke of Guise dangerously wounded and disarmed his antagonist. His mother
was perpetually apprehensive for his safety, which he continually hazarded; she
dreaded lest the old animosity should be renewed between him and the house of
Conde, with whom the house of Guise had long been at variance; a renewal of
which, she foresaw, would be attended with the most fatal events: she was,
therefore, very desirous that the duke should marry mademoiselle de
Longueville, niece to the great Conde. But the duke had fallen in love with
mademoiselle de Pons; and as this new attachment was, if possible, more violent
than any he had yet felt, he positively refused to listen to any overtures in
regard to mademoiselle de Longueville. As he determined to marry mademoiselle
de Pons, it became necessary for him to enquire how far his marriage with the
countess de Bossu might prevent the completion of his wishes; and he found that
it would raise such impediments to his designs, as he should find it extremely
difficult to obviate; this consideration, and the trouble he received from the
attorney general (who prosecuted him for his offense against law and order, by
fighting publicly with the count de Coligni), determined him to go himself to
Rome; where he hoped to obtain the dissolution of his engagements with madame
de Bossu. At this time the civil war of Naples, occasioned by the heavy imposts
laid ^n the people, broke out; Mazzienello, who was the leader of the tumult,
being destroyed, the rebels had recourse to the duke of Guise, who, by his
descent, had a sort of claim to the kingdom of Naples. The duke no sooner
received the proposal of becoming their general, than with his usual
impetuosity he accepted it; and, making his way through the fleet commanded by
Don John of Austria, he arrived at Naples, and became generalissmo of the rebel
army. It i^ unnecessary here to relate the various events that occured while he
continued in this command. The charms of mademoiselle de Pons, which had
induced him to go to Rome, in hopes of being allowed to marry her, were now
forgotten, amid the attractions of the Neapolitan beauties: but his general
gallantries among the lowest of the people, and his attachment to the daughter
of a tailor in particular, disgusted those who at first had beheld him with
admiration and respect; and at length his usual rashness made him commit an
indiscretion, which put the town into the hands of the Spaniards. He had then
recourse to flight; but was pursued, taken, and sent prisoner to Spain.

While this was passing, the unfortunate countess of Bossu was sued by the
duke's creditors; and her effects, as well as the dower she possessed from her
first husband, seized to satisfy their demands. Notwithstanding which, and all
his neglect and cruelty, she no sooner heard of his imprisonment, than she
quitted the house of her mother, with whom she was obliged to reside, and went
into France, meaning to pass from thence into Spain, to solicit his release, or
share his confinement. Her friends, however, represented to her, that her
journey would be absolutely fruitless; and prevailed upon her to return into
Flanders. By the interposition of the great Conde, who then served the king of
Spain against his native country, the duke was soon after released: the Spanish
court, indeed, gave him his liberty the more willingly, as they hoped that his
turbulent and restless spiait would create new troubles in France. He was no
sooner at liberty, than he disclaimed all obligations to the prince of Conde,
and complained loudly of the treatment he received at Madrid. The rashness of
his character seemed to have gained strength by his confinement; his politics
and his love assumed a more violent cast; the passion he had felt for
mademoiselle de Pons, seemed to return with (...) ardour than ever; and he
determined to ^ake her his, at whatever price. But when he learned, too
certainly, that during his absence she had received as a favorite lover
monsieur de Malicorne, a private gentleman, rage and indignation stifled all
the emotions of tenderness he had felt for her; he treated her with rudeness
and insult, and insisted on her returning a pair of earrings, valued at a
thousand crowns, which he had given her: he even sued her to oblige her to
restore them; but had the mortification of losing his suit; which circumstance
depriving him of all patience and temper, he threatened personal vengeance
against the object of his former attachment; who, to avoid it, was driven to
quit the kingdom.

Being then without any pursuit, and his capricious and violent temper making
it impossible for him to remain long quiet, he failed on another expedition to
Naples, which did not answer his expectation; and, on his return, a new
passion, more violent than any he had yet felt, attached him to mademoiselle de
Gorce.

In 1664 he died, leaving no posterity. All his brothers died before him; as
did his sisters afterward, unmarried. Thus ended the illustrious house of
Guise; the enterprizing ambition of which had so long disturbed the tranquillity
of France.

Madame de Bossu, ruined by the vey means which she hoped would have made her
the happiest woman in Europe, endeavored to recover from the heirs of the duke
of Guise, ^ jointure as his wife. The process lasted many years, and she died
before its termination, leaving her nearest relation, the prince of Berghes,
her heir; who endeavored to recover, from the successors of the duke of Guise,
some part of the money that had been paid for the duke. At the court of Rome,
the department called the rote, Chief jurisdiction of the court of Rome.
allowed the validity of her marrige; but the courts of law in France, through
all which the cause was carried, decided, that, as the marriage was celebrated
without the usual forms, it was absolutely null and of no effect.

THE CHEVALIER DE MORSAN.
THIS is perhaps one of the most romantic histories that the various
occurrences of human life ever produced. Though several fictions have been
founded on events similar to what is here related, fiction itself has hardly
been able to produce a more extraordinary collection of circumstances, and
perhaps the truth never having been perfectly known, adds to the interest of
the story. A notary at Paris, whose name was Charles Henry Donc, who was in a
reputable situation, left, at his decease, his three children, a son and two
daughters, to the care of his wife, Mary Clement. He had not been long dead,
when his relations found the conduct of this woman so improper, and her
profusion so great, that they apprehended she would dissipate the money left as
a provision for the children; and that even the goods and effects in the house
would be seized by her creditors, and the children be defrauded of every thing:
since it is well known, in every country, that if the subalterns of the law
once seize on prope^^y, it is never recovered without infinite loss, although
it may have been unjustly taken. Under these apprehensions for the minors, the
kindred of Charles Henry Donc petitioned to have a guardian appointed, to whom
the mother might be obliged to account. The si^ur de Joigny was named their
guardian; and, as madame Donc, could not herself make up the accounts necessary
to be produced on this occasion, she employed a man named Robert, clerk to a
notary, to adjust her books: for which purpose he was obliged to be very
frequently at the house. Marga^^t Charlotte Donc, the eldest of the children,
then about fourteen, was uncommonly beautiful; Robert became violently in love
with her, and solicited her mother's consent to marry her. The mother, who
appears to have been an unprincipled and worthless woman, and who perhaps
wished to relieve herself from the care of her children as soon as she could,
gladly consented, and Robert had leave to make his addresses; which however
were not likely to succeed, for Charlotte had conceived an antipathy to him
from their first acquaintance, and absolutely re^used ^o receive him as a
l^^er. Her ^^^^dian, who tho^ght that the lovel^ person of (...), to (...) with
the fortune ^e hoped to (...) from the wreck of her father's (...) might (...)
not (...) of sacrificing her (...) man she disliked, and who was only clerk to
a notary. He sent her to board at the convent of the sisters of St. Gervais,
from whence she refused to return for some time to her mother; dreading le^t
the importunity of her disagreeable lover, aided by the authority of a parent
she had always obeyed, might force her into a marriage she detested. Her fears
on this head were but too well founded. Robert, finding she did not as usual
visit at home, determined to force her from her asylum in the convent; and her
mother consented to the expedient. He took his measures so well, that seizing
her as she came from mass with some other pensioners, he carried her no one
knew whither. The guardian complained to the police, but without effect; and
nine or ten days afterward Robert married her, in presence of her mother, and
four other witnesses.

As there was now no remedy, the relations of the unfortunate girl thought it
most prudent to drop the suit they had commenced against Robert, and she was
obliged to submit to her destiny. But before the expiration of a month, she
found that destiny so insupportable, that, after several alarming scenes of
contention, which arose from the brutal temper of Robert, she determined to
bear no longer the dreadful yoke which had been forced upon her; she therefore
quitted the house of Robert, and took refuge among her relations. Her father's
kindred consulted together on the means of rescuing the unhappy young creature
from the hands of a wretch so unworthy of her; and they determined, that her
guardian should appeal against the validity of a marriage, which was a mere
abuse of the ceremony, and a violation both of law and religion. This measure
was immediately put into execution; and a sentence was obtained, which
directed, that Charlotte Donc should retire to the convent of La Roquette, till
the cause could be heard and decided. Thither therefore she went; but found
even there no respite from the persecution of Robert; who incessantly besieged
the door of the convent, and even endeavored to (...) her from thence by
force; which twice obliged the nuns to lay complaints against him. But as these
attempts failed, he had recourse (...) other means; and commenced a suit
against the sieur Mars de Joigny, for detaining and secreting his wife. After
long delays, the (...) was heard before monsieur Chauvelin, advocate-general;
who said, that as the marriage was celebrated with the consent of the mother,
and as the relations had suffered the parties to live together for some time
without endeavourin^ to dissolve it, it was good, and could not be (...). It
was consequently confirmed, and Charlotte Donc, was directed to return, within
six months, to her husband. The fair, unfortunate Charlotte, and her relations,
had attended in court to hear the decision: when it was over they went into the
hall DU PALAIS, so the court of ju^tice at Paris (...) called; and the ^h^cane
of law, is usually termed, "la (...) du Palais."
, where Robert, approaching his wife, and affecting the greatest tenderness and
affection, besought her, since all farther resistance was vain, to return with
him to his house -- she pushed him from her, and exclaiming, as she did it,
"There, wretch, take my last adieu!" she instantly disappeared, among the crowd
in the hall; nor could the utmost diligence on the part of Robert, discover any
trace of her. After some days of fruitless search, he summoned the sieur Mars
de Joigny to produce his wife, or to inform him where she was. The sieur
Joigny, in his defense, declared, that he knew not the place of her retreat;
and alleged, that as no sentence had put her into his care, he was not
answerable for her appearance. With this answer Robert was obliged to withdraw
his complaint; and to apply all his industry to discover his fugitive wife. But
every effort he made was fruitless: he could neither find her, or hear whether
she was yet among she living. After some years, in which he incessantly sought
her, had elapsed, the passion falsely called love, and the thirst of vengeance,
both of which had probably concurred in producing his ardent desire to find
her, began to abate, and his enquiries were relaxed; and at length, after
fifteen years, he concluded she was dead, and thought only of marrying again.
Being, however, desirous of ascertaining his situation, he again laid his
complaint before the police, on the escape of his wife. But this last effort
was as fruitless as the former; and now, being almost certain that, if she was
not dead, she would never appear to claim him as her husband, he determined to
remove to another quarter of the town, disengage himself from the acquaintance
of all who remembered his marriage with Charlotte, and pass for a bachelor. In
this character, after he had quitted all his former connections, he introduced
himself to Magdalen Ponsignard, the widow of the sieur Masson d'Angluse, a
lawyer, who consented to marry him. She was near sixty years old; but she had
money, which attracted Robert; though she had the precaution to have the
marriage contract so drawn up, that each party were to remain possessed of
their separate property. This second alliance formed by Robert, was not happier
than the first. Madame d Angluse complained, very soon afterward, that the
most affronting outrages were exercised upon her: that he perpetually
reproached her with her age; and, not contented with ill-language only, that he
even proceeded to the most cruel personal insults: and as she was not of
atemper to suffer such treatment patiently, they soon came to extremities, and
agreed only in one thing, which was to part, and that each should remain in
unmolested possession of their own eftects. In pursuance of this convention,
the wife retired to a convent; where she had not been long resident, before
Robert, who seems to have been possessed of one of those unhappy tempers which
want somebody to torment, pursued her, and insisted on her returning to live
with him. But she had found the life she had led with him so entirely
insupportable, that neither threats nor entreaties could prevail upon her to
encounter it again. She peremptorily and steadily refused; and having, in the
course of the contest, learned more of her husband's former life, than had till
then come to her knowledge, and discovered his marriage with Charlotte Donc;
she resolved to try, whether she could not annul her own unhappy connection, by
pleading, that (...) Robert's former wife was never proved to be dead, he had
been guilty of bigamy in marrying again. She therefore commenced a process
against him ^or bigamy; and demanded to have her marriage with him dissolved,
as being made while his former wife was living. The information collected by
the counsel whom his second wife employed, completely proved the marriage of
Robert with Margaret Charlotte Donc. He was summoned to appear and to be
examined. He had nothing to offer, but his prosecution of the persons who were
supposed to have concealed his first wife; which he now renewed, in hopes of
certifying her death; and, to show that he had himself no doubt of it, he
produced the deed, by which he had restored to her brother all the money he had
received as the portion of Charlotte Donc. His suit was commenced against the
sieur Mars de Joigny; against madame Royer, who was his friend and confident;
and against the sieur d'Imonville and his wife, at whose house madame Royal
lived, the sieur d'Imonville being her uncle: and to these persons he joined
mademoiselle du Clos, the celebrated actress; who, he pretended, had been the
principal agent in concealing his wife, Charlotte Donc; who, he alleged, had
been dead seven years: and he produced as evidence of the fact, the following
register, from the parish of St. Sulpice: -- This 10th of November, 1723, was
interred, Maximilian de Morsan, aged twenty-two years, or thereabouts; the son
of Maximilian de Morsan, gentleman, and of Emily de Constance, his wife, who
died yesterday in the street Mazarine, at the house of monsieur Poissan; sieur
d'Imonville, Jean de Lajarh, etc. etc. friends of the deceased, being
present.Though this register appears to have no relation whatever to the
unfortunate fugitive, Charlotte Donc, Robert affected that it was she only who
was interred; and that she died of the smallpox: to substantiate an assertion
so extraordinary, he related the following particulars. He said, that when his
wife, after hearing the decision against her, had escaped from him through the
crowd that attended in the hall of the court of justice, she found refuge in
the house of the sieur d'Imonville; where, as soon as she arrived, madame Royer
had dressed her in the habit of an officer, with a scarlet coat, a laced hat, a
sword, and other accoutrements; and she assumed the title of the chevalier du
Coudray; but the habit she had taken could not cure or conceal the terrors of a
woman, who, in perpetual fear of being known, and carried back to her husband,
was for some months never seen to look at a stranger, or even to hear an
unknown voice without the greatest agony; and who, when any one she did not
know came into the house, would frequently hide herself under the beds, or in
the closets, from the pursuit of those emissaries of her husband, who she
fancied were perpetually following her. D'Imonville, his wife and niece, left
nothing untried to re-assure her: they carried her from their own house to one
in the rue de Mazarine, fauxbourgh St. Germain, which was inhabited by
mademoiselle du Clos, where the name of the chevalier du Coudrey was exchanged
for that of the chevalier des Marets, Robert farther asserted, that his wife,
now a pupil of the school of La du Clos, by degrees forgot her terrors, and
became initiated In the gallantries which passed at the house of the actress,
with whom she was a great favorite. D'Imonville had a villa at
Combe-de-la-Ville, where frequent parties of pleasure were made, at which
mademoiselle du Clos presided, and which were enlivened by the talents and
spirit of the chevalier des Marets. Hunting, balls, and pleasures of the table,
where liberty and gaity only were consulted, failed not to attract to this
villa the young and licentious among the rich and great. To those who were not
in the secret, the chevalier seemed the most amiable of men: but to those who
were admitted to greater intimacy, he appeared more captivating, as a young
woman of beauty and spirit, whose adventures and diguise gave greater eclat to
the charms of which nature had been so lavish. She now appeared under the name
of the chevalier de Morsan; and the sieur Mars de Joigny often went to this
house, at Combe-de-la-Ville. It happened that he arrived there one day, when a
large company was assembled, and entering hastily the room where they were, he
so far forgot himself, as to say to the chevalier de Morsan, "Well, Charlotte,
how are you today?" This occasioned a loud laugh among those who were
acquainted with the metamorphosis, and excited the wonder of those who were
not: these la^^ endeavoring to gain more intelligence ^^^m the sieur de
Joigny, he hastily put an end to the conversation. -- This circumstance, the
frequent change of name, and the mysterious stories that were told of the birth
of the chevalier de Morsan, raised great curiosity in the minds of many, who
had seen him with La du Clos or the sieur d'Imonville. Sometimes he was said to
be a foreigner, traveling for improvement; sometimes the son of a prince, who
was for reasons of state obliged to be concealed. The curate of
Combe-de-la-Ville, who once saw him in the bed usually occupied by madame
d'Imonville, expressed his suspicions of his sex; the chevalier turned him into
ridicule, and refused to answer his enquiries. But the servants of the house,
and several other persons, had no doubt but that the pretended young man was a
woman. After Charlotte Donc had for some time worn the masculine habit, she
seemed to have acquired masculine courage: she had a quarrel with some young
man in the neighborhood of Combe-de-la-Ville, accepted his challenge and was
actually wounded. The surgeon, however, who dressed the wound, was never called
upon in the trial. It was not long afterward that she came to Paris, to a
house La du Clos had taken in the rue Mazarine; there she was seized with the
small pox, attended with the worst symptoms: and, in the danger of losing her
life, all the transactions of that (...) seized on her disordered imagination:
(...) incessantly implored the attendants to save her from her husband; and
fancied she saw herself surrounded by soldiers, who were come to drag her to
him. As the disease approached the crisis, it wore the most threatening aspect:
spiritual consolation was thought necessary; and father Constant, a monk of the
Augustines, was sent for to administer the sacraments, and hear the dying
confession of the chevalier de Morsan. The monk addressed him as such; but the
hour was now come in which dissimulation was impossible. The pretended
chevalier said to the monk, in a melancholy tone, Alas! I am not what you
suppose: I am a woman. The monk, astonished at what he heard, exclaimed --
"How! are you a woman?" On which the patient repeated a second time, "Yes; I am
a woman." The monk then asked her if she would have him reveal this secret to
mademoiselle du Clos? To which she answered, Yes, tell her if you wlll. --
Either the priest was not aware of the immediate danger, or for some other
reason, he delayed the last sacrament and confession till the next morning: in
the interim the chevalier expired. -- The deception, however, did not terminate
with life: Michelle de la Neau, and her daughter, the former who had attended
as a nurse during the illness, the latter who was servant to mademoiselle du
Clos, were employed to put the corpse into the coffin. They saw that it was the
corpse of a woman: they expressed to La du Clos their surprise; who coldly
answered, that since it was so, the world, who had accused her of entertaining
the chevalier as a lover, had wronged her, and had been deceived. The coffin,
set on a bier, was placed at the door of La du Clos; and, to perpetuate the
deceit, the sword of the deceased, and its scabbard, were laid on the coffin,
as is usual when a military man is buried. The spectators believed it was the
funeral of an officer; and Charlotte Donc was buried as a chevalier, after
having passed as such for seven years. The sieur d'Imonville, who Robert
pretended was the principal contriver of the concealment, attended the funeral.
-- When the entry was made in the register of this funeral, a note was added,
thus, "You are not to suffer an extract of this to be taken."

If this relation, given by Robert, was true, his wife was among the dead seven
years before he was apprised of it; and she had been lost near fifteen, when by
some means or other (but by what does not appear) he gained intelligence of the
disguise in which she had lived. Seizing eagerly on a clue which promised to
lead him to the discovery he had so long attempted in vain, he pursued his
enquiries at Combe-de-la-Ville, and at Paris, among every rank of people with
whom D'Imonville and du Clos were connected, till he had collected the
circumstances from which he formed this narrative: and in this research he had
been assisted by Anthony Donc, the brother of Charlotte; who being, in case of
her death, heir to whatever his father had left, was equally interested in
penetrating the mystery. Their united enquiries produced fact, which, they
affirmed, made a positive discovery of the death and interment of Charlotte
Donc, -- Having a collection of proofs, which they thought sufficient to
establish the facts, they no longer hesitated to lay it before a court of
justice. Thirteen witnesses were examined, whose evidence amounted to what has
been before related -- That an individual, who was believed to be a woman, had
lived with La du Clos for some years; who was at first called the chevalier du
Coudray, afterward des Marets; but latterly had been known by the name of the
chevalier de Morsan; and who was supposed to be Charlotte Donc, the fugitive
wife of Robert. The nurse, who had attended her in her last illness, swore to
the circumstance of her apprehending that soldiers surrounded her bed to force
her to her husband; and that, on laying her out, she was found to be a woman.
The servants who had lived with La du Clos, the Augustine monk, and some other
witnesses, gave testimony of those facts which have been before recapitulated:
but none swore positively, that the person passing under the name of the
chevalier de Morsan, was Charlotte Donc. But Robert pretended, that the time
when his wife disappeared, answered exactly to that when the stranger first was
seen in the society of de Joigny, the guardian, du Clos, D'Imonville, and
others with whom de Joigny was connected; which, added to the testimonies of so
many witnesses, and to circumstances so unusual, must convince the court, that
the chevalier de Morsan was no other than the wife of Robert. -- The counsel
for Robert, in pleading on this ground, against those who had concealed his
wife, represented the enormity of the offense they had committed, against all
law and order, as well as against religion and justice. They said, that not
content with having stolen the wife from her husband, to whom she was directed
to return, and having led her into an irregular and scandalous course of life;
with having imposed on the world, and violated the laws of society, by the
disguise under which she had lived, and under which she had been buried; they
dared to enter a falsity into a book kept for the security of that society: in
which if frauds were thus allowed, no man's property could be safe from the
attacks of pretenders; no man could venture to bestow his daughter or his
sister in marriage, or to marry himself: and, in short, it was a fraud that
struck at the very root of social compact and good order. But so conscious were
they of the probability of detection from this quarter, that they tried to
prevent an extract from being taken from a book, which, in fact, belonged to
the whole community, by inserting in the margin a note, more likely however to
excite curiosity, than to prevent its being gratified; since, if it was really
the body of the chevalier de Morsan which was interred, why should it be
concealed? In falsifying the name and sex of the person buried, they were
guilty of a capital crime; the punishment for which is a confiscation of all
the effects of the contending parties.

Monsieur Brisson, counsel for D'Joigny, D'Imonville, and du Clos, undertook,
in opposition to these assertions, to prove, that the person who had lived so
long with La du Clos, was not Charlotte Donc, but the chevalier de Morsan, a
foreigner; whose existence admitted of no doubt, and whose history he could
without difficulty trace. He said, that the abbe Chamillard, a Jesuit, had been
acquainted with this young man in Bavaria, of which country he was a native;
that, in 1715, he came to Paris, and told the abbe Chamillard, to whom he
immediately addressed himself, that affairs of the utmost consequence had
obliged him to quit his country, and come into France. The abbe, affected by
his misfortunes, undertook to find for him a proper situation, and to do him
all the service in his power. In consequence he introduced him to madame Royer,
with whom he was much acquainted, and desired her to look out for an asylum for
this young stranger; who, thereupon, engaged her uncle D'Imonville to receive
him into his house, assuring him that the abbe Chamillard knew the time would
come, when it would be in his power to repay his kindness with interest. The
sieur D'Imonville, who from this understood he was a stranger of illustrious
birth, willingly offered him his house and his purse; and he continued with him
for some time. At first, he told his protector, that he was the son of
Maximilian de Morsan and Emily de Constance; and that an affair, which he could
not reveal without great prejudice to himself, had obliged him to leave Munich.
By this means he evaded for some time the questions which were put to him: but
at length, sensible of the kindness with which he was treated in the house of
D'Imonville, and the repeated acts of friendship he had experienced from him
and his family, he told them he would no longer conceal his real history from
them, especially as he had hopes of being very soon in a situation to show his
gratitude for their attention to him. "You have," continued he, "proved your
attachment to me beyond a doubt, and are worthy of all my confidence; I will
not therefore conceal from you, that I am the natural son of the elector of
Bavaria; who my mother was, I have never been so happy as to learn." The si^ur
D'Imonville, charmed with this confidence, and to find that he had been of use
to the son of a sovereign prince, redoubled his attentions: he thought it no
breach of confidence to reveal to the abbe Chamillard what he had heard; who
answered, "What you now tell me, I have long known: I assured you, when I first
introduced this young man to your acquaintance, that he was of high birth, and
I did not deceive you. I am happy in having been the means of your forming a
connection, which cannot fail to enrich you. His affairs at present are in a
train, that affords him a prospect of very soon acquitting himself toward
you." D'Imonville, his wife, and niece, concluded that the affair which was in
agitation was a design of the elector of Bavaria to legitimate his son. Some
months passed away, during which the family removed to another house, the first
floor of which was inhabited by mademoiselle du Clos, the celebrated comedian,
with whom they became acquainted. In 1719, the chevalier de Morsan told
monsieur D'Imonville, that his affairs were now nearly settled; that they were
likely to succeed beyond his hope^, but that it was necessary for him to show
himself at Munich: (...) be sought (...) the last favor he (...) which would
(...) repay all the rest: (...) that this was a (...) journey. D'Imonville
could not himself raise the sum required; but he borrowed of a notary two
thousand three hundred livres. He purchased for the chevalier proper clothes to
appears in at Munich, and a post-chaise; and, after having made these
preparations, expected that he should depart: but the young man, when he saw
every thing ready, could not resolve to go; he had a love engagement, which he
had not resolution to break through; and he contrived every day some new excuse
to delay his journey. D'Imonville, who had formed sanguine expectations of the
future power and wealth of the chevalier, was extremely chagrined at this
negligence, after all the exertions he had made for him; and he resolved to
remonstrate seriously with him on the folly of his conduct. The chevalier, on
being pressed by D'Imonville to name an early day for his journey, had no
longer any pretense to delay it; but he flew into a passion, and words grew
high between them. La du Clos who was in the apartment beneath, herd the noise,
and came up to enquire what was the matter. The sieur d'Imonville explained the
subject of their contest; and said, he had now made his last effort on the
chevalier whereupon La du Clos, addressing the young man, said to him, "My dear
child, since monsieur d'Imonville can do no more for you, you shall come and
live with me, and I will take care of you." The chevalier, transported at
having found so charming a protectress, accepted the offer La du Clos made him;
who gave him an apartment on the floor she inhabited, and from that time
supported him entirely, and even lent him money to repay the advance made by
D'Imonville; whose remonstrance he soon ceased to resent, and they continued to
live in friendship, as before this little disagreement. In 1722 he was desirous
of entering into the army, and served for some time as a cadet, in the company
of the chevalier de Malherbe. But his friends representing to him, that the
duty of a soldier was incompatible with the attention his private affairs
required, he soon afterward, resigned. Till 1723, he lived very much in
company, and was well received in the most brilliant parties in the
neighborhood of St. Germain. I Will frequently saw the abbe Chamillard; and was
on an equal sooting of intimacy with father Richard, an Augustine. But in the
month of November of that year he was seized with the smallpox, which soon
appeared to be of the worst sort. The fever attending it deprived him of his
senses, many days before his death; and in that situation he was visited by
father Constant, who found it too late to administer the sacrement* and on the
tenth of November the si^ur d'Imonville paid him the ^ast tribut of friendship,
by attending his remains to the grave.

Such was the history related by monsieur Brisson, for his clients; whose
purpose it was to prove, that the individual passing under the name of the
chevalier de Morsan, was not a woman; and certainly not Charlotte Donc, the
wife of Robert.

The second wife of Robert, whose hope was, that, if the death of Charlotte
Donc could not be proved, Robert would be deemed guilty of bigamy, and that she
should by that means be released from her engagement with him, had collected
every circumstance that could strengthen the belief of the chevalier de Morsan
being really the person he represented. In opposition to the witnesses brought
by the other party, she produced persons who gave their testimony to many
particulars of the life of the chevalier de Morsan. He was fond of violent
exercise; understood fencing, the back-sword, hunting, and shooting; and was a
judge of horses. He was known to have passed whole days in field sports; a
degree of fatigue which no woman could have undergone: and he frequently played
matches at tennis, which kept him in extreme exercise for many hours. The
husbands and fathers where De Morsan visited, were so f^r from supposing him to
be a woman, that many of them had reason to complain of his (...) for his
person was extremely handsome, and he was universally admired. Nor did his
(...) at all correspond with the (...) given of Charlotte Donc, who was of
middling size; for he was very tall and muscular: but it is certain, that a
woman of middling height, if she dresses in men's clothes, appears short. Many
other particulars were brought, to prove that there was no analogy between
Charlotte Donc and the chevalier de Morsan.

The court, after hearing many arguments on both sides, could not find any
positive proof that the sieurs de Joigny and D'Imonville, with madame Royer and
du Clos, had secreted Charlotte Donc, and buried her under a false name. -- On
the other hand, as the second wife of Robert could produce no proof of her
being alive, either when Robert married a second time, or at the time she sued
him, they would not condemn Robert for bigamy; whose second marriage,
therefore, remained good in law: and the truth of this extraordinary affair
continued unknown. The fate of the unfortunate Charlotte Donc was at all events
deplorable. Whatever errors the peculiarity of her situation might have driven
her into, were solely imputable to the cruelty and misconduct of her mother. --
Dreadful is the lot of a woman, driven into an indissoluble union with a wicked
or worthless man, at an age when keen sensibilities make her fe^l all the
misery of such a union; while resignation and patience, which time only can
give, have not enabled her to subdue the violent emotions which such a prospect
must excite. Indeed, who can, at any period of life, help shrinking from the
view of wretchedness for which there is no remedy, from sufferings which can
only terminate (...) the grave?

JAMES LE BRUN.
IN a former part of this volume is related the story of the unfortunate
D'Anglade, who perished in misery and ignominy, through the prejudice of an
unjust judge, and the malice of an inveterate prosecutor. The following
narrative is another instance of the fallibility of human judgment; and, though
the unfortunate sufferer was in an inferior rank of life, his fate was, if
possible, more to be deplored than that of D'Anglade.

Madame Mazel was a woman who had passed the meridian of life: she was a widow,
possessed of an affluent fortune; and had three sons, all well established.
Rene, the eldest, was a counselor of parliament; George, the second, treasurer
of France, for the district of Paris; and Michael, the youngest, major of the
regiment of Piedmont.

But though her family were prosperous, they were not happy. Madame Mazel had
taken an aversion to the wife of her eldest son; and had caused her to be
confined in a convent, by an order from the king: and this she had interest
enough to affect, though her son himself by no means lent her any assistance.
The lady had contrived often to escape from her confinement, and had as often
been forced back by the machinations of her mother-in-law; whom, of course, she
hated most inveterately. The conduct of madame Mazel herself, was such as
seemed but little to authorize the power she assumed to punish that of another:
she had gaming-tables constantly in her house, and a man called the abbe
Poulard lived with her on a footing, of intimacy, which did no honor to her
reputation.

This lady's servants, in her hotel at Paris, were, two footmen, both lads
between sixteen and eighteen years old; an old female cook; a coachman; two
young women who waited on her person; and James le Brun, who had lived with her
twenty-nine years, and who was now her butler, intendant, and maitre d'hotel:
he possessed all her confidence, and deserved it by his attachment to her
interest, and his general integrity, which had recommended him to the esteem of
all who frequented the house. His mistress left to him all her receipts and
payments; and never, in all the sums that passed through his hands, was there
the least deficiency or mistake. The tradesmen, whom he paid regularly, and
every other person connected with the affairs of madame Mazel, spoke highly of
his honesty and ^^nterested conduct; and, among other insta^ces of unblemished
integrity, it was related of him, that one evening, after very deep play had
been held it his mistress's house, he, on clearing the apartments, found a sum
of money, the owner of which (who did not know the sum she had lost, or what
she had done with it) he took pains to discover, and returned her the whole. Le
Brun had a wife and five children, and was the best of husbands and of fathers.
His two eldest daughters were of that business which is in France termed
co^ffeuses; which rather answers to our idea of the tire-women of the last
century, than to any attendant we have at present. In this employment they
acquired reputation, not only for their skill, but their decent and regular
manners: and their father, who had brought them up soberly and religiously, was
so desirous of their morals being preserved, that though his mistress, whose
hotel was much larger than she had occasion for, offered him an apartment in it
for his whole family, he rather chose to hire an habitation for them, than to
have his daughters in a house where gamesters, and other dissolute and idle
people, were perpetually visiting. -- Such was the character of this
unfortunate man, James le Brun.

That of the abbe Poulard, the intimate of madame Mazel, was far from being
equally respectable. This man, who had taken his vows in the order of jacobins,
had lived among them for some years; and then, by a bu^ from the pope
surreptitiously obtained, he quitted that society, to enter into the order of
Cluny: but, instead of doing so, he became the companion and confidential
friend of madame Mazel.

Admitted to a table where luxury and profusion reigned, the abbe forgot the
rules of his profession, and was so far from keeping any maigre days, that he
criticized, sometimes with the asperity of a gluttonous master of the house, on
such dishes as were not prepared to his taste. His bedchamber was on (...)
third floor, sumptuously furnished with a bed of blue velvet, lined with
crimson silk, and every other article proportionably rich. In such a situation,
it is not surprising that the abbe Poulard chose rather to be excommunicated
than to quit it: and he suffered, with great indifference, the excommunication
to pass against him by the grand prior of the order of Cluny. Nor was he much
more affected by an order given by the advocate-general to the jacobins, to
seize and confine him. However, after an abode of six years in the house of
madame Mazel, he thought it convenient, for some reason or other, probably to
avoid farther scandal, to take a lodging in the neighborhood, though he still
retained his apartment in her hotel, and frequently slept there: and, that he
might all hours have access to it he had a master-key, which opened every
chamber in the house as well as the street-door.

By means of this man, George, the second son of madame Mazel, who was known by
the name of the sieigneur de Lignieres, became acquainted with his sister, the
widow of a counselor of Man's, whose beauty had made a deep impression on the
heart of the sieur de Lignie^es, insomuch that he had promised to marry her: a
match the most fortunate for her, and therefore greatly wished for by her, and
her brother the abbe, but opposed by madame Mazel. All these circumstances are
related with the most minute and tedi^^^ particularity in the French original;
as i^ make the reader remark, that the assassination of madame Mazel was more
likely to be imputed to the revenge of her eldest son's wife, or those who were
interested in the marriage of the second, than to him on whom, unfortunately,
the suspicion fell.

Her manner of life, however, was such as made her liable to the designs of
many others. Every Monday and Friday she kept an open table, where gamesters by
pro^ession, of both sexes, as well as persons who were unhappily addicted to
that ruinous amusement, assembled to dine. After which the house, which was
very large, was filled with parties of hazard and other games of chance, at
which they continued the next day, and often till the next night. Madame Mazel
herself always retired about eleven o'clock, having first gone round to the
various tables, to accommodate the losers with money, who happened to be
without, which she often did to a large amount -- a circumstance which, of
course, gave reason to suppose she had always considerable sums by her. Many of
those who frequented her house, heard her, on various occasions, repeat, that
she never had a less sum by her than two thousand pistoles.

She was known to have made a will, in which she had charged her eldest son,
who was her principal legatee, with the mainte^ce and lodging of the abbe
Poulard, dur^^g his life. She had given six thousand livres to Le Brun; and
divided, between him and her own woman, her linen and clothes. This will was
known to many, and was deposited in the hands of a notary; but she had
repeatedly said it was her intention to make another.

The house she inhabited was in rue Macon, near the Sorbonne; and as a minute
description of it seemed necessary to the French relator, it must be repeated
here. -- The house had four floors: to the first, the access; was by the great
staircase; and the first apartment was a kind of hall, which served as place
for the servants The French word is OFFICE; which means, either what we call a
larder or pantry, or a butler's pantry. -- It is or was usual to have the
latter, which is here to be understood in the entrance hall.
; in which was a cupboard ARMOIRE; a press, as we should call it here.
, where the silver plate was kept, of which one of the female servants had the
key: on the other side, a little room had been added, where Le Brun lay, when
he did not pass the night with his family: the other room of this floor was
that in which madame Mazel was accustomed to receive company. A continuation of
the same staircase led to the second floor; the first apartment of which was an
antichamber, opening into another room, looking into the court of the house;
next to which was the room where madame Mazel slept. The first of these rooms
was open (...) all times. When their mistress wa^ (...) rest, the servant who
attended her to undress her, was accustomed to put the key of the chamber upon
a seat near the door, This, it must be remembered, is spoken of French locks,
which are unlike ours; the door cannot be opened from without, but by the key.
which she shut after her: they then locked the second door, and left the key
on the chimney-piece of the third room, which remained open. Thus, in this
large suite of rooms (for they were very spacious) madame Mazel was left
entirely alone.

But in her bedchamber were two other doors, one of which opened immediately
from the alcove, In France it is called the ruelle; it is a kind of recess just
big enough to hold a bed lengthways, and in it are frequently private doors,
which go into other apartments.
in which the bed stood, to a little priva^^ staircase; the other to a closet,
which opened also to the staircase. In the closet was a press, the key of which
was always put under the bolster of the bed; and in the press was deposited the
key of the strong box.

The third floor was empty, save only that the abbe Poulard sometimes occupied
the apartment fitted up for him in it, which, by the narrow staircase before
mentioned, had a secret communication with the bedchamber of madame Mazel.

The fourth story had only two rooms occupied; one by the two footmen, who were
brothers, and the other by the two waiting-women, who were sisters. The attic
story consisted of a garret running the whole length of the house; where wood,
coal, straw, and oats were sometimes deposited. A window in the roof opened to
the ridge of the house, between which ran a gutter, that continued for four or
five houses adjoining, most of which were lodging houses. On the ground floor
was the kitchen and a little wood room. The cook was accustomed to sleep in the
kitchen; but, about eight days before the fatal catastrophe, she took it into
her head to remove her bed into the wood room, which looked toward the street
with a low window. The coachman lay in the stable, and the care of the
courtyard was left to him; the key of which always hung on a nail in the
kitchen, whence the servants took it as they wanted it.

Some time before the death of madame Mazel, she had taken a master-key from Le
Brun, which opened all the doors, ill order to accommodate with it the abbe
Poulard; Le Brun had another, which he continued to use. To give an account of
the house, and its inhabitants, seems necessary to the understanding the
subsequent facts. Such minutiae as appear not material are omitted.

On the 27th November, School, being the first Sunday in advent, the two
daughters of Le ^run went in the afternoon to pay their respects to madame
Mazel. She received them with her usual good humor, but desired they would
come some other day, when they could pass longer time with her, as she was then
going to vespers at the convent of Prementre, rue Hautefeuille -- for she was
ever remarkably punctilio^^ in the exercises of religion. She left her house,
attended by Le Brun, on whose arm she leant, and the two footman followed her.
As soon as she was in the chapel Le Brun quitted her, and went to hear vespers
himself at the Jacobins, rue St. Jacques; from thence he went to see a game at
bowls, where he met a locksmith, called Lague, who had married a servant of
madame Mazel's; and they went together to a cook's shop, where they purchased
some provisions, on which they intended to sup together; then Le Brun went home
to his mistress's hotel, and from thence to his wife's lodging, and, at eight
o'clock, he went with the coach, and the other footmen, to fetch his lady from
the house of madame Duvau, according to the orders she had given them; and
after he had attended her home, he went to his appointment with Lague.

Madame Mazel supped, according to her usual custom, with the abbe Poulard,
tete-a-tete. The servants, who waited at table, remarked, that he repeated
several times his intention of going that night to his lodging in the
neighborhood, though he never before had mentioned what he intended to do of
an evening. At eleven o'clock, madame Mazel went to her chamber; and her two
women had not quitted her, when Le Brun tapped at the back door of the room.
She asked who it was? and one of the maids answered it is mr. Le Brun. Le Brun,
finding the door not immediately opened, went down, and came round by the great
staircase to the other door. When he entered the apartment, madame Mazel said
to him, "Truly, this is a fine hour to come for orders!" -- meaning that he had
staid out later than was his custom; she then told him what she would have
provided for supper the next evening, which was the night on which she kept
open table. The maid, as was her usual method, put the key on the chair; after
which they all quitted the room; and Le Brun, who went last, drew the door
after him and shut it. As they (the three servants) were going down together,
Le Brun stopped the two young women, to tell them how kind his mistress had
been to his daughters, when they waited on her in the afternoon, and after
keeping them in conversation some minutes, he wished them a good night; the
whole of his behavior testifying his usual cheerfulness and serenity.

He then went into the kitchen to take the key of the outward door to lock it;
he took it off the hook, but, finding himself cold, he laid it down on the
table, while he warmed himself, and being fatigued, possibly too, having drank
more than he was accustomed to, he insensibly fell asleep. When he awoke he
heard the clock strike one; but knew not whether it was one o'clock, or the
last stroke of twelve, or of any other hour. He ran up to lock the outward door
(which he was surprised to find wide open), and, when he had done so, took the
key with him into his room; a precaution he had seldom before taken. The next
morning, being the 28th of November, he got up at the usual hour to buy
provisions, and went to the butcher's. Going thither, he met a bookseller, a
man of reputable character, who knew him, and with whom he talked some time,
with the utmost ease and unconcern. To the butcher he said, that the meat must
be sent directly, because it would be wanted for broth for his mistress.

He then went to make other purchases, and met two or three of his
acquaintances, who walked with him home, and to whom he appeared remarkably
cheerful. As soon as they left him, he went down to give some orders in the
kitchen, and gave the footmen wood for his mistress's apartment. It was by this
time eight o'clock, and madame Mazel ^^^^lly arose at seven. The servants
expressed to each other their wonder, that she had not rung her bell at her
accustomed time. Le Brun went out a moment to see his wife; to whom he gave
seven louis and some other money, which he bade her lock up. Then returning
home, he enquired if madame was yet up? and being told she was not, he
expressed surprise and uneasiness. That of the whole family now arose to such a
height, that they determined to endeavor to awaken her, and for that purpose
they went to the door, rapped loudly, and called. Put all was silent. They were
then persuaded, that if she were living, she must have heard them, and their
t^^uble increased. Some said she had fallen into an apoplexy; others, that a
bleeding at the nose, to which she was subject, had destroyed her; but Le Brun
remarked, that it must be something worse, -- "Something," said he, is wrong; I
am very uneasy, because I found the street-door open last night.

They now determined to send for her eldest son, monsieur de Savonnieres who,
as soon as he came to the house, sent for a locksmith to open the door: while
this was doing, he said to Le Brun, -- "What can this mean?" -- whereupon
somebody again observed that it must be an apoplectic fit, and that it would he
necessary to have a surgeon at hand; on which Le Brun again said, -- Oh, no!
no! -- It is something yet worse. I am sure there has been mischief, when I
remember that the door was wide open last night.

The room being at length opened, the people who were assembled entered: Le
Brun went hastily to his mistress's bed; -- she was assassinated, and bathed in
blood. He ran to the window of the closet, which he unbarred, then lifting up
the strong box, he cried -- "but there is nothing taken from hence -- what can
this mean?" -- Monsieur de Savonnieres sent for the lieutenant criminal
Deffita, the same who formed the hasty judgment against the unhappy d'Anglade.
He laid a complaint in his own name, and that of his two brothers; and surgeons
were sent for to examine the body of the deceased.

Above fifty small wounds, made with a knife, were found on her hands, face,
shoulders, and throat; and these last, having occasioned a great effusion of
blood, had been the occasion of her death; for none of the wounds were of
themselves mortal.

In the bed was found a piece of a lace neckcloth, and a towel twisted up in
form of a nightcap; which towel belonged to the house, and was marked with an
S.

The cords of the bells were twisted up above the reach of the hand, and tied
to the curtain rod. In the ashes was found a knife, seven or eight inches long,
the handle of which had been of tortoise-shell, but was nearly burnt. The key
of the chamber door was not found on the seat, where the waiting woman affirmed
she had put it; no door was broke; and the two doors, which opened to the
backstairs were both shut and hooked withinside. The key of the press was found
under the bolster, where it was always placed: on opening this press, the
purse, in which madame Mazel kept her card money, was found, containing about
two hundred, and seventy-eight livres, in gold. The key of the strong box was
in the same place: they tried to open the strong box with it, but could not,
without the assistance of a locksmith, who was near a quarter of an hour before
he could accomplish it: in it were founds four sacks, each containing a
thousand livres; and many other bags, containing different sums; one of which
was labelled, "This is the property of the abbe Poulard." Under one of the
sacks was an orange-coloured and green purse, lined with crimson satin, which
was empty, and turned inside out; and a red leather writing box, on which lay
half a louis, and which This is a specimen, among many others, of the trifling
and minute description which pervades every French narrative.
contained all the jewels of madame Mazel, to the value of fifteen thousand
livres. In her pocket were eighteen pistoles, in gold. -- From all which
circumstances, it appeared as if those who had committed the cruel deed, had
done it from some other motive than merely that of robbery.

The lieutenant criminal questioned the two women who attended on Madame Mazel;
who related to him, succinc^ly, what had passed the night before. L^ Brun was
next called upon; who gave, with equal clearness, an account of every thing
that had happened to himself, from the time of his going out with his mistress
to vespers, to the moment of his examination. He was searched; and there was
found on him the key of the hall, where his pantry was; and a master-key with
very large wards, which, on ^rial, was found to open the door of madame Mazel's
chamber: upon which the lieutenant criminal ordered him into custody. On
putting on the napkin, it was found too little for his head: they examined his
hands, but there were no signs of blood upon them, or his clothes; no^ was
there, on any part of his person, any marks of that resistance, which it was
very evident the unfortunate victim had made against the russian who had killed
her; some of whose hair she had torn off, and held in her hand. After a very
slight search in his pantry, nothing was found that indicated his guilt;
notwithstanding which, he was sent to prison, and his wife at the same time
ordered into custody. The magistrate then retired, having put his seal on the
doors and left his officers in the house.

The next day the lieutenant returned again to the house of the deceased, to
examine the cook, the two footmen, and the coachman; but, though he employed
ten hours in these interrogations, he omitted to examine an old woman And who
is not mentioned before among the inhabitants of the house.
who lay in the kitchen.

There was found at the bottom of the back stairs, a new rope, tied to an iron
hook, and knotted as if it was designed for a ladder. Le Brun was again
examined in prison, and neither on his person, or in his answers, was there
found the least cause to believe him the guilty person. His pantry was again
searched: they found only a basket, containing some old iron; among which was a
hook, and a file; a towel belonging to the house marked S, and some cords. They
then examined the lodging of his wife, where nothing was found that tended to
criminate him; however, they seized on his linen, to compare it with a shirt,
which was found stained with blood in the garret, hid under some straw (and
which evidently belonged to the assassin) and with the lace neckcloth before
mentioned.

The two women declared, that this neckcloth never had belonged to Le Brun, but
said, they remembered having washed it for a servant called Berry, who had been
dismissed from the service of madame Mazel about four months before, because he
was detected in robbing her. No similitude was found between the shirt and
those belonging to Le Brun; nor in any enquiry that was made, did the slighted
circumstance arise, that tended to fix the charge on him. The poor man was,
however, in the mean time, closely confined, and not suffered to see his wife,
his children, or his friends; while the abbe Poulard, who during his first
examination had fainted, and appeared ^inder the utmost agitation of spirit,
went to every place, exclaiming, that Le Brun only could be guilty: and he made
the same declaration before the judges, though he brought no proof of it. In
default, however, of proof, he invented a story, which he thought would
prejudice the public against the unhappy Le Brun: -- he said, that "madame
Mazel had, in her youth, a connection with a nobleman of high rank, by whom she
had a son; which son was that very Berry, who had been some months before
discharged for theft: that madame Mazel had been entrusted, by her paramour,
with a very large sum of money, for the use of this son; which secret was known
only to Le Brun; who, in hopes of engaging him to marry one of his daughters,
had communicated the mystery of his birth, and of this deposit of money, to
Berry; and Berry, thereupon, with the concurrence and assistance of Le Brun,
had gone to his mother, madame Mazel, to beseech a restitution, or a provision;
but that the inhuman mother, instead of granting his request, had seized, and
attempted to strange him; which obliged him, in his own defense, to give her
the blows which occasioned her death." -- Though this account, which the abbe
pretended to have had from Le Brun, directly charged Berry with the murder; and
though the neckcloth was found, which was known to be his, no enquiry was made
after him* and the prosecution was still continued against Le Brun. -- The
story of the relationship between the deceased and Berry, was clearly false, as
his parents were known to be both living at Bourges: and, on Le Brun's being
interrogated, as to the truth of this story, he was so far from throwing on the
memory of his deceased mistress any part of the infamy imputed to her, that he
spoke of her with the greatest respect; particularly, when he was questioned on
the communication between her apartment and the^ of the abbe Poulard, he
answered, that he should not answer questions which had nothing to do with the
subject of his examination; and that he would say nothing that might give a
pretense for scandal.

On the fourteenth of January, monsieur de Savonnieres presented a request to
the lieutenant criminal, in his own name, and that of his two brothers,
demanding that Le Brun should be declared duly convicted of having assussinated
madame Mazel, and of having robbed her of a quantity of gold coin that was in
her strong box: and that he should, at the same time, be deprived of, and
declared unworthy of the legacy left him by the deceased. -- However strange
and incredible it may seem, it appears very certain, that this legacy was the
real source of all the enmity of the messrs. de Savonnieres against the
unfortunate Le Brun: and, to deprive him and his children of it, they
prosecuted him even to death; while those, whom there was every reason to
believe the real perpetrators of the crime, were not even enquired after.

When the trial came on, the principal arguments (...) by the counsel against
Le Brun, were (...) Pleading against Le Brun.
-- That, as none of the doors were broken open, the person who obtained access
to the apartment of madame Mazel must be a servant in the house; and that
servant could be only Le Brun, who alone possessed a key that opened the doors;
-- that nobody, but a person well acquainted with the usages of madame Mazel,
could know where to find, under the bolster, the key of the press in which was
shut the key of the strong box, so as to be able to take it out and replace it.
Such knowledge could be acquired only by long observation of the customs of a
family; and could be certainly known to nobody so well as to Le Brun. He only
could have tied up the bell ropes; because nobody else could procure admittance
to the room, while madame Mazel was absent, but Le Brun, by means of his
master-key. To add to the strength of this remark, it was added, that once
before, when madame Mazel complained that her bell-cords were tied up so high
that she could not reach them; Le Brun answered, that he had tied them up,
because they were in his way when he made the bed, and that he afterward
forgot them: from whence it was inferred, that what he had done once, he might
have repeated. The counsel urged, that it was impossible to believe, that, in
the short interval during which Le Brun declared he had been asleep in the
kitchen, a stranger should be able to find his way into the house, open the
^oors, and, though madame Mazel was but just in bed, and probably not asleep,
should ass^ssinate her, notwithstanding the resistance she evidently made;
force her strong box, which was so difficult to unlock; pass afterward close
to the door of the room where the two women lay; who were but just gone to bed;
and escape by the street-door, before Le (...) that a stranger should do it was
impossible; but nothing was easier to Le Brun. A (...) in the house, after
every one else was retired; master of a key which procured him admittance, and
of the light which was necessary for his purpose; every thing conspired, the^
declared, to fix the guilt on him only.

Pleading on behalf of Le Brun.
Monsieur d'Ancour, who was employed in favor of Le Brun, made an excellent,
though fruitless defense. He began with showing, how improbable it was, that a
man of so excellent a character as Le Brun universally bore; a man who had
brought up a large family in honest and sober principles; whose conduct, as a
husband and a father, was unimpeached; and who had faithfully served his
mistress nine-and-twenty years; should now, without motive, without
provocation, become the murderer of her, to whom he had so long shown the
sincerest attachment and respect: these circumstances made the fact extremely
improbable. The next point was to show, that it was impossible Le Brun could be
guilty of if. The report of those who inspected the body of the deceased, said,
that she had received above fifty wounds, and had evidently made great
resistance; in consequence of which, the assassin must have borne on his person
many (...) of that resistance. Le Brun had none; not even the smallest scratch
on his hands, or spot of blood on his clothes: -- the towel, twisted up like a
cap, was so much less than his head, that he could not put it on: the knife was
not his; had never been seen in his possession: -- the neckcloth was known to
belong to another person: -- the shirt was not like any he possessed; it was
unlike, not only in quality, but in size; and was made for a little man,
whereas Le Brun was very tall and robust. -- These facts, said M. d'Aucour, are
so evident, that the accusers of my client cannot deny them; forced, therefore,
to acknowledge that he cannot have been the actual perpetrator of the crime,
they have recourse to another charge; and accuse him of being an accomplice.
But this charge, continued M. d'Aucour, is even more absurd than the other. If
any unaccountable frenzy could have instigated Le Brun to such a deed, he would
not have trusted the execution of it to another hand: if he had been prompted
by avarice, he would, as he had time enough, have secured the large sum, in
money and jewels, which were left behind, and not have contented himself with a
small part only of what he had risqued so much to obtain. He would certainly
have escaped before the next morning, instead of going, as he did,
unconcernedly about his usual business. But if any domestic let in the russian,
why must it be Le Brun? Why not one of the other footmen, or maids? Why not the
coachman in whose care the courtyard was left? Why not the cook, who had also
a master-key to the outward door, and in whose room was a low window,
communicating with the street, through which she might give the master-key out?
Finally, Why might it not be the abbe Poulard, whose character was such as made
him be supposed a much more likely man than Le Brun to commit an infamous
crime. -- But why must it be concluded, that the assassin was let in at all? Of
a house open at all times to gamesters of both sexes, and to crowds of servants
who attended them, it is not difficult to know the entrance, and the passages.
Might not the wretch, who meditated murder and robbery, conceal himself in the
house during the day, when all the doors were open to all comers? Might he not
have remained there one night, or even more, hid among the straw, coals, and
wood, in the garret, which was rarely frequented? Might he not even have come
in by means of the trap-door, which opened in the roof, and which was never
shut? And was there not sufficient temptation to villainy, in a house which was
known to have a hoard of gold never less than two thousand pistoles, besides
other moneys; and which was so easy of access? -- There being, therefore, every
reason to believe the crime was not committed by the intervention of a servant;
or, if of a servant, not of Le Brun; M. d'Aucour demanded, on behalf of his
client, that he might be declared innocent, and set at liberty.

But, notwithstanding this able defense, and that his adversaries could bring
no one proof against him, no one presumptive evidence, the fatal key in his
possession, which opened all the doors, determined the judges to condemn him. A
yet more powerful motive, perhaps, was, the wish of the messieurs de
Savonnieres to have him condemned! They therefore proceeded, on the eighteenth
of January, to judgment. Eleven judges were assembled: of whom two declared,
they required farther information before they decided; two voted that he might
be put to the question; By torture
six condemned him to death, and that in the most cruel manner that could be
devised.

Poor Le Brun was extremely beloved; and the murmurs and complaints of the
people, who all believed him innocent, reached the ears of the judges. They
said, in their defense, that as they knew their decision would not be final,
but would be appealed against, and carried to another court, they determined to
make it as severe as possible, in hopes of frightening the prisoner into a
confession of the actual perpetrator of the crime, and all its circumstances.
Thus, instead of justice, these men had recourse to stratagem. Le Brun
appealed; But to what court, (...) Richar^ (...) to tell us. -- The court of
the (...) was that (...) Le Brun was first condemned.
and M. d'Aucour, on the second hearing, undertook his defense anew.

He again urged all that he had before set forth, in behalf of his oppressed
client; and set all the improbabilities, he had before remarked, in a yet
stronger light. He represented, that no one circumstance could be alleged
against him, but the possession of a key which turned half round the lock of
the apartment where madame Mazel lay: and on such slight presumption they
condemned to die, by the most cruel torments, a man, who for five-and-forty
years (of which twenty-nine had been passed in the same service) had never been
accused of the least offense against God or man! The fatal key, which is thus
to bring him to the scaffold, not only was not surreptiously obtained, but had
undergone no alteration to enable it to turn the lock entirely; a precaution Le
Brun must have taken, had he meant to have used it to enter his mistress's
room, after she was in bed; for then the door was double locked, and this key,
which would only turn once, was consequently unfit for the purpose. It was
objected, by the accusers of Le Brun, that he ought not to have kept this key;
for that madame Mazel, after being robbed by Berry, had taken away the
master-keys from all her servants who possessed them. It is true, continues M.
d'Aucour, she did in a fit of vexation, very natural, yet not very reasonable,
take away from the cook, and from Le Brun, their master keys. But she soon
after gave back to the cook that which she had taken from her; and as she had
given that which Le Brun used to carry to the abbe Poulard, she suffered him
(Le Brun) to use that he had by him, and which had been given him many years
before, by a servant who married out of the family; and Le Brun always did use
it, not only with the knowledge of all the other domestics, but of his mistress
herself; indeed it was absolutely necessary for him, as he bought all the
provisions for the family, and was obliged to be at market in a morning long
before the rest of the family were stirring.

Besides, had Le Brun lent the key to the assassin, he would not have taken it
back. He would have suffered him to have kept it, or have thrown it away, under
pretense that he had himself lost it. It is inconceivable that he would retain
what would be brought in evidence against him.

But why, pursued M. d'Aucour, is not enquiry made after Berry? Berry, who
before robbed madame Mazel, and was dismissed in disgrace; who was known to be
an infamous wretch, capable of any mischief -- to whom the neckcloth was known
to belong; who had often applied to be admitted to his place again, but had
been refused; who was seen at Paris about the time the event happened; and had
been seen since with money, which could not have been honestly obtained?

Why is not notice taken of the abbe Poulard, an equivocal character at best; a
priest, who, after being in two orders, actually belongs to none? -- who had
access at all hours to the house of madame Mazel, and who was seen to go in at
midnight, the evening the murder was committed; and who had an interest in the
death of his benefactress, who was an obs^cle to the marriage of his sister
with her second son? Why does the wife of the eldest son, whose inveterate
hatred and frequent denunciations of vengeance against her mother-in-law were
well known; why is she not suspected of having hired an assassin, to put an end
to a life so obnoxious to her? Any one of these persons, M. d'Aucour affirmed,
were much more likely to be the perpetrators of the homicide than Le Brun,
whose interest it was that his mistress should live, not only because he
enjoyed an excellent place, but because if she did alter her will, as she
sometimes said she should, he had no reason to believe she would lessen his
legacy, but rather to hope she would increase it; as she was continually
bestowing additional favors on him and his family, and, as she advanced in
years, felt herself more and more attached to an old servant, careful of her
interest, and whose services she found every day more necessary, in her
domestic arrangement.

When all these reasons were added to the universal good character of the
accused, the concern expressed by all ranks of people for him (for all believed
him innocent), and the total want of proof against him, M. d'Aucour pleaded,
that so far from the sentence being confirmed, it undoubtedly ought to be
annulled. He again, before he concluded, pointed out to the court the
extraordinary conduct of the abbe Poulard, who, with an officiousness very
unjustifiable, had labo^ed by falsities, and injurious allegations, to throw
the guilt on the unfortunate prisoner. -- But the abbe Poulard was not a second
time question^d till it was too late.

The counsel on the other side laid the greatest stress on the circumstance of
the key; on what Le Brun said, when questioned by M. de Savonnieres, This is
not apoplexy, but something worse; and on the seven louis given to his wife to
lock up, which they pretended to believe was part of the money taken from
madame Mazel.

On the twenty-second of February, sentence was again to be passed by
twenty-two judges. Two only of the number demanded farther enquiry; the other
twenty decided for the question ordinary and extraordinary.

The unhappy man was put to this dreadful trial, and, amid the most cruel
tortures, persisted in declaring his innocence.

As he continued steadfastly to deny the fact, a new sentence became necessary.
On the 27th, the same number of judges being again assembled, two voted that he
shoul'd be sent to the galleys for life; all the rest voted for a farther
enquiry of twelve months against Le Brun and his wife, during which he was to
remain in prison, and his wife to be at liberty. A right was retained to
sentence his loss of the legacy, or afterwads to decide upon it as occasion
might require.

(...) consequence of this last judgment, Le Brun, who had till now been kept
in a dungeon, without being suffered to speak to or see any human being, but
the jailer, was allowed to have his wife, his children, and his friends
admitted. But this alleviation of his misery came too late. The violence of the
torments he had undergone was such, that he was reduced to extremity, though a
very athletic and healthy man of forty-five, and his wretched wife had only
time to procure him the administration of the sacraments. As he received them,
he again most solemnly protested his innocence, and expired, amidst the despair
of his wife and children, and the regret of all who had ever known him. Such
was the grief universally expressed by all ranks of people, and such the
concourse who attended his corpse to the grave, that it seemed to become a
public cause, even before the real culprit was discovered. What then must have
been the feelings of his prosecutors and his judges (if indeed they had any
feeling) when the monster, who had really committed the crime, for which this
innocent worthy man suffered, was dragged forth!

Information was (by what means is not said) given to the lieutenant of the
marechaussee of Sens, that a man named Gerlat, otherwise Berry, Berry was the
name of the province he came from: -- (...) footmen, like the French soldiers,
assume a (...) of the province to which they belong, (...) of m^re fancy, (...)
etc.
had established himself there as a dealer in ho^ses, and without any visible
means by which he could acquire money to support such a traffic.

In consequence of which, in March 1690, he was arrested. He offered the men,
who were sent to take him, a purse sull of louis d'ors to let him escape -- and
upon him was a watch, which was known immediately to have belonged to madame
Mazel.

A process was instantly set on foot against him, and witnesses examined. Some
swore they had seen him at Paris at the time of the assassination; which he
absolutely denied. A woman swore she saw him come out of the house after
midnight, on the night it was committed: a barber deposed, that he had shaved
him the next day, and, having observed scratches and wounds on his hands, Berry
had told him, that they were made by a cat, which he had attempted to kill. The
shirt and the neckloth were proved to be his, by comparing them with what he
had found upon him.

The process went on with great celerity; and among other arrets, one issued,
directing the prisoner to be confronted with the abbe Poulard -- which was
done; but what passed, or what afterward became of the abbe, monsieur Richer
says, he was never able to, learn. Probably he was ordered into perpetual
confinement, in one of the religious houses from which he had deserted: certain
it is, that all traces are lost of this apostate priest. Berry was put to the
question; when he said, that, by orders of madame de Savonnieres, wife to the
eldest son of madame de Mazel, Le Brun and himself had destroyed her, by
agreement with each other. He hoped by this falsehood to associate madame de
Savonnieres in his guilt, and by that means gain time; but when he found this
falsehood useless, he confessed, that he concealed himself in the garret of the
house (having found all the doors open) from the Friday to the Sunday, (...) on
bread and apples, he had put into his pocket: -- that at eleven o'clock on
Sunday morning, knowing it was the hour madame Mazel went to mass, he went down
into her (...), which he found open: -- that he tried to hide himself under the
bed; but could not (...) under with his coat on, which obliged him to (...)
again to the garret, where he (...) and waistcoat, and came back in (...), when
he (...) under the bed, (...) some time: -- that after din^, (...) Mazel being
gone to vespers, he got from under the bed, warmed himself at the fire, and,
finding his hat roublesome, made himself a nightcap of tatowel he found behind
the glass; that he tied up the bell-cords, and staid at the fire till he heard
the coach enter the courtyard; then getting again under the bed, remained
there till madame Mazel had been in bed near an hour; then he showed himself,
and asked her for her money, when on her screaming out, he told her, if she
cried out he would kill her; and upon her still continuing to do so, and to
attempt ringing the bells, he struck her with a knife; that she tried to defend
herself for some little time, but her strength failing, he continued to strike
her till she died: -- that he then lighted a candle, and took from the bolster
the key of the press, from whence he took that of the strong box, which he
opened, without any difficulty, and took all the gold there was, which amounted
to about six thousand livres, which he put into a canvas bag that he found in
the box: -- that he placed the key where it was before, and, it being then
moonlight, he took his hat, and leaving the towel and his neckcloth he knew
not where, he ascended to the garr^t, where he took off his shirt, and putting
on his coat and waistcoat, went down to the street-door, but that he drew the
door of madame Mazel's room after him with the key, as gently as he could, and,
when he got into the (...) by being so lucky as to find the street-door
unlocked, he threw the key of the chamber away: -- that he had taken a
rope-ladder with him, by which he meant to have escaped from the, windows of
the first story, if he had found the door locked; which ladder he left at the
foot of the stairs.

The confession of this wretch, entirely clears up those circumstances that
appeared extraordinary, and wholly exculpates the memory of the unfortunate Le
Brun; whose wife and children appear to have received no compensation for the
cruel injury done them, and the entire ruin that overwhelmed them. Berry died
on the wheel; and the memory of Le Brun was declared free from any stain: --
but the evil of having given up an innocent man to torture and death, could not
be repaired.

MADEMOISELLE DE CHOISEUL.
AUGUSTUS de Choiseul, fourth son of Caesar due de Choiseul, became by the death
of his elder brothers (and of a son which one of them had left), due de
Choiseul. He married Louisa Gabrielle de la Baume le Blanc de la Valliere,
whose elder brother, Charles Francis, was due de la Valliere; the youngest,
Maximilian Henry, chevalier de la Vall^ere; and her sister, Maria Jolanda de la
Valliere, who was first married to the marquis de Brossay, and afterward to
the count of Tournon. The celebrated madame de la Valliere, mistress of Louis
the fourteenth, was the aunt of this family; and consequently they were cousins
(...) that monarch, (...) princess of Conti^ (...)

The duke and (...) not divorced, lived (...) seldom saw each (...) treating of
peace with (...) duke de Choiseul was (...) the hostages for its rat (...)
thither took place in (...) he returned to Paris in (...)

The issue of his first marriage were supposed to be, a daughter, born in 1683
(whose education was entrusted to her aunt, the abbess de Sauvoir); a son, born
in 1688, who died at two years old; and a second daughter born in 1692, who was
also put under the care of her aunt, the abbess.

The dachess de Choiseul died of a rapid decline, in School, at the age of
thirty-three; the duke married a second wife, by whom he (...) children; and
died in 1704, at the age of sixty-eight.

He appears to have been a negligent and improvident father, having taken very
little notice of his children while he lived, and dissipated great part of the
property they ought to have possessed at his death. -- When that event
happened, his family and that of his first wife met, to consider of the affairs
of the two young ladies, his daughters, as two only were then believed to
exist. Their estates and persons were put under the guardianship of their
maternal uncle, the duke de la Valliere; and in every proceeding which the
entangled state of their father's affairs made necessary, no men^^on was made
of more than two daughters. To them also was bequeathed a part of the fortune
of their grandmother, the marchioness (...) without any notice being taken of a
third sister.

In 1708, the eldest of the (...) de Choiseul became of (...) the acts passed
on that occasion there was mention of only one sister: two years after which
she fell into a decline, and died, leaving a will, in which she named her
sister, Maria-Louisa-Theresa de Choiseul, her sole legatee; who consequently
became, as was then imagined, sole heiress to the house of de Choiseul. The
king, who, at the ^ntreaty of his daughter, the princess of Conti, had granted
a pension to the two young ladies jointly, to make them some amends for the
dissipation of their father, now gave the whole to the survivor: and in the
course of a few years she received payment of many legacies, and took
possession of several inheritances, as only daughter of the duke de Choiseul;
these her guardians possessed in her behalf till she came of age, which
happened in 1720; in the course of which year she also grew consumptive, and
died: the duke de la Valliere, and the chevalier de la Valliere, her uncles,
were her heirs; they possessed themselves of her estates and properties, of
which they retained the possession till 1723.

Then it was that the lieutenant criminal received a complaint from a young
person, calling herself de Choiseul, who said that she was the daughter and now
sole heiress of Augustus duke de Choiseul, and Louisa Gabriella de la (...) le
Blanc de (...) Valliere, his wife. This young lady had been brought up by the
marchioness d'Hautefort, and had been always known by the name of (...) de St.
Cyr, from one of the estates belonging to madame d'Hautefort.

In this complaint she set forth, that she was the daughter of the duchess of
Choiseul, born the 8th October 1697; -- that the duke her father knew of the
pregnancy and delivery of the duchess; and that, at the request of both her
parents, madame de Hautefort had received her into her care; to which the
duchess de Choiseul had, on her deathbed, again most earnestly recommended
her, seeing, too evidently, that the duke totally neglected his children, and
fearing for the fate of her youngest daughter, then in her earliest infancy; --
that she had always been acknowledged and openly treated as their daughter by
both her parents: -- she therefore demanded to be restored to her rights, as
heiress to the duke of Choiseul. -- On this plea she was allowed to commen^e a
suit; and witnesses being heard, there appeared sufficient reason to believe
that the plaintiff was really born of the duchess de Choiseul. To institute
however a regular suit two things were necessary -- an extract of the register
of baptism, and an adverse party.

The first of these was found by means of causing herself to be baptized by the
name of Augustina-Frances de Choiseul; and, as the duke her father had been
remarkably neglectful in regard to the baptism of his other daughters (who were
not baptized till one was eleven, and the other two years old), it was not
improbable that the same inattention had prevailed in regard to his youngest
daughter.

After some measures had been taken, peculiar to the French law, mademoiselle
de Choiseul (as she was now called) summoned the duke de la Vallieere to give
her an inventory of the fortune and effects of madame de la Valliere, her
maternal grandmother, and to make restitution of the effects they possessed as
heirs to her mother, the duchess de Choiseul.

The duke de la Valliere, in his defense, said, that the person calling herself
Augustina-Frances de Choiseul must establish by authentic proofs her claim to
that name, and to her title of heiress of the duke de Choiseul.

As the duke de la Valliere could be sued only as a peer of France, the cause
was to be heard before the chamber of peers.

Before that tribunal then was brought the cause; when counsel on behalf of
mademoiselle de Choiseul pleaded, Pleading on behalf of Augustina-Frances,
calling herself as Choiseul.
That the duke de la Valliere had been a witness to the birth of their client;
that he had promised his sister, the duchess de Choiseul, to take care of her
infant through every circumstance of her life: but when he found that, by
suppressing what he knew of her birth, he should divide considerable property
as heir to that sister, he scrupled not to violate every promise he had given
her, not only on the birth of her child but again when she was dying; and now,
when her daughter claimed her own property, desired to have authentic proof of
what he knew better than any one -- proofs, which it was the more difficult for
her to bring, as all the family papers were in the hands of the very person who
demanded them, and whose interest it was to conceal every memorial of the
contested fact. If, said they, the duke de la Villiere has done this, he is
certainly liable to the prosecution of mademoiselle de Choiseul; if he has not
done it, she is guilty of a false and injurious accusation, and must submit to
the punishment that follows such an offense.

The duke de la Valliere, in his defense, said, Defense of the duke de la
Valliere.
That he was not guilty of suppressing the claim of his opponent; -- for how
could he suppress what never existed? In all the papers relative to
transactions in the family, before the death of the duke de Choiseul, who
survived his wife seven years, there was no mention of a third daughter; and
what proofs of another nature could he have concealed, when none were ever
pretended to have been known? -- neither baptismal register, or any other
evidence of her ever having been acknowledged the daughter of the duke and
duchess de Choiseul. "But," continued the counsel for the duke de la Valliere,
who will say that the duke suppressed the claims of a daughter, who was never
owned by her father? While he lived, the duke de la Valliere had nothing to do
with the fortune of the Choiseul family; and when he died, how is it possible
that the duke de la Valliere could foresee that the two daughters he left would
both die unmarried, one at the age of twenty-seven, and the other at
twenty-eight? Unless he had foreseen that by these improbable events he should
possess his niece's property, it could not be worth his while, by unjustifiable
and dishonorable means, to throw into obscurity the birth of a third daughter
of his sister. The marchioness de Hautefort pretended, that the duchess de
Choiseul, when in her last sickness, conjured her by their long friendship, to
take care of her infant daughter, whom her death would leave to the mercy of a
father who showed the most cruel indifference to all his children. If this was
the case, why did the marchioness de Hautefort give her another name? Why did
she suffer so many acts to be passed in which the name of her ward was entirely
omitted? Why did she not present her to her grandmother, her relations, her
father? Why not baptize her as a daughter of the duke de Choiseul? Why not
appeal to public justice to ascertain her birth, i^ there appeared any
backwardness in her family to acknowledge her, or if any circumstances attended
it which might make her legitimacy liable to be disputed? -- These seem to be
the strongest points urged in defense of the duke de la Valliere. -- The facts
asserted on behalf of mademoiselle de Choiseul, and of which facts she desired
leave to bring proof, were the following, Proofs offered to be brought by
mademoiselle de Choiseul.
That the duchess de Choiseul, whose pregnancy was known to all her husband's
family and her own, was, on the 8th of October, 1697, delivered of a daughter,
in a house belonging to her and the duke, rue de Verneuil, fauxbourgh St.
Germain, and while she lay-in received the complimentary visits of all the
family; -- that as soon as the infant was born, the accoucheur, apprehending it
was likely to die, had sprinkled it, in the usual form appointed in such cases;
-- that soon afterward madame de Choiseul fell into a declining state of
health, and feeling herself in danger, recommended her third daughter most
earnestly to the care and protection of her friend, madame d'Hautefort, and to
that of her brother, the duke de la Valliere; and that she gave to the former
two pictures of herself, and some other effects, which she besought her to give
to her youngest daughter, that she might have some memorial of her mother; and
that when the duchess was dead, madame d' Hautefort took the child from the
village of Meudon, where she was at nurse, and put her, together with her
nurse, into lodgings, rue St. Antoine, where the duke de la Valliere often
visited her; from thence she was removed to the house of one Lasalle, rue
Princess, that she might be more immediately under the eye of madame
d'Hautefort, where the duke continued to see her, and whither he sometimes
came, accompanied by madame d'Hautefort and La Comme, a woman who had for many
years been a faithful and favored servant of the duchess de Choiseul; and the
duke de la Valliere frequently made little presents to the nurse, to encourage
her to take care of the infant.

That at the age of two years and a half, madame d'Hautefort brought the little
de Choiseul home to her own house, where she lived till the commencement of the
suit, and where the duke de la Valliere, her uncle, continued to see and to
acknowledge her as his niece; and though she was usually known by the name of
mademoiselle St. Cyr, yet ^he was allowed to have a claim to that of de
Choiseul.

The counsel related the names and abodes of the various nurses under whose
care the infant was at different times placed; and of her governess, who was
particularly charged with her education, under the direction of madame
d'Hautefort; and lastly offered to prove, that the duke de la Valliere had
acknowledged repeatedly, that the little girl, of whom madame d'Hautefort had
the care, was the daughter of his sister, the duchess de Choiseul.

To add strength to this allegation, a letter was produced, written by the
marchioness de Tournon to the marchioness d'Hautefort, which contained these
words: I am very sorry, madame, that the ill health of mademoiselle de St. Cyr
prevents my seeing you, as I have nothing more at heart than to assure you of
my gratitude. I wish nothing more ardently than to see the affair you know of
brought to a conclusion; it is certainly that which affects the health of our
amiable songstress. -- My friend, of whom I have an high opinion (whom you saw
with me on Sunday, and who left me on your entrance, believing we had
business), told me yesterday that he wished very much to see you here, to give
you his opinion of the business, in which he sees no difficulty; but in the
management of which, able persons are absolutely necessary, and such he will
name to you. Consider, therefore, whether, tomorrow, Saturday, or Sunday, you
cannot give me an hour of your time after dinner, as he will meet you here on
receiving notice; and, as I have received the visits of all my relations, we
shall not be interrupted.

I hope the child will be well; if not, she must come sick. I shall be charmed
with this opportunity of conversing with you, and of assuring you of my tender
attachment. Suffer me to conclude without either compliment or signature.

By this letter it clearly appears, that the amiable songstress, the child, and
mademoiselle St. Cyr, spoken of in it, are the same person; and that madame de
Tournon then acknowledged her to be her sister's child, and even intended to
assist in restoring her to the rank to which she had a right.

Mademoiselle de Choiseul having now collected, by her lawyers, a body of
evidence which appeared very strong, was advised to proceed against the duke de
la Valliere, the chevalier, and madame de Tournon, together; otherwise she
might, after having succeeded against one, be liable to the same difficulties
with the other two. They were summoned to appear, and to be examined. The duke
was first questioned; his answers were evasive, and it seemed that he suffered
a struggle between the truth he kn^w, and the falsehood it was his interest to
maintain. The countess de Tournon absolutely denied every thing; but when the
letter above recited was read to her, she appeared hurt and confused; yet
persisted in affirming, that the letter did not relate to mademoiselle St. Cyr.

The chevalier de la Valliere, on the contrary, honestly told all he knew; and
from his account, mademoiselle de Choiseul gained an advantage, that all the
efforts of the duke could not counteract.

Thus provided, this young person, hitherto appearing as a private gentlewoman,
depending on the bounty of madame d'Hautefort, prepared to bring that suit to
an issue, which was to rise her to an exalted rank, and to restore to her the
possessions of one of the most illustrious houses in France.

But before she had proceeded far, an unexpected discovery threw new light on
the obscurity of her birth; she was told that one Le^^c had in his possession a
register, which had for a great length of time been kept by his father (who had
been dead ten years); and that as he (the elder) had attended the duchess of
Choiseul, it was probable that whatever related to the birth of her youngest
daughter would be found entered in this book.

Her lawyers therefore summoned Leduc, who the next morning appeared before
Jourdain, a notary employed in the affair: he produced the book, in which his
father had carefully minuted the times of his various attendance, the money he
received, and every other circumstance that occurred in his practice. There was
found a detail of his first visit to madame de Choiseul, of his having
afterward bled her; and at length, that on the 7th of October, 1697, he was
sent for to her at six o'clock in the evening, when he found her in labor, and
who, between the hours of two and three the next morning, was delivered of a
fine girl; which infant was entrusted to him to be put out to nurse; and which,
on the 11th of October following, he carried to Meudon, having first made a
slight rasure of the skin under the right ham, and again a little lower on the
leg, which he rubbed with gunpowder: a method which makes a mark that never can
be effaced. -- These marks, mademoiselle de Choiseul bore. -- Leduc then
mentioned in his book, that he had carried the infant to St. Etienne du Mont to
be baptized, where she had received the name of Julia; but without speaking of
her parents, godfather or godmother. His journal also contained an account of
money received and expended; among other articles, that he paid four livers ten
sons for the coach that carried him with the child to Meudon; -- that he
received various sums, at times, for the maintenance of the child; and, among
others, was a memorandum, that he was paid thirty new louis for his attendance,
by the marshaless de Choiseul; a name which occasioned the adverse party to
assert, that the whole transaction did not allude to the duchess de Choiseul,
but to some other woman of fashion bearing the name of de Choiseul. (There were
then five or six marchionesses and countesses de Choiseul in France.)

The marshaless de Choiseul it certainly could not mean, as she was eighty
years old; and it is improbable, as she was not on good terms with the duchess,
that she should have undertaken, through friendship, to settle with Leduc on
her account.

All the articles however of Leduc's register, which related to the contested
point, were extracted, and inserted in the instruments preparing by the lawyers
on behalf of mademoiselle de Choiseul; who also desired to have this book
deposited in safe hands, that recourse might be had to the original when
requisite. To this Leduc, the son, consented. But, as there were memorandums in
it relative to an infinite number of persons, he required to have the liberty
to seal up himself every leaf in which there was nothing that related to
mademoiselle de Choiseul. This was proper and reasonable; and in that form the
book remained to be inspected by the court.

The duke de la Valliere used every effort to prevent the journal of Leduc
being received as evidence. When he found that he could not accomplish it by
other means of opposition, he insisted upon having the whole book inspected;
possibly supposing, that the contents of such a journal being publicly known,
might be attended with such inconvenience, and occasion so much confusion, that
the court itself would interfere to stifle the whole. In this also he failed.
The six judges who were to decide upon the cause, took the book themselves, and
having examined it, found only fourteen articles which related to the cause in
question; one of their number took a copy of those articles, and the book was
carefully locked up.

The duke then made another effort to suppress the evidence of the book
entirely, but his attempt again failed. He was now therefore obliged to submit
to have the cause tried in the very court, against the decisions of which he
had, in the course of the controversy, twice appealed. The lawyers employed by
mademoiselle de Choiseul failed not to urge, with great ability, all the facts
herein stated, to substantiate the claim of their client.

From the answers given by the duke de la Valliere himself, the celebrated Le
Normand, counsel for the plaintiff, drew an inference favorable to her cause.
The duke never declared that he did not believe mademoiselle de Choiseul was
born of his sister; but only, that he did not know or believe that she was the
daughter of the duke and duchess of Choiseul; by which he tacitly allowed she
might be the offspring of the duchess; and while he could not deny the
maternity, threw indirectly a reflection on the honor of his sister.

The letter written by madame de Tournon was a strong presumptive evidence,
notwithstanding all her attempts to explain away its meaning; but the evidence
given by the chevalier de la Valliere was yet more conclusive. He acknowledged,
that he knew his sister, the duchess de, Choiseul, had four children, a son and
three daughters; -- that his mother, and all the family, were apprised of her
pregnancy in 1697; -- that he knew the daughter of which she had been delivered
was brought up by madame d'Hautefort, under the name of St. Cyr; -- and that,
when his sister was dying, she told him she had recommended her youngest
daughter to the protection, not only of madame d'Hautefort, but to that of her
brother, the duke de la Valliere; and that they had both promised to watch over
her welfare. To these forcible evidences, was added the journal of Leduc; and
the whole seemed to form a body rather of positive facts than presumptive proof.

The duke de la Valliere's defense consisted chiefly in reprobating the whole
conduct of the defenders of mademoiselle de Choiseul; particularly their
availing themselves of the journal of Leduc, in which circumstances were
mentioned, which threw an odium on the conduct of the duchess de Choiseul, had
they been true; though it is observable, that the duke de la Vaillere's
frequent repetition of his assertion, that he did not believe the plaintiff to
be the daughter of the duke and duchess of Choiseul, threw the same kind of
reflection on the memory of his sister. -- The fact certainly was, that the
plaintiff was born eight months and some days after the arrival of the duke de
Choiseul from being an hostage at the court of the duke of Savoy; and for four
years preceding that period he did not reside in the house with the duchess,
though he sometimes saw her.

When he was at Paris, he resided at the temple, while the duchess inhabited a
house in rue Verneuil; circumstances that, together with the mysterious manner
in which the child was brought up, certainly had the appearance of improper
conduct in the duchess. On this, however, the duke de la Valliere laid no
stress, but to exclaim against the conduct of mademoiselle de Choiseul, who, in
order to force herself into a family and property to which he protested she had
no right, scrupled not to stigmatize as an adultress, a woman of the most
unimpeached and respectable character; and to disturb, with an odious calumny,
the ashes of her from whom she pretended to derive her being.

But it was necessary, that, instead of idle declamation, the duke de la
Valliere should bring proof that his sister, the duchess de Choiseul, did not
bring forth a child at the time this daughter was supposed to be born; or that,
if she did, this was not the person. Totally failing in those proofs, an arret
passed in the great chamber, by a majority of twenty-two voices against nine,
permitting mademoiselle de Choiseul to prove to the court all the points her
counsel had alleged. The whole power and interest of the duke de La Valliere
and his friends were exerted to prevent this arret from being carried into
execution.

They tried to prevail on the king to annihilate the whole proceeding, by an
act of arbitrary power; but the affair being laid before the council of state,
the arret was confirmed. -- In consequence of all the proofs being examined,
sentence was given, in June 1726, whereby Augustina-Frances de Choiseul was
fully established and maintained in her claim; and was declared to be the
daughter of Augustus de Choiseul, duke and peer of France, and of his wife,
Louisa Gabriella de la Beaume le Blanc de la Valliere; and all parties were
forbidden, either by a renewal of the suit, or in any way whatever to trouble
her.

Mademoiselle de Choiseul, whose health had always been extremely delicate, had
suffered such agitation of spirits during this long and expensive contest, as
greatly to impair it. When the suit, at some period of its progress, took a
turn which made her friends tremble for her success, she fainted, and was
carried out of court totally insensible. And to the anxiety of her mind it may
be imputed, that she enjoyed her good fortune only a very short time. She had
hardly been possessed of her rank eighteen months, when she fell into a
decline, and died, as both her sisters had done, unmarried, and under thirty.

The influence of avarice appears very strong in this history. The duke de la
Valliere undoubtedly knew that mademoiselle de Choiseul was his niece; yet he
could not determine to acknowledge her, when a restitution of her fortune was
in question the same cruel self-interest prevailed with madame de Tournon. It
must however be allowed, that the circumstances of the birth, and mysterious
manner in which the marchioness d'Haut^^rt, the friend of the duchess de
Choiseul, ^^^cated her daughter, had a very unfavourable appearance; yet as so
little is known of the character of the duke her husband, and that little does,
not place it in a very advantageous light, it was perhaps owing to his
capricious or suspicious temper, that they were constrained to adopt measures
injurious to the reputation of the duchess, and fatal to the interest of her
daughter.

The cause is related at great length by Guyot de Pitaval; but this abridgment
is taken from the edition of Les Causes Celebres, by Richer, in which it
occupies two hundred and twenty pages, containing many circumstances
unnecessary or improper to be here related.

RENEE CORBEAU.
A YOUNG man, native of Seez in Normandy, of noble parents, studied the law at
Angers. He there saw Renee Corbeau, the daughter of a tradesman of the town,
and under a promise of marriage seduced her. Her situation was soon such as
made it necessary to acquaint her parents with her engagement; who sought for
means to oblige her lover to perform those promises which had induced Renee to
listen to him.

Doubting that he would, if possible, evade them, the parents thought it might
be necessary to employ artifice. They therefore pretended to take a journey;
and, as soon as they believed the lovers were together, returned suddenly upon
them, and, reproaching the young man with having seduced their daughter,
insisted on his instantly making the only reparation in his power, by signing a
contract of marriage, with which a notary was prepared, who was ready in the
house. The young man signed the deed; but, feeling himself unworthily treated,
in being thus surprised into an engagement which he had never refused to
perform, he went immediately to his father, to whom he related all that had
happened. The father, yet more enraged than the son, persuaded him to take
priest's orders, as the only way to avoid completing a marriage so
dishonorable and so contrary to his interest; and this advice he hastily
embraced. The unfortunate girl, thus abandoned by her faithless lover,
commenced, together with her parents, a suit against him for seduction. He was
in consequence arrested, and the affair was brought before the parliament of
Paris.

The sentence, after long pleading on both sides, was, that the young man,
should either marry Renee Corbeau, or be beheaded: as his being a priest made
the former impossible, he was to suffer death.

He was delivered to the executioner; the fatal moment was at hand, and the
priest attended to perform the last duties -- when Renee Corbeau flew to the
place where his judges were yet sitting, and, making her way through the crowd,
besought permission to speak; and a moment's suspension of the dreadful
punishment about to be inflicted on her lover.

The judges, struck with her beauty and distress, consented to hear her and
with the simple and affecting eloquence of nature she plead (...) for his life.
She represent that they undoubtedly thought her more unhappy than guilty, since
they punished with death him who was supposed to have betrayed her; but that
such a sentence, far from repairing her misfortune, would render it
irreparable, by taking from her the only person who could restore her honor;
and, instead of doing her justice, would condemn her to tears and remorse for
the rest of her life; and would leave her to endless regret, when she
reflected, that her fatal love had been the occasion of his death, for whom
only she wished to live.

She besought those among her judges, who had ever been sensible of the force
of love, to put themselves for a moment in her situation, and to reflect what
they would themselves suffer, were they to be deprived of the object of their
affection, by a cruel death, and to know themselves the occasion of it; -- for
it is said she, I who have armed the iron hand of law against him -- it is I who
am his executioner -- and it is I who, infinitely more unhappy then he is, am
condemned to exist under infamy, and to carry with me to the grave the dreadful
reflection of having murdered him by the excess of my attachment.

Though the holy orders, into which he had entered, prevented his marrying her,
she represented that they had been compulsive, and made only through fear of a
violent and imperious father: but that a dispensation might be obtained to
dissolve them. She therefore implored the judges to suspend the execution of
the sentence for a time, that her lover might take measures to annul his
religious vows, and become her husband.

The court, affected by her tears and despair, were induced to grant a respite,
for six months; and, as a legate from the pope was then expected in France, she
flattered herself she should obtain from him, permission for her lover to
renounce the ecclesiastical habit and marry her.

But the cardinal de Medicis, who was the legate that soon after arrived, was
so irritated against the young man, for having sacrilegiously embraced holy
orders, only to evade an engagement which his honor and his conscience, as
well as every human law, urged him to fulfill, that he absolutely refused to
grant the dispensation; and the unhappy Renee Corbeau was again driven to
despair. -- Henry the fourth, that excellent monarch, was then on the throne;
his ears were ever open to the complaints of his subjects, and when youth and
beauty pleaded, there was little doubt of redress from his compassion, though
his justice was silent. Renee Corbeau threw herself at the king's feet, and the
king, interested by her figure and situation, very soon suffered himself to be
prevailed upon. He ordered that a dispensation might be granted; it was
immediately expedited, and the lover thus snatched from impending destruction,
was married to his mistress. They lived together many years in the most perfect
union: the husband always remembering, with the tenderest gratitude, that he
owed his life, and the honor of his family, to the affection and attachment of
his wife.

FINIS.
CONTENTS.
I. The Marchioness de Gange. 7 II. The Deserted Daughter. 53 III. La
Pivardiere. 69 IV. The Contested Marriage. 84 V. The Beggar of Vernon. 108 VI.
The Count de St. Geran. 126 VII. Madame Tiquet. 164 VIII. Anglade. 184 IX. The
Pretended Martin Guerre. 202 X. The Married Nun. 222 XI. The Marriage of the
Duke of Guise. 239 XII. The Chevalier de Morsan. 254 XIII. James Le Brun. 277
XIV. Mademoiselle de Choiseul. 310 XV. Renee Carbeau. 329

