A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT HEBRON, AT THE CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4th, 1799.

BY CYPRIAN STRONG, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN CHATHAM.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1799.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
DEUTERONOMY iv.34. OR has God assayed to go and take him a nation from the
midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war,
and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors,
according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt, before your eyes?


GREAT and interesting events have ever been considered, as meriting a
particular memorial. It has not been uncommon, to perpetuate such a memorial,
by the institution and observation of annual rites and festivals. -- The
messengers which God sent to the Hebrews, his ancient covenant people, very
frequently called their attention, to great and signal national events; as
appears from the sacred writings. How frequently did they recapitulate, the
various deliverances which that people had experienced? A recollection of such
events was considered, as being eminently calculated to solemnize the minds of
the people, and to render them sensible of their obligations to Jehovah. This
is without doubt, the use which is to be made of the signal interpositions of
Divine Providence, in favor of a people.

ALTHOUGH the propriety of joy and festivity, at the remembrance of great and
interesting events, cannot be questioned; yet, it is a truth ever to be
insisted on, that, on such occasions, our hearts should be above all, impressed
with a sense of the agency of God, and our indebtedness to his bounty and
liberality.

THE Independence of the United States of America, or their transition from
being a distant and dependant branch of the British Empire, to a state of
absolute independence, and being admitted to rank with the nations of the
earth, is an epoch of such importance, as has obtained an annual celebration in
the various capitals, and in a multitude of less conspicuous towns, throughout
the United States.

IN a commemoration of this great event, we seem to be more than countenanced
by the inspired writings. Though it may be and probably is true, that the
seasons which have been consecrated to that design, have been too much absorbed
in such mirth and gaiety as have not been sufficiently regulated by religious
views and considerations.

IN the passage of scripture which has been read, you observe, that Moses calls
up the attention of the Hebrews, to the important period and event of their
being formed into a distinct nation -- taken out of the midst of another
nation, by great temptations, (or trials) by signs, by wonders, by war, by a
mighty hand, and by an outstretched arm. There is, in this, an undoubted
reference to the deliverance of the Israelites, from Egyptian bondage, under
which they had groaned for a long time; and their being made a distinct and
independent people, no longer subject to the control and mandates of an
Egyptian king. Moses lays a particular emphasis on this, as being a very
singular event, which claimed a particular remembrance, and demanded the
highest admiration. Has God assayed to go and take him a nation, from the
midst of another nation, according to all that the Lord thy God did for you in
Egypt! etc. As if he had said, this is a strange and memorable event; -- an
event which ought so to impress you minds, as never to be forgotten by you.

IN the American revolution, we have a repetition of the same wonderful
interposition of Divine Providence. Although the colonies, which now compose
the United States, were at a distance from the seat of the British government,
yet I need not inform this audience, that we were considered as being under its
control; and the British parliament claimed a right to make laws for the
colonies, which were binding, in all cases whatsoever. And it is well known,
that they extended their authority so far, as to tax us at pleasure, for the
purpose of raising a revenue. It is very true, that we were not reduced into a
state of such complete bondage as the Israelites were in Egypt; yet, it is
equally true, that a principle was advanced, by the British parliament, which,
if pursued to its full length, must have terminated, in the same servitude and
ignominious bondage. -- It was that principle which alarmed the fears and
aroused the apprehensions of the people. It was a view of its consequences, and
a determination never to submit to them, that called forth the patriots of
America to arms, and supported them in the arduous conflicts which ensued. It
was at this time, and under circumstances so similar in kind, to those of the
Israelites in Egypt, when they were taken to be a nation, that the Supreme
Being took the United States, and raised them up to a state of independence.
And, as the Egyptian nation, from out of which God took the Hebrews was great
and powerful, so it was as to the nation from which the United States were
taken. -- The resources of Great Britain were astonishingly great -- her navy
rendered her mistress of the seas, and the most powerful nations on earth,
trembled at her military prowess.

OUR deliverance and national independence took place, like that of the
Hebrews, by temptations, by signs, by wonders, by war, by a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm. The conflicts which were endured were unspeakably great --
the wonderful interpositions of providence were numerous and singular. The
event is of so late a date, that the various occurrences which took place are
now fresh in your memories, and need not an enumeration.

IN the case of the Hebrews, God qualified and raised up Moses, as the leader
of his people; whose wisdom and integrity, under the direction of Jehovah,
conducted the Hebrews, through the stormy period of their national birth. In
like manner, God raised up a WASHINGTON, whose memory will always be precious
to the friends of the revolution; and qualified him, as a leader and commander
of the American armies, through the bloody and arduous contest for national
independence.

THE birth of nations is an event, which Moses the leader of God's ancient
covenant people considered, as being worthy of a commemoration. We at once see
it to be such, as the Hebrews are respected. Their deliverance from the hand of
Pharaoh, and being put into the enjoyment of liberty and national independence,
was considered as an event of such a magnitude, as to be commemorated from
generation to generation. The design of the institution of the passover was, to
commemorate this great and interesting event. Hence, this direction was given,
at the time of its institution. "And thou shall show thy son, in that day,
saying, this is done because of that which the Lord did unto me, when I came
forth out of Egypt. And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and
for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law may be in thy mouth; for, with
a strong hand, has the Lord brought thee out of Egypt. Thou shall, therefore,
keep this ordinance from year to year." Whoever takes a view of the revolution
which has terminated in the independence of the United States, will see the
same reason, in kind, why its citizens should perpetuate the memory of that
important event.

AS to American Independence, it became an obobject of consequence, at the very
time in which it took place. It is very probable, indeed, that in any future
period, it would not have been brought about. America, at the time of the
commencement of the revolution, had become an object of such consequence, that
it provoked the jealousy and tempted the rapacity of the mother country. It was
then that Great Britain thought it safe, to assert those claims, which she
meant ever after, to make the rule of her administrations. It was then, that
the weakness, pusillanimity, and dependant feelings of the Americans were
thought to be such, as would induce them to admit the extraordinary claims of
the British parliament, and to give a convenient opportunity for establishing a
precedent, which would forever rivet the chains of slavery and secure the
subjection of the several colonies. -- But that time, which was considered as
so favorable to Great Britain, was the very time in which those claims ought to
have been made, had our particular interest been alone considered.

IT is true, indeed, that the numbers, strength, and experience of the
Americans were such, as in human view, were inadequate to a successful
resistance, when compared with the numbers, strength, and experience of
Great Britain; yet, perhaps, no time could have been more favorable. At that
time, the minds of Americans were in full vigor. They were not depressed by
habitual slavery. It is probable, they would never have had the same
sensibility, and been fired with the same zeal and intrepidity, in defense of
their natural rights in any future period. They would, in all probability, have
been less united, and consequently more feeble in resisting such claims, had
they been more gradually introduced, or delayed but for a few years. -- The
attack was made, when the Americans had just arrived to a state of such
maturity, as most sensibly to feel for independence.

THERE are a few, who, at this time in the day, affect to believe, that it
would have been as well, if not better, if America had still continued in a
state of dependence on Great Britain. But must not the minds of such be greatly
misinformed, relative to the state of the two countries; and the policy which
would certainly dictate the measures of Great Britain? -- Had she not claimed
such powers, as if exercised, must forever drain America, of all the profits
which arise from commerce and industry? Had she a right to tax us at pleasure,
without our consent; and would she have been wanting in putting the plenitude
of her power into exercise? Was she not loaded with a most enormous debt -- a
debt which would be uniformly increasing, and would ever afford a pretext for
the most wanton and extravagant exercise of such power? And would it not be
always found, extremely convenient, to alleviate her own burdens by increasing
the burdens of Americans?

INDEPENDENCE was not only important in its nature, but the time when it was
declared was of all periods the most advantageous; as it was a time, when we
were better united for such a struggle, and were disposed to make a more manly
and obstinate resistance to external acts of oppression, than, perhaps, at any
other period.

THE advantages arising to us, from a state of independence appear, not merely
in our having escaped the miseries and calamities arising from being subjected
to a foreign administration, which must ever have made it an object to drain us
of our wealth and to keep us in a state of servility; but, also, in our having
it in our power to regulate our own concerns -- to take the advantages arising
from our own industry and commerce -- to nourish and cherish internal peace,
without being necessitated to embroil ourselves in the quarrels, and to suffer
from the enemies of other nations.

OUR independence merits a most grateful memorial on account of the many great
and distinguishing interpositions of Divine Providence in the establishment of
it. I barely mention this, as time will not permit me, so much as to name the
many singular interpositions of providence of this nature. Besides, it is
presumed they must occur to many of your minds on the slightest recollection.

I PROCEED, therefore, to observe further, that our national independence
deserves to be had in remembrance, on account of the excellent civil
constitution which has been bestowed on us. Of all the civil constitutions
which have been formed by the wisdom of man, perhaps, no one has ever been
adopted, which is so well calculated to render a people prosperous and happy,
as that of the United States. -- A constitution, which, on the one hand,
secures so much liberty to the subject, and at the same time contains such
energy, and provides such powerful checks against abuses of every kind. The
constitution of Great Britain has been much admired and loaded with encomiums,
as the constituted powers contained in it, are so equally balanced and guarded.
But, after admitting every thing which can be fairly said of the English
constitution, it is presumed, the wisdom which dictated that of the United
States must be far superior. The checks which it provides against abuses and
usurpations, are much more extensive and effectual, than can be pretended in
the former case. There is, indeed, in the constituent parts of them, a great
similarity. By the British constitution, there are three distinct branches in
the national legislature; as King, Lords, and Commons. In the national
legislature of the United States, there are the same distinct branches, the
President, Senate, and Representatives. But in the former, the King and the
Lords are hereditary and entirely independent. By the constitution of the
United States, on the contrary, every branch of our national legislature is
elective. The men who compose them can be in office, but for a short time,
without being re-elected. Each branch of the legislature is under the influence
of the strongest checks, and holden by the most forcible ties to faithfulness.
Their reign is so temporary, as that the opportunity to form and execute
schemes of corruption is very limited. The natural propensity of the human
mind, to distinction and eminence, will form a powerful check against such
measures as are injurious to the people; and will impel to such as are
calculated to secure and promote their real interests. As long as the people of
the United States are well informed and virtuous, so long they will be free,
and their government uncorrupted. It is in their power, to remedy the evils,
arising from having wicked and designing men at the head of government -- they
can lift up and pull down at pleasure. If government be not wisely
administered, the fault must be in the people; for the frequent election of
every branch of the national legislature, if wisely executed, is a sufficient
remedy to all the mischiefs arising from a corrupt administration. In this
respect, our national constitution stands gloriously distinguished from that of
Great Britain; and, American liberty is more extensive, and much better secured
than that of the English. Besides, should experience point out any necessary
alterations, they may be made, with as much facility as the safety of the
community will admit. This is one consideration which renders our independence
eminently worthy of a most joyful commemoration.

THE peace and happiness, which the people of the United States have enjoyed,
further shows, why we should joyfully commemorate the era of our national
independence.

REPUBLICAN governments have generally, if not universally, been stormy and
tempestuous. This observation is justified, by the history of former republics.
And there is a sufficient cause for it. Where a government is free and
elections frequent, there is abundant opportunity for demagogues to practice
their arts on electors -- to raise cabals -- sow the seeds of dissentions, and
to keep the public mind in a state of fermentation. But, the United States,
since the establishment of their independence, have been, on the whole, the
most happy people -- have enjoyed the greatest share of national happiness,
which has ever been experienced by the nations of the earth. Some little
convulsions have formerly risen, but our government, although so favorable to
liberty, has, still, sufficient energy to put a period to them.

FROM the time of the establishment of our national government, till the
commencement of hostilities, between rival nations in Europe, union and
harmony, peace and friendship have extended through the nation; and every tide
has brought in our ships, laden with the riches of foreign climes.

SINCE that period, our internal peace has been, to a considerable degree
interrupted. This, however, has not originated from any defect in our national
government. Foreign politics and intrigues -- the dissemination of principles,
which are unfriendly to morality and every kind of government that has force
and energy, have been the origin of our national divisions. It is not indeed,
unnatural to suppose, that the attachments and antipathies, which existed in
the minds of the citizens of the United States, should have produced a
temporary division. The minds of the people having been irritated, at the
violent measures which had been taken by Great Britain, and having, in a time
of distress, experienced the aid of France her competitor; and, besides,
considering the avowed pretensions of France in favor of human liberty, it is
not very surprising, that some, in the ardor of enthusiasm, should have
nourished a partiality in her favor. But, since, in the progress of events, it
has become so obvious, that her governing maxim has been, to " divide and
conquer" -- to separate people from their government; and have laid the ax at
the root of religion and morality, as well as to all kinds of government,
republican and monarchical, it is high time to beware -- to turn our attention
to the support of our own government, and to combine our whole force in its
defense. There is now so much light, concerning the principles and object of
the French administration, that an advocate for it, can hardly be considered,
in a more favorable point of light, than as being an enemy to all government
and order, both civil and religious.

THE evils we have experienced, as has been observed, have arisen from external
circumstances and measures; not from the nature and constitution of our own
government. While the attention of the citizens of the United States was
confined, to their own affairs and internal concerns, they were eminently
prosperous and happy. And it is presumed, their happiness would have been
continued to this day, had they not listened to foreign intrigues; and could
have been pleased, with a government which had energy, as well as a regard to
equal and rational liberty.

ANOTHER consideration, which further illustrates the propriety of
commemorating our national independence is, the advantages we are now under to
be a happy and prosperous people. It is true, there is no government however
wisely constituted and administered, but what may be inadequate to the purpose
of rendering a people happy. Such may be the jealousies and biasses, lusts and
passions of men, that nothing can render them happy; -- the best measures and
most direct means may be baffled, by the unreasonable prejudices and passions
of men. Nevertheless, in the United States, we have the fairest chance for
happiness, arising from our situation, natural advantages and civil
constitution, of all people in the world; if we are only faithful to cultivate
and improve them.

THE enlargement of territory, can never be an object of pursuit, if our
desires are kept within the limits of moderation. The extent of the United
States is sufficient, to render them one of the greatest nations on earth.
Their natural advantages and resources, taking into consideration, all those
articles which are necessary for support and defense are equalled, perhaps, by
no nation in the world. The necessaries of life are produced in great plenty.
The articles which are necessary for defense -- such as for naval equipments --
all the implements of war, including arms and ammunition, are within our reach,
without having recourse to distant countries.

SUCH is our civil constitution, that the security of liberty, property and
every natural right, is left at the election of the people; so far as will
consist with a proper degree of energy in government. Our rulers, or those who
stand at the head of our national government, will be just such men as we are
pleased to elect. -- That we have and ever shall have, men of talents and
abilities to legislate and govern, we have no reason to doubt. And it will be
our own fault, if we have not such men at helm. Our danger arises from sloth
and inattention on one hand, and from prejudices and lusts on the other. It is
in the power of the people, to have just such men and just such an
administration as they please. If electors are without information, and will
give in their suffrages at random -- if they will suffer themselves to be
wheedled by designing men and artful demagogues, they may forge their own
chains and rivet them. But, it is in their power, with proper care, to secure
to themselves a government and administration, which will render them
prosperous and happy. And, what further can we expect or desire?

FINALLY; I would just observe, as another reason for the annual commemoration
of our national independence, that it exhibits to the world, a public evidence
and testimony, that the people do approve of their own government, and will
unite in the support and defense of it. -- The establishment of such an idea,
is of great importance at all times, and especially at the present time. It is
a fact, which cannot be reasonably doubted, that the hostile measures which the
French Directory have been pursuing, relative to the United States, have been
grounded on a presumption, that we are a divided people -- that there is a
prevailing opposition to our own government. Indeed, we can hardly be
surprised, that such conclusions should be formed; for it has certainly been
the principal business, of some distinguished characters, to foment and
increase divisions -- to disaffect the minds of people and to blow the trumpet
of sedition. -- As the hostile measures of France, have proceeded from such an
apprehension, it becomes important, that we manifest, in every proper way, our
attachment to our own government, and pursue every measure, which will evidence
our union, and exhibit a determination to support it. And, the annual
commemoration of our independence, is one way, in which our attachment to our
own government may be properly manifested. It is true, that men, who are
disaffected and are under the influence of Jacobinic principles, may unite in
such a celebration, merely as a cloak, to secure themselves from the
resentments of the true friends of government. But, such hypocritical conduct,
is founded on the idea, that such a commemoration of our independence, carries
the appearance of union and friendship to government. -- As all the hopes of
France, which is the only nation that, at present, is disposed to make war upon
us, are grounded on a supposed existence of a prevailing dissatisfaction to our
government, so it is important, that we unite in giving every testimony of our
approbation of it and determination to support it.

I SHALL now close, with a remark or two, arising from the foregoing
observations.

FIRST. It becomes us, on this anniversary, to offer to the Supreme Being, our
most fervent and devout acknowledgments.

I PRESUME, I am speaking to an audience, which consists of such persons, as
believe in a universal providence; or, that God has the disposal of all events.
The sacred scriptures teach us, with great explicitness, that the agency of God
is concerned, in the rise and fall of nations. Moses, when speaking of the
deliverance of the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, and their being made an
independent nation, ascribes it to the agency of God. -- The disposing hand of
God is as visible, in taking the United States, "from the midst of another
nation," and raising them to a state of independence, as it was in the case of
the Israelites! It is true, that nothing of a miraculous nature occurred; yet
the hand of God was as visible in the American revolution, as in the other
case. No human calculations could have ascertained, the result of the conflict,
between Great Britain and the colonies, which now compose the United States.
These observations might be illustrated, by having recourse to many facts,
which are now fresh in the memories of the elder part of this audience. -- But
omitting them, we are taught, from the sacred scriptures, to view such events,
as the effect of God's providential government. We ought, therefore, in a
solemn and religious manner, to acknowledge God, and ascribe the glory of all
our deliverances to him.

AS to the great revolution, which took place relative to the Israelites, in
raising them from a state of servitude to independence, Moses observes, in the
words after our text, "Unto thee it was showed, that thou might know, that
the Lord he is God; there is none else besides him. Out of heaven he made thee
to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee." -- Let us then, on this
occasion, make our devout and religious acknowledgments to God. Let us
acknowledge his agency and disposing hand. While we rejoice, let it be
ultimately in God. May our joy be of a religious nature.

GOD has some great and important designs in the event, which has made such a
revolution in American affairs, besides raising us to consideration among
earthly kingdoms. He is constantly prosecuting, his great and glorious
purposes. Let us give glory to him, and ascribe to him all power. Let us ever
feel our dependence upon him; and esteem his favor to be life and his loving
kindness to be better than life.

FINALLY; Let us unite in the defense of our national independence and
government.

OUR independence is a rich and inestimable inheritance, which the Supreme
Governor of the world has bequeathed to us; and it has been secured, not only
at the expense of great treasure, but of much blood. Our national constitution
and government, are eminently calculated, to render us singularly happy. They
are founded on the wisdom and experience of ages; and may still be amended, if,
on trial, they are found to be deficient. It is true, the government of the
United States has energy; and it is one of the most idle dreams, which ever
entered the head of the most extravagant enthusiast, that a government, without
energy, would ever answer the purposes of society.

THE professed respect, which is paid to our national independence, by the
annual celebration of the day, on which, the Congress of the United States had
the fortitude and heroism to make the declaration, is an implicit
acknowledgment of its importance and of our determination to defend it.

THAT attempts have been made, to alienate the minds of the citizens of the
United States, from the general government -- That the demoralizing and
disorganizing sentiments, which have spread over so great a part of Europe, and
proved so destructive to the human race, have been disseminated in these
States, and the most assiduous attempts made to foment divisions and raise
cabals, against the general government, will not admit of a rational doubt.
Divide and conquer, has been the object, which has been invariably pursued, by
the French government. Whoever attends to their professions and arrets,
respecting the United States, and compares them with the measures which were
pursued with Switzerland, and terminated in the destruction of the Helvetic
Union, will see their perfect similarity; till their progress was arrested, by
the manly measures which have been taken by our general government, for the
defense and security of our independence. Take a critical view of the measures,
which were adopted and invariably pursued, by the French Directory, and which
issued in the ruin of Switzerland, as represented in the history of Mallet Du
Pan, and you will see, we have a loud call to set up a double watch, and to
summon up the most invincible resolution, in support of our independence. Our
great object ought to be, to strengthen and support our own government, and it
is our wisdom, to have nothing to do with the politics of other nations,
further than is necessary, to prepare and qualify us, to defend and support our
national interests.

TO say that there are no errors of any kind, discoverable in our national
administration, would imply that we have something more than men at the head of
it. Especially, if men of anti-federal and jacobinical principles could not
trump up something of that nature, which might appear plausible, and would be
swallowed both by ignorant and designing men, it would be mavelous indeed!

BUT, my fellow-citizens, since so fair an inheritance is given us, by the
beneficent Ruler of the Universe, after making due acknowledgments to him, let
us resolve to defend it -- to be good subjects and good citizens. Let us
resolutely support the government and constitution of our own choice. Let us
guard against the principles of modern philosophy, discountenance the intrigues
and designs which come from abroad; and the efforts of designing men within our
own bosom. -- Let that patriotism, which manifests itself in supporting the
measures of our own government, be cultivated and strengthened. But, let that
mock patriotism, which advocates foreign measures, concerted to divide and
weaken us, and which, under a specious zeal for liberty, is forever carping for
faults in our own government, be reprobated as the greatest fiend to peace and
order.

IN every possible way, let the bands of order and good government be
strengthened. -- Let the principles of our constitution be preserved inviolate.
-- Let men of integrity and firmness, the friends of our independence, be the
men on whom your eyes are fixed, as candidates for office. -- May the hearts of
the citizens, in the various branches and districts of the United States, be
united and cemented; and may the intrigues of designing men be totally
disconcerted. May our independence be maintained, and our children and
children's children, as they shall come upon the stage, have occasion to
commemorate it, till time shall be no more. AMEN.


