SOME ACCOUNT OF THE CONVINCEMENT, AND RELIGIOUS PROGRESS OF JOHN SPALDING;
LATE OF READING. WITH HIS REASONS FOR LEAVING THE NATIONAL ESTABLISHED MODE OF
WORSHIP.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BENJAMIN and JACOB JOHNSON, NO. 147, HIGH STREET.
1799.

The following brief memorial, of the experience of a deeply devoted mind, is
deemed worthy of public notice, as an additional testimony to "the cloud of
witnesses," we are already favored with, to the internal efficacy of the power
and principle of Truth. The writer was a valuable example of Solomon's
observation, "Honorable age is not that which stands in length of time; nor
that is measured by number of years: but wisdom is gray hairs unto men; and an
unspotted life is old age:" being remarkably distinguished by a steady, uniform
devotion, and dedication of heart to the pure cause of Truth and Righteousness
on the earth; which he believed himself called to maintain, and to endeavor to
promote by example and precept. His memory is therefore very precious; in
particular to some who had an intimate acquaintance with him. To these more
emphatically, "he being dead yet speaks," in the remembrance of his solid,
wise deportment, his fewness of words, and those seasoned with grace; and his
steady firmness toward opposers of principles and testimonies, which he had
not taken upon trust, but deeply examined their foundation, nature and
tendency; and being baptized under a living concern to support them, as before
observed, he dared not flinch in the day of battle, but both in that society of
which he became a member, and also amongst others, he was deeply and awfully
engaged to stand his ground in the divine ability afforded, and to exhibit an
example of ancient simplicity and uprightness; as he observed to a friend in
one of his letters, some months before his decease. After pointing out his
great concern in observing the declensions amongst a highly professing and
eminently favored people, and making various remarks on the importance of
preserving as a wall of defense, the religious discipline established among
them, and not giving way to weakness, in order to maintain a specious, merely
external unity, and by being indifferent toward those noble testimonies which
his soul loved, and was uncommonly bound to: he firmly, yet humbly, added, "O
my friend, excuse my freedom; the cause of truth I have to believe, though with
a due proportion of fear I would express it, is so deeply impressed upon my
mind, that neither the fear nor the love of any created being or thing, can be
permitted to obstruct or divert me from what may appear to be required of me."
In a great degree in this firmness he lived, bearing much opposition, and the
cross* as related in the following memorial; and yet more particularly known to
some who were acquainted with him; and thus firmly he died in great stability
and peace, having little to say, but that little was truly much in a small
compass, expressed at different times to a few friends who visited him near his
end: some of whom were also with him just at the solemn period: and though in
the midst of mourning, were joyful witnesses and partakers of that solemnity
and peace, which proved as a seal to the deep concern, exercise, and happy
close of the dear deceased. He was ill about three weeks of a fever; and in the
forepart of his illness expressed to a friend who visited him, "that there was
no cause of discouragement to the right minded." Being asked at another time if
he had any thing in particular to express to friends, he replied, "No; only my
love: all is well: nothing stands in my way." And thus he peacefully laid down
his life, in the 30th year of his age, the 30th of the 1st. Month, 1795.

SOME ACCOUNT, etc.
I SHALL pass over the early part of my life, only observing I had been
educated in a religious way. I mention this, as at times, when I lived in
London, where I served an apprenticeship, in the midst of my dissipation, I
frequently felt the reproofs of the Lord in mine heart, but which were soon
smothered in the vortex of pleasure. After I had served my apprenticeship, I
returned into the country to assist my father in his business of a farrier, at
Reading, in the year 1786. A little time afterward, as I attended the parish
church so called, where a celebrated preacher officiated, I found an awakening
power, which produced not a little alteration in me. I more constantly attended
the services, public and private; joined the more particular professors, and
went on for several years as one of them. I also abstained from vain company
and conversation which I had before been addicted to, so that I was one of the
chief professors; but I found a gradual wearing off of the force of the
impressions I had received; less dislike to worldly company; and the power of
sin gaining the ascendency; that I at times felt much uneasiness; particularly
as, on serious reflection I felt the strength of my lusts and passions, and the
evil propensities of my nature unsubdued; notwithstanding my knowledge of the
truths of the gospel, and the profession I made: and observing and conversing
with my fellow professors. I found the same great anxiety of mind, and
breathings to the Lord, that he would make me indeed what I professed to be;
and what I was persuaded by the scriptures of truth, a true Christian might be:
that is, free from the power, as well as the guilt of sin. Thus I went on till
about the year 1792, often feeling the dominion of sin, and, desiring
deliverance from it; when I was led to consider the people called Quakers, and
was soon satisfied there was a manifest difference between them and others,
even in outward appearance, which when I considered, I was convinced was more
conformable to christianity than any others I had known; most of whom followed
all the fashions of the world, particularly in dress; an inconsistency I
frequently observed with much concern. I then sought the conversation of some
of them, and still found more simplicity, more like the precepts and practices
of Christ and his Apostles, that I desired to know the principles from which
such superior practices resulted, and enquired for some of their writings. The
first book I think that I read, was W. Penn's No Cross No Crown, which much
tendered my spirit, and removed some unfavourable opinions I had received
respecting Friends. I then in some measure saw how far what I had known before
fell short of what that work directed to; yet I continued attending at the
parish place of worship; having the most favorable opinion of the minister
there, and a particular esteem for him, as a man who also frequently professed
a particular affection toward me. Once I remember, when I had so far deviated
from my profession, as to go to a horse-race, he sent for me, and kindly
admonished me as a friend and overseer. I mention this, as afterward, when it
pleased the Lord to enlighten my mind more clearly, and convince me of the
necessity of leaving the form of worship I had been accustomed to, it was a
sore trial to me to leave him, in a manner that I apprehended he would feel not
a little concerned about. The next book I read I think was Barclay's Apology,
which opened many things so clearly to me, that I could not but consent to
them; nevertheless there were some things that at first reading I could not
assent to, particularly respecting public worship. I thought it needful there
should be a time appointed, and somebody ready to officiate, that the ignorant
might be instructed: and that a man, taught as I apprehended, of the Lord, and
properly qualified, might at any time exhort or preach to the people. I still
attended the old place, going occasionally to friends meetings on any
particular occasions, when some strangers were expected; whose testimonies,
though I could not but approve of them, yet were not able to draw me from my
former society; but I found the work of the Lord going on by degrees.

At first, I think, I considered the ordinance of the Lord's supper, as it is
called, and was sensible I had never found any profit in it, from the beginning
of my partaking of it; and though I had often heard others speak very highly of
it, as finding particular and extraordinary comfort and benefit in it; and I
often at the time earnestly desired to find the benefit of it as well as
others; yet it still remained a dead, unprofitable service: I therefore
declined it entirely. The next thing I think I observed, was the public
singing. I began to see a great inconsistency in that practice, particularly
after sermon. I could feel it had in myself as well as in others, a manifest
tendency to lightness of spirit, and removing any serious impressions which
might have been received from the foregoing discourse; that I soon left the
place, immediately after sermon was ended. It was not long however before I saw
a gross inconsistency in the practice altogether, when I weightily considered
the matter contained in what was sung, how impossible it was for a congregation
of different kinds of people to join in singing whatever might be given out,
whether suitable to their conditions or not; much of which, I was persuaded,
could not be said by any, without uttering gross falsehoods; which I could not
believe could be acceptable in the sight of the Lord. I was in consequence
constrained to give forth some observations on the subject in writing,
addressed to the professors of religion, attending the place called St. Gile's
Church.

"A few observations concerning the custom of singing in public meetings of
worship; by one, who has long been convinced of the inconsistency of it, and
now calls upon every one who professes to be a follower of the meek and lowly
Jesus, to lay aside prejudice, and seriously consider the following remarks,
which are offered in the fear of the Lord."

"First, It ought ever to be considered, that God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth In other words, it is the
language of the heart which he regards, not words, however excellent of
themselves. Now I appeal to the witness of God in every heart, considering the
variety of conditions, the different subjects, of praise, adoration,
confession, petitioning, etc. etc. contained in every collection, whether in
the fear of the Lord any one, in whatever state or condition he may be at the
time, can with propriety be ready to sing whatever may be given out. It appears
to me impossible that a whole congregation (even if we except the ignorent) can
be in the same frame of mind, considering the various dispensations of the
Lord's providence toward his people; consequently if that is not the case, it
follows of course, that if all sing, some must utter words with the mouth
contrary to the language of the heart, which so far from being acceptable to
the Lord, I am persuaded is hypocrisy and an abomination in his sight."

"Again, it appears to me inconsistent also with regard to the other parts of
worship; for if the language of the heart is spoken in prayer, which often
precedes singing, and which implies a sense of our wants, does it not show an
indifference whether our prayers are heard and answered or not, to begin
singing immediately, perhaps very different in matter as well as in manner, to
what has been prayed for?"

"Again, after preaching, if the Lord's power is known and felt under the word,
is it not more likely to profit, if the mind is occupied in serious meditation,
than singing, which from my own experience, I can say, has a tendency to divert
the mind from solemn, serious reflection? I am now speaking more particularly
concerning those, who have attained to a measure of the grace of God. Ask
yourselves seriously. Is outward singing intended or calculated to please the
carnal ears of men, or a holy God? Why such anxiety about tunes, voices, and
music? Is the Lord to be pleased with such poor things? Oh, no; you cannot
suppose it. Consider from what root it springs, from the old man or the new;
and remember the axe is laid to the root, to destroy all that is of the earth,
of our fleshly nature. I have considered those passages in the New Testament,
where the subject is mentioned, and am confirmed by them in my opinion, of the
inconsistency of public singing. The apostle speaks of singing with grace in
the heart; of making melody in the heart to the Lord; not making a noise with
the tongue unless that proceeds from the heart; which how seldom it does in
public singing I appeal to every considerate mind."

"I am convinced in my own mind, considering our situation here, the power and
devices of the enemy, our own inbred corruptions, that it is more seasonable to
watch and pray, to be ever on our guard, and waiting to feel the light and
power of Christ, to discover and subdue the hidden things of darkness; that as
children of the light we may walk in the light, and find the blood of Jesus
Christ, his Spirit and Power, cleansing us from all sin; than evidencing that
trifling, careless spirit, too commonly, if not always, attending outward
singing."

"I could say much more against it, but would not be tedious, particularly
respecting those that are without. How seldom can such people, living in open
and avowed opposition to God, join in singing without uttering gross,
abominable lies: and are we not accessory thereto? Is it not expected when a
psalm or hymn is given out, all present who are capable will join? Then let it
not be said, how can we help the abuse of it. Ought we not rather to set them
an example of truth and righteousness, and not countenance any practice that
has a tendency to promote lightness and irreverence? Oh! my friends, this
cannot be acceptable to the Lord, who requires truth in the inward parts. I
recommend to your serious consideration, what the Lord says in the 1st of
Isaiah respecting the ordinances, of his own appointing, when not done in a
proper spirit. I perceive every day more and more, an evident departure from
the simplicity of Christ. Where is the daily cross borne? Observe the
appearance of professors. What difference is there from the world? Sure, my
friends, these things ought not to be. Bear with me, I beseech you. I am much
concerned for the honor of our profession. If the cross is truly borne, all
self-seeking and self-pleasing will be done away, and the fruits of the spirit
more evidenced; which I am persuaded will not be in the present practice of
public outward singing, often of words, as to the matter, scarce within the
bounds of probability: and I am convinced if people would seriously consider
the manner, it would appear very inconsistent with the gravity and solemnity of
the true Christian profession."

"May the Lord set these things home upon every heart, that there may be a
concern to offer unto him acceptable sacrifice; which more than once is said to
be a broken and contrite spirit."

"Blessed are ye that mourn," says Christ, (not ye that sing) "for ye shall
rejoice;" which rejoicing, if it may be applied to the present state of the
church here, I conceive to be a grateful sense of the Lord's mercies; and
showing forth his praises not only with our lips but in our lives. To conclude,
my friends, turn into your own hearts; behold, says Christ, the kingdom of God
is within you; look not without for what I am persuaded is only to be found
within. It is not much hearing or much speaking, that brings true peace to the
soul; the ear is never satisfied with hearing. As a proof of that, do not we
see professors running hither and thither, as though the more they heard, the
better they should be; encompassing themselves about with sparks of their own
kindling, but what says the Lord? "Ye shall lie down in sorrow." I am fully
convinced it is for want of this looking in, and waiting to feel the power of
the Lord there, judging and subduing sin, that there is so much talk, so much
outward parade, and so little spirituality in the lives and conversation of the
people." J. S.

This I sent to the clerk, at the same time I sent some reasons for the
apparent change in me, as absenting from the sacrament, so called; and which I
desired him to lay before the minister and others, at a prayer meeting; which
he seemed to object to, supposing me in an error, and having a very
unfavourable opinion of Friends principles. I soon after had some conversation
with him on the subject; which rather confirmed me in my opinion than
otherwise, his arguments appeared so weak against Friends. Thus I went on some
little time longer, still attending mornings and evenings; but attending
Friends meetings in the afternoon. About this time I read Sewel's History of
the Quakers, which I think removed every objection, and confirmed me in my
opinion of the truth of their principles. Their severe sufferings, their
patience under them, and honest boldness before kings and rulers, convinced me,
that nothing but a divine power could have supported them. I sought the company
of some faithful Friends, as I could discover in some I had been with, little
more than the form. I desired to know the power in myself, and to be truly
taught of the Lord, that I might not do any thing by imitation, or because
others did so; but retired often alone, to be instructed of the Lord, what to
do and what to leave; and, glory to his name, he was found of me, and made
those retirements precious and profitable to me, revealing his will unto me by
degrees, as I was able to bear it. I now became acquainted with some solid
Friends, and was occasionally in company with them, which excited the attention
of my friends and neighbors; so that there was much talk about me, and various
reports were propagated respecting it, most people thinking it very strange I
should turn Quaker.

About this time I met with a considerable trial, the death of my father whom I
dearly loved. I had long been persuaded in some measure of the vanity and
inconsistency of wearing black clothes on such occasions, knowing it to be only
a worldly custom: and had often said to myself during my father's illness, I
would not put it on for any one except him; but there appeared so many reasons
why I should conform on his account, that it was not till a little time before
his death, that it pleased the Lord to remove my scruples respecting it, and
strengthen me to bear such a public testimony, as of necessity that event
occasioned. And indeed much opposition I met with on account of it, but the
Lord supported me through all. I then constantly attended Friends meetings.

About this time also I was concerned to write an address to some who usually
met on first days, from different parts of the neighboring country, to hear
the minister, at a private house; where I had occasionally attended, with other
professors of the town. I also wrote to the clerk, and sent him No Cross, No
Crown; soon after Barclay's Apology: and to another intimate friend, who was
very zealous, I wrote and sent, Beavan's Primative Christianity restored. And
though I desired in what I wrote to individuals, as well as the society, that
it might be put about for the perusal of any; I found little notice taken by
any, I thought they seemed rather to avoid me. One steady experienced man, in a
little conversation, observing, he hoped I did not look for that in myself,
which was only to be found in Christ, I was concerned to write to him some
little time after on the subject; and sent him at the same time, No Cross, No
Crown. While I was exercised toward the society I had left, I met with some
more trials from other quarters; my relations complained of my silence, putting
unfavourable constructions upon it. Indeed I had so much upon my mind, that I
had little desire to speak much: for being often in my way of business with
people of consequence in the neighborhood, most of whom had always shown me
much attention and favor, now observing such a change, though only in dress at
first, they began to look rather strangely upon me. The enemy of souls was not
unmindful of my situation, and raised many difficulties in my way; as the loss
of their favors, and, of course, my business; the great offense my conforming
to other things not yet done would give them: such as the ceremony of the hat,
the language, and their titles so highly valued; these seemed indeed so great
discouragements, that my mind was at times sorely distressed.

I had some time felt an uneasiness respecting the performing some part of my
business, such as nicking and cropping horses, etc. punishing them for the sake
of appearance, to please the fancies of men. When I began to mention my
scruples, much opposition was made, as the consequence must of course be the
loss of much business. I know not whether I was not too hasty in this matter,
beginning in mine own strength, and not waiting the due time; for I found when
I was required to do it, I gave way, which brought trouble upon me; till at
last I was enabled to refuse several, among whom was one for whom I did much
business, who on my objecting and telling him my reasons, seemed very angry and
reproached my changing my religion, etc. He asked me to recommend some one to
do it, but I told him I could not recommend another to do what I thought not
right to do myself.

This event occasioned some uneasiness; I was blamed highly on the supposition
I should soon lose my business; but I answered in the words of our Lord,
"Except a man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my disciple." I saw more
and more how people could follow the ways, customs, and fashions of the world,
and use means not always the most honest to get its riches: so true is our
Lord's saying, "Where your treasure is there will your hearts be also." O! how
few really deny themselves and take up the cross.

About this time came the quarterly meeting of a society I helped to establish,
called The Sick Man's Visitor, to relieve the wants of those in distress,
conducted by the chief and most serious of the professors, a committee of whom
met every week to transact the business of it, and to hold a prayer meeting as
they called it, at the same time singing, reading, etc. Being the time I used
to serve on the committee, I took the opportunity to write to them, giving my
reasons why I could not join in the services performed at those times; also
something more respecting the principles, etc. of Friends, with what was upon
my mind besides; observing if any were desirous of more information on the
subject, or had any objections to propose respecting Friends principles, I was
willing to receive them.

Hitherto there had not been any material alteration in my dress, except what I
wore on first days; I still wearing a modern hat; but now I found it required
of me to make an alteration there; which, as it was more conspicuous than any I
had made, I found very trying; nature being unwilling to bear the cross; but it
pleased the Lord to strengthen me; and indeed it caused much gazing,
admiration, and ridicule, as I could perceive and hear, though little was said
directly to me, but the Lord preserved me, and I thought I found rather a
kindness of behavior among the more considerable of my neighbors when I
attended in the course of my business, particularly from the chief justice
Air, where I had apprehended not a little discouragement, but I found through
the mercy of my God, a very favorable intercourse. And here I may observe
respecting these things, I felt a little at a time required of me; and as I was
willing to give up, the Lord was pleased to afford me strength to be faithful
to him. Now I am aware these things, respecting dress, etc. are, in the eyes of
man's wisdom despised, and thought of no consequence: indeed of themselves, I
am persuaded they are of no consequence, or if done from a wrong motive may be
rather injurious than otherwise; yet when the Lord commands, it becomes his
creatures to obey, and not reason about it, whether it is of consequence or
not. When I felt a desire to reason about it, the example of Naaman the Syrian,
was brought to my remembrance. When the prophet ordered him to wash seven times
in Jordan, his pride and wisdom were offended; he wanted some great thing done,
somewhat pompous, and agreeable to the ideas of his worldly mind; and had not
his servants been wiser than their master, he might have continued in his
disease; but the event proved, how despicable soever the means appeared, it
fully answered all he could wish; therefore it is good for any one who feels
occasionally the judgment of the Lord, against any thing however trifling it
may appear, not to consult with flesh and blood, not to reason about it, but
give up in simplicity of mind; and then I am persuaded it will be found of more
consequence than was apprehended; for if we are not faithful in the little, how
can we expect the greater will be committed to us. And indeed in this matter I
have been mentioning, I found not a little advantage; for before, when my
appearance was not very different from the world, my acquaintance would enter
into familiar converse with me; which too often had a tendency to divert my
mind from that seriousness I wished to preserve, and leave unpleasant
reflections afterward; but when they saw (in their eyes) my uncouth
appearance, it operated as a kind of check to lightness, and preserved me from
the snare of unnecessary worldly conversation; so that I had the advantage of
more retirement, which I trust I can say I have found the most profitable
seasons. The apostle says not in vain, "If any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him." And a follower of Christ will not be conformed to
the world, nor uphold whatever is of it, either in himself or others; not
merely because it is witnessed against in the scriptures, but being influenced
by the same spirit, which was in them, he is taught by it to testify against
the same the disciples of old did in their day.

It was a great grief and concern to me to consider, that as it was a day of so
great profession, many walking miles to hear, what they supposed the gospel,
preached, our steeple house being generally crowded by people from the other
parishes; I say it grieved me, that my leaving the fashions of the world which
they all professed to deny, should cause such amazement as it appeared to do
even in professors; which helped to confirm me in my opinion, that how much
soever they could talk about religion, very little of the power thereof was
known: indeed had I not felt a want of the power of godliness, I should not
have left them, as there were many ties which held me both to the priest and
people. But it was that divine power I longed for; and nothing short of it
could satisfy me, and sure nothing but that could have supported me in the
different trials I soon had to encounter; but the battle was the Lord's, and
his was the victory over every appearance of mine adversary, and to him be all
the glory.

For several months my mind was much exercised on various occasions, the enemy
assaulting me continually with reproaches from without and fears within. My
business seemed to decline, and I was reproved for over acting my part, and
informed that some of the society had said so. It was great grief to me to
observe some Friends, for whom I entertained great esteem, not so faithful
against worldly titles, as Esquire --; Sir such a one; Mr. --, etc. as I believed
was required and practiced by ancient Friends. It gave the enemies much
occasion against me.

About this time peoples' minds were much agitated on political subjects, the
French having overturned all orders and distinctions, which gave great offense
to people in general; they called their days, etc. as do Friends, instead of
the old names. I mention this because the adversary assailed me with the
suggestion that I should be deemed of their spirit. I could expect little
favor, though politics was a subject I thought little about, and spoke less:
believing as our blessed Lord said, "My kingdom is not of this world," every
true disciple being influenced by the same spirit, the attention as well as the
affections will be engaged in things above, not of this world, more than
needful; and it had been some time before a concern to me, to observe some of
the society of Friends meddling with such matters, more warmly than I thought
consistent with their profession.

I was at times so sorely pressed, so burdened in spirit, that I seemed as
though my strength was broken, and was ready to cry out, "The children are come
to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth;" but still my desires
were to the Lord, who had hitherto supported me, that I might still experience
him a God near at hand, and not afar off: for I felt how unable I was to move a
step without his divine assistance. So low was I reduced, that though I
received several reviling letters, which were clearly against the truth, I had
not power to answer them; being taught to leave the cause to the Almighty, and
not be anxious to justify myself before men, but which may be an encouragement
to any who may experience similar trials, I felt a secret upholding, a
consoling assurance, that the Lord would plead his own cause, and in his own
time bring forth judgment unto victory; and I desired that his hand might not
spare, neither his eye pity, till his work was accomplished to his own glory,
however it might be with me. Thus I continued some time, till it pleased the
Lord to revive me; when, though I had little business in comparison to what I
had heretofore, yet I was abundantly satisfied with an enlivening sense of the
Lord's presence; which infinitely surpassed all worldly goods, so that in
measure I knew the truth of our dear Lord's promise, that whoever may be
enabled to leave any thing for his name's sake, shall receive an hundred fold
even in this life, either in kind or in kindness: and sure the comfortable
sense of the approbation of the most High, is of infinitely greater value than
any thing this world can afford. O! that the people, particularly the Lord's
professing people, may be encouraged to be willing to part with every thing,
however near and dear to flesh and blood, that stands in the way, which
obstructs that divine communion with him we are taught to expect; for true it
is, except a man forsake all that he has, he cannot be Christ's disciple; and
he is not a hard master, does not require any thing to be parted with, but what
would really be injurious to our spiritual welfare; though to man's carnal
apprehension it may seem in some cases in a different light. Man naturally
loves ease. The cross of Christ is not pleasant to flesh and blood, but, my
friends, if ever we know the truth of what Paul declares, that "they who are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts;" and the more
readily we submit to the yoke, I am persuaded we shall the sooner experience
that subdued, which dislikes the cross: then we shall know what our Lord said,
that his yoke is easy and his burden light.

A fear had arisen in my mind, lest I should be beholding the mote in my
brother's eye, and not attending sufficiently to that power, which could alone
remove the beam out of my own; and though my spirit was frequently grieved on
hearing vain conversation, and often seemed to feel a desire to reprove, yet I
was afraid to cast a stone, feeling myself not without sin, and I had to
remember and to desire to practice what is recorded; to study to be quiet and
mind my own business; and I think I can truly say, that in stillness and
retiredness I experienced a degree of peace, and I trust a growth in grace: and
I must acknowledge with humble thankfulness, the condescending kindness of my
heavenly Father, in favoring me with much opportunity of retirement; having
comparatively but little worldly business, for I sorrowfully found in those
lawful engagements, a very great difficulty of keeping in that straight line of
duty, which I believed was marked out for me. In the course of conversation
words would occasionally drop, which, afterward on reflection, brought
distress on my mind and I desired to be thankful that I was enabled not to
desire much of this world's goods, but rather the reverse, and to be content
with food and raiment. It was a concern to me to observe among Friends, on a
young man's beginning business for himself a conformity in some things with the
world, I thought to gain their favor and custom; it appeared to me paying very
dear for their assistance; and I believed I could prefer working hard as a
servant, to the most profitable situation on such terms; and fervent desires
would frequently arise in my mind, that all who profess to be followers of
Christ, particularly Friends, who profess more than most, would be concerned to
practice our blessed Lord's advice, to seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness; yea and seek nothing else till they had found it; then I
believed by attending to that, they would be divinely directed in temporal
concerns, and preferring it above all things, would be preserved from the too
prevailing snare of flattering the world for their support. I have thought that
people are often led to such practices, by engaging in concerns which bring
extraordinary expense upon them; which, requiring more of the things of this
world, a greater difficulty is experienced in bearing a faithful testimony
against what they may be convinced is evil. These considerations, through
divine assistance, induced me to be careful of confining my expenses in as
narrow a compass as I believed consistent with my situation; and though for
many years I had strong inclinations to enter into the marriage state, I now
experienced a check to every desire of the kind* believing it was my duty to
keep myself as much as possible from the cumbers of this world, and as a
faithful soldier to be ready for whatever my great Lord and master should
require of me.

Near the close of the year, 1793, I wrote to the Friends of the monthly
meeting, to be admitted a member of society; which Friends in due season
expressed their unity and compliance with: and here I would observe, that from
my first acquaintance with Friends, I could not but approve their caution, in
not hastily admitting any into membership; differing from most societies, who,
I have perceived, evince a kind of exulting eagerness in adding to their
numbers. And I can say that I did not feel an anxiety to be received into
membership; but rather to know that power which first gathered Friends into a
society; to experience an union of spirit with the faithful, than any name or
outward relationship: and though a little before I wrote to the monthly
meeting, I had some apprehension of being drawn for the militia, which would
probably have exposed me to some severe trial, not being of the society; yet
convinced of the necessity of bearing my testimony against wars and fightings,
I was mercifully enabled to be still, and leave the event whatever it might be,
to the Lord, who had hitherto supported me, and not apply for admission any
sooner on that account.

The first meeting for discipline I sat in, I felt a powerful concern to speak
on a particular subject, but considering my state of childhood in the society,
and a fear lest I should appear forward, I endeavored to get rid of it, and
avoid speaking; yet it seemed rather to increase than diminish, till just at
the close, I expressed a few sentences, and found in a little time the burden
relieved, at least in a degree.

I was often sorrowfully concerned to observe in the nomination of Friends to
quarterly and yearly meetings, a disposition to make excuses; believing those
meetings were established under the influence and power of divine wisdom. I
thought if there was a proper attention to the guidance of the same, Friends
would be directed in their nomination; that the great Lord of the harvest would
choose whom he pleased to employ in any particular service; and I thought there
might be danger in lightly and hastily making excuses, lest it should be a
disobeying the call of the most High. It appeared to me, that worldly concerns
had too much influence; that it was considered whether it would be convenient
or not. Now I knew from my own experience, that if an ear was open to listen to
excuses, enough would be presented against many services or duties, as
attending week day meetings, and others, in times of business. But I saw or
felt it was safest and best to have a single eye, to have only one object in
view, what the Lord required of me; than to look on temporal concerns, whether
it was convenient or not, but simply give up and leave the consequence; and I
can with humble thankfulness and gratitude acknowledge the inconveniences or
losses I might have apprehended would be the consequence, were changed into a
comfortable sense of divine approbation, and an abundant reward of peace.

The 28th of the 2d month, 1794, being appointed by government to be observed
as a general fast and humiliation before Almighty God, and the mayor of Reading
sending out a bill, desiring all sects and parties to observe it as required: I
felt a concern to write a few reasons, etc. why we, the religious society
called Quakers, could not observe it as required; which were copied and handed
about in manuscript. One copy I sent to the clerk of the parish, desiring him
to lay it before their ministers, and as many of the people as might be.

"A few reasons why the religious Society called Quakers, cannot observe, as
required, the day appointed for a general fast and humiliation (so called)
before Almighty God."

"That the magistrates and people may know it is not from any contempt of
authority, nor in rebellion against government, but that they may preserve a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward man;"

"First, Because we believe that the Lord alone has a right and authority to
enact and require how and when he will be worshipped. That all worship
whatsoever performed in the will of man, and which the spirit of Christ does
not lead into, is not acceptable unto the Lord, who has declared, that in vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men;" and that
"the true worshippers must worship in spirit and in truth." Therefore we
believe, that it does not belong to man to impose modes and forms of worship,
and if, in compliance with the will of men, any should conform to such
pretended worship, the conscience not being clear, nor the heart rightly
engaged in the service, it would be hypocrisy in the sight of God, and sin to
the person so complying:" for "whatsoever is not of faith, is sin."

"Secondly, Because we believe, it is not the fast which the Lord has chosen,
or will approve of, according to what he has declared by the prophet Isaiah,
and elsewhere, as for a man to afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his
head as a bulrush. And our Lord called those hypocrites, who desired to appear
unto men to fast; and commanded his disciples to anoint their head and wash
their face, that they might not appear unto men to fast, but unto him who sees
in secret; who does not look on the outward appearance, but upon the heart, and
who requires truth in the inward parts. And by the prophet he declared, that
the fast which he had chosen, was to loose the bands of wickedness, to feed the
poor, clothe the naked, etc. that then he would accept their prayers."

"Thirdly, Because it is required to implore the blessing of Almighty God for
the success of our arms, which we believe is repugnant to the spirit of
Christianity; as Christ is the Prince of Peace, who did not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them; and commanded his disciples not to resist evil,
but to love their enemies, and to do good to them that hate them. Therefore in
obedience to these commands, through the influence and assistance of the spirit
of Christ, we cannot willingly think or do evil to any, whatever they may
intend to do unto us; but are enabled to commit ourselves to divine protection,
without the use of any carnal weapons, assuredly believing the Lord will
preserve all those who faithfully confide in, and obey him."

"For these reasons, and not from obstinacy, or perverseness, or any disrespect
to those in authority, we cannot keep our shops shut, or in any manner directly
or indirectly, uphold or countenance such a custom."

It is believed by a remnant, who are secretly mourning for the abominations of
the land, and travailing in spirit, that truth and righteousness may abound,
that there is great cause for fasting and humiliation before Almighty God; for
the transgressions of the people are multiplied against him, so that there is
reason to expect that the Lord will visit with his rod even this highly
favored country; and it is their secret desire that as the judgments of the
Lord are in the earth, the inhabitants thereof may learn righteousness. But,
friends, your pretended humiliation for a day, with your lips confessing your
sins, and again returning to your old course, is only mocking God, who will not
hear, though you make many prayers, and cause your voice to be heard on high,
while your hands are full of blood, while you are desiring the destruction of
your fellow creatures; for that spirit is not of God, for God is love, and
whoever are led by the spirit of God, will love their fellow creatures, and not
desire their harm. Therefore, friends, consider what spirit you are of, before
you presume to draw near to the most High, who is not to be honored with the
lips, while the heart is far from him, which it is and ever must be, while
defiled with the pollution of sin; but seek for that new heart and new spirit
which God has promised; and remember a language of old, to those who pretend
to honor him with their lips, while their hearts are far from him: "Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to
do evil learn to do well." Then (and not till then, though you make never so
many prayers, and afflict youselves never so much) the Lord will hear your
prayers and regard your petitions."

A few months after I also wrote a few reasons why we could not illuminate our
houses on any occasion; as friends, in some places, had suffered considerably
on that account.

"Whereas we the religious society of people called Quakers, are accused by
some of being disaffected to government, because we do not illuminate our
houses, as our neighbors do, on particular occasions; this is for the
information of any who may be desirous of knowing why we thus differ: that it
is not from any political motives, nor to express any disapprobation of those
who are in authority; but as Christians, professing to walk in the fear of the
Lord, in a holy life and conversation, we believe such superficial
demonstrations of joy inconsistent with this our profession, on any occasion
whatever; but as it sometimes happens that such customs are in consequence of a
supposed advantage gained in war, we cannot believe as Christians uninfluenced
by any political considerations, that there can be any real cause of rejoicing,
but rather of mourning, for the destruction of our fellow creatures, and to
lament the prevalence of those "lusts from whence," as the apostle says, "come
wars and fightings." Professing also to be followers of Christ, who is the
Prince of Peace, of whose kingdom it was prophesied that they shall beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, that nation
shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more,
we believe wherever this kingdom is established in the heart of any
individual, the warring, sighting nature will be subjected by the peaceable
righteous scepter of Christ; who enjoined his followers not to resist evil, but
to love even their enemies: therefore we cannot, without subjecting ourselves
to the displeasure of the most High, conform to any custom, which countenances
or upholds such practices."

"But though we differ from the rest of our countrymen, we are not enemies to
our country: but our prayers are to the God of the spirits of all flesh, that
he may please to break the bow, and snap the spear in sunder, to cause wars to
cease to the ends of the earth; that the people may turn every one from the
evil of their ways, and serve him alone from whom every blessing is received:
then would righteousness and peace meet together, and abound in the earth to
his praise, and to our present and eternal felicity."

I had for some months, at different times, as I apprehended the concern
revive, wrote an address to the professors of religion, particularly those who
attended the place I had left. Feeling a concern to have it printed, I waited
from time to time to feel it clearly, as appearing in public in any manner of
such a nature, was to me a most weighty consideration; I was fearful of moving
in mine own will, but at length I apprehended the time come for its publicly
appearing, and submitted it to the inspection of several Friends of our
meeting, for their approbation of its being laid before the morning meeting in
London; being unwilling to move without the full concurrence of Friends. It met
with their approbation and consent, and it was going to be sent to London, when
a member of that meeting happened to come to our town. Friends advised it to be
shown to him, who expressed a fear, that as I was so lately come among Friends,
if it was not quite approved of, it might be a discouragement to me, and
recommended if I was easy to let it rest a little longer. I seemed willing to
find an excuse, and to get rid of the burden without its publicly appearing;
and laid it by, not feeling the concern again revive with sufficient power: but
I had at times to fear whether I had not too hastily got rid of it, and let the
right time pass by. May the great Master not impute rebellion to me, but have
in this matter, as I have at other times experienced, a gracious condescending
regard to my weakness; for I have desired to be made willing to be completely
given up to his service, and follow him wheresoever and howsoever he may
require; the frequent breathing of my spirit is, that the inward ear may be so
opened that I may be able to distinguish between the Master's voice and every
appearance of the adversary, and all willings and runnings of the creature.

In the year 1794, I was at the yearly meeting in London, which held, I think,
nine days, and notwithstanding the nature of my business, I was made willing to
give up the time, and have with thankfulness to acknowledge I found no loss,
but the invaluable reward of peace. Surely the Lord is not a hard master, but
whatever is given up under a sense of his requiring, is abundantly restored,
yea as an hundred fold.

A little time after being at an appointed meeting where no regular one is
held, under an apprehension of duty, I spoke a few words. And here I would
observe, I had long a sense as though I should have to appear in this service,
and often felt a word arise in meetings, but was fearful of moving in my own
will, of running before I was sent; remembering the command of old, He that
has my word let him speak my word faithfully; what is the chaff to the wheat?
I desired that there might be no mixture, nothing of the creature, but that the
master might prepare the offering wholly; yet I often found a similar testimony
to what I felt arise, delivered by another friend. I would willingly have been
excused the service, the prospect being far from pleasant, at least to that
which would prefer ease, yet I was desirous that I might be willing and able to
give up to whatever the master required; I seemed only to wish to know quite
clearly, beyond the least doubt, when and what to speak. Perhaps I expected a
clearer evidence than was meet, or made it an excuse to refrain, till after one
first day meeting, not giving up to speak a word, I felt the reproofs of the
most High so sharply, till next meeting, that though very unwillingly, and
after much inward wrestling against it, I found it safest to give up, and was
in a degree sensible, that it is better to appear as a fool unto men, than bear
the indignation of the Lord.

Some little time after I felt the concern of publishing the little piece
before mentioned revive with increased weight: and after a time I believed it
my duty to send it up to the morning meeting of Friends in London, for then
^^^pection and judgment respecting printing it; which I did, under the title of
"Reasons for leaving the national established mode of worship; more
particularly addressed to those who attend at the place called St. Giles's
Church Reading:" accompanied with a few lines to the meeting, from friends of
our own, which the meeting with a few alterations approved of, and left me at
liberty to print it. As soon as I received the pamphlets I sent one to the
priest, with the following letter: I also sent one to each of the principal
professors with whom I had been acquainted.

To --
Respected Friend;
The little Piece which this accompanies, I think I can truly say, I wrote
under an apprehension of duty, uninfluenced by any personal motives whatever. I
submit it to thy candid perusal, and can assure thee, that notwithstanding the
apparent difference, I still retain an affectionate regard, and a real respect
for thee: nor can I suppose thou will impute to a want thereof my omitting thy
usual titles, being persuaded thou art sensible that true honor and respect do
not consist in words, or any superficial expressions. I was constrained to drop
them, from a belief of the inconsistency thereof with the simplicity of true
Christianity, and of the unlawfulness of feeding the vain mind in man, by
giving him flattering titles. I have desired to follow nothing by imitation,
but from conviction, and I hope these desires have been mercifully answered.

I remain, respectfully. Thy Friend, JOHN SPALDING.
Reading 11 Mo. 1794 Postscript,
"There is a little matter I have for some time felt a desire to call thy
serious attention to. Not long since, part of the goods of some of thy
peaceable neighbors were taken away by force, for the repairing, I apprehend,
the place where thy congregation meet to worship I have been led to consider
the inconsistency of this practice with the spirit of the gospel, of which thou
art esteemed a minister. I have examined the Scriptures of Truth, and do not
find that either Christ or his apostles ever used, or taught such a practice,
to oblige those to support them, or their places of worship, who did not
receive them. "As ye would that men should do unto you," said our Lord, "do ye
even so unto them," for this "is the law and the prophets," Now I am much
inclined to think, if thou will calmly and weightily consider this matter, a
deviation from this important injunction will appear. If this people had the
powers of the earth on their side (as thou have in these matters) and insisted
upon thy helping to support their place of worship, where thou had a
conscientious objection to go, would not thou think it unreasonable; and
rather that every society should support its own ministers and places of
worship? And truly there are those who from a real conscientious scruple,
cannot willingly uphold those called parish churches. I have felt it myself,
and expect I can if thou require it, advance some weighty reasons for so doing;
at present my regard for thee induces me to press a serious examination of this
matter; and I feel a desire that customs originating in the times of ignorance
and superstition, and the more powerful motive of interest itself, may not
induce thee to contemn the simple, yet I hope sincere, representations of the
mean and despised.

"Now this I do not write from any desire to avoid suffering for praised be the
Lord, there is a remnant at this day, who are enabled to take joyfully the
spoiling of their goods for a good conscience sake, in supporting their
testimonies against what they believe to be repugnant to the spirit of the
gospel dispensation."




This I sent with one of my pamphlets beforementioned; the next evening I
received the following.

Mr. Spalding,
"As I am willing to hope that your pamphlet and letter were well meant, I
thank you for them; but as they are replete with most wicked errors, and as the
author of them is a schismatic and heretic, I must reject both you and them. As
you once gave hope that you might walk in the ordinances of the Lord blameless,
and continue with us in a church which God is still filling with his glory, I
cannot but feel a regard for you, and pity you the more for your departure and
apostasy from the faith. I would advise you to search God's word, and your own
heart, with prayer, for the teaching of his spirit, that you may discover the
sound doctrine of the one, and the sore plague of the other. Peradventure God
will give you repentance to the acknowledging the truth, and you may be
restored to a sound and sober mind, out of the snare of the devil, by whom you
are now taken captive at his will. Should an event so desirable to yourself and
your family ever take place, I shall rejoice to salute and embrace you in
Christ Jesus, but till then I must beg to decline all correspondence with you.

I am, Your sincere friend and well-wisher.
Reading, Nov. 28, 1794.

A little while after he desired my brother to tell me to send in his account,
and also to know if he should stop his tithes out of it, which amounted to
three pounds. I in consequence wrote his account, and sent it in the following
letter, with a little piece, called "Reasons why the People called Quakers do
not pay Tithes."

"Respected Friend,
"I should not at this time thus communicate with thee, but for thy inquiring
of my brother somewhat respecting my paying tithes. It appears to me thereby
that thou art unacquainted with our reasons for not paying tithes, etc. yet, as
I suppose from thy letter, thou may not be willing to receive my reasons on
that subject, I will only observe, that it is not from any personal disregard
to thee, nor in imitation of others, that I refuse to pay them, but from a full
conviction of the inconsistency thereof with the dispensation of the gospel;
and that if I did in any manner contribute to support such a practice, it would
be a denying that Christ is come, who by his coming put an end to, and totally
abrogated or disannulled, that law or dispensation to which tithes belonged. I
send thee a small piece on this subject. Should thou be disposed to be more
fully informed respecting it, I have other authors who have confuted every
argument in favor of tithes, etc. in this last and more glorious dispensation,

I remain, respectfully, Thy Friend, JOHN SPALDING."
Reading, 12 mo. 23d. 1794. " P. S. As thou desired, I send thy account; and
here it may be proper to remark, that I cannot suffer thy demand to be paid
thereby. Thou, perhaps wilt think me troublesome and impertinent, but the Lord
knows my heart in this matter, that it is from a persuasion of duty toward
him and not from a perverseness of disposition, as men may suppose it is."

I found a spirit generally prevail among them, both preachers and hearers,
confident in their own opinion, and condemning without hearing the sentiments
of others. Oh! how does my spirit mourn for them, under a sense of the danger
of their situation and a persuasion of the applicableness of an ancient
language, "The prophets prophesy falsely, the priests bear rule by their means,
and the people love to have it so; but what will they do in the end thereof!"

Being appointed by the parish, overseer this year, I had frequent
opportunities of observing the difficulties many of the poor labored under,
and was favored to sympathize with them therein; and I had often to consider
the manner of living among th^^e in superior situations, as to outward things,
and it appeared to me inconsistent with the gracious designs of our heavenly
Father, that some should live luxuriously, and expend much upon superfluities,
while so many fellow creatures were in want of the comforts and necessaries of
life. It seemed to me a great evil, and my spirit was often bowed in
consideration thereof; for I thought that the oppression of the poor, and the
extravagant living of others, was one cause of the judgments of the most High
being at this time so awfully executed in the neighboring kingdoms. And it was
often the secret breathing of my spirit, that the people of this land instead
of applying to carnal weapons, which was now pretty general throughout the
kingdom, and trusting to the multitude of their hosts, might endeavor to avert
the threatened indignation before it came home, by turning every one from the
evil of their ways, to serve the Lord with their whole hearts, to relieve the
distresses of the poor, and content themselves with a moderate way of living,
as becomes the followers of him, who said, "My kingdom is not of this world."
--




A few serious QUERIES and OBSERVATIONS, Addressed to the high professors of
religion in this day, by one who was long in the profession, but knew not the
power, till it pleased the Lord, by the ministry and writings of the people
called Quakers, to direct him where alone the power is to be known, within.
What is a true Christian?

Is it one who assents to and believes certain facts, as recorded in holy writ,
and forms certain principles and opinions thereupon; producing perhaps a
partial reformation, an abstaining from the grosser pollutions of sin, but
denying the possibility of a total cleansing and freedom from sin in this
world? Or is it one who knows not in word only, but in deed and in truth, a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness; a being born again, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of God? "For," says our
blessed Lord, "except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God." A man may know with Nicodemus, and confess, that Christ is a teacher sent
from God, he may be able to talk much about the doctrines of the gospel, and
fancy himself secure by imputation, but what has this to do with the new birth
so essentially necessary? What can all his wisdom and understanding teach him.
Nay, he cannot come into the new birth till all is parted with. The very nature
of the thing implies a beginning again, a life as different from his former as
light from darkness. "Ye were sometimes darkness," says Paul, "but now are ye
light in the Lord." Now he who knows this new birth, not a change of opinion,
not a comprehending the truths of the gospel in his understanding, or joining
this or that society, but who knows the thing itself; not the name, not the
imaginations concerning it, but the nature, the life, the essence; will such a
man be like what he was before?

The forerunner of our Lord expressly told his hearers, when preparing them for
the gospel dispensation, "The axe is laid to the root of the trees, and every
tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire."
What tree and what root is there meant? Is it outward or inward? Who can answer
that, but he who has felt the axe, and the destruction, in a measure of the
corrupt tree? "His fan is in his hand, he adds, and he will thoroughly purge
his floor;" (mark "thoroughly,") what will remain then? O! that professors were
concerned to know, and willing to part with all that stands in the way, that
they may know indeed what it is to be thoroughly purged, instead of denying the
possibility of it; for it is a dreadful thing to oppose or deny the power of
Christ.

Christ said, "Blessed are the pure in heart;" but modern Christians, as they
would be thought, say, there is no purity of heart, but it is and must remain
deceitful above all things and desperately wicked? Again it is said, "who
brings a clean thing out of an unclean?" That the heart is naturally unclean is
allowed, but has not the Lord promised to cleanse his people from all their
uncleanness, mark all, what uncleanness will then remain? Some attempt to
excuse themselves by what Paul once experienced; "The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; a law in the members warring against
the law of the mind." That Paul once felt that is allowed, but did he not after
say, "There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit;" and did he not say, "The law of the
spirit of life had made him free from the law of sin; and how could they who
were dead unto sin live any longer therein?" Does he not again say, "I am dead
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, (not natural sinful self,) but
Christ lives in me?" "I will dwell in them and walk in them says the Lord;"
and will the Lord dwell in an unholy place? As soon would light dwell with
darkness. Satan can indeed transform himself into an angel of light, yea, he,
as God, sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. The
imagining part in man is sure to be deceived, and worship the appearance
instead of the reality, for the world by wisdom, man by his natural or humanly
acquired abilities, knew not, nor ever can know God. "If any man, says Paul,
will be wise, let him first become a fool," that his old eye may be closed, and
the new eye, which alone can discern the things of God, may be opened.

Again, Christ says, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect." But modern Christians, as they call themselves, say there is no such
thing as perfection. O that they would consider whom they oppose by so saying.

Does not Paul desire those he was writing to, to cleanse themselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord;
and pray that others may be perfect and complete in all the will of God? What
does such plain express language mean? O the subtility of that serpent, who can
reason and argue the true meaning away; and O the lamentable estate of those
that are so deceived by him, who are sitting down at ease, with the vain
imagination that what Christ has done, as they suppose for them, will be
sufficient; without experiencing the work in them; who having eyes see not, and
ears hear not, in the true spiritual sense.

Again, Christ says, "Swear not at all;" but modern Christians say, We may
swear in some cases. We will reason about Christ's words, and judge ourselves
what they mean; how far they are to be obeyed or not. Though James says, "Above
all things, my brethren, swear not." Yet ye say, We may swear such and such
oaths, O poor Christendom, how is thy gold become dim!

Again, Christ says, "Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he
has, he cannot be my disciple; but now Christians can keep all; their own
wisdom, their own wills, the favor of the world, its riches and friendships,
its fashions and customs; though our Lord says, "Whoever is the friend of the
world, is the enemy of God;" and Paul says, "If I yet please them, I am not the
servant of Christ."

A FEW REASONS, For leaving the NATIONAL ESTABLISHED MODE of WORSHIP, Addressed
principally to those who attend at the place called ST. GILES's CHURCH, READING.
"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good,"

1 These. v. 21
FRIENDS,
My mind has been much exercised at times, since I separated from your
communion, with desires for your real advancement in the spirit and power of
that religion you make profession of; and being persuaded there are those among
you who do really desire to know the truth, I feel a renewed concern to salute
these, in a degree I hope, of true gospel love; and to offer to your serious
consideration, the reasons which induced me to separate from your society. And
truly, friends, there were many ties, which nearly united me to you; and very
unwilling I was for a considerable time, to believe that those things I had
been engaged in, and so highly esteemed, were not what they had appeared to be;
but, as I earnestly desired to know the truth, whatever it might cost me, I
felt the axe laid to the root of the tree, and the fine buildings and plausible
appearances were shaken. I became sensible, that the tree must first be made
good, before the fruit could be good; a doctrine essentially different from
what I had heard of men; even of men highly esteemed; by whom I was taught,
that deliverance from sin is not to be expected in this life; and was hearing
day after day, the uniform acknowledgement of 'being miserable sinners, having
no health,' etc. which I found, by the manifestations of that spirit which "is
given to every man to profit withal," 1 Cor. xii. 7, and which discovers the
secret things of darkness, to be not agreeable, but contrary, to the scriptures
of truth; which expressly declare, that the great Author of the gospel
dispensation "came to save his people from their sins," Matt. i. 21, and not in
them: a very essential difference. This I believed must be experimentally
known, feeling sin to be the great disease of the soul, the alone cause of
separation from the Most High, in whom alone true happiness is found. I was
sensible that while sin remained, the separation must continue, there being "no
communion between light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness;" 2
Cor. vi. 14, nor could that gracious promise be fulfilled," I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, I will be their God, and they shall be my people;" 2
Cor. vi. 16, for the apostle says, "ye are the temple of God, and the temple of
God is holy." 1 Cor. iii. 17.

Further, John the Baptist, who was sent to prepare the way of the Lord,
describing the nature and effects of his master's kingdom, says, "Now (mark
now) is the axe laid to the root of the tree; every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire." Mat. iii. 10. This is
a language surely implying a complete, effectual cleansing from all the
pollutions of sin, even now in this life. Our Lord himself uniformly, in all
his discourses, inculcated this doctrine. In that most excellent sermon on the
Mount, Matt. v. 6.7, he insists on the necessity of a righteousness superior to
that of the law; for says he, "except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven." What language can be plainer? And that he did not mean an
imaginary, merely imputed righteousness, as I fear, many vainly suppose, is
evident from the conclusion; where he draws the comparison between those who
hear, and do his sayings, and them who hear, and do them not; thereby fully
establishing the possibility of doing them. And if due attention is paid to
every part of that discourse, I think it must be obvious, that they who are of
the happy number, who not only hear, but do those sayings, and who our Lord
likens to a building upon a rock, on which they are able to withstand all
opposition; will not be miserable sinners, doing what they ought not to do,
having no health in them; etc. but will know a righteousness wrought in them
far superior to that of the law. For, as the law, the outward law, written on
tables of stone, took cognizance of outward actions; the law of Christ, written
as the apostle says, in the fleshly tables of the heart, reaches to the root,
and source of action: for, whereas the law said, "thou shall not kill." Christ
forbids being angry without cause. Again, the law said, "Thou shall not commit
adultery; Christ forbids lust, thus striking at the root. The cause being
removed, the consequence or effect must unavoidably be done away. Once more,
the law said, "Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; an eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." Christ says, "Resist not evil, love your
enemies, do good to them that hate you;" with much more of like import, which
many who profess to follow him, seem to pay very little attention to; as though
it was an indifferent matter, whether they do them or not. But it may be well
for such to consider whether our Lord would have said, "Be ye perfect, even as
your Father which is in heaven is perfect," if he did not mean they should be
so; and whether they who do as he there exhorts, will not be perfect. I cannot
conceive how it is possible to deduce any other inference without grossly
wresting the scripture. "Ye are my friends," said he, at another time, "if ye
do whatsoever I have commanded you," John xv. 14. "He that loves me keeps my
commandments," John xiv. 21. "Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
(that call me master and honor me with their lips), shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father, which is in
heaven," Matt. vii. 21. "If ye know these things happy are ye if he do them,"
John xiii. 17. For if the simple belief of Christ's sufferings, resurrection,
etc. be sufficient to save; to what purpose was all his discourses, wherein he
repeatedly insists upon the necessity of regeneration, a being born again;
which certainly implies something more than a change of opinion, a persuasion
of the judgment, and a partial reformation. For as he said to Nicodemus, "That
which is born of the flesh, is flesh* and that which is born of the spirit, is
spirit," John iii. 6. it obviously follows, that they who are really born of
the spirit, will be of the same nature as the spirit. Old things will be passed
away, and all things become new, and all of God. "A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump," Luke xiii. 21. "New wine must be put into new bottles." Mark ii.
22; with many other similitudes, plainly implying the necessity of a total,
effectual change. Again to confirm this great and necessary truth, of freedom
from sin, he says to his disciples, "if ye continue in my word, then are ye my
disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free," and, to reprove their carnal ideas of a temporal outward freedom, he
adds, "He that commits sin, is the servant of sin," and if the Son shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed," John viii. 31, etc. That this freedom
from sin, even from the power, as well as the guilt, is to be known in this
life, is certified again, by his saying of those who die in their sins,
"Whither I go, ye cannot come," John viii. 21. Now if deliverance from sin is
not known in this life, we must of necessity die in our sins. Therefore it
matters not what knowledge a man has, what is his faith, or what profession he
has made, if he has not known deliverance from sin. This is a point so
important, and a mistake therein liable to such baneful consequences, that I am
induced to dwell upon it, knowing from my own experience, how prevailing is the
contrary opinion. Nor is it strange, that people should prefer and indulge the
notion of the possibility of deliverance from the guilt and punishment of sin,
without the power thereof being subdued. We naturally love ease, an ease which
the cross of Christ is decidedly against. So close does it apply, that it is,
in our Lord's own words, as cutting off a right hand, and plucking out a right
eye. Matt. vi. 29, 30. "Whosoever," says he, again and again, "does not bear
his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple," Luke xiv. 27: The apostle
bears testimony to this important truth, where he says, "They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts." Gal. v.xxiv.
Surely if lusts and affections, the very root and seed of sin, are slain, what
can remain thereof? In another place he says, "How shall we, that are dead to
sin, live any longer therein?" Romans vi. 2. Another apostle says, Whosoever is
born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God." 1 John iii. 9.

I have produced a few plain passages of scripture, to show the ground or cause
of my separation; that deliverance from sin, a being cleansed from all
defilement thereof in this life, is not only possible, but indispensably
necessary; and that the contrary doctrine is fundamentally erroneous; as it
sets up the shadow instead of the substance, an imaginary, instead of a real,
holiness. I may probably make some more observations on this most important
point, as I proceed. I shall now offer a few remarks on some of the services
usually performed; comparing them also with the scriptures of truth, which most
professors acknowledge to be the standard or rule; from which comparison they
clearly appear to me, not to be what many call them, 'means of grace and
ordinances of God; but the mere inventions of man, set up in his own fallen
wisdom, as a substitute for the life and power, which were lost in a long dark
night of apostasy: not the true worship of God, but such bodily exercise as the
apostle says, "profits little, 1 Timothy iv. 8. For be it remembered, the great
Author of the gospel dispensation, expressly declared, "that the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth." John iv. 23. And
the apostle confirms it, by saying, 'We know not what we should pray for, as we
ought; but the spirit helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered. Romans vii. 26. Therefore, as this
necessary assistance is not at our command, for people to pretend to worship
the Most High in a prescribed form, or in the studied or extempore productions
of their own natural or acquired abilities, in their own wills, and their own
time, without waiting to feel the influences and movings of the Holy Spirit, in
and through which alone true worship can be performed, appears to me nothing
better, whatever it may be called, than will worship. The scriptures also
repeatedly mention a growing in grace, 2 Pet. iii. 18, a going on unto
perfection, Heb. vi. 1. How inconsistence then is the repeated uniform
acknowledgement, "We are miserable sinners, doing what we ought not to do,
having no health in us," etc? Does it not obviously confess, if the truth is
spoken, that no benefit has been received, notwithstanding the frequent (as it
is pretended) waiting upon the Lord? But if it is true, as the scriptures
declare, that Christ came to 'save his people from their sins;' they who make
that confession, acknowledge they are not of that number; for if they are
miserable sinners, they certainly are not saved from their sins, however they
may attempt to reconcile so plain a contradiction. This is a language not
confined to a particular part of the service; the inconsistency of the whole
appears equally obvious; as at one time confessing their sins and wickednesses;
then called upon to address the most High, with pure, humble, penitent, and
obedient hearts; one while returning thanks for creation, preservation, and
redemption; again acknowledging having erred and strayed like lost sheep,
desiring to show forth his praise not only with their lips, but in their lives,
by giving themselves up to his service, and walking before him in holiness and
righteousness all their days; but still miserable sinners, doing what they
ought not to do, etc. Can this running backwards and forwards, one time saying
one thing, another time quite the contrary, be acceptable service to that God,
who searches the heart, tries the reins, and requires truth in the inward
parts? Again, in repeating the experiences of the royal Psalmist, how is it
possible but many gross falsehoods must be expressed? For if the words of the
mouth do not express the real experimental language of the heart, however
excellent they may be, yet they are to those who utter them, not the language
of truth but of falsehood. I should hope a little serious consideration will
convince of this.

Again, respecting the custom or practice of singing, I have a few observations
to make. How inconsistent it is, that they who have just before been confessing
their misery and wretchedness, should appear so quickly and easily to forget
all, and begin singing. Surely it seems evidently to declare, they were not
sincere in their acknowledgements, or that they think it of very little
consequence whether their prayers are answered or not. Besides, not only the
manner to me appears absurd and inconsistent, but the matter in many quite
contrary to truth, and to what has been just before openly avowed. I could
specify many instances in every collection I have seen, but I wish people to
search for themselves. Surely this is trifling with serious things. I am fully
persuaded that the common practice of singing is only calculated to amuse the
creature, to please the outward ear; whatever may be pretended of its warming
the heart, and kindling devotion. And if those who practice it would be honest
and candid, I am of opinion they would be constrained to acknowledge that
amusement is the chief object: or why so pleased with tunes and music? Can it
for a moment be supposed, that the Almighty is to be pleased with such
superficial conduct? Surely not. And with respect to its kindling devotion, it
may be well to remember what is said of those, "who kindle a fire, and
encompass themselves about with sparks; they may walk in the light thereof, but
they shall lie down in sorrow," Isa. L. 11. I readily admit what is advanced to
defend this custom, that our Lord and his disciples, the night before he
suffered, sang a hymn, but what or how we are not informed; no doubt the matter
and manner were both proper and seasonable; and that Paul and Silas, in prison,
"sang praises to the Lord," I believe; but I cannot conceive what argument can
be deduced from thence for the present custom of singing whatever may be given
out, suitable or not, whether praise, profession, acknowledgement, or petition.
I fully believe this outward inconsiderate singing is very different from that
recommended by the apostle, "Singing with the spirit, and with the
understanding. 1 Cor. xiv. 15. "Singing and making melody in your hearts to the
Lord," Ephesians. v. 19. And I also believe, that the true source of praise, even a
grateful sense of the Lord's mercies can be more consistently expressed than in
outward jingle and sound.

Indeed, my friends, I fear you are, many of you, agreeably to your own
confession, in a miserable condition. Suffer me to prevail upon you to
consider, whether your continuing year after year miserable sinners, is not the
consequence of your prayers not being heard: and let a concern arise to
enquire, whether you have been seeking aright or not: for our Lord promised
plainly and expressly, "that they who seek shall find," Matt. vii. 5. Now, what
have they found, who continue as they acknowledge, 'miserable sinners having no
health in them,' etc? Do they not rather confess that the means they have used
are insufficient to cleanse and heal them; that they have not rightly applied
to the great physician, to the balm of Gilead, "to that tree, whose leaves are
for the healing of the nations; but have been spending their money for that
which is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not; instead of
hearkening diligently unto the Lord, and eating that which is good;" Isa. lv.
2. that true bread of life, which our Lord said, "he that eats of this Bread
shall live forever?" John vi. 58. It may be well to have recourse to these
means before the possibility of cure is denied; lest they thereby deny the
power of God, that he is not able to "cast out the strong man armed, who
keeps his palace and his goods in peace," Luke xi. 21. I think I need not
add, who is there meant by the strong man armed, where is his palace, and what
are his goods. The apostle speaks of some, "who had a form of godliness but
denied the power thereof." 2 Timothy iii. 5. Now, it may be well to consider, in
what can the power of godliness be known, hut in dominion over its adversary,
which is sin. And do not they who deny the possibility of sin's being subdued,
deny the power of godliness? A serious consideration may not be unprofitable. I
have often admired, that those who plead for sin, pretend highly to value the
scriptures, and say, 'the scriptures is the rule;' whereas the scriptures
uniformly insist upon the necessity of holiness; not an imaginary holiness, but
a real purity of heart and of life. "Without holiness," said the apostle, "no
man shall see the Lord," Heb, xii. 14. "Be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy." 1 Pet. i. 15.
"Present your bodies, (mark, your bodies) a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable service." Romans xii. 1. They talk much of the
blood of Christ; it is a subject often in the mouth, but what of the nature and
effects of it is known, let their own acknowledgements testify. The apostle
declares it cleanses from all sin." 1 John i. vii. Now how those who continue
'miserable sinners, doing what they ought not to do,' etc. can be cleansed from
all sin, let the considerate judge.

It is with me now, to answer some objections to this important truth; and to
remark on some passages of scripture, which those who deny the possibility of
sin being subdued, endeavor to cover themselves with. First, that 'The heart
of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it?'
Jer. xvii. 9. That the heart of every man, of every natural unregenerate man,
is truly so, I firmly believe: but be it remembered that the Lord promised to
give his people a new heart and a new spirit: Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. And dare any one
say, that heart is deceitful and wicked? O, beware of depreciating the gift of
God. "Blessed are the pure in heart, says our Lord, for they shall see God."
Matt. v. 8, "A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit." Mark vii. 18. "The seed on the good ground are
they who in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience." Luke viii. 15. For now, in the gospel dispensation,
the axe is laid to the root of the tree, Matt. iii. 10. What is the root of the
tree there alluded to but the heart, from whence words and actions have their
birth? "Thou blind Pharisee," said Christ, cleanse first that which is within
the cup and the platter, that the outside may be clean also "Matt. xxiii. 26.
And do they not in the stated form, pray that God 'would cleanse the thoughts
of their hearts, by the inspiration of his holy spirit;' a most excellent
petition; but what is it in those who use it, and yet deny the possibility of
its being answered, but a solemn mockery? For if the thoughts of the heart are
really cleansed, there can be no sin; for sin defiles and pollutes the heart.

Another objection, is the language of the apostle, where he speaks of 'a law
in his members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into
captivity to the law of sin, and that in his flesh dwelt no good thing," Romans
vii. That the apostle once was in that state, I think, is beyond a doubt; and
that every real Christian experiences a similar, till the strong man armed is
cast out, and the old leaven purged away. But that he was so at the time of
writing it, to me appears by no means credible, from what he has written just
before and after; or he must grossly contradict himself, which will hardly be
allowed? but rather that he was describing the effects of the law upon the
carnal unregenerate mind: for he says, "The law is spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under sin." Now can it be supposed that the apostle was then carnal? etc.
Surely not, For just after, he says, 'The carnal mind is enmity against God,'
and 'to be carnally minded is death,' chap. viii. 6.7. and that "they who are
in the flesh cannot please God;" but he adds, "Ye are not in the flesh, but in
the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you; and if any man have not the
spirit of Christ, he is none of his." It consequently follows, that if the
apostle was then in a carnal state, he was none of Christ's, but at enmity
against God. A little before, he says, "Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin: for he that is dead is freed from sin," chap. vi. 6.7.
And in the 2nd verse "How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein." And in the 22nd verse, "Being made free from sin, and become servants
to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life."

Now let this plain language, both before and after, written no doubt at the
same time, determine whether the apostle was then in a carnal unregenerate
state or not. And though he elsewhere says, "Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect;" Phil. iii. 10. I think it in no respect
favors the construction many put upon it, that the apostle was then in a
sinful state; but rather makes against them, as it plainly condemns the notion,
of being perfectly and for ever justified by mere imputation, and evinces the
danger of sitting down at ease, resting satisfied with an imaginary
justification. For in another place, speaking of the Christian progress, he
says, though he did not run as uncertainly, or fight as one that beats the
air, yet he found it necessary to keep under his body and bring it into
subjection, or there was a danger, notwithstanding he had preached to others,
of his being still a cast away, 1 Cor. ix. 26, 27. Another objection is, the
same apostle says, "By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast.'
Ephesians. ii. 8.9. In answer to which, I believe it is very necessary to distinguish
between the works of man, which he does in his own will and strength, and those
works which are wrought of God. Perhaps it is not rightly knowing this
distinction that people cry out against works, as though they were all
self-righteousness. The works of man, of the unrenewed carnal mind, yea the
best of them, are as filthy rags; but I think there should be a great care not
to join the works of God (those which he works in his people) with man's own
works; for in the next verse the apostle says, "Ye are his workmanship, created
in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should
walk in them." That it is by grace, I believe, no real Christian will deny, but
will, with humble gratitude in all his progress, acknowledge with the apostle,
"by the grace of God I am what I am," 1 Cor. xv, 10. This grace the same
apostle declared, has appeared to all men, (mark that, not to any particular
part) and teaches, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world. He does not say (it
teaches) we must continue in sin, "What," says he in another place, "shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound, God forbid," Romans vi. 1. That it is
also through faith, who will deny? for "without faith it is impossible to
pleased God," Heb. xi. 6. But the apostle speaks of a dead faith, James ii. 17.
of a faith the devils have, verse 19. The true faith, he says, works by love,
Gal. v. 6. purifieth the heart, Acts xv. 9. and overcomes the world, 1 John v.
4. Now what faith have those, who say, they are 'tied and bound with the chain
of their sins, that they are miserable sinners having no health in them,' etc.
The tree is known by it fruit.

Again, the words of our Lord, when upon the earth in the days of his flesh, to
those whom he had healed of their diseases, are pleaded in excuse for
continuing in sin, as "Thy faith has saved thee, thy faith has made thee
whole, etc. But be it remembered, that those to whom he said so were completely
cured, received 'perfect soundness;' and I believe, there is a remnant at this
day, who witness the same works, spiritually accomplished by the powerful
operation of the same word in the heart, even a being made whole, a being
healed of the great disease of sin, prefigured by the various cures performed
on the bodies of the people.

Once more, another argument adduced is where the apostle says, "If we say we
have no sin we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us," 1 John i. 8. But
a due attention to what follows, I think will clearly explain, that the apostle
does not favor the idea that he was then in that state; for he adds, "if we
say we have not sinned," plainly alluding to time past, and continues, "if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness;" and as all unrighteousness is sin, chap.
v. 17. they who are cleansed from all, surely can have none remaining. It is
the sincere desire of my mind, that the people would consider for themselves,
and not take things of such importance upon trust, but attend to the advice of
the apostle, "Let every man prove his own work, then shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another, for every man shall bear his own burden." Gal. vi.
4, 5. "Be not deceived," he adds just after, "God is not mocked; whatsoever a
man sows, that shall he reap," whatever be his opinion, knowledge or faith.
And in another place he says, though he had all knowledge, could understand all
mysteries, though he had all faith, even to remove mountains, yet he might be
as nothing, 1 Cor, xiii. 2. Therefore it might be well to have a care of
talking so highly of the scriptures, while the life and conversation is not
agreeable thereto; and remember the words of our Lord to some of old, "Search
the scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they
which testify of me, and ye will not come unto me that ye might have life,"
John v. 39, 40. From which it appears, and is worthy of the most serious
attention, that those who had the scriptures and valued them, as to think they
had eternal life in them, yet they would not come unto Christ, of whom they
testified; and "who was and is alone the life as well as the light of men,"
John i. 4. Therefore it may be well to take care of putting the letter, the
testimony, the declaration, concerning an object, for the object itself; for
our Lord did not say the scriptures is the way; but "I am the way, the truth,
and the life, and no man comes unto the Father but by me," John xiv. 6. And
learn the difference between the letter, the outward word, and the word that
was in the beginning, John i. 1. before the scriptures, "the word nigh in the
mouth, and in the heart;" Romans x. 8, "which is quick and powerful, sharper than
a two-edged sword, dividing asunder soul and spirit, joints and marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, before whom all things
are naked and open," Heb. iv. 12; and of whom, as I before observed, the
scriptures testify; and without whose all-powerful aid they remain a dead
letter, a sealed book. The apostle declared, the things of God can only be
known by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. ii. 11. They are foolishness to the natural
man. Therefore I think we should be careful how we attempt to comprehend the
truths, which are contained in the scriptures by our own understandings; but
rather be willing, as the apostle recommends, to become fools, that we may be
truly wise, 1 Cor. iii. 18.

I would now offer a few remarks on those two ordinances or ceremonies, Baptism
and the Lord's Supper as they are called.

With respect to the first, as practiced by those I more particularly address
myself to, little need be said; as sprinkling infants is not even an imitation
of true baptism, has no relation to it whatever, nor do I believe there can be
found a single precept or example for it in any of the scriptures of truth. I
am well persuaded it is, like many other things of the kind, a mere popish
invention, in the times of darkness and apostasy, as a substitute for the
reality; not in any one respect calculated to answer any good purpose whatever.
It may be well seriously to consider a language used at that ceremony, "that
this child is regenerate, and grafted into the body of Christ's church;" and in
the catechism respecting it, that "he is therein made a member of Christ, a
child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven." Now let every
considerate person solemnly ask himself, whether he really believes such
effects are really produced by it. If it is possible that any one can think so,
his ideas of regeneration, and Christ's church also, differ very widely from
mine.

Let it be considered also, what people are taught to promise at this ceremony:
To renounce the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh; to keep God's holy will and
commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of their lives." Are they
not here required to promise what is believed and confessed to be impossible to
perform? for surely if it was performed, they would not be "miserable sinners,
doing what they ought not to do," etc.

That baptism is necessary, absolutely necessary, for every member of Christ's
church, I fully believe; but I believe, no application of water, even when
rightly imitated, is the one true baptism. It is not the putting away the filth
of the flesh, which is all outward elementary water can do, but "the baptism of
the Holy Ghost and of fire," Mat. iii. 11, even a being baptized in the name,
that is nature, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; thereby experiencing the
consuming of the earthly part in themselves, and a being cleansed and purified
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord; for the apostle says, "As many as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ," Gal, iii. 27. not imaginarily, but really; and being buried with him,
by this spiritual baptism into death, even a death unto sin: that "like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so they also will
walk in the newness of life," Romans vi 4. And again, If any man be in Christ he
is a new creature, old things are passed away, all things become new, and all
of God." 2 Cor. v. 17. and if all of God, there can be no sin, for "sin is of
the devil, and not of God." 1 John iii. 8.

With respect to that other ceremony, called the Lord's Supper, notwithstanding
I am sensible of the deep rooted prejudice in favor of it, I feel no
discouragement; under a belief that a glorious day is dawning, when clouds and
shadows, signs and appearances, shall give place to reality, to the pure
essential substance. I am perfectly satisfied in mine own mind respecting it,
and will endeavor to give my reasons, why I believe it is not of that
consequence or obligation many fix upon it.

That our Lord, the night before he suffered, took bread and brake it, and gave
to his disciples, as also the cup, I believe; and that he said, this do in
remembrance of me; but that he enjoined it to be an ordinance I cannot find. I
presume it will be allowed to be a part of the feast of the Jewish passover, as
our Lord said, "With desire, I have desired to eat this passover with you,
before I suffer," Luke xxii. 16. and which was a remarkable type or figure of
Christ, who was the very Paschal Lamb, the substance or antitype itself. That
the bread and wine, as a part of the passover, represented the body and blood
of Christ, to be broken and shed for the remission of sins, I presume will also
be allowed. Now as there is certainly a very essential difference between the
sign and the thing signified, let us consider a little, which is of most
consequence, or whether both are of obligation. I expect none to whom I address
myself will deny, that Christ was and is really the substance and antitype of
every type and figure, under the Mosaic ceremonial dispensation. This then
being one of those figures representing the death of Christ; the substance
being come, the type fulfilled, what need of the shadow; why not give place, as
others are acknowledged to do? The apostle, writing to some, remarks, "As often
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death, till he
come." 1 Cor. xi. 26. But this I think, by no means implies that it was an
enjoined ordinance, but rather, that those to whom he was writing, continued in
the use or observance of the jewish passover. This I think, cannot appear
improbable, when it is considered, that for a time it was taught by some of the
disciples, that "it was needful to be circumcised, and to keep the law of
Moses," Acts xv. 5. of course this among the rest. Therefore it appears to me,
that they, as yet, knew not, in a spiritual sense, the coming of Christ; that
is, his spiritual appearance in their hearts; an inference which seems to be
confirmed by what is recorded of some, who had been baptized with John's
baptism, that is of water, yet had not so much as heard whether there were an
Holy Ghost, Acts xix. 2. the promised mode of his coming again, John xvi. 7.
Again, the apostle says, speaking unto wise men, no doubt spiritually wise,
"The cup of blessing we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ:
The bread we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" 1 Cor. x.
15.16. Can it be supposed that he here alludes to outward bread and wine? for
if he did, all who partake of that ceremony, let them be who they may, or what
they may, have communion with Christ. Surely that would be joining light and
darkness, Christ and Belial, righteousness and unrighteousness together, in
direct opposition to the same apostle's plain declaration to the same people. 2
Cor. vi. xv. He says again, "Ye cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table and the table of
devils," 1 Cor. x. 20. Now it is very obvious, that any can partake of the
outward bread and wine, therefore that cannot be the cup and table of the Lord.
Again, what is recorded of the disciples breaking bread from house to house,
Acts ii. 24, I think by no means implies such a ceremony, but rather a social
way of living among themselves; as it is said, they had all things common,
verse 44, and, from what immediately follows, "did eat their meat with gladness
and singleness of heart," verse 46, plainly alluding to their common meals. It
is also I think, very observable, that when the apostles were assembled at
Jerusalem, to consider what was necessary to be enjoined to the believing
Gentiles, this ceremony was not even mentioned: which had it been necessary,
would sure not have been omitted, considering the things which were then
enjoined; most of which have since been laid aside, Acts xv. 20. But our Lord's
own words appear to me decidedly to discountenance the outward sign; as where
he emphatically calls himself the "Bread of Life." "That his flesh is meat
indeed, and his blood drink indeed, and that whosoever ate and drank it had
eternal life." John vi. 46, etc. And to reprove their carnal ideas of outward
eating and drinking, verse 52, and to direct their minds to the spiritual
allusion, he adds, "What, and if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where
he was before," verse 62, how will ye eat him then? not in outward bread and
wine, "it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh (or outward food) profits
nothing."

I believe there are among those whom I address myself to, such as are sensible
of the necessity of this spiritual communion, and are truly desirous to partake
thereof. Far be it from me to wound any of these. I do tenderly salute them,
and feel a degree of unity with the least appearance of the true seed of the
kingdom: I would not hurt the least plant of the Lord's own right hand
planting. However some little differences may appear, yet let me say to these
in a spirit of love and unity, as this is acknowledged to be but a sign or
token, why is this continued, when others of equal authority and obligation are
dispensed with? For instance, that of circumcision, which our Lord submitted
to, Luke ii. 21; and which for a time, even after his ascension, was enjoined
by his disciples, as I before quoted; Why this laid aside? It may perhaps be
answered, this sign according to the apostle's definition of it, represented
the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, Col. ii. 11. I fully believe it did, and as it is equally true, that
bread and wine is also a sign, there appears to me not a shadow of a reason,
why the one should be continued in preference to the other: the thing signified
by both being of equal obligation.

Again, it is worthy of observation, that the beloved disciple John, in his
relation, makes not the least mention of this ceremony; but is very particular
in giving an account of our Lord's washing his disciples feet. Why is not this
ceremony observed, as it appears to be more particularly enjoined than the
other? For says Christ, "Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I
am; if I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash
one another's feet, for I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done unto you," John xiii. 13. Now where can there be found so strong an
injunction for the other, that of bread and wine? If it is answered, that was a
sign or figure to teach humility and love to each other, which I readily admit
it was, I think it is necessary to prove the other to be somewhat more than a
sign to support its continuance in preference, which I expect will hardly be
attempted. That it was not practiced or observed as an ordinance by the
apostles, I think evidently appears, from the whole tenor of their writings.
Paul reproves some for being subject to ordinances. "Touch not, taste not,
handle not," says he, "which all are to perish with the using." Col. ii. 20,
and does not outward bread and wine perish with the using? The apostle well
knew the true living bread was not of a perishable nature. Again, he says, "Let
no man judge you in meat and in drink, or in respect to the holy day, new moon,
or the sabbath, which" he adds, "are a shadow of things to come, but the body,
(the substance) is of Christ," verse 16. In another place he says, "The kingdom
of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost." Romans xiv. 17. And to some others he said "I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed on you labor in vain;" because after they had known God, had
tasted somewhat of the substance, they turned again to the weak and beggarly
elements, whereunto they desired again to be in bondage. Gal. iv. 9. "Ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years," verse 10, said he, which he
had declared to be but shadows of good things; and I fear the same language is
too applicable to many, who make a very high profession in this day.

From what I have observed on this subject, I think to an unprejudiced mind, it
must appear that the true supper of the Lord is an inward, spiritual communion.
"Behold," says Christ, "I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me." Rev. iii. 20; and that the outward bread and wine, was nothing more
than a part of the Jewish ceremonial dispensation; neither commanded to, nor
practiced generally by, the gentiles in the apostle's days. For, I would just
add, if it is a necessary ordinance; if in other words, it is what by many it
is asserted to be, the effects of it would be evident; for our Lord said,
"Whosoever ate his flesh and drank his blood, had eternal life." Now I presume
no one to whom I now address myself will impute such an effect to outward bread
and wine; therefore it cannot be the Lord's supper. We no where read of two
suppers. The difference between the sign and thing signified, the shadow and
the substance, I believe many are in a degree sensible of; and as the
substance, the reality is to be partaken of, yea absolutely necessary; (for
said our Lord, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you;" John vi. 53.) and as I before observed, we read of but
one supper of the Lord; surely it is of consequence rightly to know which is
indeed the true supper.

I have no doubt but there are those who in sincerity and uprightness of heart
continue in the use of the sign; far be it from me to judge these. I have only
a caution to give in love, that where these signs are regarded, it may be as to
the Lord, and not unto men. See Romans xiv. 6. I fully believe religion does not
consist in observing, or not observing, outward ceremonies. For as the apostle
says, "In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but a new creature;" Gal. vi. 15. It is not a name, a
profession, or any outward observance; but I am not without a fear that many
regard them as to men, and are in bondage unto them, and so settled down at
ease in them, that they will hardly hear the least objection to them. Such
perhaps must be left for a time: however, I have given some of my reasons for
absenting myself from your communion, and why I believe the worship there
performed, is not the worship which the Lord requires; that it is not
agreeable, but contrary to the Scriptures; that it is not 'the means of grace,
and ordinance of God,' but the invention and imagination of man; that it is
wrong in principle and in practice; in principle, because you are taught you
must not expect deliverance from sin in this life, whereas the scriptures
testify the contrary; in practice, because you worship in your own wills, and
teach for doctrines the commandments of men, which our Lord testified against;
Mark vii. 7; yea, in an unregenerate state, according to your own confession,
for a sinner is not regenerate. Therefore, what I have heard among you, that
your best services are polluted, is strictly true; for while you yourselves are
in the polluted state, all your performances are polluted also. "For who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one," Job xiv. 4; but it may be well
to remember, it stands an unchangeable truth, "That the sacrifices of the
wicked are an abomination to the Lord," Prove. xxi. 27; and though we may amuse
ourselves with the vain idea that all is well, I do assuredly believe, that to
offer any acceptable sacrifice or service, we must know, experimentally know, a
being washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God. 1 Cor. vi. 11. Therefore remember a language of old to
some who had no health in them, but were unsound from head to foot, as many
confess they now are. "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices?"
Isa. 1, 11. "Bring no more vain oblations, incense is abomination to me, the
new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it is
iniquity even the solemn meeting. When you spread forth your hands, I will hide
mine eyes, yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear." ver. 13, 14. And
consider the exhortation to them, "Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do well," etc.
ver. 16. Then it is added, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it." ver. 18. Oh, how awful is this denunciation now fulfilling around
us! It is the fervent breathing of my spirit, that this highly professing, much
favored nation, who have been calling abundantly upon the Lord with their
mouths, and honoring him with their lips, may avert the impending stroke, by
truly humbling themselves before him; and as his judgments are in the earth,
may indeed learn righteousness, Isa. xxvi. 9.

I know, friends, from a degree of experience, that there are many and various
appearances, signs, and shadows, set up among professing Christians; some of
which I have pointed out. I now wish to direct, according to the ability I am
at present favored with, to the reality or substance itself; and this
inestimable treasure which I had long in vain sought for without, among the
various appearances, I at last found to be within. I can anticipate the
surprise, and perhaps the indignation, the word within may excite in some
minds, who may be ready to exclaim, Can there be any good thing in man? Yes,
friends, the sovereign good, the only good, is to be found there; and I desire
your patient attention while I endeavor to remove that unjust, delusive, yea
too destructive idea, that nothing good is to be found in man. I believe it is
the grand artifice, the most successful insinuation of the great adversary of
mankind, to divert the attention from that which is alone able effectually to
destroy his kingdom or rule in the heart, and draw it to objects without, to
similitudes and appearances. (Mystery Babylon.) This good then, though in man,
is not of man, it is not natural to him; but a free, spontaneous, unmerited
gift. This good is, with reverence be it spoken, even God himself; a truth, I
believe of the utmost importance to be experimentally known by every
individual; and a truth abundantly testified to in the sacred writings; as the
ground work, the substance, the foundation of real religion; a language also
repeatedly expressed by the professors of Christianity; though the truth, the
reality of it, appears so little known, as by many even to be denied. Do not
you frequently read, "I will dwell in them, and walk in them; I will be their
God, and they shall be my people," 2 Cor. vi. 16. "If a man love me," said our
Lord, "he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him," John xiv. 23. "The Comforter, even the
Spirit of Truth," proceeding from the Father, said he, "dwells with you, and
shall be in you," ver. 17. "Know ye not," said the Apostle, "that Jesus Christ
is in you except ye be reprobates?" 2 Cor. xiii. 5, and that your bodies are
the temples of the living God? 1 Cor. vi. 19. I could multiply quotations of
Scriptures, to prove this great important truth, but am sensible that those to
whom I address myself are well acquainted with the words. 'You are frequently
reading, of "Christ within the hope of glory," Col, i. 27, under various
similitudes; but what is the reason, he is not known there? It is an important
question. What is the reason, I again repeat it, that Christ so often read of
in the Scriptures as within, notwithstanding so much talk and imaginations
about him, is not known there in reality? I believe, friends, I can tell you
the reason why he, the one great foundation, is not known, where alone he is
truly to be known. Because he is not sought for there; but in something
without, some appearance or representation of him, a knowledge gathered from
men or books, from the history or outward letter, which, however highly it may
be valued, I believe is merely notional. The real experimental knowledge is
only known by his internal appearance, his second coming, without sin, unto
salvation; Heb. ix. 28. and the operation and effects thereby produced. See
Mal. iii. 3, "The kingdom of God," said our Lord, "comes not by observation:"
man with all his wisdom, is unable to comprehend it, neither shall they say,
"Lo here is Christ, or lo there," not in any outward appearance, "for behold
the kingdom of God is within you." Luke xvii. 20, 21. "Say not in thine heart,"
said the apostle, "who shall ascend into heaven that is to bring Christ down
from above, or who shall descend into the deep, that is to bring Christ again
from the dead:" He is not at a distance, but "the word is nigh thee, in thy
mouth and in thy heart, Romans x. 6, 7, 8. Our Lord represented this great truth
by various objects or similitudes, to convey spiritual instruction to his
disciples; as a treasure hid in a field; Mat. xiii. 44, seed sown in the
ground; Mark iv. 26, a grain of mustard seed; Mat. xiii. 31, a little leaven
hid in meal; ver. 33. plainly alluding to this inestimable treasure as hid in
the heart, the earthly part of man. There were some of whom our Lord said,
having ears they heard not; they could not understand the spiritual meaning of
his parables; but to some he said, "Unto you it is given to know the mysteries
of the kingdom of God." Mark iv. 11. Now, friends, it is of consequence to know
of which number we are, whether these are still to us as parables, or whether
we know that which unfolds their true meaning: "I am the light of the world;"
said Christ, "he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life." John viii. 12.

The apostle says there is no communion between light and darkness. 2 Cor. vi.
14. If we have not light, we must of necessity be in darkness. There is a
spiritual light, as well as a natural. This great apostle to the gentiles,
declaring his commission to preach the gospel, said it was to turn people from
darkness to light, from the power of satan unto God. Acts xxvi. 18. Of what
consequence then is it to be acquainted with this light, by which alone we can
discern between good and evil. "All things," said the apostle" that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever does make manifest is
light." Ephesians. v. 13. That we may know what this light is the scriptures
abundantly declare, John the Baptist was sent to bear witness of this light,
which is the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world.
John 1.8, 9. In him, i. e. Christ, was life, and the life was the light of men.
ver. 4. This light shines in darkness, even the dark heart of man; though the
darkness comprehended it not. ver. 5. This is the light of the glorious gospel;
therefore, friends, I caution you to beware of calling it a natural light, or a
new light as many have done. For I believe the same light, if attended to and
its discoveries obeyed, will effect the same works spiritually in the heart, or
inner man, as it formerly did on the bodies of the people. Therefore I believe
there is great danger of speaking evil of the light, for whoever do, confess
they are strangers to it, and of course are walking in darkness, for there is
but one true spiritual light. And "If we say we have fellowship with him and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as
he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin." 1 John i. 6, 7.

Our Lord himself plainly declared* that "Every one that does evil, hates the
light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved; but he
that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God." John. iii. 20, 21. Therefore it is not strange that
those who plead for sin, which is evil, should speak against this light, and
call it a natural light; or any thing, to excuse themselves; because it cannot
but condemn them. Those things which the light, if attended to, would manifest
to be evil, are too dearly loved to be parted with, while they can persuade
themselves they are secure in retaining them. I speak from experience, and do
earnestly recommend a turning to this light within, from all the 'Lo here is,'
and 'Lo there is;' the various appearances, signs, and shadows, set up by the
will and wisdom of men, in the times of darkness and apostasy; even to Christ
within, the hope of glory, the true foundation, 1 Cor. iii. 11; the rock
against which as it is faithfully abode in, even the gates of hell shall not
prevail, Mat. xvi. 18; nor all the opposition of men. This I believe is the
substance of every shadow, the reality of every appearance, the word nigh in
the mouth and in the heart; the true anointing, which is truth and no lie, and
which teaches all things without need of man's teaching. 1 John ii. 27. This
is the new covenant, graciously promised by the Most High. "I will put my law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people; and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord." Jer. xxxi.
33.34.

Behold said our Lord, the kingdom of God is within you. Luke xvii. 21. The
seed of the kingdom which is sown in the heart, though too small for the eye of
man's wisdom to discover, though it is still to the high professing Jew a
stumbling block, and to the worldly wise Greek foolishness; yet it is to those
who hear its call and obey it, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
1 Cor. i. 23, 24. This I believe is the new birth, without which our Lord
declared no one even could see the kingdom of God. John iii. 3. The birth which
is not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God, John i. 13. For that which is born of the flesh, however high and specious
its appearance, is still flesh; and that which is born of the spirit, however
mean and contemptible in the eye of man's wisdom, is spirit. The gospel is a
spiritual dispensation. The spirit of truth inwardly manifested, our Lord
promised should guide into all truth. John xvi. 13. The apostles were not to
leave Jerusalem till they had received it, Acts i. 4, and then we are informed,
"They spoke as the spirit gave them utterance." Acts ii. 4. We have no reason
to suppose they used any form of words, neither that they spoke when or where
they chose; but we are frequently informed of their going or forbearing, as by
the spirit they were directed; Acts viii. 29. xix. 7, etc. neither are we to
suppose that this influence and direction of the spirit was consined to any
period of time; for, says our Lord, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the world." Mat. xxviii. 20. What a departure from their example and
precepts is lamentably conspicuous among most professing Christians; who have
invented various images, forms, and modes of worship, which they can perform
when they please; evidently acknowledging that they think the influence and
assistance of the spirit unnecessary; at least that they will begin at a
venture, whether it may come or not! Surely it may be well to consider, whether
it is not offering strange sire before the Lord. Lev. x. 1. The only true
worship under the gospel dispensation, is, agreeably to our Lord's express
declaration, that which is in spirit and in truth, John iv. 24, and as the
influences and movings of the spirit, (although so absolutely necessary, as
that no acceptable worship can be performed without them) are not at our
command; how proper, yea, how needful then, is an humble, silent, dependent
waiting upon Him, who alone can administer this assistance; that thereby the
true preparation of the heart may be experienced, to receive whatever He, who
searches the heart, and who alone knows what is good for those who wait upon
him, may be pleased to administer: whether immediately, by his still small
voice in the secret of the heart; or instrumentally, by whomsoever he may
please to appoint!

"They that wait upon the Lord," said the Prophet, "shall renew their
strength." Isa. xl. 31. It is the professed object of most assemblies for
religious worship, to wait upon the Lord. Now, whether those who in solemn
humble silence, wait to feel the influences of the spirit, to instruct and
enable, when and what to offer, or what immediately to receive from the
fountain of good, are such as that promise applies to; or those who are always
ready to begin, either in a prescribed form, or in the exercise of their own
natural or acquired abilities, whether they may have the assistance so
necessary or not; I think a little serious consideration may determine. Indeed
the plain express meaning of the term, Waiting, appears to me to be a silent,
attentive expectation of something; and if it is weightily considered, that, at
such times, we more particularly profess to approach the sacred presence of Him
"who searches the heart, tries the reins, and requires truth in the inward
parts;" who cannot possibly be deceived or amused by the most plausible
expressions or the most eloquent language; who has decidedly condemned the
practice of drawing near to him with the mouth, and honoring him with the
lips, whilst the heart is far from him; Isa. xxix. 13, surely it is needful at
such times to wait, silently wait, for the reception of spiritual power, lest
we should be like those who offer the sacrifice of fools. Eccles. v. 1. "Let
not thine heart," said the wise man, "be hasty to utter any thing before God,
for God is in heaven and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few. ver.
2. "Without me," said our blessed Lord, "ye can do nothing." John xv. 5. Yet
the practice of many who profess to follow him, evidently declares that they
think they can do without him, for they are, as to words and outward
performances, always ready. The apostle plainly declared, that "we know not
what we should pray for as we ought, but it is the spirit that helps our
infirmities." Romans viii. 26. Then what are all the arts of composition, and the
powers of human eloquence, without this assistance, but as "sounding brass or a
tinkling cymbal?" "When ye pray," said our Lord, "use not vain repititions as
the heathen do; for they think they shall be heard, for their much speaking:"
Mat. vi. 7, a Language too applicable, I fear, not only to the prescribed
formal prayers, but to the more private extempore productions, as though prayer
consisted in outward expression; an idea repeatedly condemned in the Scriptures
of Truth.

The apostle, after saying we know not what to pray for, adds, "The spirit
itself makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered," and
Christ called them hypocrites who prayed to be seen of men; Matt. vi. 5, and
directed his disciples to pray in secret to the father; who sees in secret.
ver. 6. The apostle also recommends a praying always, with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance. Ephesians.
vi 18. He does not recommend to begin singing as soon as they conclude a
prayer. In another place, he exhorts to a "Continuing instant in prayer;" Romans
xii. 12. again, "Pray without ceasing;" 1 These. v. 17 from all which I think it
must appear that there may be true prayer without words, and that there may
also be words without prayer. I believe there are those possessed of
considerable abilities, a ready flow of words, and a pleasing eloquent
delivery, who can at any time when they please, deliver what I have heard
called an excellent prayer; without waiting to feel that influence, which can
alone enable to "pray with the spirit, and with true understanding;" but though
such exercises may produce a temporary warmth, both in speaker and hearer, I
believe, it will be found to be only a fire of their own kindling, a mere
appearance, and not the effects of the live coal from the true altar. Isa. vi.
6. The same observations are equally applicable to every other external
performance of worship, public or private: for however it may affect the
outward ear, yea, and kindle sparks, as it were producing a temporary warmth;
if it does not proceed from the immediate sensible movings of the spirit of
truth, I much fear the appellation of will worship is too applicable to it.

I have also had a fear, that a language of old, respecting some of whom it was
said, "They limited the Holy One of Israel," Psa. lxxviii. 41. is applicable to
most professing religious societies, where any particular man or set of men,
assume to themselves the exclusive right of teaching or preaching: a practice I
believe totally repugnant to the gospel dispensation, and the uniform example
and precepts of Christ and his apostles. For I fully believe that no human
authority, call, qualification, or ordination, can make a minister of Christ.
That is the prerogative of Christ himself. It is absolutely necessary that
every individual Christian should be born of the spirit; John iii. 5. and
surely it must also be necessary that the ministers of Christ should, in an
especial manner, be so too. Paul said he was made an apostle, "Not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father." Gal. i. 1. And, as I
before observed, the dispensation of the gospel being a "dispensation of the
spirit," the ministers thereof are ministers of the spirit, and not of the
letter: not ministers of the word only, though scripture words themselves; but
of the "word of eternal life," even of the "word which was in the beginning,
which lives and abides forever." 1 Pet. i. 23. That word which is quick and
powerful, discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart." Heb. iv. 12. Words
may have, and no doubt have, their service, as the spirit brings to
remembrance, and gives utterance; but to steal the words of Scripture, see
Jer. xxiii. 30, 31. and put them in a premeditated form, however eloquently
they may be delivered, I believe is not preaching the gospel. But I believe,
that they who are particularly called, qualified, and sent by Christ himself,
as I believe every true minister is, will not presume to preach or pray, when,
where, or what they please; but as they are immediately moved and directed by
the spirit of Christ, inwardly revealed; see Gal. i. 16. who can alone know
what is needful to be administered, and these as they freely receive, they
will, agreeably to our Lord's command, Freely give, Mat. x. 8. etc. "without
any view to temporal interest whatever. And as they are not their own, they
cannot dispose of their time or talents, according to their own wills; but as
He who has called them is pleased to direct.

To conclude: the few observations I have now offered, may perhaps, to
unprejudiced minds, be sufficient to evince the inward spiritual nature of the
gospel dispensation; and that signs and figures, all external ceremonial
performances, are totally abolished from that worship, which can only be
performed in spirit and in truth; John iv. 23, 24.

They may also evince that the only necessary qualification for true worship,
is the influence and direction of the spirit of truth inwardly revealed: that
this necessary assistance is not confined to time or place, nor to any
particular man or set of men. For as the apostle declared, "The manifestation
of the spirit is given to every man, to profit withal," 1 Cor. xii. 7. I
believe there are no individuals arrived to the years of discretion, but who
are favored with a sufficient portion thereof, if properly attended to, to
direct them into the paths of true judgment. The word even the word of eternal
life, is nigh to all, nor need any look to men for instruction; but this same
anointing, if the mind is simply and unreservedly directed to it, teaches all
things and is truth. 1 John ii. 27. Who is there, who has not felt its secret
reproofs for evil, and its approbation for good? To this true teacher, of whose
all sufficient aid I have thankfully to acknowledge a degree of experience, I
do earnestly recommend the particular, unwearied, faithful, attention of every
individual.

JOHN SPALDING.
Reading, 30 th of the 7 th Month, 1794,

