AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4th, 1799, AT THE REQUEST OF THE CITIZENS OF THE
TOWN OF SUFFIELD, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN SMITH.

"We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created equal; that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. -- That to secure these
rights, Governments are instituted amongst men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed."

Declaration of Independence. PRINTED AT SUFFIELD, BY EDWARD GRAY. JULY, 1799.

JULY 4th, 1799.
VOTED,

"THAT Col. LOMIS, and Mr. DANIEL AUSTIN, be a Committee to wait on, and
present the thanks of this Assembly to Mr. JOHN SMITH, for his ORATION, this
day delivered, and that said Committee do request of him a Copy that it may be
printed."

Extract from the Minutes, H. HUNTINGTON, Clerk.
IN pursuance of the above Vote, the Subscribers waited on Mr. SMITH, with the
thanks of the Assembly, and requested a Copy of this ORATION for the press.

Committee.
LUTHER LOMIS, DANIEL AUSTIN,




AN ORATION.
This Day, My Fellow-Citizens,
WE have met, to solemnize the Nativity of our Political Independence, and to
unite in a chorus of thanksgiving for our emancipation from foreign dominion.
-- What object, more interesting, can attach the feelings of the human heart;
what subject more worthy the attention of the philosopher? At such a scene the
apathy of a stoic must warm into passion, and selfishness into philanthropy.
Not to feel, were unworthy to be free. As Americans, we have but one interest;
as Freemen, we are entitled to an independency of opinion. Calmness of
discussion should therefore be substituted for passionate disputation, and
rational argument for the insolence of resentment. Neither the rancor of
private enmity, nor the acrimony of party bickering, should allay the hilarity
of the festive board, nor check the glowing enthusiasm of general sentiment.

AMONG the revolutions which have varied the relations of man, the principles
and consequences of our own, are calculated to arrest the observation of the
philanthropist, and to furnish the intelligent mind with ideas unknown to
antiquity.

THE causes and effects of such a change, the means of preserving its
permanency, and the beneficent effects of a similar general system, are the
subjects of our present address; and are objects not unworthy the consideration
of Freemen.

THAT love of equal liberty, so natural to the mind of man, impelled our
ancestors to seek, in the uncultivated wilds of America, a refuge from
oppression. A choice of sufferings was there only alternative. At home, the
unappeasable bigot armed with implements of torture, here, the painted savage,
with an uplifted scalping knife, stood ready for sacrafice. The mercy of a
pagan was prefered to the salutary chastisement of perverted christianity. --
Struggling under the hard vicissitudes of the climate, subjected to poverty,
disease and death, they sought their remedy in perseverance, and their
consolation in religion.

THE settlements in this Country gradually rose to that respectability and
importance, as early to attract the attention of England. The children, whom
she had once disavowed, and rejected from her bosom while in a state of
infancy, to whose wants she had administered no relief, and whose cries of
distress had not excited a tear of sensibility, she now, since the vigor of
their own constitution had conquered every difficulty, and overcome every
danger, was willing to take to her parental arms, and cherish with the fondest
feelings of maternal affection.

THE connection between this Country and Great Britain, was gradually acquiring
a consistency, which bid fair to be of long duration. But the Spanish and
French wars had so incumbered the nation with debt and reduced the state of her
finances, that, not content with monopolizing the trade of this Country, she
wished for the privilege of a more intimate union, and, without the formality
of asking to extort from us the hard earned fruits of our industry. Under the
pretense of reimbursing herself for the expense she had been at in protecting
us, it was requested, not as a favor, but as a right. This, to a people who had
been nurtured in the principles of justice, and educated in the school of
equality, sounded more like the command of a master over his obsequious slave,
than the mild invitation of a parent, who regards the prosperity of his
offspring. The strength of our attachment was not so great as to lead us to
voluntary vassalage. Every imposition, whether in the form of stamped paper, or
the more palatable one of a dish of tea, was resisted with firmness, and
opposed as unconstitutional. The repeal of one oppressive act, was followed by
another equally oppressive, till the parliament, in the petulance of anger, and
in the true spirit of tyranny, declared, that they had a right to tax us,
without our consent, in all cases whatever. We now, no longer saw the
benevolent aspect of a parent. The veil was drawn aside; and the features of
the government were displayed in all their native deformity. Finding that the
sophistry of the cabinet, and the logic of an act of parliament, were
insufficient to convince our understandings of the rectitude of their measures,
they adopted, as irresistible, the kingly reasoning of the sword, and the royal
argument of the bayonet. America, from the posture of a suppliant, assumed the
attitude of a hero. The humble voice of a petitioner, was changed to the manly
tone of resistance, and the servility of address to the spirit of Independence.

THE progress of the revolution, called forth all the energies of our Country,
whether it were to oppose the enemy, in the field, or to detect the insidious
policy of their temporising plans of accommodation. We fought, we bled, we
conquered. By the assistance of a nation, whom now, it has become impiety to
name, the arms of Britain were disgraced; the Lion, who had committed such wide
havoc in the Indies, who had so often awaked Europe from her slumbers, retired
silently to his den, defeated in his attempt, and mortified with the loss of
his booty.

THAT wisdom, which guided us through the tempest of the revolution, which
conducted us through every danger, and cheered our spirits amidst the
calamatous vicissitudes of war, had yet to perform an act, which was to secure
to us, and to posterity, the reward of our toils, and the compensation of our
sufferings. In this act, we recognize the Federal Constitution, bottomed on the
broad basis of the Rights of Man. The equality of nature pervades the whole;
the sovereignty of the people is established; and those oppressive
distinctions, of king and of subject, of noble and of vassal, of churchman and
of papist, are excluded. Here religious worship, unconstrained, emanates from
the heart, without the fear of punishment; here the exclusion of religious
subordination, secludes the possibility of ecclesiastical despotism. The state
chicanery of punishing one for the crimes of another, in order to make the
latter infallible, is rejected as preposterous. No one is elevated above the
laws, nor placed in such a state of political infallibility that he can do no
wrong. As government derives its power from the community, as it is created for
its benefit, every one, to whom power is delegated, is personally responsible
for the abuse. The delinquent is to be tried before the tribunal of public
censure, or arraigned before the legislative assembly of the union. A
Government, like this, founded on the whole collected wisdom of the people,
bids fair to produce effects unknown to any similar establishments of
antiquity, which, at best, were ill concerted plans of systematized faction.
Here the whole materials are collected from the people, the edifice is erected
on their rights, balanced by their power, and amendable at their pleasure.
Here are not, as at Rome, discordant interests between the Senate and People,
to disturb the tranquillity of society; the plebian and patrician are one, and
are equally eligible to the highest, and most honorable offices of the State.
The unity of interest between the citizen in private life, and the one engaged
in the service of the public, supersedes the necessity of a standing army to
awe into obedience, or compel into submission. The dependence of each
individual on the suffrages of the people for his elevation to office, and the
frequent recurrence he must have to the same mode of election for his
continuance, bind him so firmly to the interest of the public, and so
intimately blend his own, with the welfare of his constituents, as will insure
the enaction of beneficent laws, and a steady adherence to the interests of the
community. War, which in most countries, is suspended on the dictum of an
individual, or waits with complaisance in the antichamber of a corrupt
nobility, must here, rest on the concurrence of united interest, and on the
deliberate will of a majority of the people.

THE practice, under such a system, must be wise, patriotic, and benevolent. In
its progress we have experienced the most gratifying effects. The general
outlines of the picture are strongly marked with the pencil of integrity and
mildness; a feature is now and then distorted with a shade of insurrection,
touched by the hand of faction, or by the finger of some designing political
dauber.

TO secure these blessings to ourselves, and to posterity, to transmit them
unimpaired to future generations "to the last syllable of recorded time," is a
duty, sacred and indispensable, a duty, incumbent upon us as the guardians of
the constitution, and as the asserters of the rights of humanity, a duty, that
will call forth all the faculties of the mind, and all the virtues of the heart.

AS the vices of mankind are the origin of all government, the necessity for
energy in any government, will be in proportion to the vices which it creates,
one reciprocally generating the other, till the people are either depressed
into servitude, or till the tyrant is crumbled into dust. It depends,
therefore, upon the moral complexion of the government, the character of its
laws, and the system of its policy, whether its existence shall be transitory
or permanent, whether the rights of mankind shall stand secure, or be buried in
their ruins by the sacrilegious hand of despotism. -- When we survey man in a
natural state, unrestricted by the laws of civil society, moving at his
pleasure, and impelled by the propensities of his nature, his passions and his
appetites, are the rules of his conduct, and the measure of his benevolence.
His vices are thinly sown; his virtue is the result of his nature. It is in a
state of refinement only, that the moral nature of man is tortured into
ugliness; and it is under the operation of laws enacted for the pretended
purpose of moralizing his heart, that we discover the vilest features of man's
character. It is, therefore, an axiom, as true in politics, as it is
conformable to reason, that the office of government should be, to correct the
vices of the heart, and to supply the wants of nature. This is the true design
of uniting men by the bonds of civil society, and the only means of rendering
them more wise, more virtuous, and more happy -- Our own Government is better
calculated for the attainment of this end, than any other, as it is a
superstructure built upon the natural relations of man, and conformable to the
genuine elements of society. As we deviate from this plan, we recede from the
principles of nature, from the principles of moral rectitude, and from the true
scheme of social felicity. It is upon the principle of equality only, that man
can exist uncorrupted in society, exhibit the powers of his understanding, and
disclose the philanthropy of his soul.

THEREFORE, as virtue is the only support of a Government, organized like ours,
that we may avoid that vitiating policy, which has so defaced the moral traits
of the human mind, which has extinguished the light of reason, and subverted
the distinctions between virtue and vice, it will not be judged improper, to
take a general survey of their effects in other governments of the world.

NO one would have the hardihood, at the present time, to openly violate our
constitution, nor to go designedly forward for the avowed purpose of its
subversion. The execration of the people would be his reward, and his head, the
price of his temerity. It is the secret blow of the assassin that we have to
fear, and not the manly attack of a generous enemy. The slow and silent
progress of statute invasion, and a system of measures contravening the nature
of our constitution, whether they assume the shape of party spirit, whether
they come armed with the panoply of energetic patriotism, or be clothed with
the garb of official patronage, require the vigilance of suspicion, and the
prudence of economy.

BY a fatality, somewhat extraordinary, most governments have tended to confirm
the worst passions of the heart; and, as though there were not objects enough
in nature, artificial and imaginary ones have been devised, to rouse them into
activity. To fight a man, and reduce him to servitude, because his complexion
is not so fair as our own, to fight him because he will not believe in our God,
nor assume the exteriors of our worship, are principles not written in the book
of nature, nor impressed upon the heart by the hand of a beneficent Deity. The
laws of God, and of civil society have said, "thou shall not kill;" but most
governments say, you may kill for the sake of my honor, my glory, and my
profit. The injustice of the cause, is shrouded beneath the empty greatness of
a name, the breath of a state-church sanctifies the iniquity, and covers its
nakedness with the hood of pretended religion. By this means the great barrier
between virtue and vice, is broken down; the exercise of our judgment, without
which, neither can exist, is suspended between the honor of government, and the
infallibility of the church.

MOST religions have been infallible in proportion to their connection with the
State. In proportion to this connection, they have led the human mind astray
from the path of uprightness, they have rendered illegible the moral precepts
of nature, and obstructed the rays of pure unsophisticated christianity. All
ordinances of the civil government to compel men to any particular worship,
whether they issue from the Diet of an Empire, or from the Legislature of a
humble Republic, divert the mind from the true intent of religious association,
and convert it into a scene of hypocrisy, and into a solemn mockery of the
divine attributes of the Governor of the universe. But, here, religion,
unconnected with politics, is the free exercise of an unconstrained conscience,
and worship, uncompelled by statute, the spontaneous effusion of the soul.

TO the same treacherous policy, which prevents an inquiry into the merits of
war, are to assign that principle of most Governments, which renders the
measures of administration, and the motives of its conduct, too sacred for
investigation. And even in those Governments, as in England, where political
discussions are tolerated, the legal intrenchments thrown round the cabinet,
sufficiently protect it from the unhallowed footstep of popular curiosity.
Should any one there presume to express himself with freedom, his opinion must
drop abortive from the press, or, with all the fearful apprehension of
detection, must steal silently forth into day; and, if caught, must be punished
like a heritic, and stigmatized with the name of sedition. This restriction
serves as an ignis fatuus to conduct the writer into prison, and to strengthen
the arm of their Government by feeding an order of men devoted to its interest.
-- That reciprocal confidence between the Government and people, so necessary
to the tranquillity of state, flees from the distrustful countenance of such
dastardly policy, but meets with cordiality the liberal embrace of free
investigation. When a Government fears the approach of inquiry, a strong
suspicion may be excited, that its measures are not founded in justice, nor its
conduct guided by the interests of the community. Some design may be suspected
by the people; and if they dare not censure with openness, they will promote
disquietude in secret. That obedience only to laws, which results from a
general conviction of their utility, which arises from an open examination into
the motives of the Legislature, can accord with the dignity of man, can be the
only certain and vigorous means of their execution, and the only energy of
Government founded upon the supremacy of the people. A machine that moves by
the involuntary impulse of the wind, is as much a moral agent, and as rational
in its obedience, as the willing subject of a Kingly Government, should he
chance to stumble upon his duty, or should he have the good fortune not to
break a law which he never knew. So remote from every principle of virtue, is
the disuse of our understanding in tracing the reasonableness of our duty, that
by degrees, the moral faculties of man lose their vigor, the power of
discrimination is debilitated; conscience, which wakes only as it knows a rule,
ceases to approbate; and the whole intelligence of the mind, is obscured by one
general incrustation of ignorance, of venality, and of selfishness.

EVERY inequality in the laws of a government, founded on the equal rights of
Man, is subversive of its principle, and destructive to that equilibrium which
invigorates the Constitution. The whole wealth of the nation should circulate,
without obstruction, through every channel of society. Neither the monopoly of
a company of merchants, nor the right of primogeniture, should furnish the
former with the means of oppression, nor the latter with a title to hereditary
insolence. -- Every man, when he enters into society, has an equal claim its
protection, and an equal claim to the necessaries of subsistence. For the laws,
therefore, to operate with partiality in the distribution of property, is
unjustly depriving him of his birth right, and feloniously taking from his
mouth that morsel of bread, which the hand of nature had bounteously given. To
protect the fruit of personal industry, and to secure to every man the
exclusive enjoyment of private property, is, undoubtedly, the object of
municipal law, without which, the object of Government is unattained, and every
incentive to exertion is destroyed. But directing the force of a law, to the
aggrandizement of an individual, or perpetuating, by its influence, an
inheritance in any particular family, is obstructing the current of justice,
and depriving the body of community of those motives to industry, which must
exist in a country where the acquisition of property is freed from such devious
policy, from the encumbrance of tithes, and from the fetters of entailment. --
The tendency of such unnatural distribution, is luxury, profligacy, and vice,
on one hand, and on the other, poverty, wretchedness, and crimes; on one hand
are insolence and oppression, and on the other, tame servility and passive
obedience. The sources of benevolence are dried up; the sensibilities of the
heart are obliterated; the tender sympathies and social attractions of our
nature, are congealed by the cold hand of pecuniary avarice. Governments, in
general, to remedy these evils, which their own injustice has created, invent
new crimes not recorded in the volume of nature, and confound the morality of
actions, by teaching mankind, that destroying the life of a fellow being, and
taking the money from his pocket, are acts equally abhorrent from the
principles of justice. The idol property, clothed in a bloody mantle, stands on
a scaffold, holding in one hand the suffocating halter, and in the other, a
sanguine ax, reeking with the blood of a just expiring victim. The very law,
which was meant to restrain, conducts to new crimes; and the punishment of one
leads to the commission of many. The laws of forfeiture and escheat, are a
contract between government and iniquity. The crime of a father, deprives a
family of subsistence, and clothes them with poverty, infamy, and wretchedness.
The calls of nature, and of self-preservation, more imperious than the unjust
mandate of civil power, or the mortifying practice of beggary, urge them upon
the benevolence of their enemies, or into the society of a band of robbers. The
former leads to a voluntary, or, perhaps, to a necessary death, and the latter
to a legal one.

SO indissoluble is the union between natural and moral evil, that, by removing
the causes of the one, you destroy the propensities to the other. Whether
penury be the effect of a forfeiture, or the slow consequence of an unjust
system of taxation, its influence is the same; and, unless the principles of
our nature be totally perverted, it must seek a satisfaction from the charity
of wealth, or fly for relief to the perpetration of crimes. As long, therefore,
as revenue is the principle object of government, as long as private vices are
considered public benefits, and national treasures are filled with the price of
iniquity, so long will nations be oppressed with the blessing of a public debt,
so long will laws generate vice, and mankind groan under a Draconian code of
penal law.

THIS will lead us into a short consideration of the benefits flowing from an
extended civil list, and from national debt.

THE wealth of a people does not consist in the quantity of money which fills
the exchequer, nor in what may be collected in revenue* but in the aggregate
amount of individual property, whether it be appropriated to merchandise, to
the improvement of agriculture, or to the encouragement of manufactures. It may
be said then, that the more a nation are indebted to themselves, the more is
the public stock, for the attainment of these ends, increased. This idea,
however pleasing, is but a delusion, supported by a political sophistry founded
on interest. For the property invested in this debt, is a diversion only of a
capital from the purposes of husbandry, to the purposes of merchandise, a
change of taxes into an exchequer bill, made current by a credit, which is
propped by the industry of the people. The increase, therefore, of this paper
medium, must gradully exhaust the resources of agricultural improvement,
diminish the raw materials for the support of manufactures, and ultimately ruin
the business of commerce. Most governments, to pay the interest of this debt,
guard, with sanguinary laws, the property of the subject from individual
aggression, to secure it to themselves, and check the motives of private
avarice, to satiate the appetite of their own rapacity.

THE necessary causes for the accumulation of public debt are few. Too often
have unjustifiable wars, the extravagance of governments, and their want of
economy in time of peace, drained those funds, which should be reserved for the
season of danger, and for the purposes of defense. Posterity are saddled with
the expense of their fathers' prodigality; they not only toil beneath the load
of an hereditary debt, but beggar themselves, or draw bills on their
successors, to supply the demands of their own necessities.

REVENUE, as an instrument of power, is devoutly to be imprecated.

ADOPTING for a principle, that man, as he has opportunity, will be tyrannical,
the duty of the people will be, to secure their rights from the open assaults
of prerogative, and from the covert attacks of influence and patronage. For
power, unless wisely restricted, whether it be clad in the royal majesty of the
former, or the more deceptive garb of the latter, will be equally infallible in
its operation, and equally destructive to its object.

TO modern times only are we indebted for the sublime discovery, that a people
may be as completely enslaved by the influence of office, and of favoritism, as
by the more open and avowed attempts of arbitrary power. In Great Britain we
may learn the stupendous effects of this modern mode of warfare against the
unalienable privileges of man; and, in Ireland, the lesson is too impresive to
be easily forgotten. The Magna Charta of English liberty, and the bill of
rights confirmed in the reign of Charles the first, have been but feeble
barriers against the silent encroachments of official influence; their forms
only remain, while their substance has mouldered away. Of what avail is it,
that the people have a check upon the prerogative of declaring war, when their
representatives are nothing but pillars for the support of the crown; of what
avail is it, that they can withhold an appropriation, when his Majesty can say
to their representatives "be ye clothed and fed?" It is by this means that a
body of men are created, who find it for their interest to perpetuate the
abuses of government, and to retain its shadow, when its vital spirit is
extinguished. The vast combination of officers, pensioners, and p^^^cemen, who
surround the throne, and live on the spoils of the constitution, keep up the
farce, that public debt is a blessing, that reform would be dangerous, and
innovation certain destruction. It is by this means, that the power of the
people, in reforming its representation, and constitutionally attempting the
repeal of any obnoxious law, which is not only a right but a duty, is rendered
nerveless and ineffectual.

THE splendour of the Crown, the dignity of office, the glory of the nation, are
made the catch-penny words for the increase of salary, and for the augmentation
of revenue. The wealth, which is thus ferretted from the pockets of the people,
either returns upon them in a corrupted tide for the procurement of pleasure,
and for the purchase of promotion, or dazzles their eyes, and insults their
feelings with the pageantry of a court, making their oppression more cruel, and
their poverty more conspicuous. The government to support its measures is now
under the necessity of feeding a standing army. This answers the double purpose
of increasing the revenue, and of enforcing its collecon. The designs of the
cabinet are covered by a war on the continent; the honor of the nation abroad
diverts its mind from the load of oppression at home; and the idea of
conquering a foreign enemy, shuts its eyes to a domestic one.

THE effect of a standing army upon the mind of a free community, is
destructive to the spirit of independence. The people will progressively
believe, and practically be drawn into the opinion, that the army, and not
themselves, are the means of their protection. That sense of their own
importance, that dignity as the assertors of their own rights, and defenders of
their own interest, will quickly expire; and the privilege of having arms for
their defense, which is a fruit of the unalienable right of self preservation,
will be considered as useless. In this situation, a game law, or some piece of
policy, alike insidious, would disarm the community without a struggle, and
destroy its independence without the power of retraction. Some designing
demagogue, like Dionysius, would subvert the liberties of his country, or some
enthusiastical hypocrite, like Cromwell, under the color of expelling a
tyranny, would on its ruins establish a greater.

THE system of measures, pursued by Great Britain toward this Country,
presents itself as an incontestible example of the arbitrary schemes, to which
a government will recur, when, depressed with debt, its aim is the augmentation
of revenue. Had the evil genius of America suffered the imposition, the budding
prosperity of our Country would have been blasted by the pestiferous influence
of a mercenary band of officers; still should we bask in the sunshine of royal
favor, and shine the dim satellite of a foreign power. But too wise to be
deluded, too enlightened not to see the consequences, we proclaimed our
independence, and established the rights of Man. With the errors of others
before us for our instruction, with the impressions of our own experience to
teach us wisdom, it would be the consummation of folly, and of madness, not to
preserve entire, and unsullied, the fruit of our labors, and the price of our
blood.

THE records of our emancipation will be deposited among the archives of
glorious events. Our revolution will be the epoch from whence will be dated the
commencement of man's political freedom; it will be to the civil world, what
the reformation was to the religious, the means of restoring the polity of
nations, to the true principles of reason, and the means of erecting the
happiness of man on the social affections of his nature. The other
establishments of the world, have risen on the ruins of natural equality, and
on an inversion of the elements of society. In proportion, as they have
subverted these, they have corrupted the principles of virtue, and demoralized
the intelligence of the human heart. To destroy, therefore, these unnatural
excressences, which have vegetated from those abuses, the just, and only
effectual remedy, is to eradicate the cause, and to probe the wound to the
bottom of the malady. Then, no longer, will tyranny make the tear of distress
glisten from the eye of humanity; then will the wide wasting influence of
despotism, cease from its ravages. The peasant will no longer expire with
hunger, while reaping the harvest of his lord. Towns depopulated by war, and
whole provinces laid desolate, will no more strike the beholder with dismay,
nor excite a pang of sensibility for the calamities of human nature. The
instruments of oppression, the pageantry of kings, the pomp of nobility, and
the hypocrisy of political priesthood, "will dissolve, and, like the baseless
fabric of a vision, leave not a wreck behind."

FINIS.

