A BILL FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE NAVY OF THE UNITED STATES.

23d January, 1799, Read the first and second time, and committed to a
Committee of the whole House, on Monday next.

[Published by order of the House of Representatives.]

23d January, 1799, Read the first and second time, and committed to a
Committee of the whole House, on Monday next.
A BILL For the government of the Navy of the United States.
SEC. I. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled, That the following rules and
regulations be adopted and put in force, for the government of the navy of the
United States.

ARTICLE 1. The commanders of all ships and vessels belonging to the United
States, are strictly required to show in themselves a good example, of honor
and virtue to their officers and men, and to be very vigilant in inspecting the
behavior of all such as are under them, and to discountenance and suppress,
all dissolute, immoral, and disorderly practices, and also such as are contrary
to the rules of discipline and obedience, and to correct those who are guilty
of the same, according to the usage of the sea service.

2. The commanders of the ships of the United States, having on board
chaplains, are to take care, that divine service be performed twice a day, and
a sermon preached on Sundays, unless bad weather, or other extraordinary
accidents prevent.

3. Any person who shall be guilty of profane swearing, or of drunkenness, if a
seaman or marine, shall be put in irons until sober, and then slogged if the
captain shall think proper -- but if an officer, he shall forfeit two days pay,
or incur such punishment as a court martial shall impose, and as the nature and
degree of the offense shall deserve.

4. No commander, for any one offense, shall inflict any punishment upon a
seaman or marine beyond twelve lashes upon his bare back with a cat of nine
tails, and no other cat shall be made use of on board any ship of war, or other
vessel belonging to the United States -- if the fault shall deserve a greater
punishment, he is to apply to the Secretary of the Navy, the commander in chief
of the navy, or the commander of a squadron, in order to the trying of him by a
court martial; and in the mean time he may put him under confinement.

5. The commander is never by his own authority to discharge a commission or
warrant officer, nor to punish or strike him, but he may suspend or confine
him, and when he comes in the way of the Secretary of the Navy, the commander
in chief of the navy, or the commander of a squadron, may apply for holding a
court martial.

6. The officer who commands by accident in the captain or commander's absence
(unless he be absent for a time by leave) shall not order any correction but
confinement, and upon the captain's return on board, he shall then give an
account of his reasons for so doing.

7. The captain is to cause the articles of war to be hung up in some public
place of the ship, and read to the ship's company once a month.

8. Whenever a captain shall enter or inlist a seaman, he shall take care to
enter on his books, the time and terms of his entering, in order to his being
justly paid.

9. The captain shall, before he sails, make return to the Secretary of the
Navy, a complete list of all his officers and men, with the time and terms of
their entering, and during his cruise or station, shall keep a true account of
the desertion or death of any of them, and of the entering of others, and after
the expiration of the time for which they were entered, and before any of them
are paid off, he shall make return of a complete list of the same, including
those who shall remain on board his ship.

10. The men shall, at their request, be furnished with slops that are
necessary, by order of the captain, and the amount delivered to each man, shall
be regularly returned by the purser, so that the same be stopped out of his pay.

11. All officers not having commissions or warrants, (or appointed commission
or warrant officers for the time being) are termed petty, or inferior officers.

12. Whenever any inferior officer, seaman, or other person, be turned over
into the ship of a commander other than the one with whom he entered, he is not
to be rated on the ship's books, in a worse quality, or lower degree or
station, than he served in the ship he was removed from; and for the guide of
the captain, he is to demand from the commander of the ship from which such
person or persons were turned over, a list, under his hand, of his or their
names, and the quality in which he or they served.

13. Any officer, seaman or others, entitled to wages or prize money, may have
the same paid to his assignee, provided the assignment be attested by the
captain and the purser; but the captain or commander of every vessel in the
service of the United States, is to discourage his crew from selling any part
of their wages or prize money, and never to attest the letter of attorney until
he is satisfied that the same is not granted in consideration of money given
for the purchase of wages, or shares of prize money.

14. When any officer or other person dies, the captain is forthwith to have
his name entered on the books of the ship, in order to the wages being
forthwith paid to his executors or administrators.

15. A convenient place shall be set apart for the sick or hurt men, to which
they are to be removed with their hammocks and bedding, when the surgeon shall
advise the same to be necessary, and some of the crew shall be appointed to
attend them, and keep the place clean; -- cradles and buckets, with covers,
shall be made for their use, if necessary.

16. All ships furnished with fishing tackle, being in such places where fish
is to be had, the captain is to employ some of the company in fishing. -- The
fish to be daily distributed to such persons as are sick, or upon recovery,
provided the surgeon recommend it, and the surplus, by turns, amongst the
messes of the officers and seaman, gratis, without any deduction of their
allowance of provisions on that account.

17. It is left to the discretion of commanders of squadrons, to shorten the
allowance of provisions according to the exigence of the service, taking care
that the men be punctually paid for the same -- the like power is given to
captains of ships acting singly, where it is deemed necessary, and if there
should be a want of pork, the captain is to order three pounds of beef to be
issued in lieu of two pounds of pork.

18. If any ships of the United States shall happen to come into port in want
of provisions, the warrant of the commander of the squadron, or a captain where
there is no commander of a squadron present, shall be sufficient to procure the
supply of the quantity wanted, from the agent, or navy agent at such port.

19. The captains are frequently to cause to be inspected the condition of the
provision, and if the bread proves damp, to have it aired upon the quarter
deck, and other convenient places, and in case of the pickle being leaked out
of the flesh casks, he is to have new pickle made and put therein, after such
casks are repaired.

20. The captain shall cause the purser to secure the clothes, bedding and
other things, of such persons as shall die or be killed, to be delivered to
their executors or administrators.

21. All papers, charter-parties, bills of lading, passports, and other
writings whatsoever, found on board any ship or ships which shall be taken,
shall be carefully preserved and the originals sent to the court of justice for
maritime affairs, appointed or to be appointed for judging concerning such
prize or prizes, and if any person or persons shall wilfully or negligently
destroy or suffer to be destroyed any such paper or papers, he or they so
offending shall forfeit his or their share of such prize or prizes, and suffer
such other punishment as they shall be judged by a court martial to deserve;
and if any person or persons shall embezzle or steal, or take away any cables,
anchors, sails or any of the ships furniture, or any of the powder, arms,
ammunition, or provisions of any ship belonging to the United States, or of any
prize taken by a ship or ships, aforesaid, or maltreat or steal the effects of
any prisoner, he or they so offending shall suffer such punishment as a court
martial shall order.

22. When in sight of any ship, ships or other vessels of the enemy, or at such
other time as may appear necessary to prepare for an engagement, the captain
shall order all things in his ship in a proper posture for fight, and shall, in
his own person, and according to his duty, heart on and encourage the inferior
officers and men to fight courageously, and not to behave themselves faintly or
cry for quarters on pain of such punishment as the offense shall appear to
deserve for his neglect.

23. Any captain, officer or others who shall not exert himself or who shall
basely desert his duty or station in the ship, and run away while the enemy is
in sight, or in time of action, or shall entice others to do so, shall suffer
death, or such other punishment as a court martial shall inflict.

24. Any officer, seaman, mariner or others, who shall disobey the orders of
his superior, or begin, excite, cause or join in any mutiny or sedition in the
ship to which he belongs, or in any other ship or vessel in the service of the
United States, on any pretense whatsoever, shall suffer death, or such other
punishment as a court martial shall direct -- and further, any person in any
ship or vessel belonging to the service aforesaid, who shall utter any words of
sedition and mutiny, or endeavor to make any mutinous assembly on any pretense
whatsoever, shall suffer such punishment as a court martial shall inflict.

25. None shall presume to quarrel with or strike his superior officer on pain
of such punishment as a court martial shall order to be inflicted.

26. If any person, shall apprehend he has just cause of complaint, he shall
quietly and decently make the same known to his superior officer, or to the
captain, as the case may require, who shall take care that justice be done him.

27. There shall be no quarrelling or fighting between ship mates on board any
ship belonging to the United States, nor shall there be used any reproachful or
provoking speeches, tending to make quarrels and disturbances, on pain of
imprisonment, or of such punishment as the captain, or a court martial shall
judge proper to inflict.

28. If any person shall sleep upon his watch, or negligently perform the duty
which shall be enjoined him to do, he shall suffer such punishment as the
captain, or a court martial shall inflict.

29. All murder shall be punished with death.

30. All robbery and theft, not exceeding twenty dollars, shall be punished at
the discretion of the captain, and above that sum as a court martial shall
inflict.

31. Any master of arms, or other person of whom the like duty may be required,
refusing to receive such prisoner or prisoners, as shall be committed to his
charge, or having received them shall suffer him or them to escape, or dismiss
them without orders from his captain, the commander in chief of the navy or the
commander of a squadron, for so doing, shall suffer in his or their stead as a
court martial shall order and direct.

32. The captains, officers and others shall use their utmost endeavors to
detect, apprehend, and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall at all
times, readily assist all officers and others appointed for that purpose, in
the discharge of such duty, when it is required, on pain of being proceeded
against and punished by a court martial at discretion.

33. If any officer whatsoever, mariner, marine soldier, or other person,
belonging to any ship or vessel of war in the service of the United States,
shall give, hold or entertain intelligence to or with any enemy or rebel,
without leave from the government, commander in chief, or in case of a single
ship, from his captain every such person so offending, and being thereof
convicted by the sentence of a court martial, shall be punished with death.

34. If any letter or message from an enemy or rebel be conveyed to any
officer, mariner, marine or other person, belonging to any ship or vessel in
the service of the United States, and the person as aforesaid shall not, within
twelve hours, having opportunity so to do, acquaint his superior or commander
in chief with it; or if any superior officer being acquainted therewith, shall
not in convenient time reveal the same to the commander in chief, commander of
a squadron or other proper officer, appointed to take cognizance of such
offense, every such person so offending, and being convicted thereof, by the
sentence of a court martial, shall be punished with death, or such other
punishment as the nature and degree of the offense shall deserve, and according
to the sentence of a court martial.

35. All spies, and all persons whatsoever who shall come or be found in the
nature of spies, to bring or deliver any seducing letter or message from an
enemy or rebel, or endeavor to corrupt any captain, officer, mariner, marine
or other person in the fleet, to betray his trust, being convicted of any such
offense by the sentence of a court martial, shall be punished with death, or
such other punishment as the nature and decree of the offense shall deserve,
and the court martial shall impose.

36. No person in a fleet, or in a single ship or vessel, shall supply an enemy
or rebel with stores, money, victuals, arms, ammunition, or any kind of stores,
directly or indirectly, upon pain of death, or such other punishment as a court
martial shall think fit to impose, and as the nature and degree of the crime
shall deserve.

37. Every person in on belonging to any ship or vessel in the service of the
United States, who shall desert, or run away with any vessel or boat, to the
enemy or otherwise, or with any effects of the United States whatsoever, or
yield up the same cowardly or treacherously shall suffer death, or such other
punishment as a court martial shall inflict.

38. The officers and seamen, etc. of all ships appointed for convoy and guard
of merchantmen, shall diligently attend upon that charge without delay,
according to their instructions, and whosoever shall be faulty therein, shall
be punished as a court martial shall direct.

39. If any captain, commander or other officer of any ship or vessel in the
service of the United States, shall receive or permit on board his vessel any
goods or merchandise, other than for the sole use of the vessel, except gold,
silver, or jewels, and except the goods and merchandise of vessels which may be
in distress or shipwrecked, or in imminent danger of being shipwrecked, in
order to preserve them for the proper owner, without legal orders from the
naval department, every person so offending being convicted thereof, by the
sentence of a court martial, shall be cashiered, and be forever afterward
rendered incapable to serve in any place or office in the navy service of the
United States.

40. There shall be no wasteful expense of any powder, shot, ammunition, or
other stores in the vessels belonging to the United States, nor any
embezzlement thereof, but the stores and provisions shall be carefully
preserved, upon pain of such punishment, to be inflicted upon the offenders,
abettors, buyers and receivers, as shall be by a court martial found just in
that behalf.

41. Every person in the navy who shall unlawfully burn or set fire to any kind
of public property, not then appertaining to an enemy, pirate or rebel, being
convicted of any such offense by the sentence of a court martial, shall suffer
death.

42. Care shall be taken in steering and conducting every ship belonging to the
United States, so that through wilfulness, negligence, or other defaults, no
ship be stranded or hazarded, upon pain that such as shall be found guilty
therein, be punished as the offense, by a court martial, shall be judged to
de^^^^

43. Every officer, or other person in the navy, who shall knowingly make or
sign a false muster, or procure the making or signing thereof, or shall aid or
abet in the same, shall be cashiered and rendered incapable of further
employment in the navy service of the United States, and shall forfeit all the
pay and subsistence money due to him.

44. Every person guilty of mutiny, desertion or disobedience to his superior
officer on shore, acting in the proper line of his duty, shall be tried by a
court martial, and suffer the like punishment for every such offense, as if the
same had been committed at sea, on board any ship or vessel of war in the
service of the United States.

45. If any person belonging to any ship or vessel of war in the service of the
United States, shall, when on shore, on duty, or otherwise, plunder, abuse, or
maltreat any inhabitant, or injure his property in any way, such person shall
be punished as a court martial shall direct.

46. All faults, disorders and misdemeanors which shall be committed on board
any ship belonging to the United States, and which are not herein mentioned,
shall be punished according to the laws and customs in such cases at sea.

47. No court martial, to be held or appointed by virtue of this act, shall
consist of more than thirteen, nor less than five persons, to be composed of
such commanders of squadrons, captains and sea lieutenants, as are then and
there present, and as are next in seniority to the officer who presides; but no
lieutenant shall set on a court martial, held on a captain, or a junior
lieutenant on that of a senior.

48. Every member of a court martial shall take the following oath: I, A. B. do
swear, that I will well and truly try and impartially determine the cause of
the prisoner now to be tried, according to the rules of the navy of the United
States -- so help me God. which oath shall be administered by the president to
the other members, and the president himself shall be sworn by the officer next
in rank; and as soon as the above oath shall have been administered, the
president of the court is required to administer to the judge advocate, or
person officiating as such, an oath in the following words -- I. A, B, do
swear, that I will not, upon any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose, or
discover the vote or opinion of any particular member of this court martial,
unless thereto required by an act of Congress -- so help me God. And all the
witnesses, before they be admitted to give evidence, shall take the following
oath -- I. A, B, do swear, that the evidence I shall give in the cause now in
hearing, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth -- so
help me God.

49. The sentence of a court martial for any capital offense, shall not be put
in execution, until it be confirmed by the commander in chief of the fleet. And
it shall be the duty of the president of every court martial, to transmit to
the commander in chief of the fleet, and to the head of the Navy Department,
every sentence which shall be given, with a summary of the evidence and
proceedings thereon, as soon as may be.

50. The commander in chief of the fleet, for the time being, shall have power
to pardon and remit any sentence of death, in consequence of any of the
aforementioned articles.

SEC. 2. And it is hereby further enacted. That if any person in the navy
service, being called upon to give evidence at any court martial, shall refuse
to give his evidence upon oath, or shall prevaricate in his evidence, or behave
with contempt to the court, it shall and may be lawful for such court martial
to punish such offender by imprisonment, at the discretion of the court; such
imprisonment, in no case, to to continue longer than three months; and that all
and every person and persons, who shall commit any wilful perjury in any
evidence or examination upon oath at such court martial, or who shall corruptly
procure, or suborn any person to commit such wilful perjury, shall and may be
prosecuted in any of the courts of the United States, by indictment or
information. And all and every person, lawfully convicted upon any such
indictment or information, shall be punished with such pains and penalties as
are inflicted for the like offenses by the laws therein provided.

SEC. 3. And it is hereby further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That in
all cases where the crews of the ships or vessels of the United States shall be
separated from their vessels, by the latter being wrecked, lost, or destroyed,
all the command, power and authority given to the officers of such ships or
vessels, shall remain and be in full force as effectually as if such ship or
vessel was not so wrecked, lost or destroyed, until they shall be regularly
discharged from the service of the United States, or removed into some other of
it is said ships, or until a court martial shall be held, to enquire into such
loss of the said ship or vessel: and if upon enquiry it shall appear by the
sentence of the court martial, that all or any of the officers, seamen,
marines, and others of the said ship or vessel, did their utmost to preserve,
get off, or recover the said ship or vessel, and after the loss thereof did
behave themselves obediently to their superior officers, according to the
discipline of the navy, and the said articles and orders herein before
established, then all the pay and wages of the said officers and seamen, or
such of them as shall have done their duty as aforesaid, shall continue and go
on, and be paid to the time of their discharge or death; and every such officer
or seaman, who, after the wreck or loss of his said ship or vessel, shall act
contrary to the discipline of the navy, or the articles herein before
established, or any of them, shall be sentenced by the said court martial, and
be punished, as if the ship to which he did belong was not so wrecked or
destroyed.

SEC. 4. And be it further enacted, That all the pay and wages of such officers
and seamen of any of the ships of the United States as are taken by the enemy,
and upon enquiry at a court martial, shall appear by the sentence of the said
court, to have done their utmost to defend the ship or ships, and since the
taking thereof, to have behaved themselves obediently to their superior
officers, according to the discipline of the navy, and the said articles and
orders, herein before established, shall continue and go on as aforesaid, or
until they shall die, which ever may first happen: Provided always, that
persons flying from justice shall be tried and punished for so doing.

SEC. 5. And be it further enacted, That all captured national ships, or
vessels of war, shall be the property of the United States -- all other ships
or vessels, being of superior force to the vessel making the capture, in men,
or in guns, shall be the sole property of the captors -- and all ships or
vessels of inferior force, shall be divided equally between the United States
and the officers and men of the vessel making the capture.

SEC. 6. And be it further enacted, That the produce of prizes taken by the
ships of the United States, and bounty for taking the ships of the enemy, be
proportioned and distributed in the manner following, to wit: --

1. To the captain actually on board at the time of taking any prize, being
other than public or national vessel, or ship of war, three twentieths of that
proportion of the proceeds belonging to the captors.

2. If such captain or captains be under the immediate command of a commander
in chief, or commander of a squadron, having a captain on board, such commander
in chief, or commander of a squadron, to have one of the said twentieth parts,
and the captain taking the prize, the other two twentieth parts.

3. To the sea lieutenants and sailing-master, two twentieths.

4. To the surgeon, purser, boatswain, gunner, carpenter, master's mates and
chaplain, two twentieths.

5. To midshipmen, surgeon's mates, captain's clerk, clergyman or schoolmaster,
boatswain's mates, gunner's mates, carpenter's mates, ship's steward, sail
maker, master at arms, armourer, and coxswain, three twentieths.

6. Gunner's yeoman, boatswain's yeoman, quarter masters, quarter gunners,
cooper, sail maker's mates, sergeant of marines, corporal of marines, drummer
and fifer and extra-petty officers, three twentieths.

7. To seamen, ordinary seamen, marines and boys, seven twentieths.

8. Any officer on board having more posts than one is only entitled to the
share belonging to his superior office, according to the regulations aforesaid.

9. Whenever one or more ships of the United States are in sight, at the time
of any one or more other ships as aforesaid, are taking a prize or prizes, or
being engaged with an enemy, and they shall all be so in sight, when the enemy
shall strike or surrender, they shall share equally, according to the number of
guns and men on board of each ship so in sight -- but no privateer or armed
ship, being in sight of a national ship of war, at the taking of any prize,
shall be entitled to any share in such prize or prizes.

10. Commanders of ships of war taking any prize, are to transmit, as soon as
possible to the naval department, a true list of the officers and men actually
on board at the taking of such prize, inserting therein the quality of every
person's rating; and the department aforesaid is to examine the said list by
the ship's muster book, to see their agreement, and is to grant certificates of
the truth of such list transmitted, in order that the agents appointed by the
captors, make payment of the shares, agreeably to this act.

11. In order to define the rights and privileges of commanders in chief,
commanders of squadrons and captains, in relation to captures -- No commander
in chief, or commander of a squadron, shall be entitled to receive any share of
prizes taken by the ships of war of the United States that are not put under
his immediate command, nor of such prizes as may have been taken previousto
such ship's being placed under his command and until they have acted under his
immediate orders; nor shall a commander in chief, or commander of a squadron,
returning home from any station where he had the command, have any share in
prizes taken by ships left on such station, after he has got out of the limits
of his said command.

12. Captains sailing specially under orders from the navy department, are
clearly to be understood as acting separately from any superior officer.

13. The bounty given by the United States on any national ship of war taken
from the enemy and brought into port, shall be for every cannon mounted,
carrying a ball of twenty four pounds, or upwards two hundred dollars -- For
every cannon carrying a ball eighteen pounds, one hundred and fifty dollars --
for every cannon carrying a ball of twelve pounds, one hundred dollars -- and
for every cannon carrying a ball of nine pounds, seventy five dollars -- for
every smaller cannon, fifty dollars -- and for every officer and man taken on
board, forty dollars, -- which sums are to be divided agreeably to the
foregoing articles.

SEC. 6. And be it further enacted, That for the ships or goods belonging to
the citizens of the United States, or to the citizens or subjects of any
nation, in amity with the United States -- if re-taken from the enemy within
twenty four hours, the owners are to allow one eighth part of the whole value
for salvage, if after twenty four hours, and under forty-eight hours, one fifth
thereof, if above that and under ninety-six hours, one third part thereof, and
if above that, one half, all of which is to be paid, without any deduction
whatsoever, agreeable to the articles herein before mentioned.

SEC. 7. And be it further enacted, That every officer, seaman or mariner
disabled in the line of his duty, shall be entitled to receive for his own
life, and the life of his wife, if a married man, at the time of receiving the
wound, one half his monthly pay.

SEC. 8. And be it enacted, That all the money accruing, or which has already
accrued from the sale of prizes, shall be, and remain forever, a fund for the
payment of the half pay to the officers and seamen who may be entitled to
receive the same -- and if the said fund should be insufficient for this
purpose, the public faith is hereby pledged to make up the deficiency -- But if
it should be more than sufficient, the surplus shall be applied as Congress may
hereafter direct by law, to the making of further provision for the comfort of
the disabled officers, seamen and mariners, and for such as may not be
disabled, who may merit by their bravery -- or their long and faithful
services, the gratitude of their country.

SEC. 9. And be it further enacted, That the said fund shall be under the
management and direction of the (...) the (...) and the (...) for the time
being, who are hereby authorized to receive all such sums as the United States
may be entitled to, from the sale of prizes, and to invest the same, and the
interest arising therefrom, in such of the six per cent, or other stock of the
United States, as a majority of them, from time to time, shall determine to be
most advantageous; and it shall be the duty of the said (...) to lay before
Congress, every year, in the first week of their annual meeting, a minute and
correct statement of their proceedings, in relation to the management of said
fund.

SEC. 10. And be it further enacted, That no rules or regulations made by any
commander in chief, or captain, in the service of the United States, for the
stationing, designating of duty, and government of the fleet, or any of the
crews of any ship of war, shall be at variance with this act, but shall be
strictly conformable thereto; and that every commander in chief and captain, in
making private rules and regulations, and designating the duty of his officers,
shall keep in view also the custom and usage of the sea service most common to
our nation.


