MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, ACCOMPANYING A Report of the
Secretary of State, CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS ON SOME OF THE DOCUMENTS,
COMMUNICATED BY THE PRESIDENT, ON THE EIGHTEENTH INSTANT.

21st January, 1799. ORDERED TO LIE ON THE TABLE.

Published by order of the House of Representatives.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN WARD FENNO.

1799.

Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
ACCORDING to an intimation in my Message of Friday last, I now lay before
Congress a Report of the Secretary of State, containing his Observations on
some of the Documents which attended it.

JOHN ADAMS.
January 21 st, 1799.
TO THE President of the United States,
The Secretary of State respectfully submits the following Report on the
transactions relating to the United States and France, since the last
communications to Congress on that subject.

TIMOTHY PICKERING.
Department of State January 18, 1799.
REPORT Of the Secretary of State on the Transactions relating to the United
States and France, since the last communications to Congress on that subject.
THE points chiefly meriting attention are the attempts of the French
Government,

1. To exculpate itself from the charge of corruption, as having demanded a
douceur of Fifty Thousand Pounds sterling (222,000 dollars) for the pockets of
the Directors and Ministers, as represented in the dispatches of our envoys:

2. To detach Mr. Gerry from his colleagues, and to inveigle him into a
separate negotiation; and

3. Its design, if the negotiation failed, and a war should take place between
the United States and France, to throw the blame of the rupture on the United
States.

1. The dispatches of the Envoys published in the United States, and
republished in England, reached Paris toward the last of May: and on the 30th
of that month, the French Minister, Mr. Talleyrand, affecting an entire
ignorance of the persons designated by the letters W. X. Y. and Z. -- calling
them intriguers, whose object was to deceive the Envoys -- writes to Mr. Gerry,
and "prays him immediately to make known to him their names."

Mr. Gerry, in his answer of the 31st, wishes to evade Mr. Talleyrand's
request; and with reason, for he and his colleagues had "promised Messrs. X. Y.
that their names should in no event be made public." Mr. Gerry, in his letter
of October I, in noting the repetition of Mr. Talleyrand's request for those
names, states as an objection to giving them up "that they could be otherwise
ascertained;" and that Mr. Talleyrand's messenger, admitting the fact that they
were already known, immediately mentioned their names. Mr. Gerry nevertheless
certified in writing the names of X. Y. and Z; with the reserve "that they
should not be published on his authority:" and besides formally certifying to
Mr. Talleyrand the names of his own private agents, added, that "they did not
produce, to his knowledge, credentials or documents of any kind." --
"Credentials" in writing were certainly not to be expected to be produced by
agents employed to make corrupt propositions: but Mr. Gerry had Mr.
Talleyrand's own assurance that Mr. Y was acting by his authority. It is
recited in the Envoy's dispatches, and upon Mr. Gerry's own report to his
colleagues, that on the 17th of December, 1797, Mr. Y "stated to him that two
measures which Mr. Talleyrand proposed, being adopted, a restoration of
friendship between the Republics would follow immediately; the one was a
gratuity of fifty thousand pounds sterling; the other a purchase of thirty two
millions of Dutch rescriptions," and after conversing on these topics, Mr.
Gerry and Mr. Y rode to Mr. Talleyrand's office, where "Mr. Gerry observed to
Mr. Talleyrand, that Mr. Y had stated to him that morning, some propositions as
coming from Mr. Talleyrand, respecting which, Mr. Gerry could give no opinion,"
and after making some other observations, Mr. Talleyrand answered, "that the
information Mr. Y. had given him (Mr. Gerry) was just, and might always be
relied on." This declaration stamps with the Ministers authority, all the
communications made by Mr. Y. to the Envoys. And Mr. Y. himself, who is Mr.
Bellamy, of Hamburg, in his public vindication, declares, that "he had done
nothing, said nothing, and written nothing, without the orders of Citizen
Talleyrand." The same may be asserted in regard to Mr. X. for he first
introduced Mr. Y. to the Envoys; and his separate communications were
substantially the same with those of Y. and both together were present with the
Envoys when the communications were more than once repeated.

It also deserves notice, that in stating the preliminary demands of the French
Government, the private agents, X and Y, and the Minister, use a similar
language. The agents declare, that the Directory are extremely irritated at the
speech of the President, and require an explanation of some parts of it, and
reparation for others; that this must give pain to the Envoys, but the
Directory would not dispense with it: And that as to the means of averting the
demand concerning the President's speech, the Envoys must search for them, and
propose them, themselves. Being asked to suggest the means, the answer is
"money" -- the purchase of the Dutch rescriptions, and the fifty thousand
pounds sterling, as a douceur to the Directory.

The Minister told the Envoys, that the Directory were wounded by the
President's speech; and, in his conversation with Mr. Gerry on the 28th of
October, said, "the Directory had passed an arret, which he offered for
perusal, in which they had demanded of the Envoys an explanation of some parts,
and a reparation for others, of the President's speech to Congress of the 16th
of May, 1797; that he was sensible that difficulties would exist on the part of
the Envoys relative to this demand; but that by their offering money he thought
he could prevent the effect of the arret. Mr. Z. (the "interpreter") at the
request of Mr. Gerry, having stated that the Envoys have no such powers, Mr.
Talleyrand replied, they can in such case take a power on themselves; and
proposed that they should make a "loan." But this "loan," as will presently
appear, did not mean the "money," which would "prevent the effect of the
arret." Mr. Gerry then making some observations, on the powers of the Envoys --
that they "were adequate to the discussion and adjustment of all points of real
difference between the two nations; that they could alter and amend the treaty;
or if necessary, form a new one;" added, "that as to a loan, they had no powers
whatever, to make one, but that they could send one of their number for
instructions on this proposition, if deemed expedient:" -- "That as he [Mr.
Talleyrand] had expressed a desire to confer with the Envoys individually, it
was the wish of Mr. Gerry, that such a conference should take place, and their
opinions thus be ascertained." "Mr. Talleyrand, in answer said, he should be
glad to confer with the other Envoys, individually, but that this matter about
the MONEY must be settled directly without sending to America; that he would
not communicate the arrret for a week; and that if we could adjust the
difficulty respecting the speech, an application would nevertheless go to the
United States for a LOAN:" Now this matter of the MONEY that must be settled
directly, could only refer to the douceur; for a loan in the purchose of
millions of Dutch rescriptions, or in any other form, could only be the subject
of a stipulation to be afterward fulfilled by the UnitedStates; but the
douceur of fifty thousand pounds sterling, was a sum within the immediate reach
of the Envoys; for their credit would certainly command it: in fact, a
mercantile House had offered to answer their draughts: and this, Mr. Talleyrand
unquestionably well knew; for it was a member of the same House who first
introduced the minister's agent Mr. X, to General Pinckney, in the manner
stated in the Envoys' dispatches. A collateral evidence that in "this matter of
the money that must be settled directly," Mr. Talleyrand referred only to the
douceur arises from this circumstance: The very next day (October 29th) Mr. X
called on the Envoys and said, "Mr. Talleyrand was extremely anxious to be of
service to them, and had requested that one more effort should be made to
induce us to enable him to be so." After a great deal of the same conversation
which had passed at former interviews had been repeated, the Envoys say -- "the
sum of his proposition was, that if we would pay by way of fees (that was his
expression) the sum of MONEY demanded for PRIVATE USE, the Directory would not
receive us, but would permit us to remain in Paris as we now were; and we
should be received by Mr. Talleyrand, until one of us could go to America and
consult our government on the subject of a LOAN."

Although the Envoys dispatches, and the facts and circumstances herein before
stated, cannot leave a doubt that X, as well as Y and Z, was well known to Mr.
Talleyrand, it will not be amiss to add, that on the 2d of December X, Y, and
Z, dined together at Mr. Talleyrand's, in company with Mr. Gerry; and that
after rising from table the money propositions, which had before been made,
were repeated, in the room and in the presence, though perhaps not in the
hearing of Mr. Talleyrand. Mr. X, put the question to Mr. Gerry in direct
terms, either, "whether the Envoys would now give the douceur" or "whether they
had got the MONEY ready." Mr. Gerry, very justly offended, answered positively
in the negative, and the conversation dropped.

Mr. Z, who has avowed himself to be Mr. Hauteval, was the person who first
made known to the Envoys the Minister's desire to confer with them
individually, on the objects of their mission: He it was, who first introduced
Mr. Gerry to Mr. Talleyrand, and served as the interpreter of their
conversations: and in his letter to Mr. Talleyrand, at the close of Mr. Gerry's
document, No. 35, he announces himself to be the agent of the minister, to make
communications to the Envoys.

Mr. Hauteval declares "his sensibility must be much affected on finding
himself, under the letter Z, acting a part in company with certain intriguers,
whose plan, (he says) it doubtless was to take advantage of the good faith of
the American Envoys, and make them their dupes": yet this person the avowed
agent of the French Minister, apparently so anxious to screen himself from the
suspicion of an agency in soliciting the bribe required by Mr. Talleyrand, did
himself urge a compliance with that corrupt proposition. Extract of a letter,
dated June 19th, 1798, from Mr. King, Minister of the United States in London,
to the Secretary of State.

"Col. Trumbull* who was at Paris soon after the arrival there of the
Commissioners, has more than once informed me, that Hauteval told him that both
the douceur and the loan were indispensable, and urged him to employ his
influence with the American Commissioners to offer the bribe as well as the
loan."




The sensation which these details irresistably excite, is that of astonishment
at the unparralleled effrontery of Mr. Talleyrand, in demanding of Mr. Gerry
the names of X, Y, and Z; after Y, had accompanied him on a visit to the
Minister, with whom the conversation detailed in theprinted dispatches then
passed, and who then assured Mr. Gerry "that the information Mr. Y. had given
him was just, and might always be relied on;" after Z, had in the first
instance introduced Mr. Gerry to the Minister, and served as their mutual
interpreter, and when the conversation between them had also been stated in the
dispatches; and after X, Y, and Z, had all dined together with Mr. Gerry at Mr.
Talleyrand's table, on rising from which X, and Y, renewed the proposition
about the MONEY! -- The very circumstance of Mr. Talleyrand's being continued
in office, after the account of these intrigues had been published to the
world, is a decisive proof that they were commenced and carried on with the
privity, and by the secret orders of the Directory. It was to accomplish the
object of these intrigues that the American Envoys were kept at Paris
unreceived, six months after their credentials had been laid before the
Directory: and it was only because they were superior to those intrigues, and
that no hopes remained of wheedling or terrifying them into a compliance, that
two of them were then sent away -- and with marks of insult and contempt.

2. The fact that the French Government attempted to inveigle Mr. Gerry into a
separate negotiation will not be questioned: at first it was made privately,
and under an injunction of secresy toward his colleagues: it was afterward
plainly insinuated by the Minister, in his letter of the 18th of March 1798, in
which he tells the Envoys that the Executive Directory was disposed to treat
with one of the three; and that one he openly avowed, in his letter of the 3d
of April, to be Mr. Gerry. The pretense for selecting him was, that his
"opinions presumed to be more impartial, promised, in the course of the
explanations, more of that reciprocal confidence which was indispensable." But
when before, have their "opinions" been stated as a justifiable ground for
rejecting the ambassadors of peace? Ambassadors too, of established probity,
whose characters were of the first distinction in their own country, and whose
demeanor, toward the government to which they were deputed, was decent and
respectful? Who had, with a frankness which the candor of their instructions
warranted, communicated the important points which they contained? And who
unremittingly and with the most anxious solicitude, entreated that the
negotiations might be commenced? What more proper or more honorable qualities
ought ministers deputed to negotiate with a foreign nation to possess? But why
should a foreign Government question the opinions of the ambassadors sent to
negotiate with it on subjects of difference between the two nations? If wisely
chosen, and faithful to the interests of their own country, they they must of
course possess different opinions from the government to which they are sent,
the differing opinions maintained by the two nations on their respective rights
and interests, being the cause and objects of the negotiation. -- A government
really disposed to treat on fair principles would never object to the opinions
of foreign ambassadors. It would receive them, and appoint its own ministers
with proper powers to treat with them, propose its terms, and receive those
offered; and discuss both: and if then they could not agree, put an end to the
negotiation. The French Government did not wish to negotiate, it desired to
impose a treaty on the United States. To this practice it had been accustomed
toward the minor powers in Europe, whom it had subjected to its will: and it
expected equal submission from the United States. Hence Mr. Talleyrand's secret
declaration to Mr. Gerry "that if he would negotiate, they could soon finish a
treaty; for the Executive Directory were not in the habit of spending much time
about such matters." Hence the objections to Genesis Pinckney and Genesis Marshall:
they manifested a discernment superior to the intrigues of the French
Government and an invincible determination not to surrender the honor, the
interest, or the independence of their country. It was necessary then to get
rid of them; and seeing that neither despair of negotiating, nor studied
indignities, could induce them to quit their posts, passports were sent to them
to quit France: it was with difficulty that General Pinckney could obtain
permission to tstay woe or three months for the recovery of his sick daughter,
to whom an immediate voyage would probably prove fatal. Unembarrassed by the
presence of these Envoys, the French Government, if it really desired a treaty
on any terms, hoped to prevail on Mr. Gerry to negotiate separately, although
from the first overture he declined and continued to decline it. But after the
expulsion of his colleagues, it hoped by its seductive arts to prevail over his
scruples and gain his consent to terms which, while they were present, would be
rejected; or at all events to retain him, with the semblance of negotiating,
regularly or informally, and thus keep the United States in the torpor of
indecision, without preparation for offense or defense. Unfortunately, Mr.
Gerry was induced, by the threats of immediate war against the United States,
to separate from his colleagues and stay in Paris; threats which, viewed with
their motives, merited only detestation and contempt. Four or five months
before, the threats of immediate orders to quit France, and the terrors of war
in its most dreadful forms, had been held up to all the envoys, to frighten
them into a compliance with the groundless, unjust and corrupt demands of the
French Government. Those threats had not been executed, and the unworthy
purposes for which they had been uttered had been obvious. Happily for the
United States, the character of the French government as delineated in the
official dispatches of all the envoys, and the knowledge of its conduct toward
other countries whose governments it had overturned, and whose people, in the
names of Liberty and Equality, it had enslaved, so operated as not to leave us
exposed to all the evils which suspense was calculated to produce. Mr. Gerry
indeed resisted all the arts of the French minister to entice him into a formal
negotiation, after that government had driven his colleagues from Paris: a
negotiation which in its nature would have been a surrender of our
independence, by admitting a foreign government to choose for us the minister
who should represent our country, to treat of our important rights and
interests, which that government had itself violated and deeply injured.

*The Directory and their minister Mr. Talleyrand hoped and expected that
General Pinckney and General Marshall would voluntarily have quitted France,
after the minister's letter of the 18th of March, in which he made the
offensive distinction between them and their colleague Mr. Gerry, on the
pretense that his "opinions" were more "impartial" than theirs. Accordingly Mr.
Talleyrand, in his letter to Mr. Gerry of the 3d of April, says -- "I suppose,
sir, that Messrs. Pinckney and Marshall have thought it useful and proper, in
consequence of the intimations which the end of my note of the 18th of March
last presents, to quit the Territory of the Republic." Yet Mr. Talleyrand had
given them neither passports nor letters of safe conduct! The fact is, the
French government wished to avoid the odium of sending them away, and the blame
of a rupture, which Mr. Talleyrand predicted would be the consequence; while it
was privately intimated to them that they must leave the country. The
minister's conduct on this occasion, toward General Marshall (as detailed in
his journal) was particularly marked with indignities. When it was observed to
Mr. Talleyrand, that this was not the manner in which a foreign minister ought
to be treated, Mr. Talleyrand replied, that General Marshall was not a foreign
minister, but was to be considered as a private American citizen; and must
obtain his passport like others through the Consul. To this it was answered,
That General Marshall was a foreign minister, On the 9th of October 1797, the
day after the Envoys had delivered to the minister a copy of their letter of
credence, "cards of hospitality were sent to them and their secretaries, in a
style suitable to their official character." [Dispatches p. 17.] And in the
minister's letter to them of the 18th of March 1798, he calls them "the
Commissioners and Envoys Extraordinary of the United States of America." --
[Dispatches p. 92.]
and that the French government could not deprive him of that character, which
was conferred upon him, not by Mr. Talleyrand, but by the United States; and
though the Directory might refuse to receive or to treat with him, still his
country had clothed him with the requisite powers, which he held independently
of France; that if he was not acceptable to the French government, and in
consequence thereof it was determined to send him away, still he ought to be
sent away like a minister; that he ought to have his passports, with letters of
safe conduct which would protect him from the cruisers of France. Mr.
Talleyrand replied, that if General Marshall wished for a passport, he must
give in his name, stature, age, complexion, etc. to the American Consul, who
would obtain a passport for him: that with respect to a letter of safe conduct,
it was unnecessary, as no risk from the cruisers would be incurred. The result
of these conversations was a plain demonstration of the intention of the
minister, that in consequence of his intimation at the close of his letter of
the 18th of March, that the "opinions" of two of the Envoys were not agreeable
to the government of France, Generals Pinckney and Marshall should appropriate
to themselves the character which the minister had drawn generally. The Envoys,
aware of this snare, in their answer of the third of April to the intimation
that "the Directory was disposed to treat with one of the Envoys," declare to
the minister, "that no one of the Envoys was authorized to take upon himself a
negotiation evidently entrusted to the whole," and "that no two of them could
propose to withdraw themselves from the task committed to them by their
government, while there remained a possibility of performing it;" but that if
"it should be the will of the Directory to order passports for the whole or any
number of them," it was desired that such passports might be accompanied with
letters of safe conduct, protect them against the cruisers of France.

These endeavors of the French government, whether real or affected, to draw
Mr. Gerry into a separate negotiation, constitute the substance of the
correspondence between him and Mr. Talleyrand. They appear to merit
consideration in several points of view.

1. Because if real, it was only in the hope and expectation, that by intrigues
and terrors the French government might influence Mr. Gerry to enter into a
formal treaty, on the terms which he and his colleagues had repeatedly rejected
as incompatible with the interest, honor and independence of their country. For
at this time Mr. Talleyrand had not renounced the demands of loans and a
douceur as the indispensable preliminaries of a treaty. Accordingly we see Mr.
Talleyrand, in his letter of the 3d of April to Mr. Gerry, proposed "to resume
their reciprocal communications upon the interests of the French republic and
the United States of America." And in his letter of July 12th, to Mr. Gerry,
having mentioned the arrival at Havre of a packet, the Sophia, from the
American government, he says, "until then I never supposed you entertained the
design of embarking before we had come to an agreement upon the definitive
articles to be ratified by your government." 2. Because if that government had
so far succeeded, it would have insisted on its ratification by the President
and Senate, on the ground constantly taken by Mr. Talleyrand, that the powers
of the Envoys being several as well as joint, Mr. Gerry when alone, even after
the French government had ordered his colleagues to leave France, were adequate
to the formation of the treaty; and that therefore the public faith would be
violated, if it were not ratified. 3. Because under such circumstances, the
French government doubtless calculated at least on a division of the public
opinion in the United States in favor of the ratification of such a Treaty; by
means of which it might enforce the ratification, or effect still greater
mischiefs. 4. But these endeavors to draw Mr. Gerry into a formal negotiation
are chiefly remarkable because they were persevered in during near five months,
against his constant, direct and positive refusals to treat separately; Mr.
Talleyrand asserting and Mr. Gerry denying the competency of his powers.

We have seen the Envoys, from the 6th of October, 1797, the date of their
first letter to the French minister, to the 3d of April, 1798, when their last
was delivered to him, expressing their earnest desire to enter upon and
prosecute the great business of their mission: we have seen them during that
long period patiently enduring neglect and indignities, to which an ardent zeal
to re-establish harmony and peace could alone induce freemen to submit: We have
seen them while held in suspense -- neither received nor rejected -- yielding
to the importunities of private agents of the French government, and hearing
and discussing their propositions, insulting as they were, in the hope that
when these should be shown to be utterly inadmissible, others founded in reason
and equity, and in the usual course of diplomatic negotiation, might be brought
forward. Doubtless they also wished, when their astonishment at the first
overtures had subsided, by listening still longer to such dishonorable
propositions, to ascertain the true character of the French government. We have
seen them, after waiting five weeks from the presentation of a copy of their
Letters of Credence, entirely unnoticed, "solicit an attention to their
mission," and soliciting in vain. Thus denied an official hearing, they hoped
by an unusual step to excite the attention of that government: they determined
to transmit to the Minister a letter representing the views of their own
government in relation to the subjects in dispute with France. This letter
dated the 17th was delivered the 31st of January, 1798. Waiting near a month
without an answer, and "still being anxious to hear explicitly from Mr.
Talleyrand himself, before they sent their final letter, whether there were no
means, within their powers, of accommodating our differences with France, on
just and reasonable grounds, -- on the 27th of February they desired "a
personal interview on the subject of their mission"; and afterward a second
interview. They remark on what passed at these meetings, "that the views of
France, with regard to the United States, were not essentially changed since
their communications with its un-official agents in the preceding October."

At length they received Mr. Talleyrand's letter of the 18th March, 1798, in
answer to theirs of the 17th of January. The Minister's letter represented the
complaints of France; as usual, charging the American Government with the
inexecution of the Treaties with France -- with dissimulation -- insinuating
that our Tribunals were subject to a secret influence -- holding up the British
Treaty as replete with evil and injury, and "the principal grievance of the
Republic" -- accusing the American Government of a wish to seize the first
favorable occasion to consummate an intimate union with Great Britain, and
suggesting that a devotion and partiality to that power have long been the
principle of the conduct of the Federal Government.

To this letter of the French Minister, the Envoys sent their reply on the 3d
of April. This reply and their former letter detect the sophisms and erroneous
statements of the Minister -- expose his naked assertions -- refute his
arguments -- repel his calumnies -- and completely vindicate the fidelity, the
justice, and, as a neutral power, the impartiality of the government of the
United States; and, at the same time, exhibit the weighty and well-founded
complaints of the United States against the French Republic.

Hitherto, instead of a desire to obtain a reconciliation, we can discover in
the French government only empty professions of a desire to conciliate; while
it haughtily refused to receive our Envoys, and during six months disregarded
their respectful and ardent solicitations to negotiate: And after one of them,
whom it induced to remain in France, had declared that "he had no powers to
treat separately, that the measure was impossible," then the Directory expelled
the other Two!

If now we survey Mr. Gerry's individual correspondence, we shall find no solid
evidence of any change in the disposition of the French government.

In his first letter to Mr. Gerry, Mr. Talleyrand's artifice is visible: he
addresses him as "Envoy Extraordinary of the United States of America, to the
French Republic;" and proposes to him to "resume their reciprocal
communications." Mr. Gerry, apprehending that the Minister intended to draw him
into a negotiation, repeats what he had often before declared, that for him to
treat separately was impracticable: and that he can only confer with him
informally.

On the 20th of April, Mr. Gerry addresses a letter to the Minister, and
presses him to come forward with propositions for terminating all differences,
restoring harmony, and re-establishing commerce between the two nations. He
receives no answer. On the 28th he confers with the Minister, who says he
cannot make propositions, because he does not know the views of the United
States in regard to a treaty. Mr. Gerry gives him the information. He then
promises in three or four days to deliver Mr. Gerry the project of a treaty:
This promise was never performed. On the 12th of May, the new instructions of
March 23d, sent by the Sophia packet, reached Mr. Gerry; and he gave immediate
notice to the Minister that he should return to America in the Sophia, as soon
as she could be fitted for sea.

"On the 24th of May, the Minister sent his principal secretary to inform Mr.
Gerry, that his government did not wish to break the British treaty; but
expected such provisions as would indemnify France, and put her on a sooting
with that nation." Yet that treaty had been made, by the French government, its
chief pretense for those unjust and cruel depredations on American commerce
which have brought distress on multitudes and ruin on many of our citizens; and
occasioned a total loss of property to the United States of probably more than
twenty millions of dollars; besides subjecting our fellowcitizens to insults,
stripes, wounds, torture and imprisonment. And Mr. Talleyrand, in his letter of
the 18th March, to the Envoys, declared that treaty to be "the principal
grievance of the Republic." But now, instead of breaking that treaty, France
desires to be put on the same footing. This the United States would at any time
have done, and the Envoys were now explicitly instructed to do: and seven
months before, all the Envoys, in their conversation with Mr. Bellamy (Y) the
confidential and authorized agent of the French Minister, told him "that he
might be assured that their powers were such as authorized them to place France
on equal ground with England, in any respects in which an inequality might be
supposed to exist at present between them, to the disadvantage of France."

The Secretary also mentioned the claims of the American citizens on the French
Republic: he said if the latter should be unable to pay them, when adjusted,
and the United States would assume and pay them, France would reimburse the
amount thereof. This has the semblance of candor: but on the 4th of March,
when the Envoys were in conference with Mr. Talleyrand, and they disclosed
their principal instructions, "General Pinckney and Mr. Gerry told him they
were positively forbidden to assume the debts to our own citizens, even if we
were to pay the money directly to them." And douqtless it was because the
proposition was already known to be inadmissible that it was now renewed.

The Secretary and Mr. Gerry had also some unimportant conversation about the
Consular Convention. And it is plain that the whole object of the Secretary's
visit was to amuse, by keeping alive Mr. Gerry's hopes of some pacific
arrangements.

On the 26th of May, Mr. Gerry had a conference with the Minister; pressing on
this, as on former occasions, the necessity of sending a Minister to the United
States, with powers to negotiate; to which, he says, the Minister acceded; but
afterward explained himself to mean a Minister to reside there after the
ratification of the talked-of treaty.

Such are the proceedings of the French government, by its Minister, Mr.
Talleyrand, before the arrival of the printed dispatches of the Envoys. We
discover nothing but a proposition for treating with Mr. Gerry alone -- which
he had repeatedly declared to be impossible -- and on terms which Mr. Gerry
himself, as well as the other Envoys, had long before pronounced to be utterly
inadmissible, because directly repugnant to their instructions. We shall now
see, by an examination of Mr. Gerry's subsequent communications, that the
publication of the Envoy's dispatches, far from causing a discontinuance of
negotiations with him, or any change in the disposition of the French
government more unfriendly to the United States, incomparably greater zeal for
negotiating was exhibited afterward than before.

On the 30th of May, the Minister announces to Mr. Gerry the publication of the
Envoys dispatches. In his letter of the 27th of June, he says this incident
only "for a moment suspended the principal object" -- the negotiation with Mr.
Gerry: and in his letter of June 10th he declares, that "the French Government,
superior to all the personalities, to all the maneuvers of its enemies,
perseveres in the intention of conciliating with sincerity all the differences
which have happened between the two countries." On the 18th of June the
Minister sends him a plan for conducting the negotiations; for the first time
states the "three points" on which he says "all negotiations between France and
the United States must essentially rest;" and "gives (what he calls) a large
developement" of them; concluding by pressing him to remain at Paris, to
accelerate the negotiation -- "the drawing together of those ties which the
French Republic and the true Americans have regretted to see relaxed."

On the 27th of June the Minister again writes to Mr. Gerry, and in language
the most importunate, such as had never before been used, urges him not to
withdraw, "when the French Government, superior to all resentments, and never
listening to any thing but justice, manifests itself anxious to conclude a
solid and mutually satisfactory agreement." The Minister even observes that the
first of the "three points" mentioned in his preceding letter (respecting
amicable declarations about mutual recriminations) might be postponed -- that
the third (about the consular convention) would doubtless experience no
difficulty on either side, after the second should be amicably settled: That it
was to the second therefore they should first attend; it being so much the more
important, as it embraced the source of all the differences between the two
nations. And on the 22d of July, the Minister renounces all demands of "loans
and explanations on the subject of speeches;" and even affects to be hurt that
Mr. Gerry should have mentioned them: although both he and his private agents
had, before, so long and so obstinately persevered in demanding them of the
Envoys, as the indispensable preliminaries to a negotiation. And doubtless it
is partly owing to the publication of their dispatches, thereby exposing to the
world those shameless demands, with the scandalous proposition of the douceur,
that they are now relinquished.

In adducing these circumstances to show the increased zeal of the French
Government, since the publication of the dispatches, to negotiate on its
differences with the United States, it is not to be understood, that they
afford a shadow of evidence of its sincerity. But as professions, verbal or
written, furnished the only ground on which Mr. Gerry could form his opinion,
that "before the arrival of the dispatches of the Envoys, the Minister was
sincere and anxious to obtain a reconciliation," much more, professions
stronger and more importunate, afterward made, afford proportionably higher
evidence of sincerity. But the present details demonstrate that all those
professions were merely ostensible. In the Minister's last mentioned letter,
after saying that his "second point" was most important, "as it embraced the
source of all the differences," and that to this they should first attend -- he
purposely forgets it, passes over it, and sends Mr. Gerry a note on the
Consular Convention, of all possible subjects in difference the most
insignificant; as it would have expired by its own limitation in two years and
a half; within which time, the commerce of France, judging from its present
state of annihilation, would probably not furnish a single ship to visit the
ports of the United States. In his next letter, dated July 6th, he pursues his
speculations on the Consular Convention, and sends Mr. Gerry two more notes
upon it; complaining that he had not transmitted to him his opinion upon his
first note, and recommending the two last to his attention: although Mr. Gerry
had repeatedly and positively declined a formal discussion, such as the
Minister now urged in writing. Mr. Gerry states also that this first note of
the Minister on the Consular Convention, was sent to him six weeks after he had
demanded his passport, and when his baggage was actually on board the Sophia!

In a word, the more clearly the impossibility of entering on a formal
negotiation appeared, the more was it pressed by the French Minister. Mr. Gerry
in his letter to Mr. Talleyrand of July 20th, as justly as pointedly exposes
the boasted zeal of the Minister -- "You was the first, you affirm, to press
seriously the negotiation: you will agree with me that the merit would have
been greater, had the measure itself been feasible." Again he says to the
Minister, "You frequently remind me of your exertions [to negotiate] which I am
disposed as much as possible to appreciate, regretting at the same time their
circuitous direction."

From this detail of facts, the following are the necessary conclusions:

That by the exclusive attentions of the Minister to Mr. Gerry, the French
Government intended to excite the jealousy of his colleagues, to promote
dissentions betweeh them, to separate him from them, and induce him to remain
in France; expecting either to seduce him into a formal negotiation of a
treaty, on terms exclusively advantageous to France, and injurious and
dishonorable to the United States; or, failing in this, to hold the United
States in suspense, and prevent any measures for our security -- in the event a
war; while we, amused and deluded by warm but empty professions of the pacific
views and wishes of France, and by "informal conferences," might wait in
spiritless torpor, hoping for a peaceful result: and That by this course of
proceeding -- this ostentatious display of zeal to adjust differences, and
restore harmony and a friendly intercourse between the United States and
France, the French Government intended, in case of a rupture, to throw the
blame on the former.

It is necessary to make a few observations on the decree of the Executive
Directory of the 31st July 1798.

This decree was sent after Mr. Gerry to Havre, and he supposes that the
official impediments, which for several days prevented his failing, are to be
ascribed to the minister's desire of sending the decree by him. The minister
introduces it as "a part of the measures which he had announced to Mr. Gerry on
the 22d of July." In his letter of that date to Mr. Gerry, the minister says,
"By information which the Government has just received, it indeed learns that
violences have been committed upon the commerce and citizens of the United
States in the West Indies, and on their coasts. Do it the justice to believe
that it needs only to know the facts, to disavow all acts contrary to the laws
of the Republic and its own decrees. A remedy is preparing for it and orders
will soon arrive in the West Indies, calculated to cause every thing to return
within its just limits." This "remedy" is the decree of the 31st of July.

1. The first article of this decree confines to the special agents of the
Directory, the right of issuing commissions to cruisers; and requires these to
conform themselves to all the laws relative to cruising and prizes, and
especially to those of the 1st of October 1793. Although the injunction to
conform to all the laws of the Republic relative to cruising was ominous, as
the laws most recently promulgated and best known were themselves the sources
of the depredations and evils of which we complained; yet not imagining that a
decree introduced with so much solemnity, of which one copy was sent to Mr.
Gerry, another to the American Consul General at Paris, and a third to Mr.
Letombe, late Consul General of France -- all to be communicated to the
Executive of the United States, and all of which have been received -- could be
a mere parade of words, I was disposed to conclude that the law of the 1st of
October 1793, to which all cruisers were especially enjoined to conform, might
contain regulations that would afford some relief from French depredations. By
the favor of Mr. Letombe, I obtained a copy of that law; and to my
astonishment found its object, conformably to its title, was "To determine the
mode of dividing prizes made by French vessels on the enemies of the Republic."
"DECRET de la Convention Nationale du 1. 8 bre 1793, Pan 2d de la Republique
Francaise, Que determine le mode de Repartition des prises faites par les
vaisseaux Francais sur les ennemis de la Republique."
And the only restriction, in this lengthy law of six-and-forty articles,
imposed on the individuals, officers and all others, composing the crews of
their armed vessels is, "that they shall not sell beforehand their eventual
shares of prizes."

2. The second article declares that all commissions granted by the agents in
the French colonies in America, to fit out vessels for cruisers, or for war and
commerce, shall be void in thirty days after the publication of the decree in
those colonies.

It has been supposed that by this regulation the agents may gather a fresh
harvest of fees for new commissions; and that this would be its only effect.
The agents however had before taken care of this; they had been accustomed to
limit the duration of privateer's commissions; and if they continued to cruise
after their expiration, such privateers should have been considered as
destitute of commissions, and consequently if they made any captures, as
pirates: -- But the agents knew their interest better: they did not punish the
piratical captors -- they did not declare their captures void, and restore the
property to the neutral owners -- but, declaring such captors to have no title
to the captured vessels and cargoes, took the whole to themselves. A remarkable
instance occurred in the last year, in the case of the East India ship
New Jersey, belonging to Philadelphia, to redeem which, the owners have paid to
GENERAL HEDOUVILLE, Special Agent of the Executive Directory in St. Domingo,
upwards of two hundred thousand dollars in cash. Whether any, and what portion
of such prize-money goes into the chest of the Republic, I am not informed.

3. The third article declares that all agents and other deputies in the
neutral possessions, appointed to decide there on the validity of prizes taken
by the French cruisers, and who shall be suspected of having a direct or
indirect interest in the cruisers, shall be immediately recalled.

It is remarkable that this article, apparently designed to correct the
monstrous abuse of public officers sitting in judgment in their own causes,
should be limited to such of the French agents and their deputies as were
appointed to reside in NEUTRAL places. I do not know that an instance of the
kind exists. For although the French privateers and their prizes find asylums
in the Swedish and Danish islands, yet the papers are carried thence to
Guadaloupe, and there the captured vessels receive their doom under the
superintendance of another special agent of the Executive Directory, VICTOR
HUGUES. And even the captured American vessels carried into the West India
ports of Spain and Holland, do not there receive sentence: these cases are
decided by the agent or his deputies, or other French tribunals, established in
the island of St. Domingo, frequently, if not generally, in the absence of the
masters and supercargoes. The French agents and judges find no difficulty in
this mode of proceeding; justice being administered with more facility and
dispatch when only one of the parties is present at the trial; especially when
the agents or other judges are interested in the privateers; and this the
present decree impliedly allows; the penalty of "recall" being applicable, as
above suggested, to such agents only as reside in neutral places, if any such
there be.

It is also remarkable, that this decree, which was to give the United States a
proof of the justice of the French government (a government, Mr. Talleyrand
says "never listening to any thing but justice,") and of its desire of a
reconciliation with the United States, should be limited to the West Indies,
when as great, if not as numerous abuses were practiced by French agents and
tribunals in Europe, and even France itself, as in her remote possessions. This
too many of our citizens well know. For captures and condemnations are not the
less abuses, because made under the color of municipal laws and decrees which
directly violate treaties, the law of nations, and the plainest principles of
justice. At present I shall only mention, that in a report made by major
Mountflorence, chancellor of the American consulate at Paris, to General
Pinckney, in December 1796, and which was laid before Congress in May 1797, he
states, "That the tribunals of commerce in every port of France, take
cognizance, in the first instance, of every matter relative to captures at
sea;" and "these tribunals (he adds) are chiefly composed of merchants, and
most of them are, directly or indirectly, more or less interested in the
fitting out of privateers; and therefore are often concerned in the
controversies they are to determine upon."

4. The fourth article requires the special agents of the Executive Directory
at Cayenne, St. Domingo, and Guadaloupe, studiously to take care, that the
interests and property of vessels, belonging to neutrals and allies, be
scrupulously respected.

We have too long witnessed the studious and scrupulous care of these gentlemen
respecting the property of neutrals and allies, and experienced its ruinous
consequences; and as the same laws which authorized that "care" remain in
force, and with a fresh injunction of a strict conformity to them, we can
expect only a continuance of the same abuses.

5. The fifth article enjoins the Special Agents of the Executive Directory,
Consuls and all others invested with powers for that purpose, to cause to be
arrested and punished all who shall contravene the provisions of the present
decree. -- Unfortunately, these Special Agents, Consuls, and their Deputies,
are themselves the aggressors, and justify their proceedings under the laws of
the Republic and the Decrees of the Executive Directory.

This analysis of the present Decree manifests its futility; and, with some
remarks on its preamble, will demonstrate it to be a bold imposture; intended
to mislead the citizens of the United States into a belief that the French
government was going to put an end to the depredations of French cruisers on
American commerce; while the means proposed are so gross as to be an insult on
our understandings.

The Preamble to the Decree sets forth, "that information, recently received
from the French colonies and the continent of America, leaves no room to doubt
that French cruisers, or such as call themselves French, have infringed the
laws of the Republic relative to cruising and prizes;" and "that foreigners and
pirates have abused the latitude allowed at Cayenne and the West India islands,
to vessels fitted out for cruising or for war and commerce, in order to cover
with the French flag their extortions and the violation of the respect due to
the law of nations, and to the persons and property of allies and neutrals."
And Mr. Talleyrand, in one of his letters before noticed, dated the 22nd of
July last, speaks of this information as having been "just received."

But what has been more notorious than French depredations on neutral, and
especially on American commerce, in violation of treaties and the law of
nations? These have been coeval with the existing war in Europe; but were
multiplied under the loose Decree of the Executive Directory passed the second
of July, 1796, declaring that "the flag of the French Republic will treat
neutral vessels, either as to confiscation, to searches, or to capture, in the
same manner as they shall suffer the English to treat them."

This decree committed the whole commerce of neutrals, in the first instance,
to the rapacity of French privateers, and then to the discretion of their
Agents, Consuls and Tribunals. These had only to say, truly or falsely, that
the English treated neutrals in any given way, and then they were to treat them
in the same manner. Accordingly we have seen Santhonax and Raimond,
Commissioners of the French Government in St. Domingo, in their adjudication of
an American vessel, on the 10th of January, 1797, declare, "That the resolution
(or decree) passed by the Executive Directory, on the 2d of July, 1796,
prescribes to all the armed vessels of the Republic, and the armed vessels
belonging to individuals, to treat neutral vessels in the same manner as they
suffer the English to treat them;" and "that it is in consequence of the above
resolution of the Executive Directory, and in consequence of the manner in
which the English government in the Antilles treats neutral vessels, that the
commission passed their resolution of the 7th of January, by which they declare
all neutral vessels bound to or from English ports, to be legal prize." From
these facts, and the tenor of the decree itself, we can form but one
conclusion, That it was framed in such indefinite terms, on purpose to give
scope for arbitracy constructions, and consequently for unlimited oppression
and vexation.

But without waiting for this decree, the Commissioners of the French
government at St. Domingo began their piraces on the commerce of the United
States: and in February 1797, wrote to the Minister of Marine (and the extract
of the letter appeared in the official journal of the Executive Directory of
the 5th of June) "That having found no resource in finance, and knowing the
unfriendly dispositions of the Americans, and to avoid perishing in distress,
they had armed for cruizing; and that already 87 cruizers were at sea; and that
for three months preceding, the administration had subsisted, and individuals
been enriched, with the product of those prizes." -- "That the decree of the 2d
of July was not known by them until five months afterward. But (say they) the
shocking conduct of the Americans, and the indirect knowledge of the intentions
of our government, made it our duty to order reprisals, even before we had
received the official notice of the decree." "They felicitate themselves that
American vessels were daily taken; and declare that they had learnt, by diverse
persons from the continent, that the Americans were perfidious, corrupt, the
friends of England, and that therefore their vessels no longer entered the
French ports, unless carried in by force."

After this recital, before the Council of 500, Pastoret makes the following
remarkable reflections:

"On reading this letter, we should think that we had been dreaming; that we
had been transported into a savage country, where men, still ignorant of the
empire of morals and of laws, commit crimes without shame and without remorse,
and applaud themselves for their robberies, as Paulus AEmilius or Cato would
have praised themselves for an eminent service rendered to their country.
Cruisers armed against a friendly nation! Reprisals, when it is we ourselves
who attack! Reprisals against a nation that has not taken a single vessel of
ours! Riches acquired by the confiscation of the ships of a people to whom we
are united by treaties, and whom no declaration of war had separated from us!"
-- "The whole discourse of the agents may be reduced to these few words:
'Having nothing wherewith to buy, I seize; I make myself amends for the
property which I want, by the piracy which enriches me; and then I slander
those whom I have pillaged.' -- "This is robbery justified by selfishness and
calumny." Yet santbonax, one of these "robbers," and the chief of those
Directorial agents, continued in office, and going a few months afterward from
Saint Domingo to France, was received as a member into one of the Legislative
Councils.

Pastoret also adverts to a letter from Merlin, then Minister of Justice, and
now a member of the Executive Directory, to Mr. Skipwith, Consul General of the
United States, which also appeared in the Journal of the Directory; and quotes
the following passage: "Let your Government break the inconceivable treaty
which it concluded on the 19th of November 1794, with our most implacable
enemies; and immediately the French Republic will cease to apply in its own
favor the regutions in that treaty, which favor England to the injury of
France; and I warrant you that we shall not see an appeal to those regulations,
in any tribunal, to support unjust pretensions." "Have I (says Pastoret) read
this rightly? Unjust Pretensions! Could it be possible that they should thus
have been characterized by the Minister who, is himself their agent and
defender?"

After all, this "inconceivable British treaty," was itself but a pretext to
countenance the "unjust pretensions," as Merlin himself calls them, used by the
French Government in its tribunals, for the purpose of condemning American
vessels. The details I have already given prove it. I beg leave to adduce other
evidence. It is the testimony of Mr. Barlow, an American by birth, but for
several years past a citizen of France, a man of acknowledged discernment and
talents, devoted to the French Republic, and intimate with her leading men. Mr.
Barlow has long resided at Paris, and cannot have mistaken the views of the
French Government, nor the motives of its conduct. Mr. Barlow's letter dated at
Paris the first of March, 1798, to his brother-in-law Mr. Baldwin, has doomed
the writer to infamy: yet when it describes the principles and conduct of the
French Republic, it merits attention. He says, "that act of submission to the
British Government, commonly called JAY'S Treaty, is usually considered, both
by its friends and enemies, as the sole cause, or at least the great cause of
the present hostile disposition of the French Republic toward the United
States. This opinion (says he) is erroneous." He then proceeds to an
enumeration of a variety of matters which he says have influenced the conduct
of France. But the most provoking, and the most unpardonable of all the
offenses of the United States against France, was, fortunately, not an act of
the government, but an act of the people. The Freemen of the United States,
"the true Americans," dared to exercise their independent rights, and contrary
to the wishes of the French Government and the endeavors and practices of its
Minister Adet, elected Mr. ADAMS to the office of President. Mr. Barlow's
observations on this event further develope the character and the principles of
that Government. He says, "when the election of ADAMS was announced here, it
produced the order of the 2d of March, It will be recollected that this is the
Decree of the Executive Directory, ordering the capture and condemnation of
American vessels, not having a role d'equipage -- that fruitful source of
plunder to Frenchmen, and of ruin to American citizens; and which also declared
all American seamen, making a part of the crew of enemies ships, even when put
on board them by force, to be pirates and directed them to be treated as such.
which was meant to be little short of a declaration of war:" "the Government
here was determined to fleece you of your property, to a sufficient degree to
bring you to your feeling in the only nerve in which it was presumed your
sensibility lay, which was your pecuniary interest." And what was this
"feeling" to produce? The answer is obvious -- Submission to the will of the
French Government. The mystery of French politics is here unveiled. The United
States did not submit: Hence the non-reception of her Envoys, and their haughty
treatment: Hence the insulting demands of tribute as a preliminary even to
their reception; and hence the expulsion of two of them from France.

But to return to the Decree of the Executive Directory of the 31st of July
last.

I have already shown that the mass of depredations on the commerce of the
United States, under the French flag, of which we so justly complain, are not
those committed, as the Directory in their preamble insinuate, by "foreigners
and pirates" but by French armed vessels commissioned by the Government or its
agents; or whether commissioned or not, whole acts in capturing American
vessels receive the sanction of French Consuls, of French Tribunals, and of the
special Agents of the Directory. I have shown that the laws of France and the
Directorial Decrees, are themselves the sources of those violations of treaties
and the law of nations, which have caused such immense losses to the citizens
of the United States. And to the proofs already offered, that the information
of such aggressions and abuses, particularly in the West Indies, and on the
coast of America, was not, as the preamble suggests, but "recently received." I
may add, that their "specialagents" authorized those depredations and
violations of the law of nations, by decrees assuming the laws of the Republic,
or the acts of the Executive Directory, for their bases -- by decrees printed
and published, and undoubtedly from time to time reported by those agents to
the Directory itself. Further, these outrages on the American commerce have for
years past been the theme of every tongue, and filled columns in our newspapers
-- those newspapers which Mr. Barlow says, "the office of Foreign Affairs (at
Paris) regularly receives." I will conclude this point with the testimony of
Mr. Letombe, late Consul General of the French Republic, and still residing in
Philadelphia. He has long since, and repeatedly assured me, that he collected
all those accounts of depredations and outrages committed by French privateers,
and transmitted them to his Government at Paris.

In relation to the depredations and outrages committed by the French on the
commerce of the United States, I have said that as great, if not as numerous
abuses were practiced by the French in Europe, and even in France itself, as in
her remote possessions: and that this fact was but too well known to our
citizens, who had felt severely their effects. Among these we have seen the
case of the ship Hare, Captain Hayley; but never in all its disgusting
features. With this I will close my observations on the preamble of the
Directorial decree of the 31st July.

Extract of a letter from Rufus King Esquire. Minister of the United States in
London, dated September 3, 1798 to the Secretary of State of the United States.

"The pretense for this arrete [the Decree of the Directory of July 31st] is of
a piece with the vindication of Talleyrand respecting X. Y. and Z. and the
justice and sincerity of the Directory should be ascertained, not by their
word, but by the following cotemporaneous fact."

"Hayley, an American citizen, master of the American ship Hare, lying in the
port of London, laden with a rich cargo, the property of Americans, and bound
to New York, went with my passport from London to Paris, where, in a personal
interview, not with the agents of the Minister of marine, but with the Minister
himself, he disclosed his plan of bringing the ship Hare and her cargo into
France; and to enable him to receive the profits of the fraud, without risking
the punishment of piracy, he demanded and received from the Minister of Marine,
a commission naming him the commander of a Privateer that did not exist; with
which in his pocket, he returned to London; and soon after carried the ship
Hare and her cargo as a prize into France.

"The ship and cargo were both claimed by the American owners; and upon the
unveiling of this infamous proceeding before the lower Tribunals, the judges
hesitated; and finally refused to sanction so unheard of a fraud; though
instead of restoring the property to its lawful owners, they on some frivolous
pretense adjudged both ship and cargo to be good prize to the nation -- Lately
the Tribunal in the last resort, upon the appeal of Hayley, has reversed the
judgment of the lower Court, and "decreed the ship and cargo to be condemned as
good prize to this Renegado."

"If a transaction more grossly corrupt and infamous has occurred in the
West Indies -- I have not heard of it; and yet with this case of unequalled
infamy and corruption before them, sanctioned by the highest Tribunals of the
nation, the Directory expect to amuse us with a disavowal of the conduct of a
few subaltern agents, in a remote part of their dominions!!!"

Besides the communications from Mr. Gerry, I have received from Fulwar
Skipwith, Esquire. consul General of the United States at Paris, three letters
dated the 4th, 8th and 22d of August, copies of which and of the papers therein
referred to, are herewith presented, excepting the decree of July 31st, which
appears among the communications from Mr. Gerry. Mr. Skipwith's letter of
August 22d with its enclosures, was delivered to me by Doctor Logan; I had
previously received the original, which had been brought over by Mr. Woodward
of Boston.

DOCTOR LOGAN having been the bearer of the last mentioned communications from
the French government, and his EMBASSY having not only engaged the attention of
the public, but been made the subject of debate in Congress, I trust it will
not be deemed improper to introduce into this report some circumstances
respecting it.

On the 12th of November the Doctor came to me at Trenton -- he advanced with
eagerness, and handed me the packet from Mr. Skipwith. On examining its
contents, I told the Doctor that I already possessed the same papers. I made
some remarks on the Decree of the Directory of the 31st of July, to show that
it was only ostensible and illusory; and that it would not give any relief to
the commerce of the United States. The Doctor, not contesting my arguments or
opinion, said that more was intendrd to be done; but that the Directory could
not accomplish it of themselves; seeing it depended on the laws which the
Legislative Councils alone could change. I answered, that this was easy to be
done -- that as the Directory, on the 18th Fructidor [Sept. 4th, 1797] had
garbled the two Councils, and banished some and dismissed others of the best
members -- all who were firmly opposed to their views, and as on the new
elections to supply the vacancies and the new third of the Councils, the
Directory sent home every new member who was not agreeable to them -- every
body must see that the Directory had but to declare its will and it would be
obeyed. The doctor said, That the Directory was very well disposed toward the
United States, and desired a reconciliation; that they would promote a revision
of the laws in regard to privateering, so as to put the rights of neutral
nations on a just footing: but that it would take some time to bring this
about, "the people concerned in privateering having gained a very great
influence in the two Councils!" --! --! Is it necessary to inquire how this
"very great influence" has been obtained? are the leading members owners of
privateers? Or do they receive their shares of prize money from those who are?
Do the legislative councils really act independently of the Directory? Or does
the same "influence" actuate both? -- The printed dispatches of our Envoys,
under the date of October 29, 1797, state, on the information of Mr.
Talleyrand's private agent X, that Merlin, one of the members, and now or late
President of the Directory, was to receive no part of the douceur demanded of
the Envoys, because he was paid by the owners of privateers, and in respect to
the loan then demanded, on which subject it was suggested that one of the
Envoys should go to America to consult the government, the Envoys "asked Mr. X,
if in the meantime the Directory would order the American property not yet
passed into the hands of the privateersmen, to be restored? He said explicitly
that they would not. The Envoys asked him whether they would suspend further
depredations on our commerce? He said they would not: -- but Mr. Talleyrand
observed that on this subject we could not sustain much additional injury,
because the winter season was approaching when few additional captures could be
made." Here we see our Envoys inquiring -- not whether the two councils would
suspend those depredations -- but whether the Directory would do it: and Mr.
Talleyrand's agent X, without intimating that the Directory wanted power, or
that they could only "endeavor to provoke in the legislature, a revision of
their maritime laws" -- answered peremptorily, that the DIRECTORY would not
suspend the depredations. The truth is, that it was an act of the Directory
alone, (their decree of the 2d of March 1797) which authorized and produced
more extensive depredations on the commerce of the United States than any other
decree or law of the French Republic. To effect a repeal of that decree, no
application to the Legislative Councils could be necessary. They could also
have repealed another of their own decrees, that of the 2d of July 1796, which
subjected neutral property, and particularly that of American citizens, to the
discretion of their Consuls and cruisers in the European seas, as well as of
their privateers and agents in the West Indies, and on which these agents have
founded other numerous decrees, which have occasioned those shocking
depredations and abuses there and on the coast of the United States, which the
Directory by their decree of the 31st of July last affect to restrain.

When the Executive Directory wished to enlarge the field of depredations on
neutral commerce, and on the fourth of January, 1798, proposed to the two
Councils the project of the iniquitous law "to declare to be good prize every
vessel and her cargo, to whomsoever belonging, if any part of the cargo came
from England or her possessions" -- there was a ready obedience. "The Directory
thinks it urgent and necessary to pass the law." The plan of a decree is
reported to the Council of 500 on the 11th; and "urgency" being declared, is
immediately and unanimously adopted. It goes to the Council of Ancients -- that
Council approves the act of "urgency;" and on the 18th of January the project
of the Directory becomes a law.

This law was necessary for the French government: So many American vessels had
been entrapped by the Directory's decree of March 2d, 1797, requiring the role
d'equipage, that the residue were now generally provided with that paper: Some
new pretext was therefore requisite for "fleecing" the people of the United
States of their property: and an ordinance of one of the Kings of France, made
near a century past, having declared lawful prize, the vessels and their
cargoes in which was found English merchandise belonging to enemies," -- the
Directory declare that the provisions of this ordinance ought to be extended,
to comprehend the vessels and cargoes of friends; that is, of allied and
neutral nations. The Directory knew that the United States, whose inhabitants
were chiefly cultivators, required a greater supply of English manufactures
than any other neutral country of equal population; and those manufactures too,
were, from the course of American commerce, combined with almost all our
mercantile operations, and pervaded entirely our great coasting trade. Hence it
is evident that this law was chiefly aimed at them.

It will be remembered also, that this law was passed while our three Envoys
were at Paris, where they had passed three months unheeded by the French
Government, except by its indignities -- and where they had in vain solicited
to be heard on the just claims of our citizens, plundered and ruined under the
former decrees of the Republic. This time was preferred, in order to add insult
to injury. The Envoys had firmly resisted her demands of loans and douceurs;
and when speaking of their country, dared to intimate, that it was independent:
it was therefore requisite, on the French system, to "chastise," as well as to
"fleece" it.

In closing this subject, it will be proper to notice an assertion of Mr.
Talleyrand in a conversation with the Envoys on the 2d March, 1798. In reply to
some observations of his respecting the proofs of friendship required by France
from the United States, General Pinckney observed, "that the Envoys being in
France was a proof of the friendly disposition of our Government; and that
while they were there, the French Government had passed a decree for seizing
neutral vessels having on board any article coming out of England; which in its
operation would subject to capture all our property on the ocean. Mr.
Talleyrand replied, that this was not particular to us, but was common to all
the neutral powers." This assertion of Mr. Talleyrand is not true. Although the
decree in its terms is general, and applicable to all the neutral powers, yet
in its operation, it was not designed to be, and has not been so applied -- it
has not touched a vessel of Prussia. The motives to this exemption are obvious.
France wished not by irritating Prussia, to add so powerful a nation, and one
so near at hand, to the number of her enemies, while her peace with Austria
remained precarious. But this exemption of Prussian vessels from the operation
of a general law, merits particular notice. It demonstrates that there exists
in the French Republic a dispensing power -- a power above the laws -- a power
which can prevent their execution: and it is alike demonstrable that this
sovereign controuling power can exist, and in fact does exist, in the Executive
Directory. It might then, if the Directory desired it, be exercised in the
exemption of American as well as Prussian vessels: But the Directory do not
desire it: we have not yet been sufficiently "sleeced" and chastised."

Mr. Skipwith's letter of the 4th of August enclosed the Decree of the
Executive Directory already noticed, passed the 31st of July, respecting French
depredations in the West Indies and on the coast of the United States. His
letter of the 8th of August enclosed Mr. Talleyrand's letter to him of the 6th,
respecting that decree in which it is plain that the Minister supposes the
world, and particularly the United States, will be amused by that illusory
device, and imagine that it was intended to stop abuses, and give security to
neutral commerce.

Mr. Skipwith's letter of the 22d of August covers another letter from Mr.
Talleyrand, dated the 20th of August, in which he encloses copies of two
letters from the Minister of Marine respecting American seamen who had been
imprisoned. When in July last an embargo was laid on the American merchant
vessels in the ports of France, the agents of the Marine took out their crews
and threw them into prison; thus hazarding the loss of the vessels, and
injuring the men by confinement and the bad provisions of their jails. These
seamen were ordered to be released. The other letter from the Minister of
Marine required that no injury should be done to the safety and liberty of the
officers and crews of American vessels found to be in order, nor to passengers
and other citizens of the United States having passports and protections.

The same letter from Mr. Skipwith enclosed the copy of a Decree of the
Directory passed the 16th of August, for taking off the Embargo, laid a month
before on American vessels.

The Decree itself occupies but two lines: but its preamble is extended, for
the purpose of insulting the Government of the United States, when an act of
common justice was done to some of their citizens; by insinuating that the
Government was "abandoned to the passions of the British Cabinet." This,
however, is but the repetition of a calumny familiar in French diplomacy,
respecting other nations as well as our own. Barras, President of the
Directory, in his valedictory address of Mr. Munroe, declared that "France
would not abase herself by calculating the consequences of the condescension of
the American Government, to the suggestions of her former tyrants": professing
at the same time great "esteem for the American people." Mr. Adet had before
charged the American Government, with a "perfidious condescension to the
English;" and after making his last communications to the Government, he, by
their immediate publication under his orders, appealed from the Government to
the People of the United States. Yet Mr. Talleyrand says, that the French
Government has indeed "complained of the American Government, but to the
Government itself;" meaning to have it understood, though carefully avoiding the
expression, that it had complained to the Government alone. With the like
sophistry he attempts to evade our well founded allegations, that the French
Government has made reproachful and injurious distinctions between the
Government and People of the United States, endeavoring to separate the latter
from the former. He says "it is utterly false, notwithstanding the public and
private insinuations which have been made, in private writings and in solemn
acts, that the French government has ever sought to detach the people of the
United States from the Constitution they have given themselves." Such a charge
against the French government has not, that I know, ever been made by the
American government: but we have accused them, and truly, with endeavors to
detach the People of the United States from the Government chosen by themselves
to administer that Constitution: and this the Minister does not attempt to
deny. The Directory would perhaps be contented that the People should retain
the forms of "the Constitution they have given themselves," and to which they
are attached, provided they would elect to administer it, men devoted to
France, and ready to obey the intimations of her will. And because the People
have not been thus obsequious, but have dared to make a different election, --
the French Government has expressed its "terrible" resentment. Mr. Barlow has
assured us, in the passage already cited from his letter, that for this single
act of the People of the United States, in exercising freely their right of
election, the Directory passed a Decree "which was meant to be little short of
a declaration of war;" by which it "was determined to fleece the people of
their property:" certainly in expectation that, by touching their feeling in
that "nerve," they would be induced, in order to save their property, to submit
implicitly to the Government of France. Failing in this attempt the French
government made another, in the Decree of the 18th of January, 1798, which though
general in its terms, I have shown to have been levelled directly and chiefly
at the commerce of the United States. And this at the time (as I have before
remarked) when three Envoys Extraordinary were waiting, month after month, and
most respectfully soliciting to be heard, and to enter on the discussion of all
the subjects of difference between the two countries; and among these, on the
French depredations on our commerce. Yet Mr. Talleyrand has the confidence to
assert, and to Mr. Gerry too, one of those Envoys, that the French Government
"never refused and never will refuse to enter into discussion upon every proper
subject?" Does the Minister mean that those depredations are not "a proper
subject of discussion;" Yes, with respect to a vast proportion of them. Mr. Y.
his private agent, explicitly told our Envoys, that the condemnations of
vessels for want of the role d'equipage were not to be questioned; "that being
a point on which Merlin while Minister of Justice had written a Treatise, and
on which the Directory were decided."

It is fit here to recollect another and a peremptory refusal of the French
government, "to enter into discussion" upon the subjects of difference between
France and the United States.

General Pinckney, appointed the Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States
to the French Republic, went to Paris in the autumn of 1796. There was at first
(as in the case of the Envoys Extraordinary in 1797) a show of receiving him:
but soon the scene was changed; and he was not only refused a hearing, and
after bearing a thousand indignities, ordered to leave France; but the
predecessor of Mr. Talleyrand, Charles De La Croix, in a letter to Mr. Monroe,
intended to be communicated to Genesis Pinckney, declared, (being specially
charged to do so by the Directory, and Mr. De La Croix repeated the declaration
to Genesis Pinckney's Secretary) "That it will not acknowledge nor receive another
Minister Plenipotentiary from the United States, until after the redress of the
grievances demanded of the American Government, and which the French Republic
has a right to expect from it." To this resolution we have seen the Directory
adhere; and we have also seen, in the demands it made to our Envoys
Extraordinary, as the indispensible preliminaries to any negotiation, what it
meant by a "redress of grievances," prior to the reception of a Minister from
America: it consisted in a douceur for the pocket of the Directors and
Ministers -- in the purchase at par of thirty-two millions of Dutch Securities,
then worth but half that sum -- and in Loans as immense and indefinite as their
depredations on our commeoce.

The same letter from the French Minister De La Croix to Mr. Monroe, affords
another proof of the aim and endeavors of the French government to separate
the People from the Government of the United States. In the sentence next
following the above quoted passage, Mr. De La Croix says, "I pray you to be
persuaded, citizen minister, that this determination having become necessary,
allows to subsist between the French Republic and the American People the
affection founded upon former benefits and reciprocal interests."

If I were to allow myself to make any further reflections on the conduct of
France toward the United States, it would be to illustrate the truth of Mr.
Barlow's assertion, That the French Government determined to FLEECE us. If the
French government "listened (as Mr. Talleyrand says it does) to nothing but
justice," and really desired a reconciliation, it would have proposed to fix
some measure of satisfaction for the injuries it said it had received. Or if
too proud to propose to us, at least it would have prescribed to itself, some
limit to reprisals: or at any rate, it would not have spurned us from its
presence, when we respectfully presented ourselves, sought a reconciliation,
and offered to make a just satisfaction for every injury we had committed. And
if (as Mr. Talleyrand asserts) "the French government has not ceased to offer
the exact justice it demands," it would also have permitted us to state our
claims. -- But it would have been so easy to ascertain all the damages we had
done; and their amount would have been so small; even if we agreed to pay for
all English, Spanish and Dutch vessels brought by French cruisers into our
ports, while all those nations were at war with France -- a few of which the
justice of the federal courts, in vindication of the sovereignty of the United
States, rescued from the hands of the French Consuls, Agents and Privateersmen;
and if to that amount we also added ten times the value of the miserable
corvette Le Cassius, a vessel which had been unlawfully fitted out for war in
the United States, but which has been the burden of every note from Adet's in
1795, to De la Croix's and Talleyrand's in 1796 and 1798, the amount of the
whole, it was known, would be so small -- the French government did not choose
to have it ascertained: for then the injuries done by the French to the
commerce of the United States must also have been examined and adjusted: and
when adjusted, payment must have been made or stipulated: but in this, the
French government, doubtless thought "it would find only a real disadvantage:"
the amount of its own demands deducted from those of America, would hardly seem
to have diminished the latter.

Such a mutual adjustment would also have been accompanied with a settlement of
all questions and disputes about the construction of treaties, and all other
subjects of difference: But in this also the French government, upon its own
system, "would have found a real disadvantage." For it would have vastly
reduced the field for privateering in the European seas; and in the West Indies
it would have been nearly annihilated: for there, for every vessel taken from
the enemies of France, her cruisers have probably captured twenty belonging to
the United States. But the French government, by always abstaining from making
specific demands of damages -- by refusing to receive our ministers -- by at
length proposing to negotiate in a mode which it knew to be impracticable, --
with the person who had no powers, and who therefore constantly refused to
negotiate -- and thus wholly avoiding a negotiation -- it has kept open the
field for complaints of wrongs and injuries, in order, by leaving them
undefined to furnish pretenses for unlimited depredations. -- In this way "it
determined to fleece us:" In this way it gratified its avarice and revenge --
and it hoped also to satiate its ambition. After a long series of insults
unresented, and a patient endurance of injuries aggravated in their nature and
unexampled in their extent -- that government expected our final submission to
its will. Our resistance has excited its surprise; and as certainly increased
its resentment. With some soothing expressions, is heard the voice of wounded
pride. Warmly professing its desire of reconciliation, it gives no evidence of
its sincerity; but proofs in abundance demonstrate that it is not sincere. From
standing erect, and in that commanding attitude requiring implicit obedience,
-- cowering, it renounces some of its unfounded demands. But I hope we shall
remember "that the Tiger crouches before he leaps upon his prey."

Department of State, January 18, 1799. TIMOTHY PICKERING.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE,
January 24 th, 1799. SIR,
SINCE the printing of my Report on French affairs, having noticed an error in
the 20th page, which led to another in the 21st, I have represented the same to
the President of the United States, who has directed me to communicate the same
to you, for the information of the Senate.

In page 20, lines 10 and 11, from the bottom -- instead of the words in the
parenthesis (about the Consular Convention) should have been inserted the words
(about the examination of reciprocal damages.)

In page 21, beginning in the 21st line, after the word ostensible, the next
sentence should read thus: In the minister's last mentioned letter after saying
that his "second point" (to fix the meaning of the treaties between the two
countries) was most important, "as it embraced the source of all the
differences," and that to this they should first attend -- he purposely passes
by the most interesting questions which it involves, and sends Mr. Gerry a note
on the Consular Convention, of all possible subjects in difference the most
insignificant; etc.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, Sir, your most obedient servant,
TIMOTHY PICKERING.
The Honorable the President of the Senate of the United States.




