THE PHILANTHROPIST; OR A GOOD TWELVE CENTS WORTH OF POLITICAL LOVE POWDER, FOR
THE FAIR DAUGHTERS AND PATRIOTIC SONS OF AMERICA.

Dedicated to that great Lover and Love of his Country, GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire.

God prosper long these sister States,
In union, health and peace,
And grant henceforth that quarrels vile
'Twixt A's and D's may cease.
Nor Gaul nor Brit, can make Columbia rue,
If but COLUMBIA TO HERSELF be true.
By the Rev. M. L. WEEMS, (of Lodge No. 50) Dumfries, VIRGINIA.

PRINTED BY J. MAY. MDCCXCIX.

To his EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, ESQUIRE, LIEUTENANT GENERAL of the ARMIES
of the UNITED STATES.
Most HONORED GENERAL,
SCARCELY was I delivered of this young republican Philanthropist, before I
began, according to good Christian usage, to look about for a suitable
godfather for it. My thoughts presumptuously enough, I confess, instantly
fixed on you -- for two reasons. First, I was desirous of paying to you, (as
being next to God, the greatest benefactor of my dear country) this little mite
of grateful and affectionate respect: -- and secondly, because I well know
there exists not on this side of heaven, the man who will more cordially than
GENERAL WASHINGTON, approve of whatever tends to advance the harmony and
happiness of Columbia.

God, I pray him grant! that you may live to see us all, your loving
countrymen, catching from your fair example, that reverence for the Eternal
Being; that veneration for the laws, that infinite concern for the national
Union; that unextinguishable love for our country, and that insuperable
contempt of pleasures, of dangers, and of death itself in its service and
defense, which have raised you to Immortality, and which alone can exalt us to
be a great and happy republic.

On the Square of Justice, And on the Scale of Love, I remain, Most Honored
General, Your very sincere friend, And Masonic Brother, M. L. WEEMS.

THE PHILANTHROPIST; OR A GOOD TWELVE CENTS WORTH OF POLITICAL LOVE POWDER, FOR
THE FAIR DAUGHTERS AND PATRIOTIC SONS OF AMERICA.
ALL MEN ARE EQUAL.

"SOHO! What the plague have we got here now? All men equal! All men equal!!!
Here Is a pretty love powder for us truly -- An arrant dose of Jacobinism I Will
warrant it, sufficient to poison the nation."

This is just what I apprehended; for some gentlemen, the moment they hear
mention of EQUALITY, fancy they see a host of hungry sans-culottes in full
march for desolation, equalling all property, levelling all distinctions,
knocking down kings, clapping up beggars, and waving the tri-coloured flag of
anarchy, confusion and wretchedness, over the ruins of happiness and order.

From such equality, good Lord, deliver us! But the equality now in question is
as different from that, as is a spirit of heaven from a goblin damned. It Is an
equality of mutual dependence, of civil obligation, of social affection, of
dutiful obedience to the laws, and of harmonious co-exertion to make ourselves
and our country happy.

When I say that all men are equal, I allude not to the endowments of mind or
body. For, whether we consider the size, strength and activity of the former,
or, the wit, memory and other faculties of the latter -- there is certainly a
surprising inequality among men.

As to SIZE --

Some are dwarfs Of dwarfs there have been numbers; but Baby, the little
Frenchman, born in 1741, is the most remarkable. At his birth he weighed but a
pound and a quarter, and was for some time rocked in a large slipper by way of
cradle. When full grown he was just 29 inches tall, healthy, handsome and well
proportioned. At 22 he died of old age.
mere pigmies, hardly a match for cranes -- while others, the giant As to
giants, both Ireland and Patagonia have produced a great many, 7, 8. and 9 feet
high: but Goliath of Gath out-gianted all these by far; for he measured upwards
of 11 feet straight rabbet.
sons of earth, lift their mighty forms, terrible to look on.

As to STRENGTH --

Some are so very feeble, that the weight of a grasshopper is burdensome --
while others, like Sampson, among the Hebrews, or Peter Francisco This
extraordinary man, a native Virginian, has been known to lift a cannon of 1500
weight, and to throw a stout bully over the pales of a garden with great ease.
-- He was at the famous battle of the Eutaw springs, where the gallant
Williams, who led the host of Columbia, being knocked down, the British
grenadiers endeavored to dispatch him on the ground. The Americans defended him
with great bravery, and dreadful was the clashing of the bayonets over our
prostrate hero. He was soon covered with the dead bodies of the combatants
falling on him; Peter, being an officer, had no better weapon than a heavy
cutlass, with which however, he got a blow a piece at four grenadiers. Every
blow was ready money to old Charon.
among ourselves, possess a degree of bodily force that is truly astonishing.

As to ACTIVITY --

Some men For example -- Col. Daniel Boon, the settler of Kentucky, who in his
flight from the Indians, ran upwards of 150 miles in 36 hours.
swift footed as the roe-buck, can bound across the fields with the motion of
the winds, scarcely injuring the tender grass in their rapid course; while
others snail slow in progress, can scarcely drag their torpid limbs along.

As to HEALTH --

Some blessed with constitutions of steel, hardly know what sickness means, as
was the case of a Mrs. Blackney, an English lady, who on her death bed
declared, that during a life of 80 years, she had never felt even a pain of the
head -- while others enervated by sloth and strong tea, can seldom get through
a whole day without making dreadful complaints.

And, as to LONG LIFE --

Millions return to the dust almost as soon as they are awakened out of it;
while others, like superanuated strulbrugs live 'till they are quite tired of
living. Witness, Thomas Parr, an old English ploughman, who lived to see ten
kings and queens rise and fall from the throne of England. Such bubbles are
kings, compared to cheerful laborers! He died aged 153 years. Old Henry
Jenkings, (of Bolton England,) went a good vay beyond Parr, for he lived 169
years. Both of these veterans were honest, temperate, hard working, poor men.

As to BEAUTY --

Some have so much of heaven in their looks, that a single glance is enough to
electrify with delight every nerve in our frames, and to throw our leaping
hearts into the sweetest palpitation; while others are so slightly touched with
this divine magnetism that they attract none of our iron race, but are at full
liberty to point toward heaven and make angels their admirers.

"Even crosses from our Maker's hand,
"Are blessings in disguise."
Equally great is the difference between different persons, in the powers and
qualities of their minds.

As to COURAGE --

Some, like the war-horse, rejoice, at the sound of the trumpet and plunge with
eagerness into the thickest battle, declaring with the mad-cap king of Sweden,
that no music equals the whistling of bullets; while others like delicate
court-ladies fall into a tremor at the fight of an unloaded gun.

As to UNDERSTANDING --

Some are so very dull that it is a hard matter to teach them a sum in the rule
of three; while others quickly drink dry the shallow fountains of human
knowledge, and then boldly strike out into the main ocean of the Almighty's
works. Witness our great RITTENHOUSE, of whom it' was well said by the
Vice President of the United States, that, "though he never made a world, yet
he came nearer to it than any man ever did."

And witness too our sage FRANKLIN, who, though bro't up a poor Printer's boy,
soon learnt the art to chain the thunderbolts of heaven and to bid fierce
lightnings play harmlessly about our buildings. "E coelo fulmina eripuit,
sceptraque tyrannis."

AS to ELOQUENCE --

Some, like our famou^s PATRICK HENRY, can lead the passions of men about, with
as much ease as a countryman calls his pigs after him; while another hardly has
utterance sufficient to declare his passion to a pretty milk-maid.

As to HUMANITY --

One is so tender hearted, that like the amiable Dr. GOLDSMITH, he can say to a
little captive fly, "go poor thing, there is surely room enough in this great
world for you and me;" while another can pickle the raw hide of a poor slave,
for breaking a tea-cup.

As to BENEVOLENCE --

This, like the man of ROSS, will sell his elegant pictures and plate, to
assist his distressed tenant; while that, will distress his tenant, selling
even the bed from under his sick wife and children, to raise money for gaudy
pictures and plate.

Thus there appears a most surprising inequality between men, both in mind and
body; an inequality almost as great as that between angels and men, or between
men and children. This inequality is so very striking, that some, when told,
that all men are equal, burst out into a hearty laugh, treating it as a silly
French conceit. -- Such gentlemen will perhaps keep up the laugh when they hear
that this inequality among men, as individuals, is the very cause of their
equality as a social body. -- That great philosopher, Paul of Tarsus, has
explained this seeming paradox in a most beautiful and masterly manner. He
compares the various members in the body of society to the members in the human
body. -- "We have all, says he, many members in one body; some of these occupy
a high place, as the head; some a low, as the feet; some appear to enjoy great
honor; the eye which sees beautiful objects, the ear which hears sweet sounds:
while others, the poor feet, are obliged to plod on the ground liable to be
bruised by stones or defiled by mud." But notwithstanding this apparently great
inequality among the members, they have no just cause of pride or discontent.
The foot has no reason to envy the eye, nor the eye to insult the foot. They
are all equally dependent on one another, equally necessary to the perfection
of the body, and to each others welfare. For, what could the eyes do without
the feet? Or how could the feet do without the eyes? With the like admirable
wisdom, God has placed together the members which compose the great body of
society. -- Some are rich, some poor, some wife, some ignorant, some strong,
some feeble. These though seemingly very unequal, are yet perfectly equal, in
their mutual dependence, in their absolute need of one another. The wife are
like eyes, to see, for the ignorant; the poor, like the feet, to plod; some,
like the head, to contrive; others, like the arms, to execute. Some were made
to direct; others to obey; these to labor with their head, and those with
their hands. None of these can do without the rest. As in the body, the head
cannot say to the foot, "I have no need of you"; so in society, the richest
man, nay, the greatest king cannot say to the poorest tradesman, "I have no
need of you"; for the laced coat that glitters on his back, the sword which
graces his side, the chariot in which he rolls, the palace wherein he lives,
the books that amuse his mind, the music that enchants his ear; all these, and
the ten thousand other conveniences and elegancies of his life are the joint
production of as many different artificers. Were it not for these ingenious
poor men, what would become of the greatest monarch on earth? Why, he would
soon find himself a most necessitous and wretched being. To be more sensibly
convinced of this, let us suppose the proudest Nebuchadnezzar that ever scoffed
contempt on his poor subjects, to be placed in a situation where he could
derive no assistance from them, and mark the figure his haughty kingship makes.
"With a flint tomahawk he hacks down a dozen or two of sapplings; these he sets
up on end, ties at the top, and covers with bark and mud, leaving a hole just
big enough for himself and his dog to creep in and out at. This is his wigwam,
his castle, his palace. In the midst of this he kindles up a fire, around which
he yawns and dozes away his gloomy winters. With no clothes but skins torn from
the quivering limbs of Wolves and Bears, no food but acorns and the carcases of
such animals as he has mastered by his club and bow; no music but hissing
serpents, screaming wild cats, or the storm howling through the forest."

Thus destitute is the condition, thus imperfect the happiness of the man who
has none to help him. His abilities, though the greatest ever bestowed on man,
are infinitely insufficient to procure those innuinerable felicities of which
his kind Creator has rendered him capable. His body embraces a number of senses
such as seeing, hearing, tasting, etc. which are so many pleasant inlets to a
vast variety of gratifications; add to this, his mind, with its capacities, for
all the far sublimer pleasures of knowledge, virtue, beauty, painting, poetry,
harmony, etc. so numerous, that nature herself with all her exhaustless
treasures can hardly supply them.

But how utterly impossible it is for an individual to acquire all these things
for himself, must instantly occur to any one who considers what a world of
industry, time and ingenuity it takes to invent and carry to perfection a
single art or science: then how passing absurd to think that any one man though
armed with the strength of Sampson and the wisdom of Solomon, can manage the
thousand arts and sciences which exalt the citizen above the savage, which
sweeten and embellish life, and which from the most helpless of the animal
creation render man the lord of the world! No: this is the work, not of ONE,
but of MYRIADS; a work to be effected by men not as solitary, scattered
individuals, but as the members of a compact all powerful society.

Let us now view them in their associated state. Convinced of their extreme
feebleness while alone, they come together for mutual safety and benefit. The
various talents which God has distributed among them individually, are now
brought into the common stock and exerted for the general good. Some contribute
great bodily strength, others increase that strength by the aid of art and
ingenious inventions: the old counsel the young, the wise teach the ignorant,
the bold encourage the timid; and as fifty thousand men, taken individually,
have but little strength or terror, but consolidated into an army, furnished
with proper weapons aided by discipline, and led on by brave commanders, they
become unspeakably formidable. So, when the talents and strength of thousands
(though insignificant in the individual) are collected into one great social
body, aided by arts and acting in harmonious concert, they acquire a force that
is truly astonishing, and can with ease accomplish things beyond the reach of
imagination. See them now, like a noble band of brothers, bending to the
glorious toil. The deepest mines cannot conceal their precious metals. Furnaces
and forges begin to blaze and thunder. Iron and steel are fashioned into tools.
-- Quarries of stone and marbles are dug up and polished for buildings. The
strongest animals are subdued and put into their service; the bounding horse,
the sturdy ox, and even the mighty elephant lends them all his powers. Nothing
can resist their force. Old ocean roars and foams in vain. Tall ships rise upon
the stocks, suck the yielding flood and plough the main in quest of foreign
luxuries. The aged forest falls beneath their sounding axes. Elegant houses are
erected; the fields are ploughed, meadows drained, and orchards planted.
Adorned with fruits and flowers, the earth smiles like the garden of God. Their
barns are filled with plenty, and their presses burst out with new wine. Royal
dainties, even cakes of wheat-flour with marrow and fatness, are piled upon
their tables; while their wardrobes are filled with fine linnens and purple,
and with silks dyed in the rich colors of the showing arch!

Thus abundantly supplied with all the necessaries and conveniences of life,
they now get leisure to cultivate the fine arts and to taste of those far
sublimer pleasures of which God has rendered them capable. Painting and
printing are invented, by the help of which we can take a view of all the great
men and mighty nations of ancient or modern days. Their origin, wars, vices and
virtues, with all their interesting consequences, are set before us, to our
infinite entertainment and instruction. Music is studied, that magic art, whose
wondrous notes can waken every passion of our souls, and charm our senses into
rapture. Poetry too is cultivated, that astonishing power which transports us
out of ourselves, and lifts our thoughts to heaven.

Who, without the sweetest emotions of gratitude, can cast an eye over this
immense feast, this royal banquet of delights which the great king has spread
for us his subjects? Or who can meditate, though but for a moment, on this
pleasing wondrous theme, without feeling that great truth; the natural equality
of men? Does not every man, rich or poor, equally covet these felicities of
life; and is he not, of himself, equally unable to procure them? Are we not
equal in our wants, and equal in our inability to supply them without the help
of others, and therefore equally dependant on one another? Without our brethren
we can do nothing, no, not even make a hoe or a hatchet; but united with them,
supported by their ingennity and strength, we can look on this world with all
its rich furniture as our own, and gratefully exclaim with the Poet.

"For us kind nature wakes her genial power,
Suckles each plant, and blossoms every flower.
Annual for us, the grape, the rose renew
The juice nectarious and the balmy dew.
For us the mine a thousand treasures brings,
For us health gushes from a thousand springs.
Seas roll to waft us, suns to light us rise,
Our foot stool earth, our canopy the skies."
What virtuous min I can think of these things without catching impressions the
most desirable, without feeling sentiments the most tender and benevolent
toward his fellow-men? We have seen that, it is not good for man to be alone;
that alone, he is a feeble helpless wretch, living in a world stored with ten
thousand blessings, but which, Tantalus-like, he has not power to taste; that
alone, he is but as a poor shipwrecked sailor cast on a desolate island, where
he is hard put to it for berries and roots to keep him from starving. But that
in our associated state, we are like a great family of brothers whom God has
placed together as mutual aids, and has endued with suitable talents, giving
this to one, that to another, so that we can now most easily command all the
conveniences and elegancies of a happy life. O how closely ought these
considerations to unite us to our species, how powerfully do they bind it upon
us to love one another? Is it not as much a law of nature that we should love
one another, as it is that the members of the body should love one another? As
that the eyes should love the feet for carrying them to gaze on the dear
objects of their affections? Or, that the feet should love the eyes for
directing them to slowery walks to ramble in?

This endearing light in which nature herself teaches us to view one another,
is enough one would think to banish all hateful passions from our bosoms, and
especially, pale, heart sickening envy. Envy! Merciful God! Whom shall we envy?
Our own flesh and blood kindly multiplied into a thousand brothers, and placed
around us on purpose to administer to our happiness! And for what shall we envy
them? For those very talents and possessions which God has conferred on them
for our own good, and which will be the more for our good, in exact proportion
as they possess them in a more eminent degree. This were a sin not only against
nature, but utterly unknown to nature. Do the members of the body ever repine
at each others perfections? -- Does the foot repine because the eye is quick
sighted to see a thousand charming objects; because the ear with admirable
nicety can distinguish enchanting sounds; or because the arms are strong and
able to get an abundance of good things? No: they rejoice in each others
perfections, as in the instruments of their own glory and happiness. In like
manner, ought not every member of the great body of society to rejoice in the
perfections of his brother member? Am I a poor man, ought I not to rejoice that
God has bestowed great riches on my neighbor, who can undertake works of great
public usefulness and give employment and bread to thousands of poor men and
their families? Am I weak and ignorant, ought I not to thank God for giving my
neighbor wisdom to invent and to instruct me in those arts which make my life
so much more easy and comfortable? Am I timid and fearful, easily frightened
out of my rights -- ought I not to be thankful that my neighbor has courage to
rise up in my behalf and to defend me against him who would be too strong for
me? Am I rich, never so rich -- I have equal cause of gratitude that I am not
left to starve amidst my piles of guineas and half-joes, but that God has
kindly placed around me thousands of poor brothers, all ready, this with his
strength, that with his ingenuity; one with this charming are, another with
that, to add to me all the comforts and pleasures of life! And indeed if I be
wise, I shall thank God more cordially for distributing these talents among my
brethren, than if they were all concentered in myself. For, had I the talents
to become as great a Sta esman as Adams, as profound a Philosopher as Franklin,
as ingenious a Physician as Rush; yet all these eminent talents would be of
little use to me or to others, because I should not have time to improve them.
But distributed as now they are most wisely, among the mass of the citizens,
one talent to this, and another to that, they are all cultivated to the highest
perfection, and consequently prove eminently useful both to the possessor and
to the public.

This endearing view of human kind, this looking on our neighbor as ourself,
kindly multiplied into many members, into many dear brothers for mutual good,
must show us as with a sun beam what a horrid thing it is for one man to hurt
another! What a most horrible abuse of God's goodness, most monstrous
perversion of his blessed design to abuse to the heaviest curses, those very
talents which he gave us for richest blessings to one another!

That power which God gave you to protect the innocent and to frown the
disorderly into good behavior, will you abuse it to overawe the poor, and to
frighten them out of their rights?

That superior genius which he gave you to instruct your brethren in arts and
happiness, can you abuse it to overreach and defraud them? That manly strength
which God gave you for their assistance, can you cruelly turn it against them?

That precious gift of speech which was given you to hold sweet converse with
your brethren, can you most wickedly abuse it to blast their characters, and to
make their very appearance vile and odious?

That wealth which was given that you might be a guardian angel to the poor,
will you like a Demon abuse it to their corruption and ruin?

That noble courage which was lent you to fly to the defense of your countrymen
unjustly invaded, can you most horribly abuse it to their destruction, in worse
than brutish battles, and worse than develish duels?

What if you were to see the teeth tearing the flesh from the bleeding arms, or
the arms stabbing and mangling the quivering body, would not the very sight
freeze the blood in your veins, and fill your souls with horror! how then must
it affect how torture the soul of humanity to see us men, whom God peaced here
to live in love, thus dreadfully abusing our powers to curse each others
existence, and to crush one another into an untimely grave! Poor deluded
mortals! We may call ourselves men of honor, but surely it will be more
tolerable in the day of Judgment for bloody savages, than for such men of honor!

This great doctrine "the natural equality of men," founded in our equal wants
and equal inability to supply them, suggests the great duty of exerting
ourselves for the common benefit. He who neglects this deserves not to be
called a good man, for he withholds from the community the blessings which he
might confer, and by meanly withdrawing his shoulders from the common burden,
he cruelly throws too great a part of it upon others. Such a man, instead of
rising as is foolishly imagined, by such a life of idleness and dissipation,
degrades himself into the condition of an ungrateful beggar, who lives upon the
labors of others without making any return.

And besides, what can sink a man more even in his own eyes, than that he has
done nothing to serve his neighbors, to benefit his poor relations, to educate
and establish his own children, or to advance the interest and glory of his
country; in fine, that he has buried his talents, defeated the kind intentions
of heaven in bestowing them, and that if he were cut off by death, his place
would not be misled, nay, the world would be happily delivered from an useless
burden.

On the other hand, what nobler satisfaction can any person enjoy than in the
reflection, that, no day passes over his head but sees him diligently employed
in promoting his own and the happiness of mankind: that he not only supplies
others with many of the good things of this life, but endeavors by his good
example to raise their joyful views to a far brighter world. An exalting
consideration this, and one equally open to the poor and to the rich; for as in
the natural body, the smallest joint, the smallest nerve and fiber, contributes
to the strength, elegance and usefulness of the whole; so in the social body,
the general peace and happiness depend on the good behavior of the lower
classes, especially as these are by far the most numerous. Hence it is not to
be doubted, that the meanest laborer, the poorest slave, who cheerfully exerts
himself in the duties of his place, has a right to share with the most exalted
of the sons of men, that glorious tide -- the friend of mankind and the servant
of God.

This great doctrine "the natural equality of men," sweeps away all ground of
pride from the rich, and of dejection from the poor.

Some of the great nabobs of the earth, long accustomed to the cap in hand
homage of the poor, may not perhaps like to be told that there is no difference
between the rich lord in his silks, and the poor blacksmith in his lea her
apron; no odds between the learned doctor in his velvet cap and morocco
slippers, and the simple unlettered ploughman.

Inconsiderate mortal! who can take airs upon yourself and despise your poor
brother because he is ignorant and you learned. You understand Latin and Greek,
and can talk of Comets and Eclipses, and yet after all, the Cobbler is a more
independent man than you are, for he can do better without your Comets and
Eclipses, without your hic, haec, hoc's, than you can without his shoes.

And you my monied friend who are pleased to suppose yourself quite independent
of mechanics and tradesmen -- worth a host of blacksmiths, butchers and bakers,
etc. etc. etc. Suppose these good people were all to rise up in wrath, and
swear by their sledge-hammers, awls and ovens, that you should have no more
meat, bread nor clothes; no more elegant houses, carpets or plate, what would
become of you? Unable, like them to work, and yet ashamed to beg, what a sad
chop-fallen figure you would make!

Every thing shows "the natural equality of man." If the philosopher confers a
favor on the ploughman by inventing for him a plough, the ploughman requites
the favor by using it, and thereby supplying the philosopher with bread. If the
artist does a great service to the sailor by building him a ship, the sailor
comes along side of him, by navigating his ship through the stormy ocean and
bringing him the rich commodities of foreing countries. Thus we all depend on
each other like the link in a golden chain, which though not all precisely of
the same size are yet equally essential to the beauty and (...) of the whole.
Break but one link and the rest are (...) but little use. Thus, take away any
one class of the citizens -- e. g. the cultivators of the earth, and what
should we do for bread? Take away our mechanics, and of how many conveniences
should we be deprived? Take away our men of genius, and what a number of noble
arts and inventions should we lose? Take away our poets, painters and
musicians, and how many sweet embellishments would be lost to social life? And
if our gallant seamen and soldiers, our Truxtons'. Tingeys', etc. were to be
taken from us, how insecure would be all the riches, elegancies and pleasures
acquired by the ingenuity and industry of the other classes! -- Thus as in the
natural body no member could be amputated without great detriment to the whole,
so in the social body no class of the citizens could be taken away without
great detriment to the rest. Thus has GOD, the common PARENT, removed far from
us all ground of pride on the part of the rich, and of dejection on the part of
the poor -- " the rich and the poor, says Solomon, meet together, the Lord is
the maker of them all." In his view all good men are equally honorable, and
none of them are more or less worthy than another; but in as far as he
discharges or neglects the part allotted him and increases or diminishes the
sum of general happiness.

Since then no individual has either time or talents to procure the materials
of a happy life, without an affectionate union with his fellow men in society
-- it is very plain that God intended man for society, and it is as plainly his
intention that good laws and government should be introduced among them. As in
the human body those numberless sinews which give it all its motions, are not
left at liberty to distort and convulse it at pleasure, but are wisely confined
by ligamentous bandages which will not allow their irregular and dangerous
cramps: just so the members of the political body require to be confined within
the bounds of their duty and usefulness. The weakness of human nature renders
this necessary; for when men leaving their caves and dens first came together,
they were neither Solomon's nor Saints, but a rude selfish race, too ready to
lay light hands on whatever pleased them, and to knock down all who displeased
them; and at this day there are but too many of the same mohawk principles,
ready to rob, to slander, and even to murder their neighbors in duels. Yes, the
Iron restraint of the laws is necessary; and laws require rulers to execute
them -- for it would never do for a whole country to quit their ploughs and
convene to make laws to punish criminals. Certain persons must be elected by
the people and invested with their authority to make good laws and to see them
rigorously executed, "to the terror of evil doers and to the praise of them
that do well."

Hence appears the exceeding obligation of civil obedience, an obligation the
greatest of all others, our duty to God excepted. Indeed this constitutes a
very considerable part of our duty to him; for God desires above all things the
happiness of man. But as man cannot be happy without society, nor society
secure without laws, nor laws effectual without rulers, nor rulers beneficial
unless they are dutifully obeyed -- it follows that CIVIL OBEDIENCE is
infinitely pleasing to God. It Is the accomplishment of his favorite wish and
therefore he looks on it as paid to himself, and very justly too: for as we are
to be their subjects, God has been pleased to delegate to us the power to choose
such laws and rulers as we shall think most likely to make ourselves happy. And
since in choosing these we are but using the right which God himself put into
our hands, expressly to make ourselves happy according to his blessed will; it
follows that the rulers which we chose are, in fact, of God's choosing. -- "Let
every soul (cries that noblest of patriots St. Paul,) be subject to the higher
powers (the rulers) for they are ordained of God -- (yes, surely when chosen by
the majority of the people) whosoever therefore resists the rulers, resists
the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation." No wonder that the great preserver of men is so anxious that we
should dutifully obey our rulers, for it is indeed the greatest of ab social
blessings, the grand principle of union, strength, order, peace, and happiness
to a nation. Embraced in this golden band, we are no longer feeble, crumbled
individuals, but the force of millions is collected and exerted as a mighty
man. The ample shield of a nation's power is spread over each virtuous
character. Under its awful shade we enjoy safety and peace. The sons of
violence are curbed, the bloody effects of individual rage and resentment are
happily checked. The weakest if innocent, is a match for the mightiest, having
the force of the whole community to take his part. -- And, besides, clasped in
the fostering bosom of his country, he can partake of all the conveniences and
pleasures procured by the art and industry of his fellow citizens, and at the
same time following his own favorite business he can gather the rich fruits of
it for his own and the good of others. Thus, secure in each others protection,
thus abundant and happy in the sweet rewards of their mutual labors, they can
eat, drink, and rejoice together like brothers, under the shade of their own
vine and fig tree, none daring to make them afraid. O how goodly a thing it is
to see a whole nation living thus together in unity! A single instrument of
music artfully touched, affords much delight, but how much more delightful to
hear an hundred different instruments all mingling their sweet notes in one
grand concert! So, to see one man living prudently and happily, affords a
heartfelt satisfaction; but to see thousands and millions living harmoniously
together, under the same excelient laws, all cheerfully engaged at their
several works, and moving on smoothly in their proper ranks: the rulers wisely
leading, the people dutifully following, and all lovingly accompanying one
another.

This is a spectacle worthy the eyes of blessed angels; nay, God himself looks
down delighted upon them, the Father of the universe regard, them with smiles
of complacency: He sees the travail of his soul and is satisfied.

Since so many and such precious pleasures and advantages arise from good
government, what virtuous man can otherwise than most cheerfully pay his part
of the taxes necessary to its support. O let us not wait 'till justice knitting
her brow declares, that since we desire so much from government, we are bound
in equity to contribute to its maintenance; let us not wait 'till the great
lover of men thunder forth his orders -- "for this cause (the welfare of
government) pay you taxes also, for they are God's ministers attending on this
very thing:" No, let generous sentiment, let a grateful sense of the numberless
blessings we receive from our excellent government render it a pleasure to us
to contribute to its support, its honor and peace. In no country have the
people such reason to pay their taxes cheerfully as in this; for in no country
do they derive so much from government, or pay so little to it.

In Great Britain which is thought to be the happiest government in Europe,
they tax every thing, even the elements cannot escape them. They tax the air
above, the earth beneath, and the waters under the earth. And as if all this
was not enough, as if wearied of this little peace meal kind of work, they have
made lately a short apoplectic stroke at once of ten percent ad valorem, that
is, one hundred dollars out of the thousand every year -- in addition to a
thousand little hectic taxes besides. But in this country, thanks to God, our
taxes are so very trifling as justly to excite our astonishment. That a man
dwelling in a comfortable house, rated at 150 dollars; a plantation of 500
acres, (called a principality in Europe) and 3 valuable slaves, making in all
3000 dollars, should be taxed scarcely 3 dollars for the whole. Is not this
most astonishing! and are there. Americans who can think this oppressive who
can refuse to pay it, can berate and go near to kill their brothers just for
asking this well earned pittance, can even fly in the venerable face of the
parent country, blowing up the flames of a bloody and expensive insurrection! O
tell it not in England, publish it not in the streets of London, lest the
toil-worn porters throwing their heavy burdens from their backs, stamp on the
earth in wrath, and curse us all for fools!

Many of the poor, to my knowledge are not quite so cheerful in paying their
taxes as good citizens ought to be, because they have been taught (God forgive
their teachers) that all the money goes to the President and to the quality, i.
e. the great folks. This is so far from being true that the very reverse of it
is true; that is, instead of the poor paying taxes for the rich, the rich pay
taxes for the poor. The really poor pay nothing, nay, those in circumstances
that may be called comfortable pay nothing. e. g. with 99 dollars and 99 cents,
you may build a very snug house, a much better one than Abraham, Isaac or Jacob
ever lived in, and in which you and your loving dame with half a score chubby
rosycheeked boys and girls may live as merry as crickets, and yet your country
does not ask you a copper for your house, the scene of all this innocent mirth.
But Mr. Bingham of Philadelphia, one of the quality, living in a house that
cost 30,000 dollars, pays no less than 270 dollars yearly.

Again, you own a heavy wagon and team: with this, Jehu like, you rattle along
the high ways, tear up the roads, break down the bridges, and set the poor road
menders to cursing and swearing, and after all, what is your tax? Why not even
a sharp-shin. But lo! here comes one of the quality in a little gim-crack
phaeton and Lilliputian pair, not a tithe the substance of your wagon -- a
carriage that makes no more impression on the roads than does a cat running
over a harpsichord, and yet this gentleman pays a tax of 9 dallars.

No, no, my brothers, if you be really poor, you pay nothing, even though your
poverty should be owing to your own shameful love of ease, or of whiskey, you
pay nothing! Your dear country, like the strong eagle of heaven gathers you her
poorest her unfledged-nestlings, under her wings, and imparts to you her vital
warmth and strong protection, with no other motive than love: or no other pay
than the pleasure of doing it. O then let not for gratitude, for justice sake,
let not the sons of Belial deceive you by bringing up an evil report against
this good land. But admitting that you were treated as are the poor in many
countries, where the neediest Widow is obliged to throw in her mite, the
wretchedest Lazarus his crumb or his scab for the support of government;
admitting I say, that you were constrained to dowse your half bits, do you
think that they would all go to John Adams and to the quality! No, not, a cent
beyold what was their well earned wright. As every vein in the body sends on
its tax of blood to the heart, the great treasury from whence it is quickly
driven on again through the large and small arteries to each well fed fiber in
the system; so, under our constitution, which nearly resembles the human body,
(that most perfect of all God's works) every guinea or cent that is taken up by
those great absorbents, the Sheriffs, is carried strait on to the treasury,
from whence in a very few pulsations, it is distributed among the servants of
the public, those wife and brave men whom you yourselves have chosen to
superintend your laws, or to fight for you. Aye, my dear country men, if you
did but confider what cost, fatigue and danger these gentlemen encounter to
serve you, you could not, I am sure you could not, grudge your mite to reward
them. A part of this little money, that each of you gives, goes to your Judges,
your Assembly men, your Senators, etc. Now do but reflect how many thousands of
dollars these gentlemen have laid out on their education and libraries to
enable them to cope with the long-headed Pitts and Talleyrands of Europe.

Consider also, the brain-racking, spirit-wasting, hard, flesh-consuming study
these poor gentlemen are obliged to undergo for your sakes: as proof of this,
look at your Jeffersons, Maddisons, Marshalls, Harpers, etc. see what pale,
pensive, werter-looking countenances they generally wear, obliged every now and
then to creep off to the springs, to brace up their lax fibers.

A part of your little taxes goes to your brave soldiers, and to your gallant
seamen, your Truxtons, your Tingeys, etc. Noble fellows, who have exchanged
their wives and smiling babes for the gloomy waves, that they may there enjoy
the heroic pleasure of meeting your enemies. Consider what they undergo for
you. While "you are on your down-beds lying, fondly locked in beauty's arms,"
they poor fellows, may be preparing for very different scenes, making ready for
bloody battle. See the hostile man of war bearing down upon them. The hearts of
the youthful warriors palpitate, while the blood comes and goes in their
cheeks; but the love of their country, the justice of their cause, and a noble
sense of honor brace them up as with triple steel. "All hands to quarters --
fore and aft, a clear ship -- up hammocks -- light the matches, and stand by to
wake the thunder -- now my hearts be stout and bold." The flag of Columbia
waves over their heads, the heroes eye the beloved stripes. The smile of joy is
on their countenances, and the fire of valor flashes from their eyes. -- They
demand the fight. The tall black ship of the enemy is now close along side; her
tremendous artillery stares them in the face, yawning for destruction. The
dreadful fray begins; the air is rent with their horrid thunder. Old ocean
trembles and lowers all her waves. The ships are wrapped up in flaming fire,
while storms of Iron bullets dash every thing to pieces. The decks are covered
with mangled corpses, and the scuppers run torrents of blood. But lo, the
mortal strife is ended, and Columbia is victor. But alas! what avails it that
her flag rides triumphant, many of her bravest sons lie low. Hearts that glowed
with heavenly fire, that beat high with the love of their country; muscles that
were gloriously strained at the four and twenty pounders, fighting for you my
brothers -- These now lie in mangled heaps hardly known that they ever were
men; their dearest blood mingling with the briny waves, their precious limbs
soon to be tossed to devouring sharks!!! O my countrymen, can we think of these
things and yet deem it hard to pay a tax of one little dollar in the thousand
to our gallant brothers, who thus at the expense of their lives secure to us
the other nine hundred and ninety-nine.

But not only on account of the exceeding moderation of our taxes, but also of
their amazingly equal distribution, we have reason to pay them with more
cheerfulness than any people on earth. In other countries, the political body
is so grown out of all proportion, the head and larger limbs are so bloated
with fat, while the inferior members are so shrivelled for nourishment, that it
is hard for a cordial love to grow between them. That a bishop should receive
his 10 or 15000 l sterling per ann, should ride in his coach, live in his
palace, and keep up a constant carnival, while his poor brother Levite is
obliged to lent it all the year on a pitiful curacy of 20 l

That a king should receive his twenty or thirty hundred thousand dollars per
ann. ^^^le the hard working mechanic is put to it for bread, and after all his
toils and sorrows is scarcely able to keep his family out of prison or a poor
house; and as if all this was not enough, that the government should suffer a
host of pensioners and sinecures-men, each with a large salary, to be clapped
like so many elegant cupping glasses on the vitals of the people.

Who could suffer this without a decline of love for his country, or indeed
without feeling that love turned into detestation?

But O happy Americans! we groan under none of these iniquitous impositions to
wean us from our country; with us the political body still preserves its
exquisite shape and symmetry: the head is not bloated, the feet are not
starved. Our public officers (the head) are furnished with plenty, but not
excess Few of our public officers, viz. our Judges, members of Assembly.
Senate, Congress, etc are allowed more than they could make by their respective
professions, many not so much. And as to our good old President, though his
25000 dollars have made a great noise, yet it is questionable whether it be a
cent too much. He is placed in a situation of all others the most public and
expensive. His levee, his table, etc. must consume vast sums. It were high
treason in him to eat his venisons, or to drink wine by himself. He is expected
to act the national publican, to keep open house, and to entertain comers from
all the winds of heaven. Think of that my brothers.
; while our common citizens (the feet and hands) may, if industrious, have
enough, and to spare.

Another consideration which must rivet the souls of all reasonable men to our
constitution, is that charming delicacy, that profound and equal respect, with
which she treats the religious opinions of her children. Even in that
government, which is looked on as the most equitable in the Eastern world, (I
mean Great Britain) the people are at daggers drawn about religion. The Ups
insisting on the Downs to think of God Almighty, and to worship him just as
they do, or to dowse their money. Oh! this is a shameful thing, a dreadful
draw-back on patriotism! What, shall I sweat and bleed in support and defense
of my country, and when I expected her sweetest smiles, her kindest caresses,
shall she most ungratefully reject my petition to say what prayers I think
best; shall she look tamely on and see my hard-earned substance sold by the
sheriff to swell the princely revenue of some bishop, to whose church I belong
not? He must be an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no gall, whom this would
not provoke to detest his country as a cruel stepmother, and to turn his back
on her forever. But, thanks to God, we have none of these pontifical villamies
to wean our affections from our country, or from one another. We are perfectly
at liberty to worship our Maker, every man according to the dictates of his own
conscience; and provided we act up to the high character of good citizens, our
excellent constitution stands equally a wall of fire around all, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, Christians or Mahometans.

O my beloved mother country! my soul embraces thee with more than filial
ardour for this thy wise and equal love to all us thy dutiful children, and for
that thou allowest no establishment to create heart burnings among us, no
merciless Priest with fire and faggot to roast us to death.

And O my dear brothers, native or adopted sons of Columbia! If ever people on
earth were under particular obligations to love their country, we are that
people. Our land is signally favored of heaven and our government has every
thing to make it dear to us. Bought by the dearest blood of our Fathers;
planned by our ablest Legislators; approved by our firmest Patriots; and
ratified by the sacred majoriy of our nation: It stands on the broad base of
Equity; maintains inviolate the just rights of every cirizen; secures to all
alike their civil and religious liberties; and to all alike holds out the
fairest opportunities to rise to wealth, to usefulness, and to glory. O blessed
land of well secured liberty, of equal laws, of moderate taxes, and of
universal toleration! where no king can trample, no statesman oppress, not
priest can persecute us; but where all, like an equal band of brothers,
cheerfully cultivating our several talents, may enjoy more happiness than can
be found in any other nation on earth! What dutiful son can think of all these
thy truly republican favors without clasping thee to his heart as thy dearest
best of mothers, who gave us our birth, nursed our helpless infancy, supports
our manhood, and lavishes on us a profusion of every earthly good. Or what
prodigal son who considers the husks fed on by the poor in other lands, but
their plenteousness of bread at thy table O Columbia, but must instantly
exclaim, "I will arise, and will go to the arms of my country." Volney assures
us, that in the Holy land the people are so wretchedly poor, that to avoid
starving they use so much cockle and wild seeds in their bread as often sickens
them -- and that he actually saw at the gates of the once flourishing Damascus
a couple of meagre, half naked wretches contending with hungry dogs over the
carcass of a dead camel. O that we did but know in this our day the many
felicities we enjoy under this our government, and did but love the government
as we ought!

But how shall we manifest our love? By splitting into parties and mortally
hating one another? No, God forbid; for a furious party spirit is the greatest
judgment, the heaviest curse that can befall our country. It extinguishes love
in the best hearts, and in the worst it blows up the coals of hatred to ten
fold fury. It makes even good men shy of one another and breaks off the
sweetest friendship. This vile spirit deforms every thing; by giving a hardness
to the features and a fierceness to the eyes it turns the loveliest woman into
a Fright, and the comliest man into a Demon. It pollutes the most sacred
places, introducing unnatural strifes even there where sweetest harmony should
ever sound; in our streets and at our tables. It fills our newspapers which
were meant to be the vehicles of innocent amusement and calm instruction, with
the bitterest abuse, provoking to bloody battles and murderous duels. It
confounds all the great distinctions of worth and villainy in characters; the
vileft creature, the basest Arnold, if on our side, is cried up as an angel;
while an angel if he oppose us, though never so decently and for ever so good
reasons, is branded as a miscreant! It corrupts our taste; the dirtiest
newspaper printer, if he blackguard for us, is applauded as a Junius; while a
Junius, if against us, is execrated as a mere Billingsgate writer. It banishes
all sense of gratitude, justice, and truth. What signifies the purest
innocence, the uprightest intentions, the greatest abilities, the profoundest
learning, if opposed to us, they vanish into nothing; the greatest abilities
are hooted at, the brightest virtues are not seen, the longest and faithfulest
services are all forgotten under the bias of this most disingenious spirit --
JEFFERSON is an empty Pedant, FRANKLIN and old Fool, ADAMS a British Agent, and
WASHINGTON -- let faction write the rest! It ruins all our public affairs; the
blessed end of society and government is to unite men in promoting their mutual
interest, but the aim of party spirit is to disunite them entirely. Overlooking
the general good, the study of each faction, (I mean the designing men) is, to
advance their own separate strength, and to sink their opponents in the public
esteem, calumniating the worthiest characters, charging the wisest measures
with folly, the best intentions with villainy; thus fiding the minds even of
honest men with prejudices against their rulers, and opposition to taxes,
which, by compelling government to use coercive measures, bring on insurrection
and civil war with all their horrors: when brother with worse than hellish fury
shall sheath his steel in his brother's heart, or call in ruthless foreigners
to aid the accursed deed; and when God, the righteous Judge, in punishment of
such unnatural monsters, shall allow these foreigners to swallow up their
substance, to fill their land with blood and violence, and to fix the galling
chain of slavery on them and posterity for ages!

Blessed be God, it is still in our power to escape this political damnation,
and to become the happiest of all nations; the remedy is simple, and is
contained in the following admirable precepts of an inspired writer: -- "HONOR
all men -- LOVE the brotherhood -- FEAR GOD -- HONOR the king."

Let us honor all men; yes, even those who differ from us in political
sentiments. They may love their country as dearly as we do, and may, with equal
sincerity, be aiming at her best interests, though they do not approve the same
means. They may be more in the right than we are aware. Let us treat them with
respect, and never disgrace our character and cause by rudeness and reviling,
by "rash suspicions and unmanly slander."

To make this more easy and pleasant; Love the brotherhood. Let us remember
that we are the same materials wrought by the great. Architect, into thousands
of springs, wheels, and cogs, of different strengths and sizes, but to make up
the same grand harmonious machine; that we are the same flesh and blood
wonderfully multiplied into millions of brothers, and wifely gifted with
different talents and a passion for society, to make up one great political
body. O then let us live together as brothers, treating each other's sentiments
with respect, making proper allowance for education, reading, abilities and
company; overcoming those who differ from us, by soft words, sound arguments,
and good lives; and wifely recollecting that violent opposition even to the
most absurd opinions, instead of breaking, will rivet the chains of error, and
preclude all possibility of future conviction. And O, if our own happiness is
dear to us, let us forever remember that in exact proportion as we lesson our
mutual love we lessen our own happiness; we dissolve the golden bands of union,
we become weak, contemptible, and an easy orey to any cruel and wutchful enemy.
D.

Let us fear God; that is the only firm base on which the happiness of
individuals, the prosperity of nations can rest securely. It is the only root
from which every branch of duty can spring in full vigor, be fed and enlivened,
It gives courage in danger, moderation in prosperity, and contentment in
poverty. It inspire the Ruler with inviolable honor, the common citizen with
cheerful obedience, and pours over all, the rich blessings of unanimity and
public virtue.

And next to God, let us honor his representative on earth, that is, the
Supreme Magistrate, whether called King, Emperor, or Piesident. If he be chosen
by the general voice of the people, he is God's own minister, for God designs
above all things the happiness of man; man's happiness requires society,
society laws, and laws a magistrate: therefore a magistrate chosen by the
people is in fact chosen of God, and every good man, Deist or Christian, will
honor him as such. And thank God, we have a Chief Magistrate, who is, and has,
for a great many years, been "a minister of God to us for good," one whom we
can honor with alacrity, not coldly as from duty, but cordially as from love;
love, for his great virtues, love for his eminent services to our dear country.
For, who first alarmed our country against British encroachments? Our
President. Who first roused the indignation of our oppressed Colonies? Our
President. Who for his flaming zeal in our behalf was proscribed by the British
government? Our President. And yet, who adventured through an ocean of British
cruisers to beg for his bleeding country the help of other lands? Our
President. Who decided the grear question for AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE? Our
President. Who in spite of French intrigue negeciated a peace most advantageous
and glorious for his country? Our President. And who, for seven and twenty long
years has ceaselessly toiled to advance our nation to glory and happiness? Our
President.

Now, who can have any claim on our gratitude, or on our confidence, if this
man has not. Who can meditate on all these his great services, without feeling
a fire kindling and breaking out in earnest prayers to heaven, for its richest
benedictions on his head -- that venerable head now grown gray in our cause!

"Father of life and love, thou God supreme! in infinite mercy look on our
nation, and on our Chief ruler, whom thy providence has set over us. O may his
counsels be guided by thine eternal wisdom, his loins girded with strength, and
the arms of his hands be made strong by the arms of the mighty God of Jacob, so
that the nations who hate us without cause may stand in awe; and that our
children's children may enjoy all the blessings of peace and love, while the
sun, moon, and stars shall endure!"

Happy, thrice happy, if we would but all love one another as members of the
same body, and heartily concur in the same glorious work, the discharge of our
duties. The rich cheerfully employing their wealth for the good of the poor;
the poor their labor for the convenience of the rich: the strong their power
to defend the weak; the wise, their abilities to instruct the ignorant, and
every one, his respective talents to re-establish the golden reign of justice,
mercy, and truth. Wise and blessed above all nations should we be, if we would
but adopt such a conduct -- a conduct honorable to human nature. and worthy of
christianity, which represents men to each other as children of one parent, as
members of one family, journeying together through the checkered scenes of this
transitory world, toward a region where all the distinctions of rich and poor,
high and low, are unknown, and where virtue alone shall be exalted, and vice
degraded forever.

FINIS.

