REPORT OF WILLIAM WESTON, ESQUIRE, ON THE PRACTICABILITY OF INTRODUCING THE
Water of the River Bronx INTO THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

DONE AT THE REQUEST OF THE CORPORATION OF THE SAID CITY.

-- No. 102, in Pearl street -- PRINTED BY JOHN FURMAN.

M, DCC, XCIX.

CITY OF NEW YORK, ss. At a Common Council, held on Saturday the 16 th day of
March, 1799, the following REPORT of WILLIAM WESTON, Esquire. (on the
practicability of introducing the WATER of the River Bronx, into this city)
made at the request of this Board, was read, and ordered to be printed, viz.
SIR,
IN compliance with the request, contained in your letter of the 18th of
December last, I have taken the earliest opportunity, which my engagements and
the state of the weather would permit, to ascertain the practicability of
introducing the water of the Bronx into the City of New York. The result of
which investigation, I have now the honor of transmitting to you, requesting
that you will lay the same before the Common Council, who, as the immediate
guardians of the city, must feel peculiarly anxious to possess such information
on the subject, as may enable them to determine upon the propriety of the
measures, necessary to be taken to accomplish that important object.

I AM sensible that Estimates of the expense attendant on the execution, would
have been a desirable piece of information; but a wish to render them as
accurate as the uncertainty of the business will admit, induces me to request a
further indulgence of time, to procure information on several material points,
essential to be known, previous to the completion of the necessary
calculations, but with which I am at present unacquainted^

THOUGH the amount of the expense, ought, and doubtless will, have a proper
degree of influence on the final decision; yet perhaps it is not a disadvantage
in the first instance, that the question should be determined on its abstract
merits alone.

IN an object of this nature, the first point to be fixed, is the Quantity of
water, necessary to be delivered in a given time: was nothing more required
than a sufficiency for culinary and other domestic uses, the matter might be
easily ascertained. But as the principal object of this undertaking, is the
introduction of a copious and constant supply, for cleansing and cooling the
streets, it becomes a question of importance to determine, as near as may be,
the annual amount of the required demand. Several specific quantities have been
mentioned; but in my opinion, they are all inadequate to the contemplated
purpose. In this, as in all other undertakings, I conceive it to be an object
of the first consequence, to have the effect dependent on the will, and where,
from the nature of the thing, no certain conclusions can be obtained, it is
wisest to err on the safe side.

WHATEVER doubts may be entertained of this deduction as a general principle, I
believe there can be none respecting the propriety of it in the present
instance; for, however great the amount of the surplus water may be, there are
a variety of useful, and productive purposes, to which it may be advantageously
applied. Proceeding on this ground, I have endeavored to calculate as near as
the want of sufficient data would enable me, the Minimum quantity necessary to
be introduced in 24 hours. Though conclusions deduced from Hydraulic principles
of the expense of water issuing from pipes of given diameters placed on the
summits of the several streets, would have been much preferable to vague
guesses; yet the infinite variety of cases, arising from different degress of
depression below, and distance from the principal Reservoir, would have
rendered the operation a very laborious one, and from a variety of causes, the
result very uncertain. Indeed, every mode, with which I am acquainted, may be
objected to, on the latter principle, but though it is perhaps impossible to
ascertain the exact truth, we must endeavor to approximate as near thereto as
possible. -- Conceiving it to be the intentions of the gentlemen, who have
recommended the measure of washing the streets, as essential to the health of
the citizens, to have a regular and plentiful current of water running at least
twelve hours every day, through all the streets, by means of pipes placed at
the respective summits, producing an effect, similar to what we may observe to
be done, by a moderate shower of rain of the same duration. Calculating
therefore, the area of the city; the quantity of water usually descending in
the time above mentioned, and making due allowance for such parts of the
general surface, as are pervious to water, we shall obtain a result, that
perhaps on the whole, will be as near the truth as can be done by any other
mode, and sufficient to answer every purpose required. I find that the area of
the city, bounded by the East and North rivers, and the intersection of them by
Grand-street, is upwards of 750 acres, and making an allowance of 350 for
public squares, gardens, and other unpaved surfaces, we have a remainder of 400
acres; which being unpenetrable to the rain, all that falls on that surface,
must be discharged by means of the Channels of the different streets, into the
adjacent rivers. I have made various enquiries, but have not as yet received
any correct information of the quantity of water produced by a moderate shower,
of 12 hours continuance. I am, therefore, under the necessity of assuming as a
fact, what may hereafter be proved to be erroneous, though I have reason to
believe, that my calculations will not be found to be over-rated. Fixing,
therefore, the depth, as shown by the raingage, at one fourth of an inch, we
shall find the total amount to be 363,000 cubic feet, or 2,221,560 ale gallons,
and adding to this 778,440 gallons, as an adequate supply for domestic
consumption, we shall have Three Millions of gallons to be introduced into the
reservoir every twenty-four hours.

I BEG leave to observe, that an increase or diminution of the above quantity
may be effected by one of the plans, submitted to your consideration, without
materially altering the design or enhancing the estimates, while by the other,
the expense will be nearly proportioned to the quantity required. I offer the
preceding calculation, merely as an essay to determine a point, which as yet
has remained undiscussed, though of such importance, that I deem it the basis
of the whole work. I shall readily yield to any valid reasons, that may be
produced in support of variations from the above conclusions.

THE quantity requisite being determined, the next point to be ascertained, is
from what sources it can be most conveniently derived. I am acquainted with but
two modes, that deserve any consideration. The first is the introduction of a
part, or the whole of the waters of the Bronx -- The second is a supply
obtained from the springs of the Collect. As this question has much agitated
the public mind, and each plan in its turn been extolled or decried by their
respective advocates and opponents, it has produced, (what is frequently the
effect of a collision of sentiments) a more obstinate attachment to
pre-conceived opinions. I do not, therefore, expect that any arguments which I
shall produce, will reconcile the jarring interests. Yet I trust that the
statement I shall offer, (and it is the result of some experience and
reflection), will enable those whose province it is to judge of the merits and
disadvantages of the different plans, to select that, which on the whole shall
be most conducive to the public welfare.

IN order to form a correct opinion on the subject, it is necessary to take
into consideration, the efficiency of supply; the quality of water, as it
respects the different uses to which it is to be applied; and the expense of
execution.

ON the first of these heads, I am aware that it has generally been believed,
and pretty confidently maintained, that at those seasons, when the demand will
be greatest, and most essential, that the waters of the Bronx are wholly
inadequate. These assertions have been made with a degree of positiveness, that
would induce one to believe, they were founded on the most careful and accurate
experiments, which I have every reason to imagine, have as yet never been made;
instead of which, I have no doubt they are the random guesses of superficial
observation. The question is of such importance, that we ought to be very
careful, that we proceed upon the most certain grounds. In a matter of this
consequence, I may be allowed to be a little diffuse.

IT is evident that at the period, when the greatest supply of water is wanted,
there will, from natural causes, be the least quantity furnished. This is a
common principle, applicable to all rivers, and springs; the very few examples
to the contrary, are mere exceptions to the general rule. This circumstance,
has created doubts in the minds of many persons of the efficiency of the Bronx.
Previous to my examination of that stream, I had regretted that proper
experiments had not been made, at the season above alluded to, as then the fact
would have been ascertained beyond all dispute. It is universally allowed, that
for the greatest part of the year, there is a super-abundant quantity; what the
diminution may be, is not easily ascertained; we must rely altogether upon the
information of those persons, whom a long residence has afforded the best
opportunities of judging of its usual decrease; but as not materially
interested on the subject, we cannot expect any considerable degree of accuracy
in their observations -- Allowing for this circumstance, I have been careful to
take the lowest average of the results of three distinct cases, founded on the
best data I could procure, and applying to them well known Hydraulic laws, I am
persuaded that the natural stream of the Bronx alone, if conveyed without
waste, would be fully adequate to the supply before mentioned; but fortunately
a minute accuracy is not required, as will appear by the following account of
the River Bronx,

WHOSE principal source is from a Lake, about 4 miles to the Northward of the
White Plains, known by the name of Rye Pond. This is a beautiful sheet of
water, upwards of a mile in length, containing, as appears from an old survey,
upwards of 500 acres of water; which flowing from the outlet, is received into
another pond, a short distance below; whose area exceeds 50 acres. From this
pond it descends with a rapid current upwards of a mile, to Mr. Robens's Mill;
a few rods below which, it unites with the other branch of the Bronx. This
last, which has its origin in a swamp a few miles to the Northward, retains the
name of the Bronx, to its source; yet it is the least considerable stream,
particularly in the Summer, when it is reduced to a small current; while the
other branch is sufficiently large, to turn an overshot wheel, twelve hours out
of twenty-four, in the driest times. Rye Pond is bounded by high and bold
shores, which tending toward each other at the outlet, are admirably
calculated for the formation of an immense Reservoir. This being filled during
the winter and spring, may be retained until the month of July, when the
natural supplies begin to diminish, it may then be discharged periodically, so
as to afford any given quantity of water, that may be requisite for the use of
the city.

THIS Lake is supplied wholly by springs, many of which are internal, and few
of the others originate more than a mile from the head; these are so constant
and copious, that no doubt can arise of their capacity to fill the Reservoir to
the contemplated height of six feet, which may easily be effected by throwing a
dam across the outlet of the lower pond; this would form a sheet of water of
more than 600 acres in extent, containing 959,713,920 gallons of water;
affording (independent of the natural stream of the Bronx) a diurnal supply of
nearly Eight Millions of gallons, for 120 days; three eighths of which quantity
is sufficient for our purpose; the surplus, Five Millions may be given to the
Mills below the point of partition; so that instead of injuring (and
consequently recompencing them for the damage,) the Mills on the Bronx as has
been generally apprehended, they will derive essential benefits from the
measure. Having, I flatter myself, removed the doubts of the most incredulous,
respecting the efficiency of the supply to be derived from the Bronx, it
remains to examine the competency of the waters of the Collect. The general
bias of opinion seems to lean in favor of this scheme; and if it can be made
satisfactorily to appear, that the required supply can be obtained from this
source, I am ready to allow that it is a work, that would be soonest
accomplished, and attended with the least expense. But we ought to be extremely
cautious in hazarding an experiment, where the cost would be so great, and the
event so doubtful. The question is of infinite importance, and unfortunately,
one that cannot be determined by abstract reasoning. The capacity of the
Collect, has been attempted to be proved, by its present extent, but that in my
mind is a most fallacious mode of reasoning; for however great that may be, a
powerful Steam Engine would soon exhaust it, unless replenished with numerous
and copious Springs; on these alone, therefore, it is evident we must depend;
and I know of no other mode of estimating their combined effect, than by
calculating the quantity of water issuing from the outlet of the Collect; which
even at this time is so inconsiderable as scarce to deserve attention, and if
my information is correct, it ceases to flow altogether in the summer. I am
sensible that we should not too hastily conclude, that the above is the total
amount of the supply that may be derived from this source; I think it very
probable, that from the nature of the surrounding ground, (which is a coarse
and porous gravel) a considerable portion thereof, may percolate through, into
the adjacent rivers. Much, and perhaps the greatest quantity, is also daily
drawn off by the Tea-Water Pump; which from its vicinity, I have no doubt is
supplied from the same source.

IT is true that by sinking deeper into the earth, an augmentation of quantity
would be procured, yet if we went lower than the surface of the Tide Water, I
apprehend that the quality would be materially injured. Leaving the question,
as I fear it will remain, undetermined, we next proceed to examine the quality
of the respective waters. To appreciate their merits fairly, we should judge of
their utility, by the extent of their application: Proceeding on this ground, I
believe it may be safely affirmed that the water of the Bronx, is at least
equal to that of the Collect, though this is contrary to the general opinion.
The only reason that I can perceive for the preference usually given to the
last mentioned, arises solely from its superior coolness. However grateful this
may be to our feelings, it does not follow that it is equally conducive to our
health; for whatever degree of purity it may now possess, the period is not
very remote, when from the natural increase of the city, these springs must be
subject to those contaminations, which have already rendered so many wells
unfit for use; an evil that is daily increasing, and to which no effectual
remedy can be applied. -- This to me has ever appeared an unsurmountable
objection. The idea of supplying a large city with Pure Water, from a Reservoir
in its center, has always been a very strange one to me. From the
representations made respecting the water of the Bronx, I believe many persons
have hastily concluded that it was unfit for use. When it is considered that
the principal cities in Europe, are necessarily supplied from Rivers, and with
water, generally taken from those parts, which from a variety of causes, are
most impure, and yet that the experience of ages has not evinced any known ill
effects, arising from the practice, I conceive that little fears will be
entertained of the salubrity of the water of the Bronx -- which is a collection
of innumerable Springs, issuing from a rocky and gravelly country, and running
with a rapid current, over a bed of the same materials. It will be conveyed
into the city without any additional impurity, and e're it is distributed from
the Reservoir, will by a mode of purification hereafter described, be rendered
as clear as Spring Water.

THE next object to be ascertained, is the practicability and probable expense
of accomplishing the respective plans: And here it may not be amiss to observe,
that in a matter of such immense consequence to the present and future
convenience and welfare of the city, every local view, every subordinate
consideration, should yield to the general good; that a regard to the primary
object alone, should decide the question, regardless of a paltry difference of
expense, or the immediate emolument to be derived from the undertaking. On the
first of the above mentioned heads, there have been a diversity of opinions,
which, previous to an actual survey, was not to be wondered at. These doubts
must now be removed, as it appears from the examination that has been recently
made, that the Bronx is sufficiently elevated above the highest parts of the
city, to introduce its waters therein, without the aid of machinery; and the
intermediate ground, though very irregular, presents no obstacles which art and
industry may not surmount. A general view of the subject, is all that I am able
now to present; and all that is necessary to be known, in this stage of the
business. An outline of the plan, I would recommend for adoption, as best
adapted to the varying face of the country, will be sufficient to enable you to
form a tolerable correct idea of the eligibility of the measure.

THE best situation I have yet seen to draw the water from the Bronx, is a
short distance above Mr. Lorillard's Snuff Mill; a break in the western bank,
enables us to divert the stream (by means of a dam thrown across it) without
any difficulty. The water being raised six feet above its natural level, will
flow over a small swamp, from which originates the little rivulet called Mill
Brook; following the direction of this stream, a canal may be drawn along its
northern bank at a small expense, for the distance of three miles; when the
ground falling off rapidly, renders it necessary to cross the valey in which
Mill Brook runs, by means of an aquaduct, to the opposite rising ground; along
which the level may be preserved, to the heights above Haerlem river. An open
walled canal, will be the cheapest mode of conveying the water so far; a little
loss is not material, as a small increase in the section, will remedy such
waste.

A DECLIVITY of 6 inches in a mile, with a section of 1,152 and linear border
of 89 6-10 inches, will occasion a velocity in the current sufficient to
introduce into the small reservoir at the extremity of the canal, 6 cubic feet
of water per second; which is more than the quantity required, supposing the
daily supply to be three millions of gallons. The most difficult and expensive
part of the route, will be the conveyance of the water across Haerlem river,
the most eligible mode of effecting this, appears to me, to be by means of cast
iron cylinders, of two feet diameter, with a difference of 8 feet between the
extremities. This descent will produce a velocity of 22 3-4 inches per second,
yielding in that time 5 95-100 cubic feet, while the required quantity is only
5 65-100. From the Cylinder to the Reservoir, it is a matter of consequence to
preserve as much of the water as possible: to effect this object, the bottom
and sides should be rendered impervious to that element. An absolute necessity
to preserve a regular and uniform descent, leaves us little room, in the choice
of our route: which will be chiefly along the shore of the North river. The
quality and make of the ground, vary much: the greatest impediments are
occasioned by the numerous ravines, which intersect the line of the Canal --
over all these, aquaducts must be constructed. The level may thus be preserved
upwards of 6 miles, or within 2 miles of the city; there it descends so much,
that unless higher ground can be found, it will again be necessary to have
recourse to iron Cylinders, to convey the water into the Grand Reservoir, which
may either be placed in the Park, or a vacant piece of ground to the Northward
of the Hospital, either of which are sufficiently elevated to distribute the
water through all parts of the city. -- The total distance from the Bronx to
the Park, is 14 miles 7 furlongs, and the descent twenty three feet. It is to
be observed that the principal object of this survey, being to ascertain the
practicability of the plan, and neither my time or the season, permitting that
minute investigation, which is necessary to be made, previous to the
commencement of any operations, there is a probability that advantageous
deviations may be made from the route pursued.

ALTHOUGH the form and dimensions of the reservoir, are objects of importance,
it is now premature to point out the particular mode of construction I would
recommend to be adopted; yet it may not be improper to give a general outline
thereof, as perhaps it may tend to remove many of the prejudices which have
been entertained against the supposed impurity of the waters of the Bronx. It
is proposed to divide the Reservoir into three parts, two of which will again
be subdivided; each of these minor divisions capable of containing a daily
supply of water. The first division, or reservoir of Reception, will contain
the water as immediately delivered by the Cylinder of discharge; while one of
its subdivisions is filling, the other in a quiescent state, will be depositing
the adventitious matter, with which the water may be intermixed. After so
remaining 24 hours, it will be drawn off by an aperture near the bottom (so as
to prevent any buoyant particles from entering) into the Reservoir of
Filtration, where it will still further purify itself, by gradually depositing
the remaining sediment, until it is finally received into the Reservoir of
Distribution, after percolating through a bank of washed sand and gravel, (in
imitation of that natural process to which all water owes its purification) --
This last Reservoir it is proposed to Arch over, so as to preserve the water
pure and cool; from hence it will be distributed in separate and distinct
pipes, through every part of the city.

THE water destined to cleanse and cool the streets may be taken immediately
from the Reservoir of reception, as I conceive it is not necessary, that it
should be very pure.

THE surplus water, which for a considerable part of the year, will not be
wanted for washing the streets, may be applied to a variety of purposes, but
perhaps to none more useful or advantageous, than the supplying of Dry Docks,
which may be constructed to receive the largest ships.

IF the water in the Collect is deemed adequate to all the purposes of domestic
consumption, it must be raised by means of a Steam Engine, into a Reservoir;
the situation before mentioned, will in this case be very convenient --
Although one Engine might be constructed, so as to raise, both the water for
washing the city, and for family use; yet as from the quantity necessary to be
raised, it would be unwielddy in its parts, and more liable to accident, and
also as two thirds of its powers would be useless the greatest part of the
year, I believe it will be most advisable to erect two -- the first destined
to raise the water for cleansing the streets, placed at the foot of the hill,
to the northward of the hospital; which would be supplied with water from a
reservoir made in the adjacent low ground. This would be replenished twice in
twenty-four hours by the tide, by means of an open canal, or culvert,
communicating with the reservoir. The small engine might be placed near the
other, the pump well being supplied with water from the collect, conveyed in a
culvert or pipes. The following calculations of the dimensions of the largest
engine, will be found sufficiently correct, to enable you to form a tolerable
idea of the annual expense attendant on it. Admitting the quantity (as before
calculated) to be sufficient, we find that 2,200,000 gallons, or 359,640 cubic
feet must be daily raised. Supposing the engine to work 16 hours out of 24, we
have 22,477 feet to be raised every hour, or nearly 375 every minute,
estimating ten strokes to be made in a minute, each stroke must yield 37 1-2
feet; but as pumps generally fail in producing the calculated quantity, say 40
feet per stroke; and if the lengths of the strokes are 8 feet, it will require
a pump of 30 27-100 inches diameter; but a pump of that dimension would not
answer in practice; it will be necessary therefore, to diminish the diameter
and increase the number of pumps; six of 12 3-10 inches will be equal in area
to that beforementioned. As the water would be raised about 50 feet, the
weight of the column would be 15613 lb, which would require a cylinder of 44
2-10 inches diameter (allowing the active power of Mess. Bolton and Watts
engines to be 8 lb on every circular inch) such an engine would consume about
330 lb of coal per hour.

HAVING thus given you every information necessary to be known for your
guidance, I shall conclude by remarking, that my objections to the Collect
(being founded on the doubts I entertain of its efficiency to supply the annual
increasing demand of this improving city, and to the contamination its waters
will be subject to) will be done away altogether, when it shall be made to
appear that they are groundless; in such a case, there can be no question which
plan is most eligible as it respects the time and expense of execution.

I am, Sir, With Respect, Your obedient Servant, WILLIAM WESTON.
The Hon. RICHARD VARICK. New York, March 14, 1799.



Printed by order of the Common Council, ROBERT BENSON, Clerk.


