AN ESSAY ON NATIONAL PRIDE.

ESSAY ON NATIONAL PRIDE.

TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, MEMOIRS OF THE AUTHOR's LIFE AND WRITINGS.

Translated from the original German of the late celebrated DR. J. G.
ZIMMERMANN, Aulic Counselor and Physician to his Britannic Majesty at Hanover.

BY SAMUEL H. WILCOCKE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY M. L. and W. A. DAVIS, FOR H. CARITAT, BOOKSELLER AND
LIBRARIAN.

1799.

ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF DR. J. G. ZIMMERMANN.

ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF DR. J. G. ZIMMERMANN.
THE justly acquired celebrity of the author of the following Essay renders an
account of his life a great desideratum to the literary world. His renown has
long been established as a correct and energetic writer, a sound philosopher,
and an able physician; and since, in his own words (page 164), "it is only for
those who lie mouldering in their graves, and who can no more be objects of
jealousy, to enjoy a reputation that envy cannot harm," now that he has paid
his debt to nature, his memory will not fail to be revered by every man of
genius, and his name handed down to posterity with unfading honor.

John George Zimmermann was born at Brugg, in the Canton of Berne, on the 8th
of December 1728. He was early destined to the medical line and studied physic
at the University of Gottingen, where he was a disciple and friend of the
celebrated Haller. He first resided and practiced physic at the place of his
nativity, and afterward at Berne.

We are not furnished with any particulars relative to him from this time till
his removal to Hanover, except such as may relate to his writings. The lives of
literary men indeed seldom abound with prominent features sufficient to arrest
the attention; on which account, their biography is not unfrequently confined
to the number and review of their works. Alike conscious of our deficiency, we
must also attempt to supply it, as well as we are able, by giving a general
information respecting our author's writings, of which the following is a
correct list, in the order in which they appear to have been published: 1.
Dissertatio inauguralis de Irritabilitate. 4 to. Gottingen, 1751. 2. The Life
of Professor Haller. 8 vo. Zurich, 1755. 3. Thoughts on the Earthquake which
was felt on the 9 th of December 1755, in Switzerland. 4 to. 1756. 4. The
subversion of Lisbon, a Poem 4 to. 1756. 5. Meditations on Solitude. 8 vo.
1756. 6. Essay on National Pride. 8 vo. Zurich, 1758. 7. Treatise on experience
in Physic. 8 vo. Zurich, 1764. 8. Treatise on the Dysentery. 8 vo. Zurich,
1767. 9. Essay on Solitude. 8 vo. Leipzig, 1773. 10. Essay on Lavater's
Doctrine of Physiognomy, in a Franconian periodical publication. Hanover, 1778.
11. Essay: consisting of Agreeable and Instructive Tales, Reveries, and
Philosophical remarks. 8 vo. Gottingen, 1779. 12. Conversations with the King
of Prussia. 13. Treatise on Frederick the Great, King of Prussia. 1778. 14.
Select views of the Life, Reign, and Character of Frederick the Great, King of
Prussia.


Besides these works we should mention his Essays in the Helvetic Journal, the
acts of the Physical and Mathematical Helvetic Society, and those of the
Physiological Society at Zurich; and we likewise believe he published a work on
Zoology, of which we have not been able as yet to procure the title.

Most of these productions have been translated both into French and English;
and have proved equally acceptable acquisitions to the physician, to the
philosopher, to the statesman, and to the philanthropist.

Dr. Zimmermann therefore appears to have first displayed the dawnings of his
great genius, which afterward broke out with so much effulgence, in a Latin
Dissertation on taking his degree of Doctor of physic at Gottingen, and soon
after by The Life of Haller, which was produced in the 27th year of his age.
Though in the contracted sphere of biography there was little scope for the
poetic diction and the forcible expression which abound in his other writings,
this life of Haller prepared the expectations of the public, and announced the
great talents which afterward were so conspicuous i^ the various productions
which succeeded, and secured to him the applause both of his countrymen and of
foreigners.

Of the beauty and excellence of the Essay on Solitude the English reader is
already acquainted by the inimitable translation which has quickly passed
through five editions: This however being made from the French of Mercier,
deviates in some instances from the German. In its original dress, this
performance runs through four octavo volumes; it is true there is much
extraneous matter, and many parts that are solely interesting to Germans, nay
some that may be said to be chiefly so to the author's personal connections;
but there are likewise other parts (although omitted by Mercier, from a
mistaken regard to the illiberal prepossession of some of his countrymen, and
on account of the circumspection and caution with which French authors were
obliged to treat subjects of a religious or a political nature) which to the
liberal and uncontrouled spirit of inquiry of Englishmen, would afford the
highest pleasure and interest. Such for instance are Zimmermann's
considerations on Monastic Solitude, which extend nearly through two volumes,
and which, says the French translator, in his preface, "contain many profound
reflections, yet are capable of displeasing those whose narrow prejudices might
be shocked by the liberal sentiments of an author, who appeals to the decision
of REASON alone upon the subject of certain abuses, rendered sacred by the
motives from which they proceeded."

The great esteem which this work acquired on all sides was much enhanced by
the grateful acknowledgement of one of the most distinguished personages of
modern times. Dr. Zimmermann was presented in 1785 with a small casket in the
name of her Imperial Majesty the Empress of Russia. The casket contained a ring
enriched with diamonds of an extraordinary size and luster, and a gold medal
bearing on one side the portrait of the Empress, and on the other the date of
the happy reformation of the Russian Empire. This present was accompanied by a
note, written in the Empress's own hand, containing these memorable words: "To
Dr. Zimmermann, counselor of state, and physician to his Britanic Majesty, to
thank him for the excellent precepts he has given to mankind in his Treatise
upon Solitude."

Of the Essay on National Pride we shall say but little, trusting that, in its
present dress, our readers may still admire the sound reasoning and fund of
entertainment it is universally allowed to possess in its original language. It
was first published in 1758, and has gone through a number of editions.

The French translation of this valuable work is executed with elegance and
precision; with the exception of some instances of national partiality. It may
be proper here to observe, that the very great changes which have occurred in
the political, and we may say in the moral system of Europe, since this Essay
was composed, will naturally conduce to make some passages lose their effect,
and appear out of season; but the nature of man, which is the groundwork on
which the author proceeds, remains always the same, and we think we may assert
with confidence, that whatever may be the apparent deviations from national
character, and the seemingly contradictory appearances now observable in
Europe, they will not only be found by the attentive observer to be consistent
with the remarks and opinions of former times, but will, like muddy water
subsiding after a violent agitation, admit in the end the eye to pierce through
the glassy superficies, and behold the filth and corruption of the sediment.

A duodecimo volume, purporting to be a translation from the Essay on National
Pride of Dr. Zimmermann, having been published here in 1771, it may likewise be
right to offer some apology, for the attempt now made, to translate a work
which has apparently already been produced in our own language. In extenuation
of this seeming temerity, we beg leave to make public the following extract of
a letter written by Dr. Zimmermann on the 27th of May 1794 to Dr. Lettsom,
relative to the above translation: "A pretended translation," Dr. Zimmermann
thus expresses himself, "of my Essay on National Pride has been published in
London, whereby the translator has rendered me nearly the same service as if he
had exposed my portrait, nay my person, in the pillory. If this pretended
translator had only been ignorant of the English language and of the art of
writing, I could, on account of his good will, have pardoned him for the
mischief he did me: but he has fathered upon me a great number of puerile,
flat, and trivial ideas of his oven, which he has inserted in the text of my
work; this text he has crammed with Latin and English verse, a single line of
which exists not in the original; and, notwithstanding what has been said to my
honor in the preface by a person of quite another stamp, this pretended
English translator has made me appear like a fool throughout the work: such a
translator is not only an ignorant fellow, but a cheat." Of the truth of these
severe animadversions it would be unbecoming in us to decide. Those who will
take the trouble to compare our translation with the original, will find, we
hope throughout, a careful attention to express the meaning of the author, and
neither a modification or suppression of any one sentiment, a liberty which we
find, and have often had occasion to notice, in the French translator. In one
or two instances we have given our opinion in a note, which perhaps is the sole
liberty allowable to translators.

The Treatise on Experience in Physic has not only been found an useful book to
the faculty but being clothed in a novel elegance of language, such as the
subject was supposed not capable of admitting, has also readily found its way
into other hands, and has conduced to the instruction and amusement of the
softer sex. It has recently been objected, that this work did not contain any
new discoveries or theories, but we ought to carry our thoughts and opinions at
least thirty years back, and we shall find, on comparing it with the then
circumscribed state of the practice of physic in Germany, that this treatise
contains many observations and practical reasonings, which were then new, and
which have since actually been availed of to the great advancement of medical
science.

The Treatise on the Dysentery is uncontrovertedly acknowledged to have greatly
contributed to a more improved method of treatment. There is a French
translation of it, but to our knowledge, it has never appeared, like the
treatise on Experience in Physic, in an English dress.

Dr. Zimmermann's fame as an able Physician was not only now firmly
established, but he became universally known and admired on account of these
various and valuable productions. He held the first rank amongst the literati;
and as the great Haller, by the penetration and discriminative patronage of a
British Monarch, had been honored with the medical chair at Gottingen, so our
present gracious Sovereign, equally zealous to reward the conspicuous merits of
Haller's avowed disciple and friend, invited Dr. Zimmermann to accept of the
office of his first physician at Hanover, where he was accordingly established
in that quality in 1768.

His honorable appointment at Hanover was accompanied with many advantages,
and he had fondly imagined that a life free from anxiety and care would have
been his constant portion. In this expectation he however experienced a sad
reverse, and the pleasing hope which an extreme sensibility of mind had formed,
faded "like the baseless fabric of a vison;" for he soon after became a prey to
a severe bodily disorder, and a martyr to the greatest irritability of the
nervous system.

Scarce had he arranged his domestic household at Hanover when death, insatiate
archer, aimed his relentless dart at the bosom of his favorite child. In the
following elegant and pathetic passages of his Essay on Solitude, he feelingly
deplores the loss of this amiable young lady.

" Leave me to myself! I exclaimed a thousand times, when, within two years
after my arrival in Germany, I lost the lovely idol of my heart, the amiable
companion of my former days. Her departed spirit still hovers round me: the
tender recollection of her society, the afflicting remembrance of her
sufferings, are always present to my mind. What purity and innocence! What
mildness and affability! Her death was as calm and resigned, as her life was
pure and virtuous! During five long months the lingering pangs of dissolution
hung continually around her. One day, as she reclined upon her pillow, while I
read to her 'The Death of Christ' by Rammler, she cast her eyes over the page
and silently pointed out to me the following passage: My breath grows weak, my
days are shortened, my heart is full of affliction, and my soul prepares to
take its flight. Alas! when I recall all those circumstances to my mind, and
recollect how impossible it was for me to abandon the world at that moment of
anguish and distress, when I carried the seeds of death within my bosom, when I
had neither fortitude to bear my afflictions nor courage to resist them, while
I was yet pursued by malice and outraged by calumny, I can easily conceive in
such a situation, that my exclamation might be Leave me to myself." (Page 68.)
And further on, (page 85,) speaking of his daughter: Solitude was her world;
for she knew no other pleasures than those which a retired and virtuous life
affords. Submitting with pious resignation to the dispensations of Heaven, her
weak frame sustained with undiminished fortitude every affliction of mortality.
Mild, good, and tender, she endured her sufferings without a murmur or a sigh:
and though naturally timid and reserved, she disclosed the feelings of her soul
with all the warmth of filial enthusiasm. Diffident of her own powers she
listened to the precepts of a fond parent, and relied with perfect confidence
upon the goodness of God. A malady of almost a singular kind, a haemorrhage of
the lungs, suddenly deprived me of the comfort of this beloved child, even
while I supported her in my arms. Acquainted with her constitution, I
immediately saw the blow was mortal. How frequently, during that fatal day, did
my wounded bleeding heart bend me on my knees before my God to implore her
recovery! But I concealed my feelings from her observation. Although sensible
of her danger, she never communicated the least apprehension. Smiles arose upon
her cheeks when ever I entered or quitted the chamber. Although worn down by
this fatal distemper, a prey to the most corroding griefs, the sharpest and
most intolerable pains, she made no complaint. She mildly answered all my
questions by some short sentence, but without entering into any detail. Her
decay and approaching dissolution became obvious to the eye; but to the last
moment of her life, her countenance preserved a serenity correspondent to the
purity of her mind and the affectionate tenderness of her heart. She had been
the submissive victim of ill health from her earliest infancy; her appetite was
almost gone when we left Switzerland, a residence which she quitted with her
usual sweetness of temper, and without discovering the smallest regret,
although a young man, as handsome in his person as he was amiable in the
qualities of his mind, the object of her first, of her only affection, a few
weeks afterward put an end to his existence in despair.

The few happy days we passed at Hanover, where she was much respected and
beloved, she amused herself by composing religious prayers, which were
afterward found among her papers, and in which she implores death to afford
her a speedy relief from her pains: during the same period she wrote also many
letters, always affecting, and frequently sublime. They were filled with
expressions of the same desire speedily to reunite her soul with the author of
her days. The last words my dear, my well-beloved child uttered, amidst the
most painful agonies, were these: "Today I shall taste the joys of Heaven!"



The sedentary life Dr. Zimmermann led, and the mental anguish he labored
under, brought on the most alarming symptoms of a severe and painful disorder,
first contracted at Gottingen. To procure relief from this inveterate malady he
submitted to a chirurgical operation, which was performed upon him at Berlin in
1771, and which afforded some respite from its acrimony; and he appears
afterward to have passed his time tolerably well at Hanover. Here it was he
enjoyed the reward due to his transcendent abilities; hence his fame spread
over the whole literary world; here his superior talents were called into
action and exerted; and his acquaintance courted by all whose good fortune it
was to be known to him. With many of the most intelligent men of his time he
kept up an extensive and interesting correspondence, chiefly on medical and
philosophical subjects; among these were Dr. Tissot, Professor Bonnet, Dr.
Marcard, Dr. Lettsom, and the learned and celebrated Mr. de Luc, at this time
resident at Windsor and reader to her majesty.

To add to his celebrity, and to raise him still more in the circle of society,
the truly illustrious Nothern Princess, already mentioned, the enlightened
Catherine, conferred on him another mark of her favor, by investing him with
the title of Knight of the order of St. Wolodimir in 1786. This august Empress
corresponded frequently and familiarly with Dr. Zimmermann, and he has given us
in his writings copies of some of her letters, which well deserve to be perused
by those who, too apt to be led away by popular prejudice, are inclined to
think harshly of that most eminent princess, whose acts of munificence outshine
the richest jewel in her imperial diadem.

Recollecting on this occasion the before adduced distinguishing proof of the
Empress's approbation of his Essay on Solitude, we have still, respecting that
work, to inform our readers, that it was not till about this time (1785) that
Dr. Zimmermann published the last or fourth volume. The edition of 1773
comprehended only the two first, and a subsequent publication, the third. The
appearance in detachd parts of this sublime performance gave rise to several
unmerited and partial representations of it, and two particular publications on
solitude appeared, one in 1775, and the other in 1781, by J. H. Obereit,
strongly reprobating Zimmermann's Essay, which this superficial critic
considered as a scandalous and unphilosophical attack upon, and condemnation
not only of the holy retirements of the cloister, but likewise of all solitude
in general. The English reader, on comparing this account with the Essay on
Solitude he is a^^uainted with, will be apt to question the intellects of Mr.
Obereit, but he will recollect that this premature judgment was chiefly
founded on Zimmermann's researches into the abuses and mischiefs which have
arisen in the world from the solitary lives of fanatics, and on which he
expatiates through great part of the two first volumes, while the latter part
of the work only, which treats of the pleasures and advantages derived from
retirement, forms the principal contents of our English version; the other part
having, as before remarked, been suppressed in the French translation, from
which this was taken. In the list of Dr. Zimmermann's works (page vi.) our
readers will have observed Meditations on Solitude, 8vo. Zurick, 1756. This
small work, which was contained in 181 pages, is engrafted in the larger one on
that subject, and does not therefore require a particular account. Dr.
Zimmermann, in the 8th chapter of the latter, which is the first of the 3d
volume of the German original, mentions those Meditations as the foundation of
the more extensive work he was then engaged in: "With a weak and juvenile pen,"
he says, with singular diffidence, "I recommended in that performance a proper
and sensible enjoyment of the fleeting moments of life, and the most likely
means to make a profitable employ of the most important sciences; I interwove
in it the enthusiastic love of religion and virtue, which I have always
endeavored to make the guide of my steps. I wrote this small book in the most
beautiful season of the year, in a remote and silent part of my paternal
dwelling, where no sounds assailed my ear, where no objects diverted my
attention, except the tender cooing of a solitary pair of doves."

Our author enjoyed in an eminent degree the esteem and confidence of Frederic
the late King of Prussia. On the sixth of June 1786, that great monarch and
distinguished hero, declining under the accumulated weight of age, the gradual
decay of his bodily powers, and a dropsical complaint of long standing,
addressed a letter to Dr. Zimmermann, requesting to know, whether he could make
it convenient to come to Potsdam to attend him as physician. His Majesty
received an answer in the affirmative, in consequence of which the Doctor was
further honored with a pressing invitation, and he accordingly took his
departure, and arrived at Potsdam late in the evening of the 23d of June, and
early on the following morning was sent for to the King. Frederic's case was
decidedly a dropsy, although he could not be brought to believe it, and Dr.
Zimmermann was convinced from the first day of his attendance that his Majesty
was irrecoverable; especially on account of his intractability as a patient,
and his great indulgence in melons and other things the most prejudicial. He
waited constantly on his royal patient every morning, and in these interviews
held many conversations of the most interesting nature with that great and
valiant potentate. For his services and the expenses of his journey he received
two thousand crowns, and took his leave of Potsdam on the 11th of July, deeply
affected with the last words of the King, addressed to him, and which were,
"Adieu, my good, my dear Dr. Zimmermann; do not forget the old man whom you
have seen here." Thirty-eight days after his departure, Frederic II. justly
called the Great, breathed his last, and left the world a brilliant example of
heroism and wisdom, of philosophy and philanthropy, indelibly recorded, not
only in the annals of time, but in the grateful and patriotic hearts of the
posterity of his fellow soldiers and fellow countrymen, his subjects.

In a little time after this mournful event, Dr. Zimmermann published an
Account of his Conversations on the abovementioned occasion with the King of
Prussia. This account is peculiarly interesting and entertaining, as it
comprehends almost every subject which the enlightened mind of the Prussian
monarch and of his celebrated physician thought worthy of consideration. A good
English version of this book appeared very soon after.

In 1788 our elegant and sensible writer published a Treatise on Frederick the
Great, which passed through four editions in the shortest space of time. This
work was written with a view to defend the memory of that illustrious
character, and to clear it from the aspersions which were wantonly thrown out
by Count Mirabeau in his book on the Prussian Monarchy. Soon after that writer
published his Secret History of the court of Berlin, which was even more
illiberal than the former; Dr. Zimmermann, therefore enlarged his preceding
work into an ample vindication of that much wronged Prince from the unmerited
insinuations of his calumniator, and produced it under the title of Select
views of the Life, Character, and Reign of Frederick the Great, King of
Prussia. This production was translated into English in 1792 in a superior
style by Major Newman of the Nassau Guards.

It is now the painful province of the biographer to record, that from this
period Dr. Zimmermann's health yielded under the struggle between his feelings
and his duty; in the faithful discharge of which, his attention had always been
unremitting. Numberless must have been the heart-rending scenes that presented
themselves, to the last degree agonizing to a man so truly compassionate and
sympathetic as was this great philanthropist; and it is therefore no wonder
that his health at length gave way under their combined operation. Add to this,
his continued and favorite occupation of writing, which was his only
recreation for the last ten or fifteen years of his life. These gradually
undermined a constitution of a texture naturally slight, and the disease, by
which it was so materially weakened, gained upon him daily, and at last even so
as to affect the faculties of his mind; which, however great and comprehensive,
from being continually upon the stretch, sunk under the afflictive burden, and
relaxed into that melancholy state of intellectual debility, which has but too
frequently proved the lot of enlarged minds after an uncommon and unbounded
career of scientific glory.

The same causes to which we attribute a bright sunshine of genius have often
been found eventually to produce those clouds which have overwhelmed the
evening of a glorious day. An exquisite delicacy of the structure of the organs
of sense and feeling is such, that although it bestows a higher degree of
penetration and judgment, it still makes them the sooner relax by
over-exertion, while those of a grosser texture, and of a formation less
refined, constantly retain their ordinary powers entire and unimpaired.

The hypochondriac turn to which men of great learning and sensibility are
peculiarly liable, manifested itself in the subject of those memoirs even while
at Gottingen: and such is its fatal power, that when once it obtains the
smallest hold on the human mind, there is nothing can restore it to its former
tension. It is increased by every intervening sinister accident, however
trifling; and hence Zimmermann, who doubtless experienced many severe domestic
and personal misfortunes, felt far more than the generality of mankind under
similar circumstances. The superiority of his understanding and the greatness
of his genius where here of no avail: lesser minds would have medicined private
grief by the consideration of public honors. But Zimmermann was not thus to be
compensated for a body laboring under the pangs of disease, and a mind
smarting under the agonizing stroke of domestic affliction. The distinguished
honors conferred upon him by three of the greatest potentates of the earth;
the various other well-earned fruits of his extraordinary celebrity, afforded
him no satisfaction; anxiety and disease tortured him by turns, and overwhelmed
every prospect! With him all was dark! With him, "How widowed every thought of
every joy!"

The fits of melancholy and anxiety which invariably accompany the disposition
of mind and frame of body already described, and with which Dr. Zimmermann was
assailed from time to time, began early in 1795 to assume a very unfavourable
appearance. The despondency which had for a long time afflicted him, was now
increased; his natural genius and fortitude seemed materially affected, and his
friends grew concerned for his future welfare. At intervals his conversation
was communicative, sprightly and agreeable, but these happy moments seemed of
short duration; they were immediately succeeded by a tedious and gloomy
reserve, evidently demonstrative of a disturbed imagination.

The success of the French arms had created an universal alarm; their attempts
to revolutionize Europe, and overthrow the established religion and government
of other countries, as well as their own, tended to increase the number of
their enemies. Dr. Zimmermann was not an idle spectator of their progress. He
saw with astonishment their internal divisions, and struggles for power. He saw
faction sacrificed to faction, while their armies continued victorious. Fears
were entertained for the safety of Hanover; and he, who nourished and professed
the utmost detestation for these disturbers of mankind, in the extreme
perturbation of mind into which he was now fallen, felt excessively alarmed,
and he could not conquer his dread of persecution, to which his steadfast and
known adherence to the principles of religion and of integrity might possibly
subject him. In his heated imagination, the evils of an invasion of the French
were aggravated, if possible, even beyond the horror and dismay which those
sons of rapine and destruction uniformly spread around them, wherever their
baleful career conducted their sanguinary footsteps.

Oh! what a noble mind was here overthrown! In this deplorable state, and
plunged in the deepest melancholy, it was judged advisable to try the effect
of a change of air, and an excursion to Eutin was accordingly recommended.

Dr. Zimmermann passed two or three months in that charming retirement in the
company of his friend, Count Stolberg. It however produced no material
alteration for the better, for on his return to Hanover in July 1795, when all
fears of the enemy had subsided, his erratic ideas took another turn, and his
insanity appears to have been perfectly confirmed.

Here, with Dr. Marcard of Oldenburg, we sincerely reprobate the unavailing and
disagreeable recital of the various and melancholy instances of a deranged
brain, which Dr. Wichman, the physician who attended this celebrated man during
his last illness, has thought fit to make public. He has given a puerile and
disgusting detail of the wanderings of a ruined mind; and he has uttered them
in a way as if he wished them to serve as data whence to form conclusions
respecting the life and character of the sufferer. Surely an impenetrable veil
ought rather to have been thrown over this scene of abased humanity -- over
this degradation of the human soul! Is it not enough that we behold with awful
sorrow, the outlines of the dark picture, but must we be made acquainted with
all the minutiae of the distressing scene? Is it not enough for the awakening
of solemn reflection, that we view the silent repositories of the dead, and the
mouldering marble that announces the universal decay of every sublunary thing,
but must we also rake into the loathsome and festering clay that once was man?

How affecting to reflect on this great example of the weakness of human
nature! "Why," says this observant philosopher, who lived to become a memorable
instance of the frailty he deplores; "Why should we pride ourselves upon our
understanding, when the finest intellects are liable to be deranged by the most
trivial physical accidents? Independent of external circumstances; a little
extraneous air in the bowels, or an indigestible lump in the stomach, and lo,
the divine light of the soul is extinguished!" (Page 253.)

His mental disorder was now accompanied with the most excruciating agonies of
body; he visibly declined from day to day, and the virulence of his malady was
greatly heightened by his utter repugnance to the taking of the medicines
prescribed. He likewise contracted an abhorrence of all food, and obstinately
refused to take a sufficient quantity of aliment for the sustension of life.

This unhappy turn produced a frightful emaciation, so that from a tolerably
corpulent man his body became literally a mere skeleton. To cut short this
distressing narrative, he wasted away till the 7th of October 1795, when all
the powers of life failing, he expired without the least agitation, seemingly,
wholly worn down by the incessant operation of the complicated maladies of mind
and of body under which he labored.

For some days previous to the close of his existence, it does not appear that
he gave any proofs of a bewildered mind, and it should seem that the total
debility of his natural powers had in some degree contributed to restrain the
wanderings of his imagination. His last words, addressed to Dr. Wichman, with
an emphatic pressure of the hand, were, "Laissez moi seul; je me meurs." And
resigning his breath with the utmost calmness, he seemed, as Seneca said,
Potius e vita migrare quam mori.

In the preceding pages we have already discussed his merits as an author. He
was in every respect an elegant and emphatic writer; the only fault we are
inclined to admit, is a kind of redundancy of expression, arising from the fire
and force of his language, that sometimes declined into tautology. He is
likewise supposed to have written too much of himself, and to have made use of
the first person with too great a profusion in his writings; he was himself
sensible of this defect, and has in many passages either transiently, or more
at large, hinted his inducements for "conversing familiarly," as he expresses
it, "with his readers." He wrote, as he felt, from the genuine impulse of a
benevolent heart, which did not admit of the formal fetters of a scholastic
precision of style. In rejecting, however, the application of these rules, it
is only for writers like Zimmermann, who captivate with resistless energy the
minds and the hearts of their readers, to be allowed to shine, greatly
eccentric. Thus, nobody feels the egotism of Caesar's celebrated laconic
epistle of veni, vidi, vici, on account of the superior greatness of the
writer, of the subject, and of the sentiment; but when Caligula sends a handful
of cockle-shells and pebbles to the Roman senate with "behold the spoils which
I have achieved on the ocean, behold the proofs of my conquest of the islands
of Britain," who does not ridicule and despise the egregious egotism and
effrontery of the Imperial buffoon?

We are given to understand that he left many unfinished pieces behind him,
which, it is much to be regretted, he did not live to complete. These are now
consigned to oblivion; for by his will he ordered them all to be destroyed, and
expressly prohibited the publication of any posthumous works. It is, however,
to be wished, that his extensive and valuable correspondence with so many
literary characters of the first rank, may, in part, be rendered public; his
letters would certainly afford an abundant source of pleasure to the scientific
mind; and we hope that those who are possessed of these precious reliquiae will
not feel any repugnance to select and publish such of them as are adapted to
meet the eye of the world.

As a physician, Zimmermann attained great honor. In general it was supposed
he followed the practice of Tissot; but he always was the first to adopt any
new discovery whenever he became sensible of its utility, and never, as many of
the faculty are accused of doing, rejected improvement as innovation.

Upon the whole, Dr. Zimmermann much improved the practical part of the medical
science at Hanover. During the last ten or fifteen years of his life, we have
already remarked, he chiefly confined himself to his desk and study. Yet he
constantly devoted two hours every morning to attendance on his patients;
besides being often abroad during the day. The least apprehension of danger
called him instantly away, and his compassionate and sensible heart made him
disregard every thing for the sake of relieving his fellow creatures.

Whenever he beheld the convulsions of expiring nature, he most cordially
sympathised with the sufferer; and this feeling and tender disposition was not
a little prejudicial to his health. On this subject we are led to quote his own
words (page 32, English Translation of Solitude): "A physician, if he possesses
sensibility, must, in his employment to relieve the sufferings of others,
frequently forget his own. But alas! when summoned, and obliged to attend,
whatever pain of body or of mind he may endure, in maladies which are perhaps
beyond the reach of his art, how much oftener must his own sufferings be
increased by those which he sees others feel." And again (page 75): "At the bed
of sickness, when I behold the efforts which the soul makes to oppose its
impending dissolution from the body, and discover by the increasing tortures
the rapid advances of approaching death; when I see my unhappy patient extend
his cold and trembling hands to thank the Almighty for the smallest mitigation
of his pains; when I hear the utterance checked by intermingled groans; and
view the tender looks, the silent anguish of attending friends; all my powers
abandon me; my heart bleeds, and I tear myself from the sorrowful scene, only
to pour my tears more freely over the unhappy sufferings of humanity, to lament
my own inability, and the vain confidence placed in a feeble art."

It has been unjustly inferred, from the satirical and severe style of some of
his writings, that his temper and conversation abounded with the overflowings
of vindictive spleen. But here he has been wronged indeed! He wrote only to
crimson the cheek of error, and show vice in its own feature; he was, on the
contrary, distinguished by an urbanity of manners, and an amenity and mildness
of behavior, the very reverse of the sarcastic spirit displayed in his works,
and which is levelled at the vices and follies of the world; but when they
obtruded upon his notice in society, they were ever treated with the most
Christian meekness as frailties of human nature, deserving of compassion and
regret.

The exemplary piety and firm belief in Christianity, which breathe throughout
his writings wherever he treats of religious subjects, originated in a
thorough conviction of the truth of the belief he professed, and in a free and
candid enquiry into the grounds of Gospel doctrine. His was indeed sound
philosophy; it did not lead him astray into the paths of skepticism and of
error; whither the delusive meteors arising from superficial investigation have
bewildered so many, otherwise great and distinguished minds. He observed every
moral as well as every religious duty; he was benificent and charitable from
principle, as well as from nature; and the same law of Christ, which inculcated
the exercise of these duties, commanded him likewise to forbear the
ostentatious display of them.

If we rightly construe the scanty hints we have been able to collect from his
writings, Dr. Zimmermann was twice married. By his first wife, to whom he was
united in Switzerland, he had several children. The lady who lived to deplore
his loss was, we believe, married to him in 1782 at Hanover. For this amiable
companion of his last days, he was indebted to the friendship of Madame Doring,
wife of the Counselor of State of that name, and daughter of the celebrated
Vice Chancellor Strube; to this lady he has dedicated his Essay on Solitude.
"It was you," he says in this Dedication, "my ever esteemed friend, that so
happily chose for me the amiable and beloved companion of the end of my life,
and whom you brought with you to Hanover, when after an absence of eight months
you returned to complete the kindest offices of friendship in making me happy
with the deserving woman you had always wished I was united to, and whom you
then made me acquainted with."

His friendship and gratitude toward Madame Doring may be traced in the very
cordial effusions of his mind, page 70, of the English translation of Solitude;
where, speaking of himself, he says -- "Represent to yourself an unfortunate
foreigner placed in a country where every one was suspicious of his character,
borne down by misfortune from every side, attacked every moment by despair,
and, during a long course of years, unable either to stoop or sit to write
without feeling the most excruciating pains; in a country where, in the midst
of all his afflictions, he was deprived of the object which was dearest to him
in the world. Yet it was in such a country, and under these circumstances, that
he, at length, found a person who extended the hand of affection toward him;
whose voice, like a voice from heaven, said to him, "Come, I will dry your
tears, I will heal your wounded heart, be the kind comforter of your
sufferings, enable you to support them, banish the remembrance of sorrow from
your mind, and recall your sensibility. I will endeavor to charm away the
silence of disgust by entertaining conversation, and, when tranquillity returns,
collect for you all the flowers which adorn the paths of life; discourse with
you on the charms of virtue; think of you with love; treat you with esteem;
rely upon you with confidence; prove to you that the people among whom you are
situated are not so bad as you conceive them; and perhaps that they are not so
at all. I will remove from your mind all anxiety about domestic concerns; do
every thing to relieve and please you: you shall taste all the happiness of an
easy tranquil life. I will diligently endeavor to point out your faults, and
you, in gratitude, shall also correct mine: you shall form my mind, communicate
to me your knowledge, and preserve to me, by the assistance of God and your own
talents, the felicity of my life, together with those of my husband and my
children: we will love our neighbors with the same heart, and unite our
endeavors to afford consolation to the afflicted, and succor to the
distressed."

Zimmermann's personal appearance was impressive and noble: he was above, what
is termed, the middle size, and rather inclining to corpulence; his countenance
was manly and open, with an expressive and keen eye which beamed intelligence.
He possessed a persuasive and modulated voice, and in his language, whether
German or French, both of which he spoke with equal fluency, he united both
energy and force with harmony and polished expression.

Such was the man we have attempted to describe; as such our readers will
venerate his memory, and drop over his ashes a tear of gratitude and concern!

It is in the mean time, until an historian furnished with more correct and
more copious information shall favor the public with a complete biography of
this celebrated character, that these few memoirs, collected in a country,
which, notwithstanding Dr. Zimmermann's connexions with it, is to him a foreign
one, and in a very circumscribed space of time, are offered to the world as an
introduction to this work, the intrinsic merit whereof, in its original
language, has procured the greatest eulogiums from the best judges; whence it
is hoped the translation will be perused with some degree of pleasure, and if
it may be allowed to form a companion to the Essay on Solitude, it will be
considered as the most flattering mark of approbation which an indulgent Public
can possibly bestow upon it.

NATIONAL PRIDE.
Chapter I. Of National Pride in General.
THERE is no passion more universal than Pride. It pervades all orders of
society: from the throne to the cottage, every individual in some point or
other conceives himself superior to the rest of his species, and looks down
with contempt or haughty compassion on all who are placed beneath his imaginary
superiority. Every nation contemplates itself through the medium of
self-conceit, and draws conclusions to its own advantage, which individuals
adopt to themselves with complacency, because they confound and interweave
their private with their national character. The inhabitants of most countries,
great or small, powerful or otherwise, value themselves upon a certain
something, of which they believe themselves to be exclusively possessed, and
are apt to view every thing that relates to this particular point of honor,
both in themselves and others, with prejudice and prepossession. Thus humility,
which forbids ascribing to ourselves greater worth than we really possess, and
equity, which enjoins us to bestow the tribute of praise wherever it is due,
have with respect to the judgment passed by nations upon each other become
antiquated virtues. A powerful state may overawe, may destroy the dependence of
its weaker neighbor, but can never bring its inhabitants to be humble; every
thing else may be taken away, but their good opinion of themselves will remain.
The Doge of Genoa, who had the honor of submissively begging pardon of the
haughty Lewis the fourteenth in his palace at Versailles, for the trouble that
Prince had been put to in bombarding his native city, saw nothing, amidst all
the splendor of that magnificent court, so worthy of admiration, as the Doge
himself.

National advantages are either imaginary or real: in the former case, when a
nation unjustly pretends to the possession of great advantages, its pride is
arrogance; in the latter, the pride arising from the consciousness of
possessing greater worth than others, when well founded, may be called a noble
pride, which arrogance can never be; for that always implies an unjust, an
overweening, preference of ourselves. Self-esteem proceeds from a sense of our
own imaginary or real perfections, contempt for others from a sense of their
imaginary or real defects; and the union of these two sentiments in the mind,
by the partial comparison which a nation makes between the advantages it
possesses, or believes itself to possess, and the deficiencies of other
countries in the same respects, begets national pride.

The nature of my subject requires uncommon liberality of sentiment, and the
strictest regard to equity, to avoid giving any reasonable cause of complaint
against me. It is an arduous and difficult undertaking to attack men in their
tenderest point, to delineate with forcible strokes the foibles and ridiculous
characteristics of the most considerable nations, and, penetrating through the
exterior appearances and prejudices of mankind, to lay before the reader a true
picture of their actions and motives, so as not to offend any one, and to steer
at an equal distance between the opposite extremes of fawning flattery and
wanton satire.

Misinterpretations, I am aware, can hardly be avoided. I may often appear to
exemplify a national foible by that which may have been remarkable in one of
its individuals; yet to allege on that account that I draw general inferences
from few and partial observations, or that I cast on a whole nation the odium
resulting from the defects of a few persons, would be doing me injustice. I
believe I have not offended any man of understanding; and the sensible part of
mankind in every country, I am sure, will not take umbrage at the exposure of
the weaknesses which tarnish the better qualities of its inhabitants.

Illustrious characters of all professions are every where to be met with; and,
in this work, I defend the just claims of all nations to common sense and a
good understanding, against the selfish monopoly which has been exercised by
the vanity of a few. I esteem and love persons of merit of whatever clime or
religion, and glory in their regard; but this does not prevent my censuring as
ridiculous whatever really is so among the generality of their countrymen: this
remark may peculiarly be applied to what I say respecting the Spaniards. It
would be to form from my writings a very improper idea of my real sentiments,
and of the whole tenor of my life, to suppose that I entertain an aversion to
the English, whom I hold to be the worthiest nation of the globe,
notwithstanding the ill I have to say of them: amidst all my censures, I love
the French, and highly respect many individuals among them: the Italians too
are well worthy of my regard, on account of the fertility of their genius and
the vivacity of their conceptions: yet none of these nations will I spare.

A remark in a certain Paris review, though it made me smile, requires some
explanation to the public. It states, that I have not indiscriminately passed
my satirical censure on all nations; that I ought to have looked nearer round
me, and might full as easily have traced in Germany, instances of the same
ridiculous pride with which I made myself so merry when I find it in the
French, the Spaniard, or the English, if I had but deigned to cast an eye on
the circle more immediately within my own observation.

Instances of the most laughable personal pride, it is true, are plentifully to
be met with in the German universities, in the German cities, in the German
nobility, and in short in every thing that may be called German; but instances
of silly national pride occur but very seldom in people, who despise the works
of their own artists, who give the preference to foreign manufactures, and to
foreign learning, and occasionally console themselves by a comparison with the
petty nation of the Swiss. With what assurance could I have exposed the slight
traces of national pride to be met with among the honest Germans, when one of
the most learned men of our age reproaches them with the want of this useful
folly as a very great national defect? This gentleman says, in his preface to
the history of the frogs, "In Europe there exists a great nation, distinguished
by laboriousness and industry, possessing men of inventive faculties and of
great genius in as great a number as any other, little addicted to luxury, and
the most valiant among the brave. This nation nevertheless hates and despises
itself, purchases, praises, and imitates only what is foreign; it imagines that
no dress can be elegant, no food or wine delicious or even palatable, no
dwelling commodious, unless stuff, tailor, clothes, cook, wine, furniture, and
architect, come to it at an excessive expense from abroad; and what adds a zest
to all, from a country inhabited by its natural enemies. This singular nation
exalts and praises solely and above measure the genius and wit of foreigners,
the poetry of foreigners, the paintings of foreigners; and especially with
regard to literature, foreign books written in the most miserable style, are
solely purchased, read, and admired by these infatuated people, who know little
even of their own history, save from the faulty, unfaithful, and malicious
relations of foreign authors."

Let others decide on the justice of this well-meant reproach; for me it only
remains to inform the Parisian censor, that I am really no German, although I
write German, and yield, in his opinion to none in the humility with which I
address the Austrian and Swabian nobility, according to the custom of the
country, using the title of Gracious Lord, and seem to him to sacrifice truth
at the shrine of servile adulation.

Chapter II. Of Individual Pride, and the Pride of different Classes.
FOLLY is the queen of the world, and we all, more or less, wear her livery,
her ribbands, her stars, and her bells. Most men, being partial to themselves,
esteem only their own image in others. The predominancy of vanity among mankind
is what causes the number of the proud to be so great, since it is from vanity
that all pride arises, while self-conceit which begets this vanity is by no
means originally implanted in human nature, like that necessary self-love,
which incites every creature to attend to its own preservation. It seems rather
an adventitious quality which must have arisen in a state of society, when the
mind became capable of comparing itself with others, and which, in consequence,
has been interwoven with our other assumed opinions, and pervades all our
actions and motives. We generally have too good an opinion of our personal
qualities, not to take pleasure in comparing ourselves with others; and the man
of sense equally with the fool entertains the same complacent ideas of himself,
founded on this comparison; only in the last it is always more absurd, in
proportion to the futility and injustice of his parallel.

Self-conceit begets arrogance, haughtiness, vanity, frivolity and ostentation,
and appears in various shapes, according to the difference it meets with in the
natural intellects, in the mode of education and of living, in the society, in
the station, and in the rank and fortune of men. In little minds, whatever form
it assumes, it is always folly; in minds more enlightened, it sometimes is
linked with knowledge; in all it subsists either openly or in secret at the
expense of others, especially where it is the only antidote against the malice
with which a number of fools depreciate one wise man.

The self-conceit of every one must of necessity clash with that of his
neighbor, and of course increase by opposition; for whoever is not as much
valued by others, as he thinks he deserves, esteems himself the more, by
comparing their supposed ignorance, with his ideal worth; while by openly
contemning his competitor, this last is likewise induced to fall into the same
train of thinking with respect to his own advantages, which he, by the same
mode of arguing, conceives to be superior to those of his neighbor, for
exactly the same reason. Self-conceit too opens the way to an irresistible
satisfaction, by the tacit agreement which mankind seem to have entered into,
that each shall love in a certain degree in another what they think worthy of
admiration in themselves. Now, as in both cases self-conceit in a lively temper
becomes a passion, it leads us into innumerable errors, since passion always
affects our sight in such a way, that we see but one side of the picture, in
which too we are sure to behold no more than we choose.

We always return to the consideration of our dear selves, just as the
imagination of a lover is ever recurring to the contemplation of his mistress;
he neither sees nor regards any thing but the object of his affection. So too
the self admirer is blind and deaf to all but his own astonishing perfections;
he is provoked at whatever does not exactly coincide with his ideas of them,
and supposes that his own conviction of their existence is sufficient to render
them equally discernible to all: as some years ago, a young English inamorato,
possessed with the true spirit of Quixotism, constrained our inoffensive
country people whom he met with in the fields round Lausanne, to confess that a
certain young lady of Geneva, whom he named to them, was the most lovely of her
sex, by threatening them with the point of his sword.

Loving ourselves beyond all others, so we think ourselves entitled to the
first place, and believing our way of thinking on all points to be perfectly
right, we consequently look upon our judgment as more sound, and our
penetration as more subtle, than the judgment or penetration of such as deviate
from our received opinions: with regard to such as agree with us, we only
esteem them as representing ourselves; and, misled by these selfish notions, we
wish to be regarded in the same pleasing light by others as we look on
ourselves; but experience, alas! teaches us that our thoughts, our opinions,
and our sentiments, please others only in so far as they accord with their own;
for this reason our vanity forces us to esteem in others that coincidence of
opinion which assures us of their esteem, while we cannot avoid hating the
contrariety of their sentiments to ours; because we most certainly know, that
they for the same reason either hate or at least despise us; and again, many
people, averse to disturb the repose they enjoy in the downy lap of
self-complacency, never take the trouble to investigate the opinions of others,
or to weigh their own against them; and so, remaining ignorant of their
respective merits, go on in the beaten path of invariably giving the preference
to themselves.

These fundamental principles, deduced from nature by the most acute
philosophers, and confirmed by the daily experience of every attentive observer
of mankind, throw a light on many ludicrous appearances which are constantly to
be seen around us, or obs^rved in history, which appears to be no other than an
account of men's infirmities and defects, all which arise from self-conceit,
either with respect to ourselves or others.

Man looks upon himself as the center to which all created beings tend. Among
the pismires inhabiting this mighty molehill* there have always been some who
could not discard the idea, that the sun only shone for them to bask in; that
yonder starry worlds were nothing more than golden studs placed for the sake of
ornament in the firmament, and that the whole of this magnificent system was
created solely for the supply of their wants, the gratification of their
senses, and the amusement of their imaginations. Many orders of men have
continually flattered themselves with the idea that they were the chief, if not
the only objects of Divine Providence, and have, in consequence, ascribed
innumerable effects of the general and regular course of things, to an
immediate interposition of the Deity, solely regarding themselves, according as
their prejudices, their passions, their interest, or their vanity might incite
them to believe.

The same folly is observable in individuals of all ranks, for each is in his
own eye a being of the greatest importance: true, he may often yield the
precedence to others, but that only because they are held in higher estimation
by the rest of the world, for he is very far from respecting them in his heart,
and the less on account of this mortifying pre-eminence; for this very reason
it is, that the individual whom every one places immediately below himself in
worth, is evidently the first of his profession. After the battle of Salamis,
all the commanders were enjoined to declare before the altar of Neptune, upon
oath, who had conducted himself best on that day; every one of them claimed for
himself the first palm, but they were unanimous in allotting the second to
Themistocles.

All men prize above measure their own taste and favorite science, and esteem
every one who has not a genius for that particular branch of knowledge, as
unqualified. This is carried so far, that men often ridiculously conceive the
delights of another world will be tasteless without the enjoyment of their most
cherished passion: the sportsman believes that when he is freed from the narrow
bounds of this nether world, his spirit will be eternally happy in following
the pleasures of the chase, from one planet to another, through the whole
expanse of heaven; and the alchymist entertains no doubt but that the elect
will be blessed to all eternity, in the perusal and contemplation of
Paracelsus. To adduce but one instance, Le Sack, a famous French dancing master
during the reign of queen Anne, in great admiration once asked a friend,
whether it was true that Mr. Harley was made an Earl and Lord Treasurer; and
finding it confirmed, said, "Well, I wonder what the devil the queen could see
in him; for I taught him to dance two years, and he was the greatest looby that
ever I had to do with."

Self-conceit always exalts a man above his proper level, and perverts his
right perception of the fitness of things. Every prince must have his court
days and his ambassadors be his dominions three miles or three hundred in
extent; every nobleman his attendants and pages, whether his revenue justifies
such ostentation or not; and every shopkeeper's wife, whether she sells tape by
the yard or pins by the hundred for six days, must on the seventh, be a fine
lady. A blockhead will ever extol the depth of his penetration; the knave his
honesty; the blind follower of a particular religious tenet his thorough
conviction of its infallibility; the hypocrite his piety; the upstart his
nobility; the demirep her virtue; the old maid her chastity; which she indeed
often to her sorrow retains for want of it is having ever been tempted; the idle
and insignificant can pertly engross the whole of a conversation of which they
make themselves the topic, without feeling how much they depress men of sense
on such occasions. There is not a youthful coxcomb in the universe who would
barter his head for that of the most eminent genius; nor a wealthy scoundrel
that cares for any kind of merit but the cunning that has brought him his
riches; and no virtue can counterbalance the glittering gewgaws of coronets and
embroidery in the eyes of a titled ignoramus. Those who indulge in self conceit
generally go farther, and not only love their opinions like themselves, but
look with scorn on all who entertain different ideas, and who do not exactly
give the preference to what they esteem worthy of it. The idler pities the busy
fool that is ever immersed in the occupations of trade; the hunter despises the
fellow that cannot talk of dogs and horses; the gamester thinks those who care
not for cards little better than clods; the burgomaster who magisterially gives
importance to trifles, and the counselor who scribbles his decison on the
cases that are brought for his consideration with the same ease as he gulps
down his wine, ask with haughty self-sufficiency, what good the pedant does who
can employ his time no better than to write a book? To him who has no
sensibility of soul, all the nobler, the purer emotions of the heart, seem
absurd and ridiculous; the man who does not feel the poignancy of genuine wit
stares at the applause it excites; while on the other hand low jokes, puns, and
obscene allusions form a fund of entertainment to congenial vulgar minds; to
giddy girls, whose hearts pant for a fop, and whose lot is often a fool, the
manly accomplishments of knowledge, sense and seriousness of character, are of
no worth; men of a churlish temper look on the enchanting features, the softly
alluring eyes and graceful mien of the lovely daughters of our general mother,
merely as childish playthings, unworthy the attention of the lords of the
creation; mercenary mercantile souls, who value a woman only by the weight of
gold she brings with her as a portion, are incapable of conceiving how any one
can be such a dolt as to take a wife with good sense, delicate feelings, and a
benevolent heart, in preference to stupidity with money; and the captivating
allurements which nature teaches a blooming girl to throw out for the grand
purpose of her creation, are inveighed against and reprimanded, as downright
immodesty by the antiquated prude, who has lost all powers of attraction.

One of the objects in which self-conceit most predominantly appears, is in
matters of religion, and the opinion we entertain of our punctual discharge of
the religious duties incumbent on us: it is sure, in this respect, to declare
itself in an inexpressible contempt and pity of those who do not make such a
public display of their piety as we do. Hardly a day passes without the
sacrifice of some innocent victim at the altar of the malignant passions of
people of this cast, to whom evil speaking is food, cavilling their
entertainment, slander their delight, false aspersion the enlivening fire of
their discourse, and malice the soul of their actions. Such gloomy zealots too
often become the slaves of every vice, and are by turns, lascivious,
gluttonous, quarrelsome, ambitious, avaricious, hard-hearted, and cruel; the
tumults of their sordid minds, at the loss of a trifle, might be compared to
the uproar of chaos; and under the cloak of devotion they sin against common
honesty: but although none are so punctual in attending divine service, though
none make such solemn preparations at the approach of every religious festival,
though the word Christianity is ever in their mouths, though they are
indefatigable in visiting the infirm and administering spiritual consolation to
those whose situation would rather require the opened hand of charity, though
none pay greater respect to their own clergy, though none so vehemently exclaim
against the growth of infidelity; yet the world is not so effectually deceived
by their hypocritical professions, as their consciences are lulled by their own
sophistications; for every honest man abhors such lip-service, and every wise
man smiles at their sanctified hypocrisy.

Partiality of judgment, with all its concomitants, injurious contempt and
censure, extends itself through all characters, stations, and professions;
people of contrary dispositions, of different ages and tastes, reciprocally
think each other stupid, ridiculous, and full of imperfections: the advantages
which they respectively enjoy are the subject of their exultation, and those
they are defective in, they cry down and disdain. Thus fools are ever making
faces at each other, and jostling their empty noddles; and thus arise the many
squabbles about trifles that daily occur in the world, and in which neither
party are in the right or in the wrong.

Shallow-brained coxcombs entertain the most marked contempt for men of genius;
the former are continually buzzing in the ears of the latter the barren objects
of their trifling observations, and the uninteresting occurrences of their
frivolous lives; while these cannot but behold with indifference the flimsy
materials which form the furniture of their senseless pates, and, sighing at
the insignificancy of their conversation, turn with disgust from the daily
round of the same remarks which neither instruct nor entertain. A vulgar mind,
and such as is only adequate to the common occupations of life, thinks these
alone useful, noble, and praiseworthy, and the time that is otherwise employed
totally lost; he pities the conceited blockheads who embark in literary
pursuits and scientific researches, and who cannot be contented with the
obvious knowledge and such ideas as immediately present themselves, without the
trouble of further pursuit than looking out at the window, or walking to and
fro before the door. Wise men and fools are therefore reciprocally tiresome and
insipid to each other whenever they meet, and both repay themselves for the
tormenting uneasiness they have felt, by mutual contempt.

Professions likewise are animated with the same spirit of disdain toward each
other, according to the ideas they have respectively formed of their utility
and rank in society: the citizen despises the farmer; the seaman the soldier;
the soldier the civilian; the civilian the ecclesiastic; and among
ecclesiastics numberless are the pretenses adduced to countenance their mutual
contempt; while the courtier expresses his derision of them all.

Among the learned, mutual scorn is as common and apparent as among the most
illiterate. There are few of the former who do not prize their favorite study
above all human knowledge, and are indifferent to every thing that does not
regard their own hobbyhorse: the naturalist thinks very meanly of the
etymological opinions and laborious investigations of the grammarian; the
botanist is equally uncharitable with respect to the studies of the astronomer;
the lawyer cannot bear to hear of the utility or learning of a physician; and
the man who, by any new contrivance, an electrical machine, an air balloon, or
a diving bell, has acquired riches and a name, cannot comprehend how the world
can trifle away time in empty prattle about politics. A country alehouse-keeper
has more esteem for one substantial farmer, than for all the wits in
Christendom; the natural philosopher laughs aloud at the imbecility of the
ethic philosopher, who foolishly supposes that the contemplation of the nature
of men and of their actions, is of more consequence than the contemplation of
the nature and actions of frogs; the mathematician's standard of excellence is
his rule and compasses, his arithmetical tables, and decimal fractions, and
these stupid inventions again are the derision of the metaphysician. The
question was once put in a mixed company at Paris, "what a metaphysician was?"
a mathematician present answered, "An ignorant blockhead." Let the chemists,
the naturalists, the physicians, the moralists, and the experimental
philosopher be asked, "what a mathematician is?" they will answer, "An ignorant
blockhead." Prose writers have a great antipathy to each other; some pride
themselves upon the gigantic size of their works, others on the selection and
terseness of their subjects; the former rake together in their writings
cart-loads of rubbish from the assemblage of all that has been invented or
heard of since the deluge; they are never tired of deep researches, and spin
out their matter with the most patient industry, ringing the changes of their
absurd notions till the reader nods over them, not from a principle of thought
and acquiescence, but lulled by the incessant repetition of the same sounds.
Such authors reverence their brethren who can write a folio, while be who can
only fill a duodecimo, must be a very poor genius indeed; for to confine
one-self to say more on a subject than is requisite for its discussion, proves,
in their opinion, a deplorable sterility of intellect; they call writings of
judgment, penetration, and elegance, unintelligible, trifling, frothy,
sophistical, French nonsense: they dislike wit as eunuchs dislike love, and,
being genuine pedants, call all such as are endowed with common sense with its
purity and simplicity, the unenlightened herd; while these, on the other hand,
think a fool's cap would be the most proper ornament to set off the gravity and
overbearing conceit, so visibly imprinted in their long and solemn visages.
Poets think very meanly of prose writers, for prose is the common vehicle of
conversation; and when their works consecrated to immortality, expire before
the next returning solstice after their birth, the perverted taste of the whole
age is vehemently called in question; but they likewise despise each other, and
of all their creditors, those to whom they owe a spite are the surest of
punctual payment. As their choler is confessedly more irritable than that of
any other people, so they do not rest satisfied with expressing their contempt
of what they think despicable, but, as those who consort with wolves must join
in their howlings, so they would oblige whoever has his character at heart, to
side with them, or submit to the application of that article in the laws of
Solon, which declares all such as remain neuter in any dangerous commotion in
the state, infamous, as not caring for the happiness or misery of their
country, nay, even making a merit of their forbearance; on which account a poet
often alternately employs, according to his humor, his pen in panegyrics and
pasquinades on the same man, who is, perhaps, today a man of genius or
Mecaenas, and tomorrow a dunce or an Omar, who ordered the destruction of the
Alexandrian library, giving this memorable reason, that whatever learning it
contained that was not comprehended in the Alcoran, was prejudicial to the
interests of the true religion, and whatever was already written in that sacred
book need not be elsewhere preserved.

From all this it appears, that men slight each other from being the slaves of
self-conceit, which is avowedly the case with almost every one; insignificant
indeed is the number of those equitable minds, which can, with philosophical
indifference, weigh their own advantages against those of others, and observe
the lightness of their own balance.

The agreement or disagreement of ideas and sentiments, is the sure criterion
by which to judge of the mutual esteem or contempt between the parties; whoever
is much sought after by little minds, and can associate with and please the
weak and ignorant, may well be suspected of similar disqualifications, which is
a consolatory reflection for the hatred which is generally entertained by the
ignorant against the learned. Of a person we do not at all know, we form not an
advantageous idea if we find he is the admiration of fools, for the center of
gravity itself is not so attractive as dullness to its counterpart. Where the
prince is a fool, that country is the paradise of fools; like the ephemeral
insects of a summer's day, the votaries of folly emerge from their retreats,
and betake themselves to Court, the moment a soul congenial to their own
ascends the throne; there they are in their element; the most unmeritorious
sycophants are advanced to the highest dignities; all that is foolish, vicious
and absurd, becomes fashionable, and is most decidedly preferred, while merit
and parts retire dejected from the society of men, who hate what is not made
after their own image.

There is another cause of partiality or contempt for men and manners, which
unites with self-conceit to beget vanity and pride, that is, the circumstances
of local situation; the objects that surround us, the society, the country in
which we live, and the government we are under, all influence more or less our
thoughts, motives, and actions; we form our ideas according as we are situated
in the above respects, and adopt to them our opinions of the decency, truth,
propriety, and beauty of every thing that comes within our observation.

He who has never traveled, who has read nothing, and who shuns the
conversation of those who have, limits his ideas to what he daily sees around
him, imagines that beyond the little span he inhabits there is nothing but wild
uncultivated deserts and gloomy wildernesses; or forming his opinions of all
that is beyond the circle of his own observation, by what is within it, he is
like the Parisian mechanic spoken of in the account of an excursion from Paris
to St. Cloud, who believed, that the hills bordering his view were uninhabited,
and, from the horse-chesnut trees in the public walks at Paris, concluded, that
all grain and pulse grew likewise on trees.

From this dependency on the objects which surround us proceeds a rooted habit
of judging of distant things by the scale of domestic appearances, and by the
notions which prevail in our own little circle. In Paris, for this reason,
notwithstanding all that may be thought of it in other countries, it is by no
means an object of ridicule for five or six city sportsmen to go a hunting in a
coach with jack-boots, bag-wigs, guns, swords and pistols, who when they come
to a proper place, take their stands behind so many trees, in order to let fly
at any poor hare that may happen to run that way: for this reason the negroes
paint their devils white and their god black; for this reason certain nations
painted the goddess of love with monstrous breasts hanging down almost to her
knees: and for this same reason it was, that on endeavoring to make an honest
Swiss comprehend the extent of kingly wealth and magnificence, he asked with a
proud consciousness of the importance of his rustic riches, "whether a king had
a hundred head of cattle on the hill?" Whoever is of consequence in his hamlet
must be a respectable person every where. At the congress of Baden in 1714, all
the several plenipotentiaries dined one day in public, and many people
assembled round the table out of curiosity. Marshal Villars discovered among
then a very pretty young woman from Zurich, and went up to her to give her a
kiss, when instantaneously a thick-headed crook-legged dapperling of a
Zuricker, pressed forward through the crowd and cried out like a demoniac,
"Hold, hold, Marshal, let her alone, for she is my sister, and her husband is
warden of our company."

The smaller and more insulated the place or society is in which we live, the
lower and more contracted are the opinions we form in consequence; and when we
are ignorant of every thing beyond our narrow sphere of life, whereby to form a
just estimate of things, we look upon our tenets as the only proper rule of
judgment, being unacquainted with the existence, much less with the probable
merits of any other. The more abridged a man is in his knowledge, the higher
does he value himself, and the more insolent does he behave toward others. He
condemns every thought that does not flow from his own fruitful brain, and
every action and fashion, of which he has not set the example. He persecutes as
much as he can with impunity every man of genius, whom he supposes, on account
of the superiority of his talents, necessarily inimical to his manner of
thinking and projects; he styles an uniform coincidence with his ideas, good
sense; blindness toward his failings, friendship; and in any case not to
further his views, is treachery and a crime; he fancies his reputation is
firmly established, when he is stared at and admired by a number of clowns; and
like the commander of a ship, who rules over his little wooden realm with
despotic sway, he is almost convinced, that the axis of the globe must quake
before him, like the table which he strikes in the vehemence of his rhetoric.

This defect is incurable in every man of note who inhabits a small town, when
his mind is not more expanded than the place of his residence; for he who is
the man of most consideration in a little circle, will naturally detest
extensive society, where he is sure to lose his pre-eminence, he will
particularly be hostile to men of commanding understandings, and will avoid
their conversation, for his soul will shrink from their scrutiny. Men are
infinitely more pleased with the company of such as out of complaisance or
ignorance accede to their absurd propositions, than of those who insinuate that
they are erroneous.

The half animated oyster, confined within its shell, knows as much of the
world, as a man involved in this intellectual mist does of the real situation
or value of things. Always surrounded by the same objects, he will never alter
his creed; he will ever esteem his own belief as an incontrovertible argument
in every dispute; he is in himself all in all, and those who hold other
principles, are blinded by falsehood. Such men ever adhere to the axiom, that
relative consequence is real consequence; in vain you may put a standard into
their hands to measure themselves by, they indignantly cast it away, they have
forsooth already measured themselves, and must, to be sure, be great and
consequential men throughout the world, for they are of weight and importance
on their own dunghill. This excessive self-esteem makes them look at all other
persons and things through the wrong end of the perspective glass; and the
value of all who are not of their stamp is imperceptible to their perverted
vision. On this account the most unimportant trifles in their hands swell to
matters of great moment; and thence also proceeds their opinion, that no one
ever was, or ever will be capable of rivalling them in the greatness or
usefulness of their exploits. It is the prevalence of this infatuation that
solely occasions the big swollen gravity, which is the soul of administration in
the petty jurisdiction of all countries. Every thing must bow down and vanish
before the tremendous authority of a judge of this description; when he
smoothes his countenance into all-sufficiciency and with an elevation of
shoulders, throws his straddling legs full length before him, clears his lungs
with a loud and awful hem, then graciously declines his face from the
contemplation of the ceiling, and slowly bending his eyes downward, casts them
with ineffible disdain on the circle of bob-wigs and uncombed locks around him,
all which seem unanimously to exclaim, "the world sure must confess this man is
great, for he is the greatest in our town hall!"

These true and unexaggerated observations, prove that the generality of
mankind are proud; that self-conceit is the fountainhead of pride; and that
pride generates the most ridiculous arrogance; when stupidity and confined
knowledge of things become by outward circumstances the companions of
self-conceit.

Chapter III. Of the Pride of whole Nations.
WHOLE nations think just as the generality of individuals do of their own
advantages. We might safely conclude from the thoughts and opinions of single
persons, what their combined effects are in the community they belong to, did
we not also directly know, that every nation must have the same manner of
fashioning its ideas with the individuals who compose it. All histories are
memorials of the partiality of nations for themselves; the most civilized and
the most savage people show, that they believe they possess certain advantages,
which they disallow to others; either the religious tenets they hold, their
customs, their government, or some other peculiarity, is a pleasing subject of
contemplation to them. As individuals, so villages, cities, provinces, nations,
are infected with this darling self-conceit, and their own particular vain
glory; and every member of the community, by a very natural chain of ideas,
takes part in the general vanity, and joins with his village or his nation in
railing at other villages and nations of the world. About fifty years ago, the
inhabitants of a certain small village in Rheinthal, a small district, and one
of those called the dependencies of Switzerland, being possessed by all the
Swiss Cantons, urged a complaint to the judge, that the parson had on the
preceding Sunday, audaciously uttered these reprehensible words, "that hardly
one hundred souls out of the whole of their illustrious community would be
saved."

Every nation is exceedingly pleased with itself, and considers all other
societies of men, more or less, as beings of an inferior nature. A foreigner
and a barbarian were synonomous terms among the Greeks; and were employed as
such among the Romans; and are still so with the majority of the French nation.
It happened at the court of Zell, in the time of the late duke, that the
duchess (who was of the French family of d'Olbreuse) with some French noblemen
were the only company at his highness's table; one of the Frenchmen suddenly
exclaimed, "It is very droll indeed!" "What is so droll?" said the duke. "That
your highness is the only foreigner at table," was the answer. Even the
Greenlanders pronounce the word Stranger with an air of contempt, and in some
of the towns of the Swiss Cantons, the word Ausburger or alien has the same
degrading signification, as is exemplified by the answer given a few years ago,
by an honest fruiterer in one of those towns, to the intimation that he
received, that his daughter, a very pretty maiden, had captivated the heart of
a certain German prince, "No no," says he, "no, no, I know better than to let
my daughter have to do with an Ausburger."

National contempt oftener arises from what strikes the senses than the
understanding. At Vienna, at Paris, and at Rome, a Swiss and a brute were long
esteemed equivalent denominations, and to speak honestly, I have myself felt
abashed, when at Versailles I have compared the still and formal gait of the
Swiss halberdiers, with the airy flippancy of the monkeys, who danced
attendance at the levee. Most people ridicule foreign manners, because they
differ from their own; and in this point, few are less blind and arrogant than
the French courtiers, who, instead of seeing in Peter the Great, a monarch of
genius, who traveled for the sake of improvement, and who had descended from
his throne to attain the qualifications necessary to enable him to fill it
again worthily, beheld in him no more than a foreigner, a brute, who being
ignorant of French customs, and a stranger to their affectation and grimace,
ought as soon as he came among them, to have studied their manners, and have
taken a pattern of their undistinguished urbanity wherewith to civilize his
Russian bears.

The mutual contempt between nations too often appears even in members of
society who ought to be far above such illiberal prejudices. There are few
authors who hear with temper a comparison between writers of their own nation
and foreign literati; and let them be ever so unfair and virulent toward each
other, they are at all times ready to unite in attacking a foreigner, who
should dare to find fault with any one among them.

The arrogant Greeks owed all their advantages, nay, their civilization, to
foreigners: the Phenicians taught them the use of letters, instructed them in
the arts and sciences, gave them laws; the Egyptians lent them the mythology on
which they built their religion; yet Greece, favored Greece, was in their
eyes, the mother of all nations. It is remarked, that the Greek historians
seldom make use of foreign names, sometimes totally omitting them, but more
commonly altering them with the most scrupulous attention to give them a
Grecian turn and a more harmonious sound; and it is therefore not surprising,
that in succeeding times, this vainglorious people adopted the persuasion,
that nearly all the other nations of the earth were colonies from Greece.

The modern Italians confidently place themselves upon a level with the ancient
Romans, without reflecting that the descendants of these conquerors of the
world are the most insignificant among the slaves of caprice and superstition;
or that the cities, whose pristine fame they glory in, and even many of those
whose names have been renowned in the middle and latter ages, are now nearly
uninhabited, and their unfrequented streets overgrown with weeds. Many small
towns in the Campania of Rome were the native places of Roman consuls, generals
and emperors, and the present squalid inhabitants of such places speak of them
as their townsmen and relations. The peasant, who can point out the spot where
such or such an eminent character was born, firmly believes, in common with all
the inhabitants round the sacred barn and hog-stye, or whatever else the Roman
villa has been metamorphosed into, that their countryman, their progenitor, was
the greatest man history ever made mention of. A single senator of Rome,
deciding without appeal on the petty squabbles and disputes of the lowest order
of citizens, is the actual representative of that tribunal to which the
impressive majesty of the ancient senate and of the Roman people is dwindled.
He has four assessors called conservators, who are changed every quarter. These
conservators, as well as the senator himself, are nominated by the pope, who
does not even leave the Romans that remnant of liberty which many cities enjoy,
even under absolute monarchies, the free election of their own magistrates;
yet, nevertheless, both the senator and these conservators idly conceive
themselves the successors of that august body whose seats they at present
occupy, and that they are entitled to all the respect due to a Roman senate,
and to all its invaluable privileges, while the vicegerent of heaven himself
must be highly honored by seeing at his feet that assembly before whom so many
kings and princes had bowed their necks. The Trastaverini, that is the wretched
militia of the ward of Trastavera in modern Rome, the ancient Regio
Transtiburina, absolutely call themselves descendants of the Trojans of remote
antiquity, and look upon the inhabitants of the other quarters of Rome as a mob
of spurious Latians; and yet they value both, in the midst of their poverty and
bigotry, as being citizens of ancient Rome, from whose former courage and
inflexibility they are so far degenerated, that the very rare occurrence among
them of the execution of a malefactor almost frightens them into fits. All the
modern inhabitants of Rome of the lower class, console themselves with the
remembrance of the noble actions of their imaginary progenitors, and this makes
even misery in Rome assume the air of pride and disdain. In a tumult that had
arisen there, in consequence of the high price of corn, it once happened that
the son of a poor baker's widow of the Trastavera ward was killed; the pope,
who feared the worst consequences from the popular effervescence increased by
this accident, immediately deputed a cardinal and several of the nobility to
see the widow, and offer whatever she required as an atonement for the injury
she had sustained; to which the Roman matron indignantly replied, "I do not
sell my blood." Toward the approach of a public festival, a whole family
sometimes pinch themselves in every necessary, in order to have wherewithal to
ride about in a coach. Such families as cannot, even with the utmost economy,
attain the pleasure of hiring one, adopt another expedient to exhibit
themselves: the mother dresses herself in the habit of a chambermaid, and in
that character accompanies her daughter, tricked out in her holiday clothes,
while the father follows in procession with the proper accoutrements of a
lackey.

Englishmen themselves acknowledge, that they inherit from their ancestors a
stupid prepossession against all other inhabitants of the globe. Whenever one
of them is engaged in any quarrel with a for^^gner, he is sure to begin his
address with some reproachful nickname, which he appropriates to the native
country of the person he is contending with. Foreigners are on such an
occassion respectively saluted with the appellation of French puppy, Italian
monkey, Dutch ox, or German hog. As to the word French, the national antipathy
against their opposite neighbors is so great, that to call a foreigner, dog,
is not insulting enough, but he must be called French dog, to convey the
highest degree of detestation. The national prejudices of the English are also
too conspicuous in their conduct toward the natives of their two sister
kingdoms, that compose the British empire, who live under the same king and the
same government, and fight with them for one common cause. Nothing is more
frequently heard in England, than, "thou beggarly Scott;" "thou blood-thirsty,
impudent Irish lout:" and in general, an Englishman well stuffed with beef,
pudding, and porter, heartily despises every other nation of Europe. The
Yorkshire fox-hunter esteems himself coequal with all the princes of the
earth; for his fox-hounds are the best in the whole county. An Englishman to be
sure, too, must solely, by being born a Briton, have an innate taste for works
of genius, and be a thorough connoisseur in the fine arts; and although the
pope has expressly prohibited the sale of any of the paintings or sculptures of
famous artists to strangers, yet these proud islanders on their visits to Italy
expend yearly as much at Rome in statues and paintings as they used to do
before; that is to say, they purchase as much daubed canvass and broken marble
as the money they have set apart for the acquisition of curiosities will
command.

Let me likewise give the reader the statement of the parallel drawn by
Englishmen of approved learning and talents, between them and other nations, in
their own style. They say, "The French are polite, witty, and easily elated,
but they are a parcel of hungry slaves, and cannot call either their time,
their purses, or their persons their own, for all is the property of their
king. The Italians are without liberty, morals, or religion. The Spaniards are
brave, devout, and jealous of their honor, but poor and oppressed; and for all
their bragging, that the sun never rises or sets in the Spanish dominions, they
never dare make their freedom, learning, arts, manufactures, commerce, or
achievements, the subjects of their boasts. The Portuguese, too, are all
ignorant and superstitious slaves. The Germans are always either in actual war,
or recovering from its devastations. The Dutch lag behind in every virtue, are
deeply sunk in avarice, and are only roused from their natural supineness, to
take an active part in trade, by the lust of gain. Switzerland is scarcely
perceptible in the map of the world; and to draw our attention, the virtues of
the Swiss ought to shine forth with the luster of a diamond; but the diamond,
if there be any, is by to means of the first water, and indeed tolerably
opaque." Thus it is, that all nations, when put in the balance by the steady
hand of a prejudiced Englishman, are found too light; and hence proceeds the
remarkable coldness and indifference they all evince toward a foreigner on
their first acquaintance.

The French in their own estimation are the only thinking beings in the
universe. They vouchsafe sometimes to converse with strangers; but it is, as
creatures of a superior nature may be conceived to converse with men, who of
course derive the greatest emolument and importance from such condescension.
Such among them are peculiarly disgusting, who with pretended compassion, and
an hateful display of nice equity, deign to allow a few grains of genius or
virtue to other nations; although it very plainly appears, that this favorable
opinion is not given to their merits; but is a spontaneous effusion of the
exuberant politeness in these most courteous people. These men surely will not
have the effrontery to deny, that they look upon all nations who do not equal
the French in power, or who are somewhat beneath them in smartness, or in a
taste for the frivolous arts, that are the study and the glory of Frenchmen, as
barbarians, and despise them accordingly. Their jestures, conversations, and
writings, daily betray their firm persuasion, that there is nothing great,
noble, or amiable out of their empire, and that nothing perfect can be produced
any where else, but under the fostering patronage of their grand Monarque.

The French think themselves entitled to give laws to every nation, because all
Europe implicitly follow the dictates of their milliners, tailors, hairdressers
and cooks. Where is the Frenchman who will deny, that his countrymen think
themselves the first and greatest people of the globe? How ill can Mr. Lefranc,
in one of the discourses he addresses to the king, brook the audacity of the
English, who dare to put themselves on a level with the French; for Patin
himself has said, "That the Britons were among men, what wolves are among the
quadrupeds?" How many numberless times have not the French styled their
sovereign, the first monarch of the world? Esteeming themselves the firstborn
sons of nature, they will sometimes deign to look on their neighbors as their
younger brethren, and will allow them to be laborious, tolerably good
collectors, or epitomizers; nay, occasionally, men of penetration. But why is
Newton despised in France for his useful discoveries, because he did not espy
all things? Why is Raphael himself called so poor and spiritless, and his
divine picture of the transfiguration weak and lifeless? Innumerable instances
of that national pride, which allows no great men out of France, are too well
known not to be the ridicule of other nations. The French repeatedly prefer
their superficial trifler Boileau, to the harmonious versification, the solid
and ethic reasoning, and the glowing unfading tints with which Pope has
delineated the nature, foibles, and frailties of mankind. And let us only
recollect, that it is a truth in the history of the progress of genius that at
the same time that Italy possessed the most inimitable poets and actors, and
that Shakespeare the bright morning star of the drama, broke forth in England,
France could boast of none but the most wretched rhymers.

Upon the whole vanity and self-conceit are equally predominant in all nations.
The Greenlander, who laps with his dog in the same platter, despises the
invaders of his country, the Danes. The Cossacks and Calmucks possess the
greatest contempt for their masters, the Russians. The Negroes too, though the
most stupid among the inhabitants of the earth are xcessively vain. Ask the
Carribee Indians, who live at the mouth of the Oronoque, from what nation they
derive their origin; they answer, "why, we only are men." In short, there is
hardly any nation under the sun, in which instances of pride, vanity, and
arrogance, do not occur. They all, more or less, resemble the Canadian, who
thinks he compliments an European, when he says, "He is a man as well as I:" or
the Spanish preacher, who, discoursing upon the temptation of Jesus by the
devil, enthusiastically exclaimed, "But happily for mankind, and fortunately
for the Son of God, the lofty tops of the Pyrennees hid the delightful country
of Spain from the eyes of the Redeemer, or the temptation had assuredly been
too strong for our blessed Lord!"

Each nation, too, fashions its ideas of beauty or deformity by the resemblance
or difference it perceives between itself and others. The Indian fabulists
recount, that there is in those regions a country, all the inhabitants of which
are hump-backed. A well-shaped youth happened to visit this tract, whom the
honest crook-backs no sooner saw, than they gathered round him to see the
monstrous deformity of the stranger's figure, their astonishment at which was
visible in every countenance, extending its effects even to the extremities of
their hunches, and the ridicule it occasioned burst forth in loud fits of
laughter and derision. As the youth's good luck would have it, there was a wise
man among this gibbous fraternity, who perhaps had before seen such a lusus
naturae as straight-shouldered men; he addressed the multitude as follows: "My
good friends, what are you about? let us not insult the unfortunate. Heaven
created us well made and beautiful, and adorned our backs with graceful
protuberances; let us then rather repair to the temple, and give thanks to the
Eternal for these inestimable blessings."

Whoever, therefore, would not in his own country be esteemed a foreigner, or
who would not incur the general contempt of the intellectually deformed society
in which he lives, must hold the same opinions as are held around him, must
fall in with all the reigning prejudices, and must, as much as possible, bow
his back to the fashion of the national humor; for if he should have the
humility to think meanly, however deservingly so, of his country or its
manners, he will be reckoned an unnatural calumniator.

Chapter IV. Of Pride arising in Nations from Imaginary Advantages.
THE various appearances of national pride all converge to two distinct genera,
each of them subdivisible into several species. The advantages on which
national pride is founded, are either imaginary or real, which distinction
forms the grand difference between the two original kinds of pride; both of
them are discoverable in the most considerable nations, for every one has its
prejudices, which are the foundation of its particular vanity: its pride,
however, is often grounded on a true and just conception of its own advantages;
and in this case it is materially different from that resulting from
prejudices; and, on the other hand, the pride arising from imaginary advantages
is ever, more than the other sort, sure to appear* in an over bearing sense of
pre-eminence and contempt for others.

Self-conceit often makes men think they perceive advantages where none exist,
or attribute qualifications to themselves, in which they are evidently
deficient. Our vanity is never more pleased than when our imperfections are
glossed over, except when they are even exalted into the very contrary
advantages by the delusive power of adulation. Proceeding on this principle, a
poet once ventured to compare the stature of a lady of high rank, who had no
other personal defect than being very diminutive, to the towering cedar: the
little creature, on hearing the author recite his verses, could not control
the lively sensations his flattery excited, but sat smiling on her chair. "Go
no further," said a bystander to the poet, whose simile of the cedar recurred
every moment, "Go no further, for fear the good lady in the heat of her
happiness should start up, and at once discover her natural defect and thy
abominable deception."

Self-conceit builds on imaginary advantages or perfections the most ridiculous
pride; like that with which a Spaniard or a Portuguese struts when he compares
his nut-brown complexion with the swarthy hide of a Moor; or which puffs into
consequence a burgher of Bern when he can fill his belly to the utmost. The
inhabitants of the Ladrones believe, that their language is the only one in the
world, and therefore that all the other nations of the earth are dumb. An
Indian tribe on the banks of the Ohio in North America have hair of an
extraordinary length; they therefore suppose all people with short hair are
slaves. The Turks, who are reproached for the inconsistency with which they
distribute offices and places to such as cannot be supposed to have the proper
qualification for filling them; when, for instance, they are accused with
having put a toll-gatherer at the head of an army; reply with the greatest
indignation, "That a Turk is fit for every thing:" nay, sultan Osman once made
one of his gardeners viceroy of Cyprus, because he had seen him plant out
cabbages in a particular clever manner. When the Russian general, Apraxin, was
upbraided with having suffered himself to be surprised by Marshal Lehwald, he
coolly rejoined, "The Russians never employ either scouts or spies." An
inhabitant of the province of Maine in France, proud of the temperate genial
warmth with which his native country is blessed, has lately produced a physical
history of climates, according to the taste of the old schools, in which he
praises the inhabitants of the warmer, and depreciates those of the colder
countries; of course, giving the preference in every thing good and great to
the happy temperature resulting from the middle situation in which he places
his native land. To this blessed region belong Upper Germany, part of Spain,
the civilized countries of Wallachia and Moldavia, and the humane and peaceful
inhabitants of the frontiers of the Austrian and Turkish empires; together with
the Cossacks, Calmucks, Afghans, and other people equally celebrated for
knowledge and sentiment.

Self-conceit towers to such an amazing height, and has withal so narrow a
basis, that it is very easily overthrown, and its evident futility is often too
great to require a refutation. Heartily welcome, therefore, for my part, are
the Myrmidons who assisted at the siege of Troy, to the satisfaction of knowing
that they were descended from industrious ants; and the kings of Madara, to the
honor of deriving their pedigree, in a right line, from a jack ass, on which
account they always treat every long-eared brayer as a brother, and never fail
when it rains to hold an umbrella over him, which they would not on any account
do to his driver, as that would be a derogation of their dignity, for he is not
a branch of their highly illustrious house. I cannot but smile at the national
vanity of many among the French, who even yet trumpet forth the conquest of
Mahon, when the whole world knows that this reduction of a small garrison, left
entirely to its own exertions, and destitute of succor, was followed by a war
pregnant with disasters to France, which severely smarted in every quarter of
the globe This sentence the French translator has omitted.
. I read with the same sensations, the before mentioned French author of the
physical history of climates revile the northern nations. "They, to be sure,
have invented the most senseless forms of government that ever existed, namely,
the English, and its attendant, liberty; from them proceeds the practice of
duelling; while, forsooth, murder and assassination are more manly, for they
are more practiced in the favored warmer regions: in short, those who live
beyond a certain degree of latitude deserve the lowest rank among men." This is
certainly highly ridiculous. Nor does the vanity of the Italians more move my
spleen, who call the Germans downright blockheads because they do not know how
to prepare any other poisons than can be counteracted by the physical art, or
which appear in manifold symptoms; such as the inflammation of the throat, the
stomach, the intestines, or the discoloration, and incrustation of the skin;
while, on the contrary, the cunning Italian can kill with poisons infinitely
more powerful, subtle, and irremediable. It is impossible to recount all the
imaginary advantages from which national pride, in its widely extended field of
existence, is or has been derived: I shall only touch upon such as are most
prominent, and by particularizing them, reflect as much glory on the nation to
which these appertain, as a French general does, when he drags along with him
into the field two thousand The French translator has "twenty," and instead of
a hundred dishes, has "plates for a hundred guests." We shall have many other
occasions to remark the wilful errors into which this national Frenchman has
fallen; hoping that we ourselves, in every respect, have done justice to the
original from which it is translated.
cooks, and esteems it due to his consequence and fame to have a hundred dishes
served up at his table.

Chapter V. Of the Pride arising from the imaginary Antiquity or Nobility of a
Nation.
THE vanity of mankind has ever filled the immense vacuity beyond the authentic
memorials of the origin of every nation, with fabulous history; at pleasure
removing their antiquity to the remotest ages, in order proportionally to
increase its luster. Whatever an itinerant bard sung, or an orator raved,
became frequently an universal tradition, and in process of time almost an
article of religion. The probability of these flattering inventions could no
more be called in question, when revered ages had sanctioned the opinion. A
prodigy of ancient times becomes too easily, in the eyes of purblind posterity,
an undeniable truth, while the remoteness of the age precludes a proper search
by which to distinguish falsehood from probability, and this again from
certainty; and we are ever more averse to attempt these disquisitions, if pride
find its account in the well-invented fiction.

The superlatively intelligent, and superlatively grandiloquous Athenians
conceived they had sprung up, like mushrooms, from the Attic soil, and
therefore cherished the most sovereign contempt for colonies. The Arcadians
rejected with contemptuous disdain the science of astrology, because they
believed themselves antecedent to the moon. The Egyptians were persuaded they
were the most ancient inhabitants of the earth; according to their chronology,
their empire existed forty eight thousand eight hundred and sixty-three years
before the age of Alexander; it was first peopled by gods who were hatched from
eggs, then by demigods, and lastly by men.

The Japanese in the same manner suppose themselves to be lineally descended
from gods. They are much offended when their origin is deduced from the Chinese
or any other oriental nation; but they have, nevertheless, the modesty to fix
the commencement of these gods, and do not entirely veil them in the darkness
of eternity.

Kuni-Toko-Dat-Sii-No-Mikotto, the first deity who arose from chaos, fixed his
residence in Japan, which he created prior to all other countries: this
divinity, with his six successors, form the dynasty of heavenly spirits who
took Japan under their particular protection, the duration of which is stated
to be an innumerable series of ages. The three first of these gods had no
wives, but impregnated themselves, and brought forth what they had begotten.
The four last provided themselves with women, yet propagated one another in a
supernatural way; till Isanagi-No-Mikotto learnt of the bird Isiatadakki, our
by no means contemptible method of generation; but the line of heavenly
intelligences in Japan was hereby broken and put an end to, for the race of the
Isanagi lost its divine nature by this carnal innovation.

Isanagi was translated, like his predecessors, from earth to heaven; and his
son Tensio-Dai-Dsin, who is the same with the sun, commenced the dynasty of the
five demigods, or gods incarnate, who, according to the chronology of the
Japanese, reigned in all, without interruption, for the space of two millions,
three hundred, forty-two thousand, four hundred and sixty-seven years; from
these it is pretended that the whole nation descends, without exception; and
the great pre-eminence of their Dairo arises from his being reputed the
offspring of the eldest son of the first demi-god. The history of this dynasty
of god-men is preserved in the archives of the priest of the Sinto; and
exceeds, in puerile tales and romantic fictions, all that ever the most
extravagant imagination engendered. In many towns and villages in Japan,
memorials of these heroes are shown; and their armor is hung up in their
temples for the edification and adoration of the multitude.

China is excessively vain of the numerous centuries its monarchy is supposed
to have subsisted. The voluminous history of this empire begins, according to
du Halde, with the reign of the emperor Fo-Hi, who must have lived about two
thousand five hundred years before the birth of Christ, at a time when the
Assyrians were possessed of a series of astronomical observations.
Notwithstanding the obscurity of this origin, the Chinese chronology descends
from the reign of Yao in an uninterrupted succession of twenty-two dynasties to
our times: some of them even carry back the commencement of their empire to an
era far beyond the creation of the world. But this whole account, copied by
father du Halde from Chinese superstition, and though for well-known reasons,
supported by Voltaire, has been wholly overthrown by a very learned Tartar, a
man free from all Chinese prejudices, Nyen-Hy-Jao, viceroy of Canton, and with
it its vast superstructure of vanity and pride.

The inhabitants of Indostan penetrate still deeper into the fabulous world.
Bernier made many enquiries of the learned men at Benares, a city on the
Ganges, which he calls the Athens of India, about their chronology; they
immediately and readily counted millions of years on their fingers to him, in
order to mark their remote origin; and the antiquity of their Sanscrit, or the
language of the learned, in which their God revealed his will to them through
Brama, was fixed at many thousands of years.

The history of the Malabars extends to an infinite time: they will tell you of
Darma, of Schoren, of Pandyen, and of many other kings, who must have lived
long before the beginning of the world, according to our computation: but you
must not ask them the names of princes who reigned only three hundred years
ago, for of them they are totally ignorant.

The yet uncivilized inhabitants of Paraguay give to the moon the endearing
appellation of mother; and when their parent is eclipsed, they run out of their
huts with the greatest activity, and making the most hideous lamentations, they
shoot a vast number of arrows into the air, in order to defend the moon from
the dogs who attack her, and want to tear her in pieces, which they take to be
the cause of the obscuration of that luminary, and the shooting continues till
it resumes its wonted brightness.

The Swedes have a long table of kings, in an uninterrupted chain of succession
from Noah down to his present Majesty. The Edda and Woluspo are, next to the
holy Scriptures, esteemed the most valuable monuments of antiquity by every one
who is a true Swede. Rudbeck, more concerned for the imaginary honor of his
country than for historic truth, gives the Swedish monarchy a duration of
twenty centuries before the birth of Christ: whereas Rabenius expresses his
doubts whether Sweden was even peopled so late as the beginning of the fifth
century; and that, even according to Dalin's hypothesis, Sweden only emerged
from the ocean about four hundred years before our era, The Laplanders derive
their origin immediately from a god, who produced at the same time both their
ancestor, and the ancestor of the Swedes; but the latter, in a violent thunder
storm, crept under a tree for shelter, while the courageous progenitor of the
Laplanders remained inflexible and intrepid, exposed to the whole force of the
tempest under the scowling brow of heaven.

The pride which arises from the imaginary nobility of a nation, flows from the
same source with that founded on antiquity, for we always think our nobility
more ancient the less we are acquainted with its real age.

Nobility is in reality great and honorable, when it is built on our own
merit, or upon the exalted virtues and transcendent actions of our ancestors;
but the pride of nobility is ridiculous and absurd, when one only glories in a
title or a coat of arms, and presumes so much on the deserts of one's
forefathers, as to conceive that the acquisition of personal esteem can be
dispensed with. A noble birth, when accompanied by a weak understanding,
produces in the right honorable owner naught but arrogance; and self-conceit
becomes noblemen who have the honor to be descended from heroes, and the
misfortune to be dissimilar in every thing to the worthy founders of their
race, as little as family pride does the man who boasts of the noble blood that
runs in his veins, while he is without a pair of breeches.

In Spain, every farmer and every tradesman has his genealogical tables, which
begin generally, as those of Welchmen do, at Noah's ark. This imaginary
ancestry forbids a Spanish countryman to plough his own ground; labor is, in
his opinion, only fit for slaves; and the man who works two hours during the
day, is of greater consideration and more noble blood, than he who employs six
out of the twenty-four in useful occupation: he therefore gets a foreigner to
take off his hands, the agricultural part, and at the same time the profits
arising from it, while he lounges at home thrumming over a tinkling guitar. But
when such an illustrious peasant debases himself so far as to hold the plough,
he yet knows how to give an air of grandeur to this mean employment; he sticks
a couple of cocks' feathers in his hat, and has his cloak and sword lying
beside him, so that as soon as he perceives a traveller or a stranger, he
instantly abandons the plough, throws the cloak over his shoulders, claps on
his toledo, strokes his mustachios, and struts over the field with the
appearance of a cavalier taking the air. The common people in Spain think the
French all beggars, because there is many a Frenchman who earns a livelihood
there by manual labor: the Swiss will soon have the same reputation, for with
heartfelt concern, even while now writing, I see whole droves of honest,
sturdy, Roman Catholic Switzers, with their buxom wives and numerous children,
pass by my windows in their way to Spain, to avoid, as they themselves say,
starving at home.

The Florentine noblesse are uncommonly reserved and haughty toward strangers,
who cannot prove their nobility, and may, perchance, be mere tradesmen; yet it
is an acknowledged fact, that there is a little window toward the street in
every palace or large house in Florence, with an iron knocker and an empty
flask hung over it, as a sign, that wine is to be sold there by the bottle. It
is not thought inconsistent for a Florentine nobleman to sell a pound of figs,
or half a yard of ribbon, or to take money for a bottle of sour wine; yet it
would be a disparagement to his nobility, if he were to introduce a
meritorious, but untitled Englishman, into a public company where every one,
however insignificant otherwise, who is of any tolerable family, inherits, or
assumes the title of prince, count, or marquis.

At Verona, the person who conducts strangers to visit what is worthy of remark
in that city, is a decayed nobleman of one of the first families of the place.
When one of my friends entered with this man into a coffee-house, he found his
conductor was addressed, by his brother nobles, by the title of Excellence:
such Eccellenza's abound in the public places of Naples, where they walk about
in worn-out gold waistcoats, with well darned stockings.

In the mountains of Piedmont, and in the county of Nice, there are some
representatives of very ancient and noble families, reduced to the condition of
common peasants, but they still retain the ancient pride of their houses, and
boast of the noble blood that runs in their veins. A gentleman, in traveling
through these mountains, was obliged to pass the night in the cottage of one of
these rusticated nobles, who called to his son in the evening, " Chevalier, a
tu done a manger aux cochons?"

The nobles of the nation of the Natches, in Louisiania, style the common
people Miche Miche Quipi, which mean, stinkards; they themselves are, in
different ranks, suns, noblemen, and honorable gentlemen: the suns are such as
are descended from a man and woman, who pretended to have immediately issued
from the sun; this man and woman became lawgivers to the Natches, from the
commonality of whom they ordained that their race should for ever be separated.
In order, however, to prevent their blood being adulterated by any mixture with
that of the lower ranks, and to provide against the slippery conduct of their
wives, they enacted, that nobility should only descend in the female line.
Their children, both male and female, were styled suns, and respected as such,
but with this distinction, that in the males this privilege appertained only to
one man, and became extinct at his death; the females were all born suns, and
their male offspring are suns equally with their mothers, but the issue of
these are not suns, but noblemen; their grandsons, honorable gentlemen; and
their great grandsons, stinkards.

National pride, founded on imaginary antiquity, is, therefore, a great folly;
which, however, many enlightened nations give into, and which pleases them as
much as a genealogical parchment does a country gentleman, who, filled with ham
and pease, plumes himself on his long line of ancestors.

Chapter VI. Of Religious Pride.
TRUE and false religion has ever been, among all nations, in narrow minds, an
object of a particular pride, which soon becomes a branch of national pride: a
bigot not only accounts his religion the only true one, but hates and despises
every other, and pronounces sentence of eternal damnation on all who do not
think, in this respect, exactly as he does.

Religious pride consists in the prepossession we entertain of the
infallibility of our religion, and the idea that it is the only one conducting
to salvation; in consequence whereof the followers of every other doctrine are
positively no other than steaks ready prepared for the devil's gridiron. A
religion need not all be true to lead its followers to this point, for
falsities are embraced with no less obstinacy than truths. But let the religion
on which you pride yourself proceed immediately from the gospel of Jesus and
his Apostles, and be of course true; yet to condemn others who have not had the
same opportunity of recei^ing instruction, or who have not the capacity to
comprehend a system of religion which is diametrically opposite to all they
have seen, heard, or been taught from their earliest youth, is, in my opinion,
utter insanity.

Men ought not to pronounce so lightly on each other. The same God of love and
charity will judge us all, and he will judge us according to the integrity and
sincerity with which we shall have served him. If every one does not exactly
take the nearest and best path, he is notwithstanding in a road that leads to
the same end, which he will undoubtedly attain if he believes in revelation,
whereby we are all taught to pass a virtuous and unspotted life, by which we
become partakers of all the promises of religion. The hope of salvation is
grounded on the moral character of a man, and not on his theology; not so much
on his opinions and his knowledge, as on the worthiness, purity, and honesty of
his life. In all religions, therefore, we may be really pious, if we habituate
ourselves to the examination and purification of our hearts and conduct, and
make the honor and service of that God whom we acknowledge, the chief motive
of all our serious actions The French translator in a note condemns this whole
passage, and declares* "That none can be saved but Catholics, as is proved in a
multitude of excellent works."
.

That self-deception and prejudices, however, are no where so glaringly
violent, as in religious matters, has been most justly a cause of universal
complaint. Priests, of all religions, have ever vociferated to their followers
over the whole world, "We only are in the right; it is our religion only that
is the true one, and all others consist of nothing but the greatest
absurdities, and the most abominable doctrines." Even in the church of love,
gentleness, and long-suffering, every party and every sect anathematize the
doctrine which differs but a hair's breadth from their own. One system refutes
the theology maintained and asserted by another system, and each disproves what
the other affirms. There is scarcely any error that is not defended by one sect
or other as an undoubted truth. Each party glories in its proofs, and derides
its antagonists most triumphantly; each writes and affirms as if it were
infallible, though they write and affirm the most contrary tenets; as the force
of their arguments is derived from the country in which they are adduced; for
what in one place is accounted a divine truth, is twenty miles off esteemed a
most palpable falsehood.

All this appears to me the less extraordinary, as, according to the testimony
of unprejudiced church historians, the spirit of party, of prepossession, and
the opinion entertained of the sanctity and infallibility of the particular
doctrine they adhere to, often so much dazzles divines of great erudition and
penetration, that they overlook common sense in defending their opinions. It
has often with the justest concern been observed, that disputes are continually
entertained without foundation, and that the Bible is proved from a polemic
system, instead of the system being proved from the Bible; that the Scriptures
are often only known by the passages and quotations which have been adduced to
confirm a certain profession of faith by the teachers of that profession, in
their sermons and writings; and when they have said such and such words occur
in such a particular part of the Bible, it has been implicitly believed, nay,
the quotation has been read in exactly the same expressions, or the leaders of
religious parties have distorted and mutilated the passages, taken words
abstractedly, and without their connection, so that they have been wrested from
their original meaning; and, when by torturing them, in every sense, with the
most pitiful sophistry, they have at length adapted them to their own peculiar
interpretation, immediately each party has set up a loud te deum for their
imaginary victory.

And it is from such oracles, as from the purest springs, that most Christians
seek to be informed of eternal truth; and thereby they only increase the
bigotry and zeal which has been instilled into them, in their earliest youth,
by their inconsiderate teachers: whatever they have been taught to look upon as
holy, inviolable truths, always remain so; they find proofs where there are
absolutely none, and hold the principles of their opponents to be futile and
ungrounded, nay, irreligious and profane, before they have ever examined them.
By this unreasonableness of both sides their animosity increases, and
combatants and controversies, errors, heresies, heretics, and heretic revilers,
multiply ad infinitum.

All sects and religious parties have accordingly conceived themselves
infallible; each entertains the miserable opinion, that among all the many
religious communities, theirs alone possess the knowledge of divine truth in
its purity, without considering that, in some points, others may be nearer the
truth than themselves. They reciprocally contemn, abhor, and reproach each
other with blindness, obstinacy, hardness of heart, or deceit; they all believe
themselves in the straight road to Heaven, and that all others are wandering in
the path that leads to hell and perdition; they all call upon the testimony of
one omniscient God, which when it comes to be narrowly looked into, proves to
be no other than the testimony of their own sect. Every man of confined
understanding prides himself on his received opinions, and looks upon all who
do not agree with him in religious principles, as impure and despicable; so
that to revile another system of religion, always implies the praise of our
own; for it ever is, in this respect, as with our watches; we all depend on the
truth of the one we possess, which alone points out the exact time of the day,
while all others go either too slow or too fast.

This conceit of the excellency of religious opinions is often carried so far,
that all great men are held to belong to our own persuasion. The Turks are
morally convinced that Adam, Noah, Moses, the Prophets, nay, Christ himself,
were all good Mahometans; and according to the Alkoran, Abraham was neither a
Jew nor a Christian, but a true believing Mussulman. In Voltaire's opinion,
Fenelon is a deist. In that of the peasants in the neighborhood of Naples,
Virgil was a saint; and a little edifice near his grave, a chapel where he used
to read mass.

On the other hand, a contempt for a different religion is often occasioned or
increased by the obscurity and misconception of its rites and tenets. Tacitus
says, that the Jews adore, in their holy of holies, the image of an ass;
because an animal of that species had been their guide in the wilderness, when
they had lost their way, and had brought them to fresh water when they were
perishing with thirst. Plutarch relates, that the Jews pay divine honors to
swine, because these creatures had taught them husbandry; that their feast of
the tabernacles is celebrated in honor of Bacchus, and their sabbath
instituted for the like purpose. The customs of the very best among men, the
primitive Christians, either misunderstood, or wholly unknown, became handles
for the most senseless contempt and the most cruel persecution: the Jews
alleged they were guilty of the foulest crimes; the Heathens affirmed, that an
ass, with eagle's talons, was the object of their adoration; that a new born
infant, entirely covered over with consecrated flour, was presented, like some
mystic symbol of initiation, to the knife of the proselyte, who, unknowingly,
inflicted many a secret wound on the innocent victim of his error; that as soon
as the cruel deed was perpetrated, the sectaries drank up the blood, greedily
tore asunder the quivering members, and pledged themselves to eternal secrecy,
by a mutual consciousness of guilt. It was as confidently averred, that this
inhuman sacrifice was succeeded by a suitable entertainment, in which
intemperance served as a provocative to brutal lust; till at the appointed
moment the lights were extinguished, shame was banished, nature was forgotten,
and, as accident might direct, the darkness of the night was polluted by the
incestuous commerce of sisters and brothers, of mothers and of sons; it was
asserted that they threatened to involve in a general conflagration the whole
earth, and all the heavenly bodies, by means of their infernal magic: in fine,
that they were murderers, adulterers, committers of incest, and enemies of the
gods, of the emperor, of chastity, and of human nature.

It too often happens, that the revilers of a religion, are not acquainted with
it, because they hate it; and, vice versa, that they hate it, because they are
unacquainted with it: they attribute to its professors doctrines which,
perhaps, they abhor, and institutions of which they never once had an idea:
they scatter the most contradictory and absurd calumnies against the followers
of an opposite creed, as we have already proved by many instances; to which I
shall add but one more. A Franconian catholic of quality believed that his son,
a very intelligent young man, was infected with the principles of
Protestantism, as he was particularly, inquisitive and studious; as an antidote
to this supposed venom, the right honorable, free, and imperial fool, hit upon
the following precept, which he solemnly charged his son to observe, as he was
setting out on his travels: "Take care, my son," says he, "to avoid the company
of Protestant divines, for they are all Sodomites."

A people, who conceive they alone profess the true religion, will not only
believe themselves under the immediate protection, and objects of the peculiar
favor of the Supreme Being, but will express the most ill natured abhorrence
for the followers of another religion, whom they even do not treat with common
humanity. The Israelites always looked upon themselves as the Lord's anointed
people; and in the time of our Savior, they accounted the Samaritans unworthy
of their regard or conversation; their Rabbis held it an unlawful and
indecorous thing, either to request a favor of a Samaritan, or to accept of
any civility from one of that sect. Ever to this day the Jews refuse to receive
any wine from Christians, for fear the errors and vices of Christianity should
be infused together with the liquor into their Hebraic purity. According to the
precepts of the Talmud, no Jew must salute a Christian without inwardly cursing
him, nor wish him a good journey without a secret tacit addition, like that of
Pharaoh to the Red Sea, or of Haman to the gallows.

The Mohammedan religion is excellently adapted to instill into its followers the
greatest arrogance. Mahomet, their holy prophet, is, according to the Turks,
the man whom God and his angels daily conversed with; to whom the stars paid
obeisance; whom the trees and stones advanced to greet; who split the moon with
his finger; who made roasted shoulders of veal to speak; the apostle of the
Lord, who in the twefth year of his divine mission was taken up into heaven,
and was taught the secrets of Omnipotence from the mouth of Omnipotence itself;
add to this, the promises made by Mahomet, to all his followers, of the future
splendor of his empire in this world, and the voluptuousness and magnificence
of it in the next: hence it naturally follows, that a Turk entertains a
sovereign contempt for all other humbler systems of religion.

The Turks, far removed from connecting themselves with the followers of Ali,
apply to them the most opprobrious epithets; they call themselves Sunni, or
true believers; but these they style Schias, which is as much as to say, a
despicable and reprobate sect. A Turk very seldom will affirm a notorious
falsehood; wherefore, whenever any proof is required of what he relates, his
general answer is, "Do thou think I am a Christian?" All who are not true
believers are, in the eyes of the Turks, so many dogs, whose very approach
would defile an orthodox Mussulman; on which account, no infidel is allowed to
enter a certain tract of land situated between Mecca and Medina, which is so
exceedingly holy, and the regulation which forbids its entrance to any but true
believers so strictly observed, that should the ambassador or legate of any
infidel prince, on his journey to Mecca, set his foot on this consecrated
earth, the Xerif is obliged, by his office, to interdict him from advancing,
and to order him to retire, and if he is not scared away by these menaces, to
use violence. No Christian is allowed to reside in the whole of the country of
Hejaz in Arabia, because the holy cities of Mecca and Medina are situated
there. Neither Jews nor Christians are allowed in Egypt to be present at the
opening of the canals of the Nile, lest the water should be kept back by their
uncleanness.

In the bosom of Mahometanism too, as well as in the Christian religion, the
several sects accuse and revile each other, that they have falsified and
perverted the doctrine of their prophet, by which the mutual hatred of the
people is nurtured, and the idea of toleration exploded. The Persians annually
celebrate a festival in honor of their prophet Ali, in which two oxen are
exhibited; the one, which they take care to be the strongest, is called Ali,
and the other, always very inferior in strength to his antagonist, Omar; these
are made to fight, and as Ali always obtains the victory, the spectators from
thence conclude that they alone are orthodox Mahometans, and the Turks
heretics. The Turks, on the other hand, maintain that the Persians are the
identical saddle-asses on which the Jews are to canter away to hell at the day
of judgment.

As the Mahometans are unjust toward the Christians, so the latter are equally
unjust toward the former. No Turk ever entertained the least doubt, or
attempted to speak ill of the unity of the Godhead; and yet they have very
often in Christendom been called idolaters and worshippers of the stars; while
they are such strenuous advocates for one God, that misunderstanding one of our
fundamental doctrines, they upbraid us with polytheism; and yet they have in
many Christian books been styled Pagans, and their empire Paganism.

The Arab, in the conviction that his caliph is infallible, laughs at the
stupid credulity of the Tartar, who holds his Lama to be immortal. A feather, a
horn, a shell, the claw of a lobster, a root, or any thing else that has been
consecrated by a few unintelligible words, is an object of adoration to the
negroes, and the solemn prototype on which they take their oaths: they find in
the earth they tread on an immense number of gods, and ridicule the Europeans
for their poverty in this respect. Those who inhabit mount Bata believe, that
whoever devours a roasted cuckoo before his death is a saint; and, firmly
persuaded of the infallibility of this mode of sanctification, deride the
Indians, who drag a cow to the bed of a dying person, and pinching her tail,
are sure, if by that method they can make the creature void her urine in the
face of the patient, he is immediately translated into the third heaven; they
scoff at the superstition of the Tartarian princes who think their
beatification secured, provided they can eat of the holy excrements of their
Lama; and they ridicule the the Bramins, who for the better purification of
their new converts, require them to eat cow dung for the space of six months;
while these would, one and all, in their turn, if they were told the
cuckow-method of salvation, as heartily despise and laugh at it.

In the kingdom of Tanjore there are Bramins, who deriving their origin from
their god Brama, hold themselves superior to all earthly power; they are so
very holy, that the bare touch of one of an inferior cast, a Parea, would
defile them; nay, the latter must not presume to worship the same deities.
These Bramins can in no case be punished with death, and are in possession of
so many, and such extraordinary privileges that they rule without control or
opposition over the lower classes of the inhabitants of Malabar, who quietly
submit to the mandates of these inflated and indolent priests

In Japan, the devotees of the sect of Insja-Fuse, had the same ridiculous idea
of their own immaculate sanctity, and retreated with abhorrence from any
communication with other men. The priests of the Sinto, or primeval religion of
Japan, are equally infected with the pride of this transcendent holiness, and
avoid, with the utmost haughtiness, both the laity and the clergy professing
the Budso, or new religion of Japan, whom they take great care to hold no
correspondence with, which would be the lowest degradation of their dignity;
while the natural reciprocal contempt of the Budso divines for those of the
Sinto, is by no means inferior.

The Dairo, or pope of Japan, is respected almost as a god in his lifetime:
the earth is not worthy the touch of his feet, and the sun is not allowed the
favor of shining on his head; the holiness of his hair, his beard, and his
nails, is so great, that to cut off or pare them is not permitted, except
during his sleep; for the Japanese believe, that all that which the body of
their Dairo then loses is only stolen from him, and that such a robbery is by
no means so sacrilegious as to take them from him while awake, for that would
argue in him a too near approach to mortality. In former times the Dairo was
obliged to sit a few hours every morning on his throne, like a statue, without
moving his hands, his feet, his head, his eyes, or any part of his body, in
order that the empire might enjoy the most profound tranquillity; pestilence,
famine, or war, would, agreeable to the opinion then entertained, immediately
have afflicted that unlucky province toward which the Dairo cast a look. The
first who was properly emperor of Japan, was styled the man of sublime
extraction, the prince of heaven, the son of the gods; and these titles have
remained to the Dairo, who on his death enjoys, in common with the Roman
emperors, the honor of an apotheosis; while the Cubosoma, or worldly sovereign
of Japan, who is the territorial lord, like the present kings of France, Spain,
Portugal, and Naples, contents himself with the more solid honors of earthly
power.

The court of his Japanese holiness is composed of highly illustrious
personages, who though they are not above exercising themselves in the
manufacture of straw-baskets, horse-shoes, or any other little handicraft, to
keep themselves from starving; nevertheless, proud of their pedigree from the
first demi-god of the second dynasty of Japan, they treat the rest of mankind
as dogs; nay, the dignity, sanctity, and purity of every thing that relates to
the Dairo is so great, that the meanest servant boys who perform the lowest
offices in the temple, and in the religious ceremonies of Japan, and whose
station exactly answers to that of candle-snuffer in a playhouse, are equally
vain of their super-eminence over the rest of the world. As to the universal
opinion entertained by the Japanese of the Christians, I shall only illustrate
the low degree of estimation in which they are held by the obligation they
imposed on the Dutch, to cast all their dead into the sea, off the harbor of
Nangasaki, for their carcases were deemed unworthy a burial in the soil of
Japan, although those lucre-loving souls assured them they were not Christians,
but only Hollanders.

Thus do mankind ridicule and despise, execrate and condemn each other, because
each conceives himself to belong to the only religion which leads to salvation,
or to be a being of exclusive and undefiled holiness. The total separation of
our own, from every other religious society, is esteemed necessary and
indispensable to sanctification, and we are, therefore, never able to be
impartial or equitable toward others; this separation; the yet existing
predominant opinion in every sect of the infallibility of its own tenets; the
unhappy spirit of persecution of many respectable theologians; the untimely
zeal, which incites us blindly to ^^pel all attacks on the doctrines embraced
by our r^lations and progenitors; and, above all, thr great multitude of holy
champions, who are continually on foot, armed at all points, ready to throw the
gauntlet of defiance, and inconsiderately and unmercifully to lay about them,
like the too zealous Peter, against every one who might show the least design
of attacking the principles of their church: all this compels mankind
reciprocally to abhor and condemn their fellow creatures; because one set
chooses to jog on to heaven by a different road than the other, and which, alas!
is carried to such extravagance, that, among other instances, a reformed
clergyman, detected preaching his articles of belief in France, would be
hanged; and a jesuit, if caught in Sweden, would be emasculated.

Thus do we, poor miserable worms! in our little span of life, presume to hate
and persecute our brother, only because we happen to differ from him in opinion
respecting an unnecessary, and nearly imperceptible refinement, or a matter
that is beyond human conception: thus do we, creatures of the dust! arrogate
the power of circumscribing the councils of the Almighty, and presumptuously
dare to stamp our passions and prejudices, our priests and priestly pride, with
the counterfeit image of the Lord of Heaven and of Earth.

Chapter VII. Of National Pride, as arising from a supposed Liberty, Valor,
Power, or Consideration.
HERE and there we may find nations who, like the ancient Greeks, overvalue
themselves on account of their real freedom; or like the modern inhabitants of
Greece, treasure up the memory of the former liberty of their country, on which
they equally pride themselves.

The most notorious slaves in Italy boast of their glorious freedom. This
infatuating dream begets a most ludicrous elevation of mind, which is the
derision of the substantial republican citizen, whose consolation does not,
like that of these conceited slaves, consist in mere empty sounds or unmeaning
words. A citizen of San Marino knows nothing that can be compared with ancient
Rome, save the petty republic of which he is a member. The nobles of Genoa, who
are almost all engaged in trade, out of mercantile jealousy, make use of the
most interested and selfish policy, and every kind of artifice, to keep the
coasts, which are under their dominion, in poverty and dependence, in order
that the trade of the capital may not be injured; yet the poor devils at San
Remo and Noli believe most implicitly that they are free.

Another effect of ideal liberty, is the laughable contempt and opposition
which a conquered people have for the laws and customs of their conquerors,
which, though ever so eligible in themselves, it would be disgraceful for them
to adopt. The English have taken the trouble of making smooth, broad, and
straight roads both in Ireland and in Minorca, yet they have never been able to
persuade either the Irish or the Minorcans to use these infinitely more
commodious roads in preference to their old, crooked, or miry lanes, in which,
stupidly averse to innovation, they continue to plunge with an elevated mien
and jaded body, proud of these still remaining vestiges of their imaginary
independence.

A third effect, resulting from the idea of freedom, which is the chief glory
of a certain great nation in Europe, is the neglect of ceremony, and the
opinion that the dictates of good breeding need not be farther followed, than
as they are consistent with our own convenience, or our own inclinations; in
consequence of which latitude, it is no harm to throw one's self back in an
elbow chair, when tired of sitting upright; you may invite your friends to eat
and drink with you at all hours, and at all seasons, whether to breakfast,
dinner or supper, or whether you have roast or boiled meat to give them: you
may frankly say the wine is good for nothing, when it is really so; and, when a
lady happens in a coach, with several gentleman, to feel a certain pressing
want of nature, she may, consistently with the freedom of her nation, send for
a chamber pot from the next house, and ease herself in the coach without
blushing In this passage, which alludes to the English, Mr. Zimmermann has
fallen into a very great mistake, for, however well founded his assertions may
be with respect to the general bluntness of our character, and the little
ceremony with which men treat each other, both our regard for the fair sex, and
their delicacy, is unimpeachable: nay, so far from any immodesty of the kind
the author mentions being ever heard of in England, the very tale he exhibits
has, in other words, been the subject of satire among us upon the ladies of
France; and Englishmen generally turn, with disgust, from the manners of
foreign females, when compared to the elegant nicety, and delicate sensibility
of their fair countrywomen. The undeniable notoriety of this circumstance,
added to the penetration and sound judgment which otherwise always accompany
Mr. Zimmermann's observations, would almost induce one to suppose he had some
other nation in view in this passage; but the other parts of it seem not so
applicable to any other.
.

The pride founded upon imaginary valor, appears in an excessive estimation of
our own courage. and an unjust contempt for our enemies. A nation that thinks
itself brave, when it does not possess any bravery, or not in such a
superlative degree as it imagines, looks down with conceited vanity on its
foes, which no disappointment, no defeat, no loss no unequivocal proof of its
weakness, can remove.

Tigranes was sunk in the deepest indolence and security, when Lucullus marched
to attack him. It was firmly believed that the Roman general, as soon as he
came within sight only of his formidable enemy, would be panic struck, and fly
even beyond Asia. The Romans appeared: Tigranes expressed his vexation that all
their generals did not come to face him at once; his army amounted to two
hundred and sixty thousand men, the Roman legions to scarcely ten thousand; a
handful of men, too insignificant and too contemptible to be worth the regard
of the numerous host of Armenians. Tigranes observed to his courtiers, that
they came in too great number for ambassadors, and by far too few for enemies:
there was not one of his generals, who did not request his leave to go and
catch this covey that had imprudently ventured itself within the fowler's
reach. By break of day, the next morning, when the Armenians were intent on
surrounding the Romans, they perceived a movement in the camp of Lucullus.
Tigranes thought he was about to begin his flight; suddenly the eagles of the
first legion wheeled to the right, and the cohorts followed them. Are these
people coming against us? said Tigranes, awakened at once from his long trance.
They immediately fell upon the Armenians, and soon, as ordered by Lucullus,
they engaged in close fight, which quickly disconcerted and routed this large
host, who were only competent to combat at a distance: the cavalry fell back on
the infantry, and put it into disorder, and the whole army was, in a short
time, completely routed; the battle did not last longer than that of Rosbach,
and this signal defeat of the Armenians cost the Romans no more than six
killed, and about one hundred wounded.

An imaginary valor of another kind, is that of the Abyssinians. When father
Lobo waited on a king of that country to pay his respects, just as he was about
to open his mouth, about twenty sturdy fellows fell upon him and gave him a
hearty drubbing; the father flew to the door, where he was most respectfully
treated, and was told, that this beating was an immemorial custom, which had
been adopted to show to every stranger, that the Abyssinians were the most
courageous people of the earth, and that therefore every other ought to be
humbled before them.

The pride arising from imaginary power, consists in too high an estimate of
our strength. Xerxes, for example, caused chains to be thrown into the sea in
order to fetter it, and had three hundred stripes inflicted on its turbulent
waves for having broken down one of his bridges. He wrote to mount Athos,
"Haughty Athos, thou who liftest up thy head to the skies, presume not to
oppose to my laborers rocks through which they cannot penetrate, or I will hew
thee down, and hurl thee into the ocean." Oriental pride retains, in our days,
the same character of hyperbolical inflatation; so that to take their
expressions according to their literal meaning, the Asiatic princes would
supply on earth the place of the Divinity in every point. The king of Malacca
styles himself lord of the winds, and of the eastern and western oceans. The
Mogul assumes the title of conqueror of the world, and king of the earth; and
the grandees of his court are no less than rulers of the thunder-storm,
steersmen of the whirlwind, or exterminators of hosts.

The petty insignificant tribe of the Natches was, according to their own
tradition, the most powerful nation of the continent of North America; its
chief nobility consisted of five hundred Suns, under the control of one great
Sun. The present sovereign of this little people has a particularity in his
pride, which cannot fail to excite much merriment: every morning he stalks out
of his hovel, bids the sun good morrow, offers him a pipe to smoke, and points
out to him with his finger the course which he is to take that day.

In like manner a too exalted opinion entertained of the national consideration
constitutes pride. It has been observed, that there is hardly a Frenchman who
does not attribute to himself part of the honor of the Siam embassy, of which
he is particularly vain. The French, in this respect, often render the national
pride which is otherwise justly founded on the grandeur of their kings, or the
conduct and fame of their ministers and generrals, ridiculous, by applying to
themselves the personal merit of those eminent characters. A French colonel,
once passing through Brussels as a traveller, and having a leisure day, took it
into his head to go to the great assembly; he was told, that it was held at the
palace of a prince; tant mieux, says he; "What is that to me?" -- "But princes
only frequent it, sir, and unless you are a prince" -- "Oh, these princes are
the most good natured people in the world," interrupted the officer; "when the
city was taken last year, I had a dozen of them dancing attendance in my
antichamber, and they were all excessively complaisant."

The abbot Mauri in Switzerland is a prince of the holy Roman empire, and he
has four great officers of state; his hereditary marshals are the noble and
illustrious lords of Thurn; his hereditary chamberlains, the lords of
Wittenbach; his hereditary cup-bearers, the noble family of the Rupplins; and
his hereditary grand carvers, that of Niderost: while the salary of the chief
of those officers, the hereditary marchal is twenty florins A florin is 20d.
a year. Strangers are invited to court to dinner, which though served up in
great state, is no better than a tradesman's ordinary. His serene highness has
his own covered body-dishes set before him, which no one of the guests is to
touch, he drinks of his own high and illustrious body-wine; while both the
strangers and the domestics must be content with new wine of the last vintage.

When the Khan of Tartary, who has not so much as a house, and who subsists
solely on rapine, has finished his repast of marc's-milk and horseflesh in his
tent, he causes an herald to proclaim, that all kings, princes, and potentates
of the earth, now have his permission to go to dinner.

But I do not recollect a more glaring instance of pride, arising from an
imaginary consideration, nor do I think it can well be carried farther, than in
a negro king on the coast of Guinea, whose memory has been perpetuated by the
celebrated author of the Persian Letters. Some Frenchmen who landed in his
dominion to buy fresh provisions, were carried before the king, who was
administering the weighty concerns of his realm under a tree; he sat on his
throne, which was a log of wood, with the same majesty and consequence as if it
had been the golden seat of the Great Mogul, glittering with jewels; close to
him stood his regiment of bodyguards, consisting of three or four fellows armed
with hedge-stakes; his canopy of state was an umbrella held over his head; both
his majesty and his royal consort were embellished with the insignia of their
regal power, a few copper rings and trinkets, and they shone forth above their
subjects, in the jetty glossiness of their skins. This august monarch,
understanding the native country of his visitors, asked with much seriousness,
"Am not I much talked of in France?"

I could have added numberless other instances of folly appertaining to the
kind of pride I have treated of in this chapter, in which I have not at all
pleased myself; for it seems to me both too short, and too barren, instead of
being of a proper length, and full of striking remarks; but I have just thought
of the answer given by Vitellius to a very critical question of the Emperor
Caligula, who was shameless enough, not only publicly to maintain that he was
descended from the gods, but to confirm this idea, he asked Vitellius, if he
had not seen him in bed with the moon? Vitellius, with downcast eyes, answered,
"Most illustrious emperor, you gods are only visible to gods, the feeble sight
of mortal man cannot reach you."

Chapter VIII. Of Pride, Resulting from Ignorance of Foreign Affairs.
THE utter ignorance of foreign affairs, is a soft cushion from which a nation,
reposing in ease and self-complacency, casts an indolent look through the
medium of self-conceit, on every other; despises what it cannot comprehend, and
shows its want of knowledge and judgment as ridiculously as the Paris
bookseller, who hearing something of the King of Prussia's attachment to books,
asked with an appearance of great astonishment, "What! has the king of Prussia
also a library?"

The Italians, though in our times they know better, were long persuaded that
all the inhabitants of the countries beyond the Alps were mere barbarians;
since, after the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, the sciences first
settled themselves in Italy, and thence spread abroad into other countries. An
Italian writer said of the Germans, that their brains did not lie in the head,
as was the case with other people, but in their back and shoulders; and their
universities might be compared to stables where Minerva kept her mules.
Baillet, who quotes this sentence, adds, that it is therefore not to be
wondered at, that the wit and spirit which we admire in the productions of the
modern Italians, as well as those of the ancient Romans and Greeks, are not to
be found in German poetry. Martinelli, another Italian author, who some years
ago lived in London, affirms, that Germany has not, to this day, produced
either a poet or a physician. It is but a little while ago since I read in a
pamphlet, published by one Count Roncali, an Italian physician, that
inoculation had not been adopted by any nation of learning. Did not the right
honorable scribbler then know that the practice is become general throughout
Europe, and that, in our enlightened times, every European nation that is in
its right senses, takes for itself the lead in literature, and that all
unanimously assign to the English the second place among whom inoculation is
universally practiced?

The Germans have by most people been abused, as the beasts of burden of the
literary world, the cinder-sifters and hod-men, raking together and preparing
the mortar and materials for the edifice of letters. I read a few years ago, in
one of the best English reviews, that the German writers have, from time
immemorial possessed the same privilege with theologists, that of writing many
books, and saying little in them; that they are famous for scraping together
matter wherewith to fill many unwieldy folios, spinning out their works to a
formidable length, and wearying the patience of their reader without informing
his understanding; and finally, that every German head contained a confused
medley of books, ever in a litter, and the more looked into the less
understood. Full as injurious would it be in me to call all the English
barbarians, only because, even in these days of knowledge, at the public
disputations at Oxford, on Ash Wednesday, a young English pedant, dressed out
like a masquerader at Shrove-tide, mounts the rostrum, and lifts the
impenetrable shield of Aristotelian quirks and quibbles, against the leaden
darts which his opponents, representing the sons of Scotus, Burgerdicius, and
Smiglesius, aim at the doughty champion.

A minister of state in Persia knows as much of European affairs, as he does of
what is transacted in the moon. Most of the Persians think our part of the
world is a small island in the northern waters, which produces nothing that is
good or beautiful; for why else, say they, do the Europeans fetch such things
from us, if they were to be got in their own country?

The Chinese understand by the four quarters of the globe little more than
their empire; they have the most unbounded contempt for all other countries,
and they entertain a notion that all the heavenly bodies watch over China
alone, without any kind of concern for any other land. They take the earth to
be a vast horizontal square; and they look upon China, which they say lies in
the middle, as occupying not only the best, but the largest portion of it.
Accordingly they style their country Chong-que, or the kingdom of the middle,
and Tien-Hia, or all under the heavens. A jesuit missionary, to flatter these
opinions, in a map of the world which he made for the Chinese, placed China in
the middle, an artifice well worthy of the invention of a jesuit. As to their
own maps, in them the Chinese give their empire the greatest extent on earth,
and scatter the rest of the world in the form of very small islands, here and
there all round China. Their geographers give these islands or kingdoms the
most ludicrous names, and tell the most ridiculous stories about them; one they
call Seaoginque, or the region of the dwarfs, of whom they relate, that they
are obliged to live as closely together as bees in a hive, for fear of being
snatched away by the eagles and vultures; another is Chuensinque, or the
kingdom whose inhabitants have a large hole in their breasts, into which they
put a stick, and carry one another about on their backs: and a pack of the like
nonsense. However, since the Chinese, by their communication with us, know a
little more of Europe, they have advanced it in their maps to the size of one
of the Canary islands.

All other nations must esteem it a very great honor, if they are admitted to
be accounted the subjects of China; they are, themselves, exceedingly shy of
sending any ambassadors abroad, because they look upon an embassy, a present,
or even a letter from any foreign country, as a most positive proof of
respectful submission, and an acknowledgement of the right of China to exact
tribute of that nation; accordingly its name is immediately inscribed in a
register kept for the purpose, and appears in the annals of China as a
tributary kingdom, the number whereof is very considerable; as every man who
brings a letter to China from any prince or state, is called an ambassador, and
his sovereign a slave of China,

The emperor Yong-Tching said in a speech to the jesuits: "I am the absolute
lord of the kingdom of the middle; all other states, great and small, send me
tribute; it amuses me sometimes to instruct them; if they receive and attend to
my lessons, well and good, if not, I turn them adrift." It was in 1758 that the
jesuits tried to bring the ministers of the Chinese empire to admit of an
embassy from France, but they were refused it, as they had secretly given them
to understand, "that his most christian majesty was not tributary to the
emperor of China; that the presents which the emperor might send to the king of
France, would not be looked on as proceeding solely from the bounty of the
imperial donor, and that the king's letters were not to be accounted petitions,
nor the emperor's answers commands."

The Japanese are fools of the same stamp. Niphon, the name which they commonly
give to their country, imports light of the sun, because being unacquainted
with any lands to the eastward, they suppose the sun rises to them the first;
they are ignorant of the spheric form of the earth, and that every country lies
east and west with respect to them. Another name of Japan which occurs in their
books, is Tenka; but this seems to be not so much a proper name, as a
figurative appellation, which is adopted by the Japanese out of vanity: it
means, the region that is under the heavens; whence, likewise, comes the title
that is also given to the emperor of Japan, of Tenka-sama, or the monarch under
the heavens; which is very applicable to the idea formerly entertained by this
people, that theirs was the only inhabited country, themselves the only human
beings, and all other lands the residence of devils and unclean spirits.

We thus see, that the less any nation is acquainted with foreign affairs, the
more it exalts itself; and its vanity finds its account in this ignorance, on
which it grounds the most foolish contempt for all other countries.

Chapter IX. Of Pride, as arising from Ignorance in general.
AS ignorance and a want of self-knowledge engender self-complacency and an
unjust contempt for others; so the pride that results from general ignorance in
a nation, is the same with too high an estimation of its own knowledge, however
contracted and defective this may be.

The French have been accused, that they think their laws are so excellent,
that they ought to be followed by every other nation; they would not be so vain
of their laws, if the multitude knew that there is scarcely any knowledge of
the law of nature or of nations to be met with in France, where we should the
most expect to meet with it; that in the numerous schools and universities with
which that kingdom abounds, where so many things of no real worth are taught
with the greatest assiduity and pedantry, there is not one professorship for
the law of nations; and that of course the French are the only nation who seem
to believe that this science is of no utility.

They would not, I say, be so vain of their laws, if the opinion of one of
their own great men was more commonly known among them; who maintains that
their whole legislature, formed out of the confusion of the feudal system, is a
monstrous and unwieldy structure, which resembles a most inconsistent heap of
ruins; that the law, which ought to be the exact counterpart of universal
order, is on the contrary exceedingly contradictory to it, and instead of
uniting its subjects, divides them; making as it were, a hundred different
states in the bosom of one kingdom.

The haughty English are equally blind in this respect; these self-sufficient
islanders look on their common law, which is the sole and best guide followed
in the royal courts of justice, as the only rule of right, and such a wonder of
perfection, that Chancellor Fortescue, in the work he published in 1469 in
praise thereof, holds it almost a sin to doubt its all sufficiency;
nevertheless, this rule of law is said to be founded, for the most part, on
maxims adopted long ago, and the consequences deducible from them have all a
legal authority, although they are not unfrequently contradictory and
inconsistent; and what is more, although England maintains a standing army of
upwards of forty thousand lawyers, yet it may be confidently asserted, that
there is no country on earth where a more deplorable ignorance of their own
laws prevails than there. Near three centuries ago, it required twenty years
study to acquire a due knowledge of the laws of England; and yet, by the
villainous maneuvers of the unworthy professors of the law, the numerous
proposals made for reformation of the common law, and the commissioners several
times appointed by parliament for the purpose of improving the system of
jurisprudence, have all been frustrated and rendered of no avail: nay in 1659
This was one of the least iniquitous modes of extorting money, adopted in 1659
by the rump parliament (so called in derision, as being composed of the basest
and most contemptible members of the long parliament) during the protectorate
of Richard Cromwell; and as this assembly was never considered a legal one, it
is unfair therefore to adduce this as an instance of folly in our government;
and certainly more irrelevant to conclude from it, that our laws have ever
since remained in exactly the same state; for very material alterations have
been made in them since that period, and hardly a session of parliament passes
without rescinding from or adding to them.
, the lawyers obtained a promise, in return for a contribution of one hundred
thousands pounds sterling, that they should remain in the undisturbed
possession of all the juridical abuses, and in the same year, William Cole
wrote a treatise, to prove that the lawyers in England were the greatest rogues
and cheats in the kingdom.

Spain produces in its hot and parched climate some very keen and penetrating
geniuses; but the ever predominating love of the mavelous, which is so
remarkable in this nation, distorts and spoils nature, the only model for all
that is sublime and beautiful. The sciences remain always in Spain, for very
obvious reasons, in a very wretched situation; yet they entertain such lofty
ideas of their own superiority in this respect, that it long was a prevalent
opinion among the Spaniards, that God conversed with Moses on Mount Sinai in
the Spanish language, and revealed to them long ago all the many secrets and
hidden mysteries of nature which yet are the objects of the diligent researches
and inquiries among the most learned philosophers of the world. Conformably to
this tradition, they give some of their colleges of learning the most inflated
appellations: one is called the Olympian and another the Radient College, or
Academy.

The judgment of a whole nation must not be arraigned on account of the
enthusiastic exclamations of some hotheaded divines. Yet the innumerable
panegyrics, which, from the introduction to Torrubia's Natural History of
Spain, published in 1754, have something in them very aptly characteristic of
the national character of the Spaniards, although I very readily make allowance
for some exceptions: one of these encomiasts, father Hieronimus of Salamanca,
exclaims: "Even if I had a hundred tongues, and if each of them, nay if every
individual part of my body, every joint, every vein, was endowed with the
faculty of the most eloquent language; yet how very unfit, how totally unable
should I be to express the delight which the perusal of this Natural History
afforded me." In the confidence that all Europe pays the most profound
attention to him, the reverend father goes on; "Behold, says he, Torrubia, the
crowned lion of Spain, the modern Geryon, a philosopher who has surprised
nature in the fact, a wonder of literature, to whom nothing rises superior,
save his own immortal Natural History. He is the favored child of providence,
who bestowed every advantage on him, adding as an enchantment to them all, the
inestimable blessing of being born in Spain. Happy favored Spain! thou
faithful genius of our nation, thou art ever constant, ever enlightened, ever
invincible, ever triumphant over ignorance and error!"

The Chinese are highly celebrated for learning, and it is said they are
exceedingly vain of it; but as it appears to me, it is of their ignorance that
they are vain; the most extravagant notions are formed of China, as the
travelers who have given us an account of it are often very partial to the
wonderful, yet their relations, at the same time, carry very much an air of
probability. Look on the large and magnificent libraries of China, the
astonishing number of their Colleges, of their graduates, of their
observatories, the extreme attention which they pay to the contemplation of the
heavens; consider, that learning is the only road to honor and dignity; that
talents and knowledge form the only rule of preferment; that by the fundamental
laws of the empire, which have been most strictly observed for a long series of
centuries, none but a man of learning can ever attain to the dignity of
governor of a city or a province; and that all the courts of justice must
likewise be filled with persons of literary abilities; add to this, that the
customs and manners of of the Chinese have remained invariable, amidst the
greatest revolutions; that their conquerors even have adopted them; that the
reign of the law has never been suspended or weakened; that their empire has
seen the downfall of every other; and that amidst the ruins of the world,
their's only has remained erect and unshaken; and you will certainly be induced
to believe that the Chinese excel all other nations in every kind of human
knowledge; yet try it by the touchstone of candid and serious examination, and
the enchantment will vanish, and the nation so much extolled above others will
sink below the general level, and appear in a very mortifying point of view.

The Chinese study their own language most attentively, and well they may, for
to understand it perfectly, it would employ the greatest part of their lives.
After they have attained a knowledge of the grammar, they apply themselves to
History, Law, and Morality. Whoever wishes to be created doctor, and who thus
strives to attain one of the chief dignities of the empire, must be thoroughly
acquainted with the language; he must be able to write, which is by no means an
easy matter; he must be able to prepare a discourse in the best style, on
morality, or on the art of government; and in the Chinese academies, a chief
part of education consists in the art of making a genteel bow, of giving or
receiving a cup of tea with a suitable grace, how to walk, and how to carry a
parasol with a becoming air. One of their books of instruction, on these
important points alone, contains three thousand rules.

This is all very well, say the champions for Chinese superiority; yet it is
only by possessing a thorough knowledge of their language that they can become
acquainted with their own laws and customs, with the actions of their
forefathers, and the history of their empire; but they do not attend to the
circumstance, that many a Chinese student dies of old age before he has learned
to read. Their nonsensical pedantry, with respect to external appearances, is
held by some to be very important and praiseworthy; the reverence they show,
by bowing to the ground, or kneeling before each other, on saying good morrow
or good night, is admired and interpreted as a proof of the esteem they have
both for themselves and others. It is alleged, that this knowledge of the
exact measure of respect due to every rank and every ramification of rank, acts
as a great restraint on personal pride; that it preserves a due distinction
between the different orders, and prevents equality among mankind; that it bows
the neck of the man who is but a hair's breadth lower in rank, in obedience to
his superior. But these arguments are only worthy of such as are born and
educated slaves, and certainly ought not to be adduced in honor of the
Chinese; for mutual esteem exists in the heart, and not in a graceful bow or an
unmeaning compliment.

The Chinese are in reality unfit for the more useful arts and sciences,
notwithstanding they appear proficients in them; they know a little of every
thing, but nothing in perfection. Almost all the arts have been known and
practiced in China for time immemorial, but they remain in the same state as
they were at their commencement; and of some they are wholly ignorant.

Their constitution and government have been extolled above all others in the
world; yet the people are every where the prey to rogues of quality, and are
often in danger of starving, by the iniquitous administration of their
protectors and parents, as the governors there are indiscriminately styled.
Very good laws, it is true, are enacted in China, as well as in other
countries, but they are not observed; for the great panacea, gold, makes amends
for the worst infractions of them. To be sure, the Chinese government so far
resembles the patriarchal authority, to which they pretend it is finally
reducible, that their Mandarins, like loving fathers, bestow many severe
drubbings upon their children, whom, as to any other proofs of paternal love
and care, they very generously leave to pine away in misery, for fear the
population of the empire should become too great. Politics are so little known
and understood there, that the Chinese have no conception of any other
government than a despotic monarchy, and they can never be brought to
comprehend the possibility of the existence of a republic; and their civil laws
are often diametrically opposite to the natural and most important duties of
life. In short, let their patriarchal form of government, which has been so
much cried up, appear ever so mild and favorable to its subjects in theory or
in practice, it is certain that there is no nation on earth more plundered,
oppressed, and robbed by the great, than the Chinese.

Their system of morality has been exalted to the skies; yet it evidently aims
at subjecting even the hearts of the people to the will of a despot, and
therefore publicly makes morality subservient to policy. This error of the
Chinese legislator has rendered manly virtue an object of indifference to the
people, while the care taken to enforce obedience and submission to one head,
has likewise introduced a spirit of hypocrisy and dissimulation, very
inconsistent with good morals. These inculcate and produce an artless
sincerity, and an undeceiving candor, in both of which the Chinese are
remarkably deficient; for there is no nation upon the face of the earth more
given to low cunning and every kind of fraud; they are certainly most
ostentatiously virtuous: the women do not only shun the company of men, on
every visible occasion, but the greatest care is taken that they should not
come together even in the invisible world; for the body of a female is
carefully deposited at a proper distance from that of a male in their burial
places; but who is ignorant, that the more show is made of virtue and chastity,
the more scope is left for suspicion, and that where appearances pass current
for honor and honesty, little of the realities is to be found?

Nor, finally, am I surprised, that the Chinese indulge in the most wanton
excesses; that they thrust their children out of doors, without remorse; that
they bribe their midwives to drown their girls as soon as born in a tub of
water, when they suppose their maintenance would be too expensive; for how can
they believe, in earnest, in the excellence of virtue, when almost all their
learned men deny the immortality of the soul; maintain that matter and nature
are immeasurable, infinite, and uncreated; that their operations and motions
are uninterrupted, irresistible, and without beginning or end; and deduce from
the continuance of their agency, the production both of souls and bodies, the
duration of whose existence again, they suppose, is in proportion to the part
every being can seize of the universal substance; who, in fact, are downright
atheists?

They do not meddle much with natural philosophy, nor are they able to form a
proper conception of any one operation of nature. Their astronomy is very
ancient; they are said to have studied hard at it for four thousand years, and
yet, before the arrival of the jesuits, they could not make a correct almanac.
The court of mathematicians, consisting of a president, two assessors, and many
subordinate mandarins, superintends all matters of astronomy, and publishes the
imperial calendar, by which the people are acquainted what days and what hours
are lucky or unlucky. Their most important business is to predict eclipses, the
calculations of which they present to the emperor, who sends them to the court
of customs, whence they are distributed through all the provinces of the
empire, that the appropriate ceremonies, appointed in such cases, may every
where be duly observed. These ceremonies are of great consequence; for they
consist chiefly in beating of drums continually during the eclipse, while the
people raise their voices in howlings and lamentations, in order, by this
diabolical noise, to drive away the dragon, who is supposed to be about to
devour the sun or the moon.

In medicine, it is pretended, the Chinese can perform wonders; they are,
perhaps, as good as our quacks, and indeed, not inferior to such of our
European doctors, who attempt to persuade the public, they can put disease and
death to flight with a single pill; but they are entirely ignorant of anatomy,
and have the most wretched ideas respecting the properties and utility of the
several parts of the body; they of course know nothing of the proximate causes
of distempers, the knowledge of which, is the only true foundation to proceed
upon in the cure of them. They are supposed to possess the most extraordinary
knowledge of that part of medicine relating to the pulse; like our
water-doctors and and palmisters, they secretly make the most exact enquiries
respecting the situation and circumstances of the patient, before they venture
to pronounce with certainty, what such or such a kind of pulsation denotes; and
if the evils they have predicted do not come to pass, they know how to help the
patient to them, for the honor of their knowledge in the art of
prognostication. The maxims of this art are very limited, regular, and
systematic; if the pulse beats hard, the kidneys must be inflamed; if it is
something like the pecking of a bird, the patient must die the next morning
between ten and eleven o'clock; in fact, the whole of the art of medicine in
China consists in this knack of lying with a good grace, from the state of the
pulse, and in the knowledge of some simples, which descend from father to son,
and in the hands of such fools, naturally become, without exception, specifics
for almost all disorders.

Of their art of war, some judgment may be formed from the circumstance that
there is always a gownsman, that is to say, a man of letters, who accompanies
their armies, and to whom all their generals are subordinate. On a march, the
man in the long robe is placed in the front, but when a battle is fought, he
takes his stand some miles in the rear; provided only, that he may be near
enough to communicate his orders to the army under his control, and at the
same time so situated, as to lead the van of the run aways, if his party be
defeated.

The Chinese are praised for their inventive genius in the arts; and yet no
Chinese artist can make a single firelock; for it is but a few years ago that
they made use of match-locks, and did not know what flints were. They have yet
not been able to learn how to repair a watch when it is out of order; it is
dead, they say, and barter it away for a living one. They imagine they have
invented music, and have even brought it to perfection; what they have, is too
bad to be called music, it is even said to be worse than the French The French
translator has a note here: "On volt bien que c'est un Allemand qui parle," We
see plainly it is a German who speaks.
. As to their painting, it possesses no excellence but a brilliancy of
coloring, and is otherwise formal, spiritless, and absurd; they caricature
their own faces, and put themselves in the most grotesque postures, although
they in fact look pretty well, except their bellies which are too prominent.
They have an utter dislike to European manners, dresses, and customs: and are
so far averse to our architecture, that it was with the greatest difficulty the
Chinese builders could be brought to erect the church, that the jesuits
formerly had in the emperor's palace at Pekin, according to the model sent from
Europe. Although they cannot but look with astonishment at the size and
structure of our ships, they think themselves affronted as well as scoffed at,
when they are invited to imitate them. Their poetry is excessively phlegmatic
and insipid, without any flights to please the imagination, or interest to
affect the passions. They are, moreover, said to have invented the theater; but
in the Thespian art too, they have not got beyond the very first rudiments. And
with all this ignorance, their contempt for other nations is so decided, that
they will not adopt the most simple, and evidently the most useful inventions
of the Europeans; nay, they are so averse even to their assistance, that at a
fire in Canton, they chose rather to suffer the greatest part of the town to be
burnt, than permit the English sailors of Commodore Anson's ship to extinguish
the flames, which they were not able to do themselves, and were sorely offended
at the alacrity of the tars on that occasion, because there was no formal
permission given by the viceroy to stop the conflagration.

But the Chinese, it is pretended, understood all the necessary arts, and such
as are of real utility, upwards of four thousand years ago; and notwithstanding
we now boast so much of the progress we have made in those arts, we at that
period could neither read nor write. It has, however, been omitted to be
mentioned, what particular arts of such essential usefulness could flourish
among the Chinese, when they were even unpractised in the primary simple
occupations of hunting and fishing; when they could hardly provide themselves
food; when they had neither clothes nor dwellings: for all these arts were not
only totally unknown to them, according to their own acknowledgment, in the
pretended reign of the emperor ^^-Hi, but they were mere savages near a
thousand years afterward, when the Egyptians taught them to write, and gave
them laws and customs. To this again is replied, dispute as long as you please
about the fourteen emperors who reigned before Fo-Hi, all you may say will end
in the acknowledgement, that China was then very populous, and was governed by
a regular code of laws. Now the annals of these very times, declared to be
wholly fabulous by the viceroy Nien-Hy-Iao, say, that mankind then lived like
brutes, wandering through the forests; that the women were in common; that no
other thought was entertained then, except for present subsistence; that
animals were eat with skin, hair, and all, and birds with their feathers, and
their blood served for drink; that raw hides were the only clothing; and in
short, that Fo-Hi first taught them both hunting and fishing. Yet,
nevertheless, it is maintained, that the Chinese could write before they knew
how to make bread, and that the history of these brilliant ages have been
transmitted to us by the literati of those remote and savage times.

What, however, renders the Chinese most contemptible is, the prevalence of
superstition amongst them, which usurps the place of religion in every breast.
The memory of the reign of Tching-Tsong, the third emperor of the nineteenth
dynasty, has in particular been stigmatized by the favor shown under his
government to every species of bigotry, and the encouragement of religious
juggling, and though, as we have before mentioned, they are in general atheists
they are not the only people amongst whom superstition is found coupled with
atheism.

Evil spirits are in their opinion agents in the most common occurrences. They
have a kind of ballot or lottery, by which they discover whether they may begin
a journey, whether they may buy or sell, whether they may marry their children
fortunately or unfortunately; they take the greatest pains to find out by their
arts of divination the most advantageous spot on which to erect a house, the
quarter toward which they must make the opening of the door; the day most
propitious for the building of a kiln; which hill or eminence to choose for the
most comfortable burying-place; and this last point is of such great
consequence, that when a man excels in wit or learning, the merit is not his
own, a sudden elevation to any honor or dignity is not attributed to desert or
success in trade, to industry or penetration, but all is ascribed to the proper
choice of a place of burial for his forefathers.

The power of impostors over weak minds is no where so great as in China; no
where are fortune tellers and astrologers held in such estimation as there; the
markets and streets swarm with people of this description, who make open
profession of their business, and hang out a sign like other tradesmen; nothing
is ever done in China without first consulting these conjurers, whose lying
prognostications are imprinted with the stamp of eternal truth in the eyes of
their admirers. A Chinese, who may have been persuaded by one of these
magicians, that he is unable to beget children, will every time his wife is
pregnant of a child, of his own procreation, think her an adulteress; he will
rather embitter the life of an honest woman, and fill his head with the most
tormenting ideas of imaginary cuckoldom, than avoid by kindness the giving
occasion to his wife to serve him in reality the trick he has been made to
suspect.

The almanac which is published every year, under the inspection and with the
approbation of the emperor, and of the court of mathematicians, contains,
besides a few astronomical calculations, a specification of what days and hours
are lucky or unlucky; the days on which phlebotomy is advisable, the minute
most auspicious to beg any favor of the emperor, the hours when to pay honors
to the deceased, when to make offerings, when to marry, when to build, when to
invite friends, and in general, when to attend to almost every public and
private occupation; this almanac is in the hands of every body* and is the
summary of all the knowledge of many families, and an oracle for all China.

In addition to these egregious faults, and to this deplorable ignorance, the^e
(...) no nation on earth more addicted to pride and arrogance than the Chinese.
In their opinion, they excel all mankind in ability and knowledge, which they
possess in as great a degree as human nature is capable of; and, prepossessed
in the extreme in favor of their manners and principles, they cannot conceive
that any thing they do not practice can be right, nor any thing their learned
men are ignorant of, can be true.

And thus the most defective knowledge is a source of pride, to a nation which
perceives nothing wanting in itself, nor any thing good in others; which thinks
itself only enlightened and wise, and all others both blind and stupid.

Chapter X. Reflections on the Benefits and Evils of National Pride founded
upon imaginary Advantages.
ROUND Cape Horn, and so through Terra Australis Incognita to the Devil, is the
journey every philosopher wishes to the prejudices of all other men, while he
remains firmly attached to his own; yet prejudices must, and ought so far to
exist among mankind as they are useful.

There is certainly a degree of national pride arising only from prejudice,
that is of great political utility. Self-conceit is productive of hope and fear
in a nation; the latter preserves men from the commission of crimes, the former
invites them to the care of self-interest and to diligence. From self-conceit
proceeds likewise vanity, and from this last, the desire of rising above one's
station; the love of ostentation, emulation, arts, fashions, good manners, and
taste; vanity and pride are therefore in the hands of sound policy very useful
follies, for they are born with us, die with us, never tire, and have often the
appearance of virtues.

The love of our country is little more, in many cases, than the love of an ass
for his manger. But the intelligent and accomplished Lady Mary Wortley
Montague, after a long course of travels through Asia, Africa, and the greatest
part of Europe, was firmly of opinion that an honest English country gentleman
was the happiest of men; for he does not trouble his head to know, nor indeed
would he believe, that Greek wine is better than stout ale; he is convinced
that the richest fruits of Africa have neither the fine yellow tints nor the
fine flavor of his golden pippin; that Italian becafico are nothing like so
nice as a piece of roast beef; in short, that there can be no perfect enjoyment
out of Old England.

We always must contemplate with pleasure a nation which loves itself, exalts
its own countrymen, prefers its own manufactures to those of foreigners,
esteems its own writers, and by having the highest opinion of itself, and all
that belongs to it, is as happy as possible, either in imagination or reality,
for both are the same. Let, therefore, our philosophy call the prejudices which
arise from education ever so destructive and mistaken, which make a Moor
believe his country the finest in the world, and that God himself was at the
trouble of creating Ethiopia, while the other parts of the globe were made by
his deputed angels; or those which induce a Laplander to seek for an earthly
paradise among his Norwegian and primaeval snows, or a Swiss, as the
penetrating Doctor Smollet says in his travels, to prefer the barren mountains
of Soleure to the fertile plains of Lombardy; suffer others to behold their own
country with partiality; suffer them, like the peasants round Saint Marino, to
believe that they are the only good and honest men on earth; suffer them to
take the little circle that forms their horizon for the rule of all possible
extension, and let their governors be wisely anxious to give the greatest
importance and extent to the trifling interests of the small tract, beyond
which they think there is nothing worthy of a thought, at least, let the space
be ever so unbounded on the other side of the hedge, they care not about it,
but think there is a Deity who will attend to the whole; for content makes
happy fathers, happy citizens, and happy subjects, with no better fare than
black bread, hard cheese, and butter-milk.

This is all I can say in favor of that species of national pride, founded on
imaginary advantages. It would be a good excuse for this pride, and an
alleviation of the ill it causes, in consequence of its attendant contempt, if
it could with any justice be said that contempt lessens hatred as much as it
does envy, which is the painful and corroding sorrow pervading the mind on the
perception of another's happiness or good fortune. Whoever envies a rich man
for his wealth, finds his envy lessened, when he plainly perceived that this
Croesus is a fool; whoever envies a man of learning for his science, is sure to
find his envy diminish, if he can persuade himself, that his worldly knowledge
rises infinitely superior to that of this man of letters. But hatred consists
in wishing for the calamity of another: an enemy, for instance, is a subject of
hatred in proportion as he awakens our fears; he may be inexpressibly
contemptible, but his power may be great; and we shall never cease hating him
till his power can have no influence either on our happiness or misery.

The mutual hatred of nations for each other, however in nowise decreases by
their mutual contempt; the Greeks were full as much animated by both passions
against the Persians; the populace among Christians look on the Jews, without
exception, as dead to every sentiment of virtue and benevolence, and deeply
sunk in the most contemptible covetousness, usury, and villainy. It is,
therefore, almost an article of religion, and a meritorious work, to persecute
the Jews on account of the abhorrence which is felt for them; and to hate them
because they are contemned and despised. Contempt and hatred for another
nation, are no where united with more force and expression than in the English
against the French. A foreigner, if not dressed like an Englishman, is in great
danger of being assailed with dirt for being thought a Frenchman; but in a
thousand instances the French return this contempt. We may form, without
exception, very just conclusions of their other opinions respecting the
English, from the French accounts of the warlike actions of their valiant
neighbors; of which the Jumonville of M. Thomas is a remarkable instance. This
is an heroic poem, in which the national hate and lust of revenge has inspired
the author, one of the greatest geniuses and most upright men of France, to
take occasion, from the firing of three or four guns from a small fort, and the
death of about eight Frenchmen, to set up a lamentation as if it was a St.
Bartholomew's massacre. The French hate the Spaniards in the same manner,
because they despise them. In the campaign in Italy of 1746, the greatest
exasperation broke out on numberless occasions between those nations, who were
then allies, to the great detriment of the operations of war. At Hospitella, in
the middle of the day, a Spanish regiment of cavalry attacked one of the French
regiments, because they could not agree about their encampment, which was
separated from one another by a high road.

But the hate of a nation for foreigners is very often to its extreme detriment
universal. In England, they acknowledge that the unnatural antipathy of the
English for all foreigners, is one of the greatest and most illiberal causes
which prevents the settlement and population of the immense possessions of this
nation in America, by the want whereof the growth of trade and prosperity is
greatly impeded.

Much worse consequences flow from the contempt which arises from religious
pride. Whoever imagines that no man can be truly estimable or virtuous, whose
belief does not precisely agree with his own, whoever condemns and renounces
those who do not think exactly as he does on every point of theology, becomes
of course an enemy to the greatest part of mankind. The unavoidable consequence
of a prepossession of the infallibility of one's church is intolleration; and
this again produces a swarm of venomous prejudices and opinions, which, like
the musquitos in hot countries, are continually pestering us by myriads on all
sides, and cannot fail of stinging those who are not armed with the fly-flap of
reason, or the imperforable veil of philosophy.

As long as the hope and expectation is entertained that the whole world will
finally adhere to one confession of faith, the furtherance of the grand work of
conversion is supposed to be the indispensable and bounden duty of every
individual: those who are thought to wander in darkness and error, are
therefore not easily suffered to live in peace and quiet. The man, who imagines
he is surrounded by men doomed to eternal damnation, is therefore a saint, and
ever ready to fight the devil in his own domain; and the Gospel of the God of
Peace and Love has therefore been continuully debased and contaminated by
persecuting and blood-thirsty priests with their appropriate instruments,
swords and bayonets, gibbets, stakes, racks, wheels, and chains This passage
the French translator has thought fit to omit.
.

These opinions have at all times inflamed the minds of men; zealous churchmen
have ever been the first promoters of heresies, and have augmented the number
of heretics, exactly in proportion to the blindness of their zeal and their
industry in discovering them. Let us take a retrospect of the time of the
crusades; these cost Europe two millions of fighting men, monks and priests,
with the mass book in one hand and the bloody banner of war in the other, led
the van; numerous armies of holy robbers followed them, decorated and
consecrated to the service of the Lord by a white cross; they quitted their
lawful occupations and respectable situations in the West, to become thieves
and murderers in the East; they sold their possessions i^ order to go forth,
under the blessing of the Lamb o^ God, to plunder those of the infidels; they
abandoned their wives, to deflower virgins and violate matrons, in honor of
the Almighty; and, in the result, they sacrificed every consideration for the
benefit of being cut to pieces, in a distant, but a^ holy region, and sent to
their long home, pollute^ with the blood of the innocent, and loaded with the
execrations of the inoffensive inhabitants of the country they had made the
scene of devastation and bloodshed: and yet their religion, the cause for which
they fought, was directly opposite to the tenets of the Alkoran, against which
these sanguinary and ruinous expeditions were set on foot. The commands of
their God were founded on peace, on meekness, and on charity; those which
Mahomet imposed on his followers as the will of the Omnipotent, taught that the
sacrifice of themselves and their property in war, for the conquest and
constraint of infidels, and the establishment and enlargement of the true
religion, was the greatest merit; that those who die in battle for the sake of
their faith, live hereafter in immortal happiness; that the blood shed in the
cause of religion, if but a single drop, is pleasing to the Deity; and that to
watch one night for the defense of the frontiers of the faithful, is more
agreeable to Heaven than a rigid fast of two months.

The haughtiness of religious pride will not admit of any toleration; it
irritates the minds of men by always attempting to force them to think as we
do; and this ambition of domineering over the consciences of mankind is the
true source of religious zeal. It has been observed, that, in common disputes,
perverseness and obstinacy never reach that height which they do in the most
trifling religious controversies, for in other things almost every one is aware
that he may be deceived; but, on the contrary, we are always intimately
persuaded of the truth of our system of faith, and are therefore very angry at
those of another persuasion, who, instead of conforming to our opinions, are
intent upon constraining us to alter them in compliance with their own. The
pride of religion, and the spirit of persecution accompanying it, likewise
produces, among the professors of the same belief, that cruel and suspicious
spirit of dogmatism, that inquisitorial austerity which would preclude all
necessity of thought, and require the most implicit conformity, in whatever
regards their system of theology, and which would banish truth and knowledge,
together with the liberty of disquisition from even our Protestant religion, if
the bitterness of our zealous controversial writers was not sometimes curbed
and kept under by a biting and severe sarcasm on their untimely and unqualified
asperity.

Religious pride would have its own creed give the law to the belief of all
men. It ascribes to the Supreme Being its own ravings and unreasonable opinion,
and makes the maintenance of its theory appertain to the honor of the Godhead.
If its principles or its voice fail, arrogance, envy, rancour, and an universal
hatred for mankind, put on the mask of religion, and execute in the name of the
Lord the most diabolical revenge: hence came the presumption, the warmth and
violence which were manifest in the sectaries of the Greek church, who thought
themselves polluted by speaking to one of another communion, or by only abiding
under the same roof; hence came the opinion among the subjects of the Byzantian
emperors, that those princes who, in their eyes, were rebellious to their God,
could not have been appointed their rulers by Providence, and were therefore
not the anointed of the Lord; hence came the tyrannic sway and inflexible
cruelty which so many servants of the God of Peace have extolled and enjoined
in the worldly judges, whose aid they have called in to terminate their
religious differences; and hence, even very recently, principles the most
inimical to mankind have shone forth, with the full splendor of stupidity,
which characterized the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, in the Pastoral
Letters of the Apostle of Cracow.

Ever since the mild and invisible kingdom of another world has been changed
into the most violent, as well as tangible and apparent despotism in this,
Christianity, violated by the hands of its priests, has made men hard, austere,
unmerciful, and outrageous; it has put fire and sword into their hands; it has
led kings and princes to make a hell of this world, to murder and torture, in
the name of the God of Mercy, the subjects they were bound to cherish and
protect. But our Redeemer has not taught us a selfish and tyrannical doctrine;
he has not taught us to be sanguinary and oppressive, nor to believe what the
worthy fathers of the church, the beloved jesuits, those Janissaries of the
Holy See, as Pope Benedict the Fourteenth emphatically called them, would have
us believe, namely, that as often as they vociferate this maxim, that no
heretic should be spared, the sound ascends to the throne of God, and is a
pleasing oblation in his ear. It was not from the love of the religion of Jesus
that the Spaniards subjugated America, although under this pretext they
depopulated a space of country as large as Europe, and put twelve or fifteen
millions of the inhabitants to death, whose only crime was the being in
possession of gold and silver, which the Spaniards coveted, and which they even
offered to share with them; and although, with the most inconceivable gravity,
the Spaniards entered into an engagement at Hispaniola to hang daily in cold
blood, in honor of our Lord and his twelve Apostles, thirteen of the
charitable Indians who brought them their daily food.

Religious pride is the cause of that theological rage with which Christians of
all sects zealously labor for the good of their church, defend its doctrines
with clamor and scurrility, and burst out in triumph when erroneous or
opposite opinions have been ably combated, or the embracers of them converted;
and when they have given these notorious proofs of their attachment to their
persuasion, they think themselves real and zealous Christians. But a great
genius of our days, Dr. Resewitz, professor at Copenhagen, pertinently asks,
whether they show as much earnestness against the sins the gospel has
prohibited to us, as they do in combating theological errors? Whether it is not
often manifest that on other occasions, when disputation is out of the
question, they are indifferent to the most material points of Christianity?
Whether they do not quietly behold, or rather studiously and designedly close
their eyes, when they are witnesses of very great iniquity, and when the
doctrine of Christ is more disgraced by the manners of its followers, than by
any speculative errors that can arise? Whether they do not follow the mandates
of their own wicked lusts with the same warmth with which they are animated in
the pursuit and persecution of mistaken opinions?

In consequence of the prevalence of anathemas in Italy, whoever is guilty of
an infraction of the laws of the church in the merest trifles, is reconed a far
greater delinquent than the man who has committed the most flagrant violations
of the laws of nature and morality. A murderer, an adulterer, will more easily
gain his pardon of the church, and will more readily be readmitted into
society, than he who has sacrilegiously dared to eat a bit of pigeon on a
Saturday without an express indulgence: the former is handled as gently and
cautiously as a nun does her conscience, when the sins of incontinency rise up
against her; but the latter is a monster, a man whose conversation must be
avoided, for he is nearly esteemed an heretic; and of all the sins of the
Italian confession, heresy is the most abhorred and damnable.

The contempt and hatred which prevails so much between the opposite
persuasions of the Christian religion, are also wholly consequences of the
prejudices occasioned by a bad education* the Christian youth are taught to
condemn, what in their riper years they feel inclined to excuse; the poisonous
seeds of hatred, discord, and abhorrence are sown in their tender bosoms; and
they learn at school to detest as idolaters, or execrate as heretics, those
who, at the age of reason, they are tempted to embrace as brethren and fellow
Christians. The more we attain to a sound understanding of the real scope of
the Christian religion, the more we must feel the great absurdity and
narrowness of the prepossessions entertained by weak-minded Protestants against
the members of the Roman church, or those, on the other hand, which foolish
Catholics cherish against the Protestants. The common people among us are wont
to be mightily astonished, when they hear of any generous deed of a Catholic
toward a Protestant, or that the greatest esteem and friendship, together with
the sincerest urbanity can exist between men of different religions. The
inhabitanss of Toulouse believed that it was an established law among the
reformed, that such of them as abandoned their persuasion to embrace the Roman
Catholic religion were to be strangled; and, prepossesed with this idea, the
parliament of Toulouse ordered the old and innocent Calas to be broke on a
wheel, because he was a Huguenot, and his son in a fit of melancholy hung
himself without ever thinking of a change of religion. We must, unfortunately,
when our reason is come to maturity, be very retentive of prejudices learned
often by rote, and adopted without consideration in our youth, if we do not see
that it is possible to be true to our religion, without at the same time being
surprised that others can likewise be true to theirs; that there is nothing so
rational and conciliatory as a perfect liberty of opinion; that, in a world
where error and not truth is the portion of the greatest part of its
inhabitants, God will judge our hearts, and not our understandings; that we are
all children of one common father, and coheirs of all his promises, if we
believe only as much as we can, and live according to his commandments; and
that virtue and piety, whether seen counting of beads and repeating the Ave
Maria, or sitting down with a protestant to a dinner of flesh-meat in lent, are
always equally lovely and amiable The French translator has omitted this whole
passage.
.

Let us now cast a few glances at other national follies. Men might often enjoy
greater freedom were it not their own fault, but they fetter themselves, and
still boasting of their liberty, are truly ridiculous. The constitution of a
country or a city may be free, and remain so, and yet the minds of its
inhabitants be in chains. Whoever in a republic acts solely on his own behalf,
and speaks his mind freely only where he sees it can in no degree hurt either
himself or his family, is very often against his will and his conscience, and
contrary to his oath and duty, an abject slave. The patriot inhabitants of a
republican city ought therefore not to glory too much in their liberty, when
the majority of them are ready, like so many wild cats, to fly in the face of a
stranger, who should venture to affirm in public, that it is possible for a
burgomaster's son to err in matters of literature.

The haughty presumption of sole or pre-eminent courage, power, and
consideration, is the cause of the very astonishing perverseness of opinion
prevalent in a nation with regard to all others, and an inexhaustible fountain
of patriotic falsehoods for their historians. Few writers of history guard
themselves sufficiently against conceit and partiality, showing us the noble
deeds of our countrymen, and the advantages gained by our own nation, through a
magnifying glass, and those which may have been obtained over us by others
through a very contrary medium.

The pride which proceeds from an ignorance of foreign affairs, deprives a
nation of many advantages which flow from an acquaintance with the inventions
and knowledge of other nations. Armed with impenetrable prejudices against
every useful innovation, it fixes its regard solely and listlessly on the soil
it treads on, and thereby remains for ever enthralled by political
superstition, which cleaves to the barren pride of ancestral worth, and
condemns whatever is without precedent, however good in itself.

The pride that is founded upon ignorance, is the surest way to confirm our
ignorance. Whenever we believe that we know all that is useful, there can be
nothing else worth knowing; the arts, and sciences always will remain in statu
quo in every nation which fancies it is as far advanced in them as possible.
This foolish perverseness is a great hinderance to the extension of knowledge
in many countries, which are otherwise very capable of improvement. The French
defended and maintained the opinions of Descartes, long after his vortices, his
elements, his theory of light, his romance of the formation of mankind, and all
his other theoretic dreams were confuted. Their national pride kept them blind
to the power of attraction and the division of the sunbeams, as well as to the
circulation of the blood, and the utility of inoculation, for an equal length
of time; and they certainly would not have attempted the defense of the system
of Descartes after it had been exploded, if they were not addicted to the bad
custom of exalting every thing that is French, above all the inventions and
discoveries made elsewhere.

But we are at present upon the eve of a great revolution, at the period of a
second demarcation between light and darkness. We may observe in Europe a
second general insurrection in favor of good sense and sound judgment; the
clouds of ignorance and fear are dispelling; weary of our long continued
slavery, we are loosening the chains of ancient prejudices, in order to resume
the possession of our lost rights of common sense and freedom. The lights which
are so generally spread abroad, the spirit of philosophical inquiry which so
universally prevails, the great discoveries it has made of the defects and
errors of hitherto generally received opinions, and in short, the storming of
seemingly impregnable fortresses of prejudice and ignorance which have to this
time kept us in subjection; all manifest a strength of thought, a hardiness of
intellect, which, though it often may shoot out into a reprehensible audacity,
and will take from many the little share of liberty they possess, and the whole
temporal welfare of more, as well as now and then a head or two, though it
often will give occasion for sophistry and fallacious subtilty to become the
logic of the day; yet joined to manly policy, and a due deference to the laws,
promises to make our age that of the greatest improvements, and to give the
mortal stroke to barbarism and superstition. The useful part of knowledge is no
more made a secret in the hands of a few pedants; the thinking part of every
nation communicate their ideas to the public in the vernacular tongue, and the
most abstracted truths are now rendered comprehensible, and brought home to the
meanest capacities. All the great interests of mankind are considered and
animadverted upon in writings of sense and feeling, which touch the heart and
enlighten the understanding; every thing is narrowly inspected and accurately
defined; all is business and activity, and all seems to announce a general
reformation in the practical as well as the theoretical part of life: this
advances in some places with slow and unsuspected steps, in others it emerges
at once, like the sun from behind a cloud, and dissipates every obstructing
mist. Even in Vienna, and in all the Roman Catholic States of Germany, we see
the spirit of philosophy boldly venturing forth; we see it surmount the
strongest barriers of idleness and stupidity, and rising victorious in places
where the throne of superstition was encompassed by the most hideous clouds of
darkness, prejudice, and ignorance. Some years ago, a man of learning came from
a foreign country to Switzerland, intending to settle in a land of liberty of
opinion; he resided ten days at Zurich, and then left us to go even to Portugal.

Awake and read, is the best aphorism for the cure of prepossession against
nations whom we do not sufficiently know; the more we converse or correspond
with one another, the less will be our reciprocal contempt. Knowledge produces
between nations who have the most rooted aversion for each other, a spirit of
amity and love; lessens the mutual national hatred, which cramps the soul;
destroys the barriers of self-interest and jealousy, and, together with an
extension of intellect, and a more manly elevation of mind, gives a greater
degree of moderation and equity to our judgment of other nations. The learned
are all members of the republic of letters, in which, notwithstanding the great
inequality which is found in it, no tyrant is allowed nor any oligarchy
permitted.

About forty years ago, a stranger, who might have had the impudence to let
slip any mention of an English tragedy or comedy in good company at Paris,
would have been hissed and hooted at. But now the most sensible Frenchmen
allow, that to these bold Islanders we owe the present reigning and judicious
system of morality and policy; that they first labored for the advantage of
the many and the interest of the nation; while in France nothing was thought of
but wit and frivolity The French translator has, instead of wit and frivolity,
" que des ouvrages d'esprit."
: in a word, that the English possess as much genius, more energy, and only a
little less taste than themselves.

Good English translations of some German writings would at once remove the
greatest part of that contempt which the English writers entertain for the
Germans. The time will come, when France will not reproach the Swiss, that a
poet among them is as rare an animal and as great a wonder as an Elephant at
Paris. It is not unlikely that in England, even now, a Swiss may be supposed to
be endowed with the capacity of thinking; but the opinion of our intellectual
abilities is generally formed from those ages of devotion and strict attention
to propriety, when the first public stews were established at Berne; and when
at the same time the caterpillars, which in 1479 had committed great ravages in
our Canton, were by the patriotic council of the Apostolical Doctor and city
Recorder of Bern, Thuring Frikart, summoned by a formal notification to appear
before the spiritual Court of the Bishop of Lausanne, who in conjunction with
his ecclesiastical Counselors, after a due attention and accurate
investigation of the complaint and defense, the reply and rejoinder,
anathematized these catterpillars in the name of the holy Trinity.

Even in Spain, formerly and yet the seat of credulity and superstition, a
beginning has been made to command respect, by a sound discussion of the most
critical points of belief. Father Isla, a Spanish Jesuit, wrote a few years
ago a novel under the title of the History of the highly famous preacher
Gerundio of Campazas, surnamed Sotos (i. e. Dunderhead). The reverend brother
Gerundio appears as an epitome of all the etxravagancies, follies, and holy
absurdities, so usual in the Spanish pulpits. It met with the greatest success;
for the whole edition of the first volume was sold at Madrid in the space of
four and twenty hours, and the author afterward fell into great penury, which
is a sure proof that the nation thought well of his work.

The more sensible part of mankind seems from time to time to adhere less to
those opinions which keep them asunder, than to those which draw them together.
The toleration of opposite religions, becomes daily more advisable and more
practiced by princes; and the more money is spent at court, the greater
complacency is used toward all improvements in philosophy and humanity; since
they all serve to increase the income of the chamberlain This relates chiefly
to Germany, where books are licensed, and patents are granted by the
chamberlains.
. The laws in England are so mild with respect to catholics, that they are
suffered to have their chapels, their schools, and their priests, together with
the liberty of making proselytes, and likewise much influence in the
parliamentary elections. The Elector of Mentz founded a short time ago a
theological college of the Augsburgh confession in Erfurt. In Rome, strangers
of all religions have for a long time been tolerated; for the sake of the money
they spend, without being at all disturbed on account of their faith, or being
ever required to join in any act of devotion of the Romish Church. The people,
who in this respect think exactly as his Holiness, only say with a smile, these
folks are so unfortunate as not to believe in God. In Nice, even where the
believing populace is the most ignorant and stupid of any in the Catholic
countries, it is a fact, that the most scrupulous Piedmontese farmer pays
dearer for the dung which he gets from the house of a protestant, where flesh
is eaten every day, than for that of an honest catholic, who must put up with
meagre diet one half of the year; and as to the manure yielded by the Reverend
Fathers, the Minims, for that he will not give a farthing. Controversy is, in
our times, quite an uncultivated field, since there now are protestants who
have directly maintained, that all the most acute systems of polemical divinity
are nothing but a collection of reveries, and catholics who can forgive a
protestant, if otherwise an honest man, who does not hold as a geometrical
truth that Saint Michael reads mass every Monday in Heaven.

Overweening national prejudices have likewise partly subsided, since nations
have insisted less upon false points of honor. A very laughable circumstance
in the history of my own country will illustrate this truth to the reader, if
he compares the notion of honor then entertained by the Swiss with that we now
hold. In the year 1458, the Confederates were invited by the city of Constance
to a shooting party; but unfortunately, near the conclusion of the diversion, a
Lucerner and a burgher of Constance, being about to shoot for a wager, the
Lucerner staked a small piece of money coined in Bern, which is called a
Plappert; this the other in derision called a Kuhplappert (that is, a piece of
cow dung). This was taken so ill, that the Canton of Lucern immediately urged
the whole Confederacy to join them in resenting the injury. The forces of the
state affronted, the honour-loving Lucern, aided by those of Underwald, opened
the campaign by the invasion of Thurgaw. They seized on Weinfeld, because the
proprietor of that place was a near relation of the aggressor, and laid a
contribution on the inhabitants of two thousand florins. The other Confederates
prepared likewise for war; the forces of the Canton of Bern were already on
foot, and arms were not laid down till the city of Constance restored their
pitiful honor to the Swiss by a penitentiary gift of three thousand Rhenish
florins.

In our more enlightened days, nations will not so lightly attack each other
from such mistaken notions of honor; at least, as long as interest is the band
that holds them together. Yet Newton will often be called an almanac-maker, and
Montesquieu a blockhead, while the French and English struggle with all their
power for the mastery of the American trade.

The most inordinate pride must always accompany the most profound ignorance;
for none but an empty Parisian would suppose that his fellow citizens were the
only thinking beings on earth; and none but a Spanish Eulogist of Saint Roche,
would exclaim from the pulpit, in a complaining tone, "How could gracious
Heaven permit so exemplary, so great a Saint, to be born a Frenchman!"

Chapter XI. Of Pride, grounded on Real Advantages.
THIS pride consists in a consciousness of the excellencies we in reality
possess, and a due estimation of them in consequence.

I need not make use of ingenious arguments to prove, that the pride we are
about to treat of is essentially different from presumption or arrogance. It is
true, both individuals and nations may in one respect be proud, and in another
presumptuous or vain; yet, pride is frequently seen unaccompanied by
presumption or vanity, and these again, often exist independent and unconnected
with pride. In the latter case, it is from ideal advantages that arrogance is
formed, and such real advantages as might rationally be expected to produce
pride, are contemned and despised; whereas, in the former, a value is only
placed on what is really valuable. Arrogance is vain of little advantages;
pride, of great ones. Arrogance strives for the pre-eminence every where and in
every thing; pride leaves fools to enjoy their own rank. Arrogance makes a man
endeavor to be remarkable by his table, clothes, equipage, liveries, etc.
pride makes him trust solely to his own desert. Arrogance acts by mistaken
notions of the point of honor; pride by the principles of genuine honor.
Arrogance is fond of showing its lordliness to inferiors; pride prefers to
justle with superiors. Arrogance is offensive on account of its folly; pride,
on account of its understanding and virtue. Arrogance can descend to every
baseness; pride does not easily stoop to be mean. Arrogance often begets
ostentation; pride, by a little turn of the scale, becomes vanity. Arrogance is
in every shape folly; pride becomes folly when it gives way to self-conceit,
when it courts esteem and honors, when it exacts as a tribute from the world
that praise which must be a voluntary gift, or when it seeks for recompense
immediately around itself, requiring it from every one near, and is impatient
and peevish at the least delay.

In the pulpit, pride is declaimed against and rejected without exception,
often indeed without reason, and consequently without effect; although, on the
other hand, two of the best preachers, Spalding and Stern, have inveighed
against it with the most impressive energy. But my object, as may easily be
seen is not to depict men as they should be, but as they are; and my chief aim
is to exhibit the different ramifications of pride as they appear in man; to
examine his nature in order to develope its causes, to particularize and
arrange the several appearances of pride as they occur; and to explain their
respective effects. From this investigation it plainly appears, that there are
two sorts of pride, and many subdivisions belonging to each sort; that
therefore the moral philosopher must take care not to confound these two
species as in general is done; and that the language which cannot express the
consciousness of real worth, in contradistinction to the conceit of ideal
advantages, or self-esteem opposed to self-conceit, must be barren indeed.

This consciousness is essentially inherent in the nature of man, although it
never has fair play; since self-love ever prevents us from estimating our own
advantages by the rule of equity.

In the minds of individuals, it is the sense of inward worth that Pythagoras
held to be the greatest incentive to virtue; a sentinel which the author of
nature has placed within us, to keep aloof all that is little, mean, and
unworthy the greatness of our soul; and, what requires to be particularly
attended to, it is a perpetual exhorter to root out our defects. No base,
malignant, or criminal thoughts will arise in us, if we entertain an esteem for
ourselves, if we submit all the inclinations of our soul to the tribunal of our
judgment, and if we more fear our own condemnation than that of others. The
sense of the beauty and dignity of human nature, to which all moral virtue
finally tends, seems not able to subsist without this respect for ourselves.
Impressed with this sense of his own worth, a man cannot avoid esteeming and
valuing himself, but only inasmuch as he makes a part of the community or
nation over whom this noble sentiment extends. The esteem for one's self is a
curb to all crimes; a libertine clergyman is addressed, "Remember your
ecclesiastical dignity;" a magistrate, who judges of the propriety of a
complaint in proportion to the greatness of the sum of money which accompanies
it, is reminded, "That he sits in the seat of justice." In the last war, when
batteries upon batteries, when two, three, and four successive entrenchments
were to be forced, the cry was general throughout the ranks of the assailants,
"Remember ye are Prussians;" in like manner, the vicious should be called on,
"Remember the high destination of man."

The consciousness of the real worth of one's nation, is the same with national
pride founded on real advantages; and this pride is a political virtue of no
small importance. The sense of the worth of our ancestors, is a spur to
emulation. Partaking in the fame of our nation for arts and sciences, we are
awakened to the desire of increasing it. The conviction that we live under a
good government, endears our country to us and secures our fidelity. The just
pride of a nation, therefore, arises chiefly from its domestic advantages, but
not always from the estimation these are held in by other nations. This esteem
is sought after by vain nations; and is but little valued by those who are
free; the English are not vain, for they do not care what others think of them;
when honor is their motive of action, they do not take this motive from the
judgment of others; it suffices if they are estimable in their own eyes, or at
most in those of their countrymen. Yet vanity is so far connected with this
kind of pride, inasmuch as we believe our national fame exalts us individually
in the eyes of foreigners.

The pride, therefore, that arises from real advantages, if kept within proper
bounds, may be the germ of the greatest elevation of mind. A man, who is wholly
diffident of himself, or who by a due self-esteem does not possess a noble
confidence in his own strength, is unable to resist common occurrences, and
therefore incapable of any great action; he who has not the capacity of
appreciating his own qualities, will seldom become an object of general esteem.
It is only the man who is conscious how far and wherefore he is estimable, and
who never looses sight of the calm benevolence toward others which proceeds
from modest worth, that can have a high sense of the dignity of human nature.
The best founded pride is debased to the dust if it endeavors to make
contemptible what is not so: the best founded self-esteem is insufferable when
it denies to others their due measure of respect. Envy, too, can never
accompany a proper and noble pride, although it in nowise proceeds from
contempt; and, notwithstanding it assiduously endeavors to fix contempt on its
object, for it only betrays a fear of being surpassed. A noble mind always
feels gratified by the consideration of the worth of others, which gives it a
better sense of its own greatness, in proportion as that of others is more
perceptible. Real merit is always disposed to emulation, never to envy or
jealousy. None but men of very moderate understanding will turn away with
disgust, from the contemplation of any thing that bears the stamp of
perfection. A man of sense never despises an idiot, for he knows but too well
how often he is like him; yet he despises the fool who endeavors to be of
consequence, and boasts when he is an idiot. The virtuous man hates vice, but
does not hate the vicious whom he despises. Modesty is the most attractive
embellishment of female beauty; but a woman of exalted sentiments, who
possesses the noble pride of conscious worth, which esteems itself, and has a
just claim to be esteemed by others, will despise a heart that is insensible to
her real value, and which loves her more for her personal charms than for her
mental excellencies.

But I am now led to the contemplation of the noble self-esteem, which whole
nations are possessed of; a prospect of greater extent, and requiring a more
elevated tone, than the consideration of individual pride, already treated of.

Chapter XII. Of Pride which is produced in a Nation by the Remembrance of the
Heroism and Valor of its Ancestors.
GLOWING representations and animated descriptions of the noble exploits and
dangerous enterprises which have been achieved by great men for their
country's dearest rights, inspire the most distant generations with a generous
pride of ancestral worth, and secure the lasting duration of that heroism which
had become hereditary, giving magnanimity even to the effeminate.

The remembrance of the valor which encircled the brows of our ancestors with
never fading laurels, is a perpetual memorial and an unceasing incitement to
us, that we should do nothing unworthy of their name; that we should esteem
ourselves able to maintain it in all its pristine luster. If we would imitate
the virtues of our progenitors, if we would approach near to their renown, if
we would revive their great and glorious days, we must be mindful of our
origin, and of the duties it imposes on us; we must keep our ancestors in view,
as our bright examples; their deeds of hardihood and virtue must be the
favorite subjects of our sculptor's and our painter's art, an animating fire
enlivening the ready eloquence of our orators, and the sublime imaginations of
our poets: we must never look on their renown as an inheritance, which we may
enjoy in indolence; never indulge in that impatient and jealous pride, which
suggests that all must yield to a name of glory, and which is irritated at the
preference present merit obtains over former worth. It is then that our fathers
live again in their descendants; the spirits of the great and mighty slain
beckon us to the battle; the moss-grown cenotaphs and ancient trophies seem to
rise before us; the guardian Genii of our nation are seen supporting in the air
the shades of the illustrious founders of our fame; and, enraptured by this
pleasing vision, even the vanity and frivolity of vulgar minds yield to the
thirst of glory: every heart and hand is united in the ardent pursuit of
honor; and every soul blazes with true patriotism, and an undissembled
admiration of our country's virtue.

The ancients emulously encouraged one another, by the remembrance of the
heroic deeds of their ancestors, -- to vigilance in peaceful times, and to
intrepidity in the hour of danger. The noble sentiments of the Corinthians, on
this subject, are thus expressed by Thucidides: "Your fathers have ascended to
fame through rugged, steep and untrodden paths; let their examples be ever
pres^ent to you: do not loose by wealth and indolence, what labor and poverty
has attained." All were exhorted not to remain inactively listening to the
ancient stories, recounted by every nation of their former advantages, for
these are only honorable to those who strive to emulate them, and act only as
a foil to the disgrace of those who recede from ancestral worth, since it is
more unpardonable to depart from the great examples we have before us, and
ought to follow, than to remain insignificant and inactive, without any.

Every thing among the Greeks conduced to plant in their hearts the most heroic
courage; by the remembrance of their ancestors, whose principles and sentiments
were the spur to the noblest actions. By the view alone of the statues of
Harmodius and Aristogiton, the detestation of tyranny was renewed in the hearts
of the Athenians, and their gratitude to these courageous champions of their
liberty was daily and hourly augmented. They instituted public funeral rites,
in honor of those who died for their country: and a pile was erected three
days before the completion of the ceremonies, on which the remains of the slain
were publicly exposed to view: and the common wealth took charge of the
maintenance and education of the children of those heroes, till they attained
the age of puberty. The lowest Greeks were exalted to a level with their
greatest chiefs by a glorious death; their memory was renewed by the most
solemn offerings to the latest posterity, and their images were placed next to
those of the Gods.

Animated with the sentiments these maxims inspired, the Greeks advanced to
their enemies. They encouraged one another with the recital of the deeds that
had rendered their names famous, before the signal for battle was given, and
invoked the departed spirits of their great forefathers to witness their
actions on that day, when, proud of the glory they inherited, and worthy of the
name they had gained, they resolved either to conquer or die. This noble
resolution banished fear from their hearts, and conducted them with erect and
cheerful countenances, to the very face of death, in search of honorable
danger. The battle of Marathon alone was for many ages afterward productive of
the noblest emulation of equalling their ancestors. On every great occasion
they called to mind this signal victory: "Remember the innumerable host of
Persians; remember our own invincible little troop," was shouted on every side.
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers was re-echoed from rank to rank. The
nervous eloquence of Demosthenes engraved these sentiments on the minds of the
Athenians, excited their detestation of the artful king who attempted to
undermine the state his arms could not subdue, inflamed every mind with the
energetic love of liberty and his country, and stimulated every breast to great
and heroic deeds. The Spartans took the field, animated by this spirit of
unconquerable attachment to freedom and their country; their armies were small
but victorious. Even the present descendants of the Spartans are the most
courageous among the modern Greeks, and, under the despotic sway of the Turks,
enjoy some remains of their pristine liberty. It was in order to renew in the
Greeks the memory of their glorious ancestors that Agesilaus, when he invaded
Asia, embarked at Aulis, the port whence the fleets and armies of united Greece
took their departure, to revenge the rape of Helen: and when Alexander landed
on that continent, to undertake its conquest, his first care was to awaken in
his Greeks the remembrance of their former victories over the Trojans. He
repaired to Ilium, and visited the graves of Ajax, of Achilles, and of the
other heroes who fell before the walls of Troy: he paid the customary honors
to their manes; he celebrated with his attendants games and courses at the tomb
of Achilles, sprinkled it with oil and crowned it with garlands. "Happy youth,"
he exclaimed at the monument of Achilles, "happy that in thy life thou were
blessed with a faithful friend, and a Homer to immortalize thy valor." Such an
avidity for glory, displayed with such masterly art, roused the noblest
sentiments in every breast. Alexander sought to be like Achilles, his soldiers
like Alexander: and this continual emulation warmed their imaginations, and
raised their souls far above every terrestrial thought.

"Remember ye are Romans," was the common exhortation of the generals of
ancient Rome, to their companions in arms: this short harangue sufficed to
rouse them to perseverance and indefatigable ardour in the most difficult
enterprises, and to intrepidity and firmness in the most bloody engagements.
Filled with the memory of the valor of their ancestors, and impressed with an
enthusiastic persuasion of the future greatness of immortal Rome, as immutably
decreed by the gods, and announced by ancient prophecies, they subjugated
nations, and conquered the world by the powerful influence of their conviction
of the superior privileges and advantages which were the birthright of a Roman
citizen.

The Arabians owe the liberty they still retain, to their courage: the Turks
have not been able to subdue them, it is now many centuries; they are even
daily extending their conquests. They have established themselves in many parts
of Egypt, and neither pay tribute to the Ottoman Port nor obey his commands;
and it is the memory of their ancestors that feeds and nourishes this energy of
soul. They hear, from their earliest youth, the deeds of their forefathers
recited in their tents: Arabia resounds on every side with martial songs,
commemorating those feats of glory; and among its inhabitants, the poet is
equally renowned with the hero he celebrates. The poetic pictures of the valor
and intrepidity which characterised the golden ages preceding that of Mahomet,
are said to possess the same unadorned sublimity we so much admire in the best
productions of the Grecian and Roman muse.

These seeds of heroism took still deeper root in the more stiff and rugged
soil of northern regions. Those indigenous Scythian nations, who wandered from
the banks of the Tanais to Scandinavia, in order to live in ease and comfort,
who brought Sweden, Norway, Russia, and Denmark under the dominion of a
Scythian family; who insensibly extended themselves through all Germany, and
who successively overwhelmed with the horrors of war the flourishing provinces
of Gaul, Spain, and, finally, the whole of the Empire of the West, upon which
they poured down like the thickening clouds of a thunder-storm, impelled by the
tempestuous blasts of their own northern winds: these, I say, had the same
origin, the same laws, the same courage, the same love of liberty, the same
attachment to the customs and religion of their forefathers, and the same
contempt of death, founded upon the hope of future and eternal happiness.

The customs and institutions of these nations were calculated to animate their
sons, by reminding them of the prowess and hardihood of their ancestors. These
predominant qualities were held in the highest estimation among them, and the
love of war was deeply rooted even in their religion. Their deified Odin,
instead of a pure and abstracted notion of God, introduced an entirely sensual
system; he knew how to adapt the Wolupso, which was to form the religious code
of the Scythians, to the genius of the nation; his Heaven and his Hell were
solely founded upon a scale of comparative valor; his laws far exceed those of
Sparta, for the forcible injunction of the greatest contempt of death; the last
gasp of their warriors on the field of battle was immediately connected with
all those recompenses which filled the whole of their imaginations, and
suppressed the passion of fear, not by cool reasoning, or barren logic, but the
irresistible impulse of other more violent and opposing passions.

Odin persuaded the Scandinavians that those who died like their fathers, with
arms in their hands, would alone enjoy an happy immortality. To rush on the
swords of the enemy, and immediately to enter into the fruition of the promised
rewards, were, according to his doctrine, two occurrences which were
immediately consecutive. He persuaded them, that their future felicity depended
entirely on the shedding of their blood; and, in consequence, that a sick man
must on his deathbed procure himself to be wounded, in order to appear bathed
in his blood before his gods. Odin himself acted up to his doctrine. The faith
that he had propagated during a long and prosperous life, he confirmed by a
voluntary death. Apprehensive of the ignominious approach of disease and
infirmity, he resolved to expire as became a warrior. In a solemn assembly of
the Swedes and Goths, he wounded himself in nine mortal places, hastening away
(as he asserted with his dying voice) to prepare the feast of heroes in the
palace of the god of war. After his example, the Scandinavians sought the
highest pitch of happiness and luxury in blood and death. "Our warriors," say
their poets, "search out death with smiles, and embrace it with transport; they
are seen in the battle, with their hearts transfixed, falling, laughing, and
dying." Lodbrog, a Northern chief, thus exults at the hour of his death: "What
undescribable and hitherto unfelt emotions of joy arise in my soul! I die! I
hear Odin's voice that calls me; I see the gates of his palace open, the lovely
wantons, having their most bewitching charms half revealed to view, trip
lightly forth, and beckon me to the banquet; their azure zones heighten the
dazzling whiteness of their bosoms; they approach, and offer me the most
delicious nectar, in skulls still moist with the blood of my enemies."

All other virtues were held inferior to that of courage by the Goths, who
indeed despised every thing else -- but most of all ostentation and
magnificence. Their women even learnt the use of arms. A princess, who
chastised the temerity of a lover by slaying him with her own hand, was a
subject of admiration. A young man could scarcely hope to succeed in his
courtship, if he had not given public and unequivocal proofs of his courage.
The son of a king dared not refuse the combat, which their religion sanctioned,
if proffered even by the meanest peasant; since, conformably to their notions,
victory must declare itself in favor of the man who fought for a just cause.

These opinions, these deeds were transmitted to posterity by the first
melodious warblings of the Scandinavian poets: these songs were recited to the
boys, that their youthful hearts might early imbibe the knowledge of these
heroic actions, which they would afterward be called upon to emulate. They
begat, in the souls of the auditors, those wonders I hope to see renewed by the
immortal verses of the Tyrtaeus of Brandenburgh, and which I wish for, from the
glowing numbers of his Swiss brother.

The ancient Germans caught the same spirit. Their youth sought honorable
death, in the hope of being celebrated by their bards. The most valiant among
them* upon his decease, was advanvanced to the rank of a god; his children and
posterity enjoyed the privileges of princes; they received gifts, and a large
tract of land was assigned them: these privileges and this property was theirs
as long as they were not unworthy of the glory of their progenitor. The
beauteous daughters of the Franks A nation in Germania. The French translator
has it, the lovely women of France, etc.
bestowed their favors only on the brave warrior, and their judgment both of
the merit and tenderness of his love was founded upon the proofs he had given
of his valor; he must have taken prisoners, scaled some dangerous and
well-defended precipice, driven the enemy from some strong entrenchment, ere he
could hope to succeed with his mistress; for she would rather behold him a
breathless corpse, than safely returned to her disgraced by flight. Hence the
harsh din of arms resounded throughout all Germany, and the banners of renown
waved over every tomb. Even now, every patriot German treads, with inward
emotions of reverence, the ground where the solemn remains of his illustrious
ancestors repose in silence; and approaches, with awe, the forest where their
fame still hovers round the ancient oaks.

Could the nations of the North, educated in these opinions, avoid that noble
esteem of themselves, which their laws, their religion, and their bards so
forcibly inspired? If they have not inherited from their forefathers a fondness
for softer and more civilized renown, yet they have inherited the noblest
examples of manliness of soul, which have been deeply impressed on their
ardently emulative minds.

The pride arising from the martial fame of their ancestors, has always been
the greatest spur to courage and activity among the most valiant nations. The
youthful warriors of the Huns were animated by a species of phrenzy, solely by
listening to the vocal melody, which revived and perpetuated the great
achievements of their ancestors; a martial ardour flashed from their eyes;
they became impatient for battle, and the tears of the old men expressed their
generous despair, that they could no longer partake the dangers and glory of
the field.

The Japanese were formerly a warlike nation, fond of military renown, and of
attempting the most extended and hazardous enterprises. Their most ancient
families were distinguished by a noble and majestic countenance, and all
despised death and danger. The pride arising from the glorious reputation of
their ancestors was extended even to their children; their mode of education
tended to imprint ideas of heroism and valor in their tender breasts; songs of
war and victory were the first sounds that reached their ears. In their
schools, they were exercised in transcribing the legends of their heroes, and
the histories of their progenitors, who had voluntarily devoted themselves to a
glorious death.

It was this same pride that in former ages impelled our Helvetians to trample
upon the necks of their oppressors, after the longest struggles, and amid
impending danger. A handful of rustics gained them liberty. The memory of those
rustics glowed in the hearts of the brave Bernians at Laupen; their little band
resolved not to die unworthy their Helvetian fame; they advanced to battle;
crowned with vine leaves, they chaunted the noble deeds of the founders of
their liberty, and dispersed their proudest foes like chaff before the wind.
The memory of those rustics occasioned the defeat of the Austrian army at
Sembach: their numerous and well appointed cavalry fled before the intrepidity
of a few Helvetians; numbers and discipline were defeated by ardent
impetuosity, and the most tremendous apparatus of war yielded to the attack of
sickles and ploughshares, in the hands of the sons of freedom. The memory of
those rustics filled the hearts of the twelve hundred brave Helvetians, who,
not far from Basle, attacked forty thousand French, committed a great slaughter
among them, and disputed the victory with unconquerable intrepidity, till the
few remaining of their hardy troop were consumed to ashes among the ruins of a
church, into which they had retreated and which was set on fire, they having
refused to surrender. The memory of those rustics inflamed the souls of our
fathers, who, at Murten, drove the Burgundians before them, as the light sand
of the desert before the fierce Typhon and Ecnephia. The memory of those
rustics, gained, by a thousand immortal actions, before their posterity was
degenerated, the confidence of princes, the admiration of Europe, an
established peace, and handed down to us for a lasting inheritance, only that
Nostalgia This is a disease almost peculiar to the Swiss. It is a vehement
longing after one's native country when absent from home.
which death alone can deprive us of.

The pride, therefore, that arises in a nation from the glorious reputation and
known valor of their ancestors, is an abundant source of inflexible greatness
of soul, and the most certain preservative against the pernicious effects of
pusillanimity.

Chapter XIII. Of Pride arising in a Nation from the Reputation acquired by
Arts and Sciences.
BY the pride above described, I understand that noble self esteem which a
nation possesses from the opinion of its superior talents, either as derived
from their progenitors, or from their own exertions.

This self-esteem is a natural consequence of the high opinion entertained of
arts and sciences, and of their power over the human heart: it is in fact by
their influence that the powers of the soul are unfolded, that the circle of
its operations are enlarged, its comprehensive faculties increased, and every
spark of latent genius called into action. A man of an enlightened understanding
perceives with ease the vulgar errors of mankind, the prejudiced and
vainglorious ideas of all ages; he alone is able to judge of the wisdom,
propriety, truth, and beauty of any sentiment or action. Similar to a being
looking down from the Empyrean on this world, he beholds with composure, from
his unclouded height, the mass of mankind yet wandering in darkness and error,
their mistakes and deviations, and the gloomy tempests that rage in the deep
glens below him. The sciences collectively teach the soul duly to appreciate
its own greatness, and fill it with disgust for the sanguinary laurels of
military fame. Darius was already vanquished, and Asia subjugated, when
Alexander wrote to his preceptor Aristotle that he had, much rather be exalted
above all mortals by superior knowledge, than by the magnitude of his power;
and in Corinth, he had long before declared, that if he were not Alexander, he
should like to be Diogenes.

This noble sentiment is felt by a whole nation when it has produced a number
of eminent men. The memory of those worthies who lived for their country, is as
dear to well informed minds as that of the heroes who died for their country.
Every nation is proud of its learned men, its philosophers, and its artists, as
soon as they have paid their tribute to envy by their death; for those nations
who are most vain of their great men when dead, are often the most backward to
acknowledge their worth while living. It is only for those who lie mouldering
in their graves, and who can no more be objects of jealousy, to enjoy a
reputation which envy cannot harm; and with these limitations we may say that
the fame of a nation in sciences, proceeds from the fame of some of its
individuals, according to the measure of the genius and the ideas of all its
members.

Those who have enlightened their country by their talents, who have
strengthened it by their philosophy, and adorned it by their genius, are, if I
may be allowed the expression, Atlases, who support the name and dignity of
their nation, and transmit them unimpared to future ages. Their noblest part
lives and is active when they are no more; and their names and knowledge,
snatched from oblivion by their writings, are legacies bequeathed to the whole
world. We admire the impressions of their expanded souls, which appear in the
memorials which they have left for our astonishment and instruction; in them
still breathes their genius; in them still burns the consecrated fire of
patriotism; thence it has darted into the breasts of the great men who have
succeeded them; thence, even at this moment, perhaps, a spark flies off, which
may infuse new life into a whole exanimate posterity; may awaken their regret
for having lost the precious inheritance, and by a contemplation of the sublime
eminence whence they have fallen inflame their hearts with a noble emulation of
its grandeur.

The Greeks conceived, that for consolation in adversity, deliverance from
danger, the extension of their fame, and the luster of their actions, they were
solely indebted to their sages. In fact, many of the Athenians who fell into
slavery by Nicias's unfortunate expedition against Sicily, owed their
preservation to Euripides, whose verses they recited to their masters; and in
general their literati were so famous, that a king of Persia, when he admitted
some Grecian ambassadors to an audience, first of all enquired of them, how the
Poet Aristophanes did? Without the father of poetry, Achilles himself would
have been buried in eternal oblivion. Raised to the throne by courage and
probity, and filled with the animating spirit of Grecian knowledge, Ptolemy
Philadelphus made his capital city of Alexandria the metropolitan seat of arts
and sciences. He founded the museum, the most ancient and most sumptuous temple
ever erected by any monarch, in honor of learning; he filled it with men of
abilities, and made it an asylum for philosophers of all descriptions, whose
doctrines were misunderstood, and whose persons were persecuted; in whose
unfeigned tribute of grateful praise, he has found a surer road to everlasting
renown, than his haughty nameless predecessors, who pretended to immortality,
and braved both heaven and corroding time by the solid structure of their
pyramids, which have outlived the memory of their builders.

Rome arose from conquest to literature, from the knowledge of the worth of
valor to the knowledge of the worth of the arts and sciences. The arms of this
mighty people had indeed subdued Greece, but Greece could prove to the Romans,
that greatness of genius can exalt the slave above his master; and that
supereminence is attainable at a distance from the seat of victory and the
ruins of demolished thrones.

The fall of the republic seemed to fix the stability of the empire of the
arts. The world submitted to the absolute sway of one, and, tired of war and
slaughter, the tyrant Augustus became a protector of the muses. Virgil read his
poetry to him in the imperial palace; the first minister of state was appointed
to relieve him when he became tired of reading: overcome by his divine numbers,
Octavia swooned at his feet; and Augustus was melted into tears. The Emperor
chose Horace for his favorite, but Horace had the courage to decline that
honor. Rome, even in chains, was rendered great and illustrious by its
writers, whose renown became that of the empire and its pride.

The admiration so liberally bestowed on their fellow citizens, who had exalted
themselves by the greatness of their genius, was the most fruitful nursery for
great men, both among the Greeks and the Romans. Athens had erected the busts
and statues of its meritorious children in the Ceramicus, and Greece was filled
with the like monuments of desert. Their renown assailed on every side minds
which burnt with impatience to deserve the same honors. The Roman youth, when
they beheld the images of their illustrious ancestors, exposed in public on the
celebration of certain solemn ceremonies, were so forcibly struck with
veneration for their virtues, that the graves seemed to open, and the shades of
the dead to appear on earth, in order to teach them, in the language of the
immortals, the way to every thing great, sublime and, praiseworthy.

A nation cannot be more powerfully impelled to the love of science and of
virtue, than when it contemplates domestic examples of them, with a noble pride
of heart. Every nation ought to respect and esteem those by whom it has been
enlightened and improved; it ought to reverence their images; to celebrate
their memories; and all hearts should glow with the desire of being equally
great and illustrious. The pride which arises in consequence of the opinion of
the superiority of our talents and knowledge above all other people, was
accordingly peculiarly prevalent both among the Grecians and the Romans.

Athens, even under Pericles, astonished its neighbors by the master pieces of
its artists and sages. Pericles, who immortalized the memory of his heroes by
Phidias's art, who raised the genius of Attica to its highest pitch of
elevation by his unexampled eloquence, was the soul of Athens. It is impossible
to peruse the travels of Pausanias through this beautiful country, without
being penetrated with the most ardent admiration. We listen with rapture to the
description of the many masterpieces he enumerates; every spot of Greece
teemed with the most exquisite productions of architecture, sculpture, and
painting, and the whole in a manly and genuine elegance of taste. Greece
produced for a long series of ages great men of every description, who,
stimulated by their creative genius, deviated from the beaten track, and struck
out new and untried paths to immortality. All their productions bore the stamp
of nature in its greatest beauty, and glowed in the colors of truth. Despising
the common conveniences of life, they traveled over the remotest lands, to
expand and invigorate the powers of their minds. And the vestiges which the
Romans have left us of their greatness, and of their desire of eternal fame, in
all the three continents of the ancient world, are not only monuments of their
religious veneration for their great men, but at the same time as many
memorials of their own pride.

Italy, England, and France, approach in modern times the nearest to Greece and
Rome, by the just estimation of their respective merits in the arts and
sciences.

The Italians are, with reason, proud of the reputation of their nation in the
arts and sciences. The Italian cities had scarcely reared the standard of
liberty, before the light which had previously illuminated Greece and Rome,
burst through the shades of the Gothic chaos; the flame of these revolutions
vivified the arts and sciences, and produced immortal masterpieces of every
kind. By the liberal employ of the riches, an extensive commerce and
flourishing manufactures had brought to Florence, and impelled by that desire
of fame which patronizes the operations of genius, and gives birth to the
noblest designs and actions, this city strove for the attainment of every
species of renown. Europe beheld patriotism, sound policy, and military fame,
regenerated together with the arts and sciences, the sources of which had so
long been dried up during the barbarous ignorance of the middle ages. Florence
was before and under the Medici what Athens was in the zenith of its glory.
Italy, priestly Italy, was of all the European states the first where the fine
arts were cultivated, protected, encouraged, and rewarded. From that country
were emitted the first sparks which announced and kindled the brightest flame
of returning knowledge. A Franciscan monk, advanced to the papal throne, Sextus
the Fifth, contributed more to the embellishment of Rome in his short
pontificate of five years, than Augustus, the lord and master of the riches of
the world, in a reign of forty. From Italy came those sciences, which have
since produced such abundant fruits in the rest of Europe; to her we are in
particular indebted for the fine arts, and it is from her numerous inimitable
productions, that we owe the good taste now so universally diffused among us.

The veneration of the Italians for great men essentially contributed to their
formation. Florence is crowded with monuments erected to perpetuate their fame
both by the sovereigns and private individuals of the country. The house built
by the celebrated Viviana, very near Santa Maria Novella, exhibits a striking
mark of his gratitude toward the famous Gallileo, whose disciple he always
called himself; the front of the house is decorated with the statue in bronze
of this renovator of one of the most sublime sciences; and on the pannels,
between the windows are inscribed the dates and particular descriptions of
those discoveries with which Gallileo enriched the magazine of knowledge.

The esteem of the Florentines for these monuments erected during the age of
the fine arts is so great, that they hold it a kind of sacrilege even to clean,
scrape, and polish those images, which, standing in the open air, generally
undergo an ablution in the spring. The hundred and sixty public statues, which
strike the eye of a stranger, and attract his notice as much as the finest
ornaments of the most flourishing city of Greece did Pausanias, are exposed to
all the injuries of the weather, and entirely left to the care of the populace
who respect them as sacred relics. This respect descends from parent to child,
and is founded on a taste for the sublime and beautiful, which the habit of
seeing such things admired and hearing them praised renders natural; and this
habitual attachment to the fine arts is so inherent in the Italians, that the
ladies of Rome and Florence can discourse with as much propriety on the
subject, as ever a German professor did on the science he practices.

The Florentines bear a striking similitude to the ancient Athenians, in the
veneration they profess for whatever has any relation to their country.
Florence is in their eyes with respect to the whole of Europe, what Athens in
the famous panegyric of Isocrates is represented to be with respect to all the
rest of Greece. They view in Florence every excellence of every kind and every
age; and, in regarding other nations, owing to this self-esteem, they behold
nothing but barbarity and ignorance; they fancy that they alone have invented,
produced, and practiced every thing that is useful or agreeable.

Among other incontestible instances of the gross ignorance of foreigners, the
Florentines relate with great self-complacency the following story of a Russian
nobleman. He was viewing the celebrated collection of Baron Stosch: "And this,"
said his conductor, "is the bust of my Lord." -- "What, is the original so
antique?" rejoined the Russian, in the tone of a connoisseur. But nothing can
exceed the conduct of the confessor of Charles the Third of Spain in the
library of the Medici: this confessor, a reformed Franciscan or Cordelier,
accompanied the young prince when he went to take possession of his Tuscan
territories; being the only person in his suite who bore any appearance of
scholarship in his dress, the librarian presuming his curiosity could be no
better satisfied than by the view of that superb collection of books, one of
the most brilliant memorials the munificence of princes had dedicated to
literature, immediately waited on him with a respectful invitation to see the
library of the Medici. He accepted the invitation, and appointed a day; the
librarian had assembled all the most eminent literati of Florence, who being
joined by the confessor, he proceeded with this splendid retinue toward the
library. On coming to the door, he stopped short, cast a vacant look round the
saloon, and turning to the superintendant, said, "Pray, Mr. Librarian, have you
got the book of the Seven Trumpets here?" The librarian replied, that it was
not in the collection, and the whole learned company were obliged to confess
with some confusion, that they were unacquainted with such a book; upon which
the confessor, turning his back upon the library, declared that the whole of it
was not worth a single pipe of tobacco. It was afterward discovered, that this
book of the Seven Trumpets was a collection of the most improbable devout
stories, wrote in Spanish, by a Monk of the order of St. Francis, the
translation whereof forms part of the contents of those books printed in France
under the title of Bibliotheque Bleue.

But Italy, once the empress of the world, is now the scene of desolation and
rapine, and dependant upon those nations who were formerly her slaves; once the
protectress of all arts and sciences, she is now reproached with slumbering
over her faded laurels; she is now again reduced to a state of insignificancy,
from the height which the founders of her modern fame, Gallileo and Columbus,
had raised her; by the discovery of new worlds on earth by the latter, and in
the heavens by the former; the seeds from which those truly great men sprung
are yet in existence, but torpid and inactive, without a shoot, or without a
single leaf of honor. The Italians have for near a century ceased to be like
themselves. They have before their eyes masterpieces of art and models of good
taste, examples of the talents of their ancestors; but these precious remains
are an unprofitable heap to them, and neither kindle the fire of genius, nor
incite the laboring hand of industry to emulation. We must not visit Italy for
the sake of the Italians, but for the sake of the country they inhabit.

These reproaches, it is true, are carried rather too far, and are the more
grating to the Italians, as there are few nations so sensible of the esteem of
foreigners. Philosophy, mathematics, physics, natural history, the art of
medicine, and the fine arts, are nearly as flourishing in Italy as in France or
England. Most of the Italian universities make it their study to prevent the
prostitution of the sublimest sciences, by the trite and dry application of
them, to the injury of mankind, which has so long prevailed in the seminaries
of monkish learning. Both the nobility and the higher orders of the clergy
think it not beneath them to rival one another in every species of human
knowledge; while at the same time, as well through the whole of Italy as at
Rome, the common people are completely ignorant and unprincipled, and have no
other opportunity for instruction, than the very seldom occurring executions of
malefactors. The taste for solid knowledge increases every day in Italy; many
of their authors write with freedom, and their ideas are not invariably
fettered to ancient prejudices. The modern Italian philosophers break the bands
of hierarchy and despotism with an almost unexampled boldness. We need only
read the work of a noble Italian, on the reformation of Italy, the treatise on
crimes and punishments of the immortal Beccaria, the Coffee-house, an Italian
weekly publication, in comparison with which the English Spectator seems to be
only written for women; the reflections of an Italian on the church in general,
on the regular and secular clergy, and the head of the church, and we shall be
ashamed of harboring the thought that Italy is totally deprived of genius.

In all the sciences and almost in all the arts, the English are as eminent as
men can be, and, we may easily perceive are too conscious of their excellence.
By the honors they confer on their meritorious countrymen, they give the most
convincing proof how proud they are of their merit.

In no country of the world are rank, birth, and every thing that is not
personal, held so essentially different and distinct from merit. In Germany, on
the appearance of a stranger, the first question is, "whether he is a
nobleman?" in Holland, "has he money?" but in England, "what sort of a man is
he?" In the reign of Henry the Eighth, a lord complained to the king of an
affront he had suffered from the painter Holbein: "Let Holbein alone," said the
king, "for I can whenever I please make seven lords of seven ploughmen, but I
cannot make one Holbein of even seven lords." A minister of state, in England,
is a kind of intermediate being, between an angel and the worst of the human
species. The Earl of Chatham is deified by some, and ill-spoken of by others,
and yet merit is no where else in the world so justly appreciated as in
England. This people, often so turbulent and unruly, under the pretense of
liberty, forego hatred, enmity, sect, and party, when they are called upon to
reward great talents. Where the ashes of their kings repose, there repose
likewise those of their heroes, of their poets, and of their men of genius of
every description. The remains of an actress, which in France have no better
receptacle than a dunghill, are interred in England next to those of the
greatest statesman. Newton received in this nation, fertile in great men,
extraordinary honors when living, and after his decease he was carried in
regal pomp to this silent repository, sacred to the memory of monarchs and
departed genius. The honors so liberally bestowed upon great talents in
England, have in every age induced the noblest among its peers to interweave
the bays with their coronets; and the most abstruse disquisitions are as common
in daily conversation there, as disputes concerning a new headdress, or a
fashionable ragout in France.

The English owe the greater degree of liberty they enjoy above other nations,
to the superiority of their knowledge. Animated by a spirit of freedom, of
which no adequate idea can be formed, even in most republics, they fasten upon
the sciences as a tiger on its prey; they meditate on the great interests of
nations, and of mankind, with the most daring expansion of thought; they are
ever taken up with great objects, and ever doing great things. Ignorance and
error shrink from the penetrating vision of their genius; arbitrary power
trembles before their vigorous investigation of its principles, while the
authority of the law alone stands immovable and sacred. The greatest part of
such nations as are free, think and act but by halves; while on the other hand,
the English soar with a steady flight to the skies, because their wings are not
clipped, neither are they called back by the lure of the falconer.

The merits of the French with which they themselves are well acquainted, very
often burst forth with transcendant splendor. We are too much accustomed to
see them in a ridiculous point of view; whereas an eulogium upon them would be
more easily composed than a satire.

The present men of genius among them are supereminently great. They seem at
once adapted to every thing worthy the attention of man: they scan the heavens,
and possess the greatest refinement of sensibility; they claim our admiration
when they enlarge our ideas on the most abstruse sciences, and our tears when
they charm us with an affecting narrative of misfortune; and all their writings
possess the most inimitable elegance. Order, method, and energetic perspicuity
are their own; every thing superfluous, low, or trivial is banished from their
plan; every thought is placed in its most advantageous light. Even when they
superficially and lightly approach the outworks of science, they do it with
such penetration, that they seem at every step to pierce into the deepest
sanctuaries of knowledge. They decide with dignity, and dispute with mildness;
and above all other nations, they possess the invaluable art of being both
philosophers and men of the world, studying by the midnight lamp, and at the
same time avoiding pedantry.

The French have in particular given the sciences an attic elegance. Their
drama, considered altogether surpasses that of every other modern nation; and
they have brought to greater perfection than any other people, the most useful
and most agreeable of all arts, that of good manners and a sociability; they
have carried natural philosophy, politics, commerce, finances, and the
imitative arts to their greatest height. The numerous institutions and rewards
for learning of every kind in France give it a striking advantage, awakening
diligence and emulation; and, to these, France owes the exalted degree of
renown it has attained in astronomy, and in tactics: philosophy is advancing
with rapid strides among them; all mankind at present think on every thing, and
the French as much as any other nation. Did their great men not bow their heads
so low to a sex, who highly prize whatever is trifling, and ridicule whatever
is truly great, to a sex, to whom we will gladly resign the empire of the heart
provided they leave us that of the mind, still more might be expected and
derived from them.

There is another sort of equitable self esteem, which arises from the
awakening of a people to a sense of their own natural advantages; and though
the benefits which accrue from it are often misunderstood and cried down, it
nevertheless embraces, in my opinion, every thing that can be called great and
noble. I mean that spirit of liberty which the writings of the English have
created and cherished in the hearts of the French; and which instills into the
soul of a Parisian philosopher, in his attic dwelling, on the seventh story,
the just and necessary pride due to the true dignity and freedom of his
character as a citizen of the world The French translator has here as follows:
"Je parle de l'esprit de liberte que chef-d'oeuvres de l'Angleterre
communiquent aux Francois, and qui done necessairement aux philosophes de la
France le just orgueil qu' autorise la dignite du gouvernment sous lequel ils
vivent." "I mean that spirit of liberty which the writings of the English
communicate to the French, and which necessarily gives the philosophers of
France that just pride which the dignity of the government under which they
live authorizes." -- And a little lower down: "Les Anglois regardent les
Francois comme un peuple d'esclaves, tandis qu'ils sont pour la plupart aux
pieds du throne aussi libres que les Anglois, qui se piquent le plus de jouir
de cet avantage." "The English look upon the French as a nation of slaves,
while for the most part they are at the foot of the throne as free as the
English, who pique themselves the most upon the possession of this privilege."
The next sentence which relates to some of the writers of the Encyclopaedia, he
omits wholly; and the following paragraph throughout is ^qually translated with
the same prejudice, betraying either an ^vident fear of giving offense, or the
grossest partiality, highly injurious to the province of translation.
. This spirit does honor to human nature, and administers consolation and
encouragement to depressed humanity, while employed in removing, with a tender
but steady hand, the film of prejudice from the eyes of mankind. The English
preposterously think the French are a nation of slaves; but it is ridiculous to
despise them as slaves, for there are many Frenchmen, even at the foot of the
throne, who have souls as free as the freest Englishman; and there are some of
the writers of the Encyclopaedia who are more determined republicans than most
of the jurists either in Holland or in Switzerland, and they are publicly known
to be such, and are yet respected.

Most of the parliaments of France examine and ascertain the true interests of
the nation and of the king, with a noble and unshackled eloquence; they lay
before the throne the blessings and the love of all ranks, in order to procure
security, peace, and the hope of better days to the palaces of the great, and
the cottages of the poor. Their hearts are not cast down by oppression; their
souls are capable of the greatest and noblest sentiments; and they are ready,
at the risk of their own ease, of their wealth, and of their places,
undauntedly to utter the voice of reason and of truth. This species of liberty
consists in the uncontrolled exercise of one's faculties; it does not owe its
origin to a form of government, but to sound judgment and philosophy; and is so
much more laudable than that species necessarily arising from the political
constitution of a country, in proportion as it has greater difficulties to
surmount. A nation, therefore may be justly and greatly proud of its liberty of
opinion, when it does think with freedom, and not because it may.

The merit of individuals in the arts and sciences, therefore, produces in a
nation a very justifiable pride, which, as long as it is kept within proper
limits, elevates the mind, banishes superstition and ancient prejudices by the
aid of philosophy and sound judgment, and exalts the spirit of liberty the
more the various principles and opinions of a nation are canvassed and
investigated.

Chapter XIV. Of Pride produced in a Nation by its Constitution.
IN the same manner as we contemplate with awe, an august temple in its ruins,
so do we reverence that frame and constitution of things, existing in our
peculiar country, even until the last moments of liberty.

The pride that is produced in a nation by its frame of government, I define to
be the sense of the high and pre-eminent value of its constitution. A wild,
headstrong, lawless youth prefers a democratical government; a cunning and
intriguing man, a monarchy; the self-interested, that government which insures
the greatest personal profits to himself; a noble and philanthropic soul, that
under which the greatest number of men are rendered happy and prosperous: but
in general we may observe the most deeply rooted, and, in my opinion, the best
founded pride, in those countries whose inhabitants are most subordinate to
duty, and least so to each other; and where, for that reason, as much civil
liberty may be found as is consistent with the existence of society.

It is extremely difficult for every government to inspire its subjects with a
sense of its own peculiar excellence; but it is not difficult for subjects to
love the constitution of their country; which always ought to be an object of
respect and veneration. A man of sense may find happiness under every moderate
government; one spark of inward content is sufficient to embellish all around
him. We often see complaints urged against the best governments; but we ought
to consider, that the beneficial fruits of laws, and of the administration of
government, are in general invisible, and never immediately apparent; while, on
the contrary, the smallest and most unavoidable evils are instantly
perceptible, and are converted by exaggeration and misrepresentation into the
most frightful phantoms to appal the brainless populace.

We may be happy under the shelter of civil liberty, both in republics and in
monarchies; in the former, indeed, by right, in the latter by chance; and in
fact, equally so in every country where wholesome laws are the rules by which
men are governed, or where the will of a just and enlightened prince is the
supreme law.

Chapter XV. Of Republican Pride.
IN all republics we may find this pride; but I do not here allude to those in
which republicans may in vain be looked for at midday with a candle and
lanthorn.

I call a republican, the man in whom the love of freedom, of his country, and
of the laws, together with the execration of despotism, are predominant. Others
may give a very different definition; but, if mine should be the true one, it
cannot be denied that there may be great and genuine republican souls in
monarchies, as well as abject and servile ones in republics.

Pride in republics, is the consciousness of the liberty, equality, and
security we enjoy under a republican government. Liberty is that state of
mankind in which our actions, if they are just, and founded upon rational
principles, cannot be controlled by any external force. Our will to perform,
however, must be subject to our reason, for we cannot will any thing without a
motive. If a man, in this state of society, wills any thing that is bad, there
is always a power withstanding him, which prevents the execution of his will,
if he listens to its dictates; but by this power he is not deprived of his
civil liberty; for freedom, in a state of society, only allows us to satisfy
our real necessities in an irreprehensible manner; if in any state it allows of
more, it degenerates into licentiousness: and this idea of liberty, is
perfectly descriptive of the situation of a republican; he wills as long as his
will is not repugnant to the laws.

Mules tread with a sure foot, along the brink of a precipice, and they are,
therefore, in such places, left to their own guidance: but man is not so
fortunately gifted; for, without the restraint of law, liberty could not exist
in a state of society. The will is more frequently guided by the blindness of
instinct, than by the sober light of reason; and the law itself is, therefore,
often not sufficiently coercive to keep men within due bounds: on which account
it has been found necessary, in all republics, to confide in a number of
citizens who have deserved well of their country, or are esteemed worthy to
serve it, the care of watching over the laws, of carrying them into execution,
and of changing and new-modelling them, as a change of circumstances and times
may require. Liberty, therefore, does not consist in having no power on earth
superior to ourselves, but in this superior power not existing in the arbitrary
will of one. Where this power resides in the absolute will of many, there ought
to be such provisions in the law, by which one will always be prevented from
mastering or controlling the others; where there are such laws the most eminent
man is but the first subject of the law; and wherever no one is exempt from its
sway, none can be the slave of another.

Those constitutions which are most free have always required the strictest
obedience, because freedom can only be supported by the maintenance of the
laws. In order to accustom the people to submission to the law, in the most
trifling and indifferent matters, the Ephori of Sparta, on their entrance into
office, had it proclaimed, by the sound of a trumpet, that every Spartan should
cut off his whiskers; for they were anxious to have all their laws observed
with the same willingness and readiness, as that which permitted a young fellow
to ask leave of an old man, who might have a youthful wife, to beget him a
child.

Hence, republican liberty leaves man in the possession of his original rights,
so far as he can enjoy them compatibly with the rights of society. The
exemption from that miserable fate which makes man, sunk from his inherent
dignity, submit to be a slave, not indeed because he wills, but because he
must, strengthens the soul, expands the understanding, and enlarges the ideas,
giving to every faculty, fire, vigor and energy. Pure liberty is only found in
the noble bosom that abhors all chains, whether the golden ones of kings, or
the iron ones of republics, which do not admit even a superficial gilding.
Every free soul at court sighs after black bread and liberty. Here its
all-vivifying energy produces a certain natural artless eloquence, on which
depends the most important civil and political concerns; as it is the most
proper instrument sometimes to appease the multitude, sometimes to rouse, often
to convince, but oftener to persuade. There its mild and benevolent power
extends over philosophy, for those who entirely disrobe truth, must of
necessity approach the nearest to it.

Equality is held to be the exclusive advantage of those republics, where every
member of the commonwealth can arise to the first dignities of the state; where
their election depends upon the people in general; and where those dignities
are not in any case hereditary. But the system of absolute moral equality among
men is false and absurd, because society can only esteem a man according to the
probable proportion of his ability to contribute toward the public good, and
because even the possible proportion of that ability does not at all keep pace
with the number of men; for there is always a much greater number of citizens
than of statesmen, or men of parts. A single citizen who has saved his country,
is worth a hundred thousand others, and he ought to have as much sway as that
hundred thousand. By a situation of legal equality, therefore, I understand, in
general, that situation in which every member of the state is equally secured
from every species of violence; and therefore naturally proud of his equality
in point of personal liberty, and his superiority in that respect to the
subject of a monarchical form of government.

This equality is observable in all free countries, where the little do not
stand in awe of the great, but both yield obedience to the laws whose subjects
they are; where a man is not accounted a criminal, because he may have incurred
the anger of a grandee, and where the poor are looked upon as making part of
mankind. The founders of the ancient republics thought absolute equality so
indispensably necessary, that they divided the land they possessed in equal
shares to every citizen: a potent measure, but which in these times would be
chimerical and impracticable, to augment the love and fidelity of every member
of the commonwealth, toward his country. In former times, the acquisition of
too great personal consideration was looked upon as a crime against the state;
because wherever any one was exalted above the law, all others must be
dependent on him. The punishment of the Ostracism was introduced by the
Athenians, solely with the view of securing the republic from the predominancy
of great men over the lower class. Proceeding on the same principle, the
Venetians once condemned one of their magistrates to death, because he had, of
a sudden, appeased a very dangerous sedition; for, they said, "he who can so
easily pacify such an insurrection, is able to raise one at any time." For the
same reason, in some modern republics, no man can with impunity be noble,
wealthy, just, or eminent for his talents. Instead of striving with a
competitor worthy of rivalship, a great man finds a competitor in every fool:
and for this reason, a peasant of the canton of Appenzel once shrewdly remarked
to my friend, the worthy Dr. Hirzell, "that the inhabitants of a certain
republican city had cut off the head of one of their fellow-citizens, because
it was the only head among them."

In some modern republics, the legal inequality of rank and consideration is
concealed as much as possible under the appearance of equality; the chief men
treat each other as if they were all of the same rank, equally wealthy, and all
upon a level with respect to understanding and virtue. In republics, superior
merit, unscreened by the reverence which in monarchies is attached to the
privileged orders, is always the prey of envy, wherefore the chiefs treat the
subjects of their republic, collectively, with affability, courtesy, and love;
they seem all to affect those beneficient virtues, which proceed from an
enlightened understanding and are the true cause of the preference given to
rule over happy and free men rather than over a hero of slaves. The Carnival
was merely instituted at Venice with a view of hiding the great inequality of
conditions in that republic, for a few months in the year, under masks of the
same kind; and even Cosmo de Medicis exercised his power in Florence, over a
people who esteemed liberty as Heaven's best gift, without any exterior mark to
distinguish him from the other citizens, and as he himself used to say, in an
old great coat.

The self-esteem of a republican, which has the justest foundation, is that
arising from the sense of personal security. This advantage is seldom found in
democracies, where a state of uncurbed freedom is generally a feverish
paroxysm, in which the body politic cannot long remain. This security did not
exist in the Grecian states, where every thing submitted to the caprice of an
haughty, blind, and passionate multitude, pushing all their passions to excess,
and condemning in rage tomorrow, what they approved with rapture today. This
advantage was, above all, wanting at Athens, where the power of the mob was
unlimited, and the authority of the magistrates an empty name; where the
commands of the council were eluded, and its decisions annulled, when they
happened not to coincide with the opinions of an insolent populace, whose
assemblies were often nothing but a solemn invitation to the perpetration of
iniquity.

On the contrary, in republics of a mixed constitution, we may with justice
look for security, and especially in those aristocratical states which, by the
stability of their laws and the splendour of their government, most resemble a
limited monarchy; and which, for that very reason, are preferable to all other
republican constitutions. Under such an administration, every individual is
sure of justice; and the summary mode of doing one's self right by the
stiletto, or a pocket pistol, is solely in vogue on the other side the Alps,
where justice is either too slow or too expensive. Each preserves his own
property, and thinks himself happy because he cultivates his field for himself,
and pays nothing for that liberty which is elsewhere obtained, only by
submitting to the most exorbitant exactions. -- Lord and master of himself and
his property, he has to account to no one for his income, or his expenditure;
and is amenable to no authority but that of the law, for what he does, or what
he neglects; and to talk of the absolute will of one, excites his derision. A
nobler pride, therefore, cannot arise in the breast of a republican, than when
he considers the abject situation of the subjects of despotism, depending
entirely on the blind will of one.

Despotism in a state, is like malignity in bodily diseases; sometimes it is
the chief aliment, at others, only an adventitious symptom. But whenever one
individual obtains the power, he generally acquires at the same time the will
of becoming a tyrant, for most men are too fond of fashioning law after their
own will. The desire of commanding over our equals, is the reigning passion of
the human soul; and the rage of superiority resides in every heart, but mostly
where it is accompanied by a weak head. That republic, however, will soon be
enslaved by a tyrant, where men are base enough to show a cringing submission
to the opinions or consideration of one man, whatever pre-eminent advantages he
may enjoy above the rest of the community. There are instances of this in many
petty cities, pretending to be free, in which the whole little body of the
state, notwithstanding their boasted independence, follow, like a flock of
sheep, the opinions and will of one alone; and where this sort of tyranny is
looked upon as a family right, nay an inheritance, which may pass down
unimpaired even in the female line: But we need not be very quick-sighted, to
perceive what actuates those spirits in places of the above description, who
are implacable and sworn enemies of all the patriots of Europe; and who
maintain, with brazen foreheads, that whoever stands up in favor even of
constitutional liberty in a free country is literally a rebel.

But I do not mean, at present to treat of any other kind of despotism, than
that surrounded by guards, which sits on the thrones of kings, on the seats of
princes, or, at least, in their neighborhood; under whose iron scepter, all
who unfortunately live within its reach, must bow, and whose principles and
actions they are forced to approve, however repugnant or inimical to the
happiness, or even to the existence of a whole nation.

In such countries, it is the tyrant alone who is allowed to have a will; and
he does all he wills, even while he wills naught but what injures the rights of
man. Whatever he covets, must be conformable to divine and human laws; and he
but seldom desires what is not prohibited. Cambyses, the successor of Cyrus,
wished to marry his own sister, and inquired of his sages, whether there was no
law by which such a marriage could be allowed? These lawyers, not less
ingenious and subtle than those of modern times, replied, "There is no law
that permits the marriage of a brother with his sister, but there is one that
says, whatever a king thinks shall be law."

This is the sole rule of despots; as well of him who sits on a throne, as of
him who fills the intermediate space between the monarch and the subject; or
even of those tyrants in miniature, a despotic nobility, possessing power of
life and death over the peasantry, attached to the soil like cattle.
Unacquainted with the feelings of humanity, a tyrant looks down on his subjects
as beasts of the field, sent into the world to be miserable, and to live and
die under his yoke, as animals which he feeds because they are adapted to hard
labor; which he has care taken of when they are sick, because they are useful
when in health; which he fattens, that he may consume their fat; and which he
in the end flays, to make their hides serve to harness others under the same
yoke.

It is in consequence of this, that the subjects of a despotic government make
so beggarly an appearance; their dwellings are on this account cramped, their
furniture mean, their whole appearance penurious and squalid, and both
themselves and their cattle the living images of famine; not even a dog is to
be found in tolerable plight; the gardens, the groves, the bushes are destitute
of their feathered songsters; all is solitary and forlorn; the poor birds fly
far away to happier climes, to avoid the eager pursuit of the half-starved
peasants, whom stern necessity often renders expert fowlers. The fields lie
uninclosed, and are tilled with reluctance and sorrow. No cheering prospect of
meadows or of cultivated fields relieve the eye; no barns, no cow-houses, no
hillocks of rich manuring dung, no horses for the plough, which, on the
contrary, is dragged over the half-furrowed fields by a lean ass, a lame cow,
and an old goat, yoked together; and to complete the picture of misery, behold
in the back ground, the husbandman either driven to despair and suicide, or to
rage and murder, by the oppression and cruelty of this arbitrary government.

How shall the prince, reposing in the lap of luxury and ease, perceive the
distresses, the wants, and the universal despondency of his famished and
desolate provinces? He acquires his revenue with tranquillity and composure, as
long as any thing is offered. Every thing that surrounds him conspires to shut
his eyes and ears to the tears and groans of his people; and the most
reasonable complaints urged against his counselors are punished as offenses
against majesty itself. His agents do not cease telling him, he may and can do
whatever he pleases, in order that he may allow them to do what they please;
they continually assure him his people are happy, even at the moment they are
busy in squeezing the last drop of sweat and blood out of them: and if they
sometimes take the ability of the nation into consideration, their view is only
to calculate how many moments it can live under their gripe, without entirely
giving up the ghost.

The above is a true picture of Morocco, since the Cheriffs have brought it
under their yoke; the religion, the laws, the ancient customs, the prejudices
imbibed by the Moors, all contribute to render the power of the monarch
absolute and unlimited; and the subjects a despicable herd, a flock of timorous
sheep, without activity or will. His power extends not only over their lives
and property, but likewise over their consciences; of which, as representative
of their holy prophet Mahomet, he is the spiritual director. The people are
educated from their infancy in the notion, that to die by the command of the
emperor, confers an undoubted right to the joys of Paradise; and the honor to
be dispatched by the emperor's own hand, a diploma for a more exalted degree of
beatitude. This explains the otherwise unaccountable instances we see in
Morocco of cruelty, oppression, and tyranny on one side, and of slavery,
submission, and misery on the other. The emperor is both legislator and judge,
and, when he is in the humor, the executioner too, of his people; the sole
heir of their possessions, of which he grants to the nearest relations as much
as he thinks fit. Yet he allows a shadow of authority, in matters of religion,
to the Mufti; and he graciously permits his meanest subject to institute a suit
at law against himself, in which the plaintiff is not only sure to be
nonsuited, but also to be involved in the most unavoidable perdition.

Muley Ismael, emperor of Morocco, killed with his own hand, during the time he
reigned, forty thousand of his subjects; yet he was in a very particular manner
attached to justice. One of his officers complained to him that his wife, when
in ill-humour, had a custom of pulling him by his beard; and the emperor was so
provoked at the impudence of this woman, that, in order to prevent her from
again offending the majesty of his officer's countenance, he caused the hairs
of his beard to be plucked out, one by one, by the roots. He once saw another
of his officers on the road, driving a flock of sheep before him: "Whose sheep
are these?" interrogated the emperor; the officer replied with the deepest
reverence, "O Ismael son of Elcheriff, of the seed of Hassan, they are mine."
"Thine, villain?" said the servant of the Lord, as the emperor is styled,
"thine? I thought I was the only proprietor in my dominions:" and immediately,
thrusting his lance through the heart of the unfortunate sheep-driver, divided
his flock among his guards. The only good deed that Muley Ismael, seems to have
done in his life, was the deliverance of his empire from numerous bands of
robbers; but even this only good action bore the stamp of his sanguinary
character. He ordered the massacre of all the inhabitants, men, women, and
children of a wide extent of country, round every place where a robbery had
been committed. When he gave audience to foreign ministers, he was usually on
horseback, in an open court; round him stood his several officers barefooted,
trembling, bowed to the ground, and, at every word he uttered, they repeated in
chorus, "Great is the wisdom of our Lord, and the voice of our Lord is as the
voice of an Angel from Heaven." But their Lord never dismissed an ambassdor
till he had given him ocular demonstration of his readiness and dexterity in
murdering some of his subjects; and this entertainment generally concluded the
ceremonies of audience.

Though all tyrants, it is true, do not act exactly like Muley Ismael, yet they
go upon the same principle, that their will is the only law. I shall spare
myself the chagrin of citing examples of christian princes, whose pleasure
seems rather to consist in procreating their species, than in exterminating it;
but who, in every other instance, are as lawless transgressors against
humanity, but have not the candor to declare, what John Galeas, Duke of Milan
said, "that he extirpated the robbers that infested his territories, only in
order to be the only one of that vocation."

But Asia is the quarter of the globe where tyranny is ever wakeful and ever
predominant, deeply fixing the eternal principles of destruction, under the
pretense of momentary advantage; granting but the wretched consolation of tears
and lamentations to the nations it devours, that the great and their
instruments may live in plenty and security, who repay with interest, to the
defenseless people, those lashes they receive from their lord. Property in land
has been set aside in Turkey, Persia, and the Mogul empire: the governor of a
province says, "Why should not I be a wolf, for I am master of the sheepfold?"
The countryman says, "Wherefore shall I labor for a tyrant, who will tomorrow
plunder me of what I have today earned by the sweat of my brow?" When the
Turkish bashaws travel, they are not content with eating the peasants out of
house and home, consuming whatever is consumable; but, when with their numerous
attendants their bellies are well filled, they are unconscientious enough to
exact a contribution in money, which they call tooth-money, or an
acknowledgment for the use of their teeth, which they have worn down by
granting the farmer the honor of devouring his victuals. Hence the dreadful
pictures travelers give us of the present situation of the Asiatic states:
hence they say, that the formerly so happy Mosopotamia, blessed Palestine, and
the admired plains of Antioch, are now almost as miserable and as barren as the
modern Campania of Rome; which is naked and desolate, destitute of inhabitants,
without enclosures, without cornfieldsd, without a tree, without a bush,
without houses, nay, nearly without even a bramble.

The power of the emperor of China is, in that civilized and praiseworthy
country, absolute and unlimited: he represents a sort of deity; and the
veneration shown toward him approaches near to adoration; his discourses are
listened to as oracles, and his decisions are followed as if they came
immediately from the highest Heaven. In Persia, the commands of the king are
punctually executed, although his majesty might happen to be drunk when he
issued them. In Japan, it would be thought a derogation to the imperial
dignity, if the emperor was to inflict any punishment less than death.

The vicissitude of fortune is no where so great as under despotic governments.
Persian princes of the blood royal were compelled to become schoolmasters and
ushers; and Kouli Khan left many of his ministers no other resource for their
daily bread. The great men at court are hourly deprived of their places at
Constantinople; and the longest life of those who are the most fortunate there,
is nothing but a life of uncertainty, suspicion, and fear. Under the last
dynasty in China, princes of the imperial blood were actually seen in the
condition of porters, and only distinguished from others of the same vocation
by their belts and cords being of yellow silk, which color is exclusively
permitted to the imperial family.

A cane, in China, supplies the place of the law. The courts of justice of this
great empire cause their paternal corrections, as they are called, to be
administered in twenty hard blows, which people of rank must submit to as well
as the lower orders. The smallest oversight in words or gestures is punished
with the bastinado; and when the offender is sufficiently cudgelled, he falls
on his knees before the judge, bows his forehead thrice to the ground, and
gives thanks for the care taken for his instruction and amendment.

The power of the emperor of China rests, like that of all other tyrants, upon
the dastardy of his subjects; their abjectness is so great, that slavery is not
even thought disgraceful. An opulent Tartar or Chinese mandarin has many slaves
in his service, he himself is the slave of another greater court lord, and this
last again the slave of the emperor. The Chinese in chains have lost every
thing, even the wish of breaking them.

Despotism is said to have no where been so mild and moderate, as in the
kingdom of Tanjour, on the coast of Coromandel. Raguola Naicher, who occupied
this throne in the last century, was so just and equitable that his memory is
still revered; he took but two thirds of the fruits of the earth from his
subjects, and in the night he caused search to be made after such as might
stand in need of relief.

A true republican must therefore necessarily be justly proud of a government
under which he enjoys liberty and security, when he considers, that in the
moral as well as the physical world there are large and small pismires, between
whom there exists such an inveterate and inborn hatred, that the great never
rest till they have exterminated the little ones.

Chapter XVI. Of Pride in Monarchies.
I HAVE somewhere read, that men are seldom fit to govern themselves, and that
their vanity submits with less reluctance to the dominion of one, than the
equality of many.

These are not the opinions entertained in republics on this head; but in this
Chapter I shall depart a good deal from my own ideas, and offer in lieu of
them, the observations and opinions of subjects of monarchical states, in order
to explain more clearly how that form of government can elevate the heart.

By pride in monarchical states, I understand, the elevation of mind felt by a
whole nation, when it finds itself peculiarly happy in the person of its
sovereign; the power of doing good without limitation, the power of doing evil
without the will, promises a golden age to the people as long as the will of
the monarch is directed by great and good views. The glory of that empire,
which in Europe most looks up to its king, will always be superior to that of
any other empire on earth, as long as its king is what he ought to be.

The subjects of a monarchy are, in our times, by no means all abject
creatures, unless by their absurd cowardice they make themselves so. We now see
benevolent monarchs filling European thrones, friends to the pacific virtues,
to the arts and sciences; fathers of their people, crowned citizens; and
ministers at their sides, who equally deserve a crown. The ancients had no idea
of the temperate system of our monarchies; their governments were either
entirely republican or entirely despotic. They did not know that the time would
come when those barbarous ages would be no more, when a tyrant assumed an
absolute control over our thoughts and actions; and that the subject of a
monarchy could be as much a citizen, as the citizen of the freest republican
state is a subject. They did not know that the time would come when the same
might be said of limited monarchies which they boasted of in their republics,
that not man but law was the sovereign. They did not know that order, system,
and perseverance could exist under the shade of monarchical power; that
property might be secured, and that we may sit down in the circle of our duties
at ease, and duly attend to them; while all the arts flourish around us, every
thing excites to emulation, and the sovereign may live in the midst of his
people like a father among his children.

It is a discovery of the present age, that a certain spirit of freedom can
exist under a kingly government. The spirit of liberty of a Montesquieu, a
d'Alembert, an Helvetius, a Mably, a Chalotais, a Thomas, a Marmontel, and so
many other Frenchmen of the first rank in literature, is the greatest satire on
the notion entertained by some respecting republics; and it tends to prove that
monarchy produces sometimes as great effects, and contributes as much to
universal felicity as republicanism itself. All depends immediately upon the
king in person, or upon his prime minister. We always see that their manners
have as much influence on liberty as the laws; that they can turn men into
beasts, and beasts into men; that they will have subjects when they love free
souls, and slaves when they prefer base and sordid minds. The Duke of
Choiseul's name and memory will be cherished by the latest posterity; for he
has required some of the best heads in France to examine the principles of his
administration, and to judge of its effects on the happiness or misery of that
great kingdom; and he has promised to avail himself of the lights they may
furnish him for the improvement or alteration of his system. This frankness, so
nobly courted in an entire monarchical government, would in many a republic he
thought a crime against the state; while, on the contrary, it has already
produced such edicts at Versailles as must greatly conduce to the augmentation
of the power and consideration of France; if this system can be persevered in,
and the attacks of self-interest, the most inimical motive that can exist to
this kind of improvement, can be parried with skill and firmness.

All the faculties of the mind and of the heart rise into action under a wise
monarch. In republics, a phlegmatic indifferent man is a good citizen, and such
are held the best for the interest of the state: a man, whose talents are
superior to those of the multitude, is dangerous; he would be a better citizen
if he were more a fool; his actions and motives are narrowly pried into by
suspicion as well as jealousy, and the noblest mind, therefore, often shrouds
itself in obscurity and lives in a painful inactivity. But under the auspices
of an intelligent monarch, (...) field is opened for the exercise of the powers
of the mind; where talents run the race of emulation, and merit obtains the
prize; where the character is stamped with greatness; where genius unfolds
itself; where wisdom and virtue break through the crowd, and dare advance with
unabashed countenances. Where virtue is honored, there it resides. Riches are
despised, when compared to the most insignificant trifles which are bestowed as
pledges of the gratitude and esteem of an enlightened monarch. He is the magnet
which attracts the greatest talents and most elevated vi^tues, the hand that
fashions them, the breath that animates them, and the center of their activity.
The most comprehensive faculties lie motionless and becalmed, (...) not called
into action by the sovereign.

A monarch does not shine forth a conspicuous object to posterity, elevated as
it were upon the shoulders of his people, if he leaves th^^ undistinguished
beneath him. They together accend to the same height, with the only difference,
that the prince stands at the head of a happy people, and the greatness of his
name is written on every forehead. The glory of the monarch extends over his
nation, and all those great men who, by their deserts participate in his glory,
though they glitter likewise for themselves, yet their luster is also
rereflected on the enlightened monarch who knew how to employ their talents. A
king, therefore, who understands the true art of government, concentrates the
whole worth of his nation in himself, and his glory is inseparable from that of
his people.

It has been observed, that the art of governing with honor requires but one
talent, and but one virtue, respectively dependant on each other: this virtue
is that of philanthropy, and the proper application of it is the talent
required. When a king is seriously and heartily inclined to do good, and
employs with scrupulous discernment the most infallible means in his power to
accomplish this glorious purpose, the honor that arises to him from his
efforts only returns to its own source. A king, who unites every part of his
territories by the bands of confidence and love into one body, of which he is
the soul, who encourages population and industry, who promotes agriculture and
trade, who awakens and rewards the arts, who calls talents into action and
gives protection to virtue: such a king accumulates in the (...) of peace an
immense treasure of glory, without its costing his subjects a single tear, or
the world when drop of blood; an harvest which is reaped by the hand which
sowed it, and enjoyed by those who assist in collecting it.

This ever-existing intimate connection between the glory of a monarch and that
of his subjects, is the chief foundation of noble pride in monarchical states;
every subject appropriates to himself a part of the glory of his sovereign, and
in the same manner, the sovereign is irradiated by that which his subjects
acquire.

The spirit of rapine in a monarch cannot, it is true, induce any one of his
subjects, who is in his right senses, to boast of it. The man who is in the
service of his king and his country, may carry arms in a good or in a bad
cause; he may have received the sword from the hand of justice, or from that of
ambition; he cares not why or wherefore; he is neither looked to as the author,
the justifyer, or the guarantee of the plan he carries into execution; his
personal honor is secured to him, and he is the more respected in proportion
to the energy with which he executes his duty. An extraordinary strength of
mind, and talents of the first rate, may make him feel the misery which they
occasion in the world, and may suppress the emotions of pride; but when the
genius of war animates a royal breast, and far superior to the surprising
disclosure of natural powers, far superior to the effects of a spirit of
contention, it is founded on justice, then every feeling mind exalts itself
with the king, and is justly proud of a monarch who, broiling in the midday
sun, and covered with dust and blood, performs wonders at the head of his
subjects.

Of such a king, his subjects will with justice be proud; who has passed the
days of his youth in solitude; who has shook hands with misfortune, in the
years of pleasure; and in the season of tranquil enjoyment has learned to be a
king, a philosopher, a legislator, a hero, and a man.

Under such a king, the genius of a nation will take a new flight; the arts and
sciences will rise into just estimation; philosophy will no more be pedantry;
and even courtiers will become philosophers, when the king despises that
frivolousness which, among the great, constitutes what they call high life; and
which is excusable in those shallow harmless kings, who, seated on the throne,
are tired with doing nothing. Liberty of opinion will present an undaunted
front; persecuted virtue will find an asylum; and oppressed innocence, a
shield: the spirit of persecution will recoil through its own subterraneous
passages to the dungeons of despair, and the injured will be revenged, when by
an inestimable piece of good fortune, philosophy, united to sovereign power,
assists in chasing from the throne those vices which are destructive of the
rights of man. Every path to fame will be open to the people, when the monarch
treads each path before them; and no nobler incentive to literary exertions can
exist, than when the royal pen flows with genius and wit; when the history it
traces is truth, and the poetry it produces is pregnant with thought and
spirit. Favorites will become sincere, and politicians honest, if he tears the
mask of flattery from the face of falsehood, and that of policy from cunning.
Innocence will never murmur against its judges, and justice and equity will
cease bleeding at every pore, if the monarch shows his indignation against the
spirit of litigation, and forces it back to the hell it came from; leaving its
encouragers and protectors, the lawyers and their dependants, to get their
bread by honest means or starve.

The subjects of such a king will cherish the most justifiable pride, when he
extends his regard as well to the humblest among them as to his choicest
friends; when he adopts every measure requisite to ensure the meanest peasant
as much real happiness as the highest peer; when his presence fills the court
with the awe of majesty, and the cottage of the labourer with cheerfulness and
content.

The soul of such a monarch will animate his army; when in war, he shares with
his soldiers the fatigues of a march, the inclemencies of the season, and the
want of all conveniences, and often of the necessaries of life; when he smiles
with complacency on their bands as they pass in review before him; when he
mixes in the middle of them, cordially presses their rough hands, and inspires
their souls with the same heroic hilarity he himself feels at the sight of
them; when he goes into their tents and converses with ease and familiarity,
gaily with the merry, tenderly with the unhappy; enquiring with sympathy after
their wounds, and sharing the smart of them; striving to conquer the impatience
of suffering, and supporting the heroism of their souls even in death; when
within sight of the enemy, by a penetrating and quick glance of all that is
necessary to the success of a comprehensive and well combined plan, he
regulates the present by his experience of the past; always can seize the
fleeting, the decisive moment of advantage, and pressing forward at the head of
his troops, carrying the banner of death before him, in the very heat of the
battle, surrounded by innumerable and imminent dangers, and fighting in the
thickest throngs of the enemy, can, with an unshaken presence of mind, observe
at one glance both danger and deliverance.

The subjects of such a king will with joy, in the middle of numerous and
impending perils, look forward to the day on which his glory will be firmly
established; when they behold the most powerful and warlike nations, and who
are the best appointed to strive for the empire of the world, rise up against
him; their country attacked on all sides, nearly overrun by its enemies, and
shaken to its very foundations; their monarch long unacquainted with rest and
ease, in order to procure these comforts to his subjects, watching many a
tedious night, while protected and secured by his plans and precautions, they
lie in soft and undisturbed repose; when they see him, ever more sudden than
danger, more vigilant than artifice, impetuous and irresistible as the
whirlwind of heaven, flying with his succor from one province to another, and
delivering innocence from destruction and rapine, wherever they appear; when,
by his unheard of exploits, he extorts admiration as well from his noble-minded
enemies as from his most zealous friends, and attracts the eyes of the whole
world; when he is quick, vigorous, eager and impressive, often making powerful
and decisive exertions, sometimes striking short of his aim, sometimes
receiving injury from the recoil of his blow; not following circumstances, but
bending them to his purpose; not removing obstacles, but over-leaping them; and
ever greatest where he has to redress a fault; when, vanquished, sometimes by
nature, sometimes by numbers, sometimes by heroes he has formed and taught to
conquer, he ever knows how to pluck deliverance from danger, and redemption
from the brink of a precipice; when every misfortune is but the never failing
forerunner of a great and surprising effort of courage and prudence; when his
losses lead him to new victories, and resembling nothing but himself, great and
unexampled both in prosperity and calamity, he now triumphs over his enemies,
and now over his misfortunes.

Every patriotic soul will more than ever glow for him, when, over the widely
extended graves of the victors and the vanquished, the wearied world shall
re-echo with the joyful sound of peace, and the monarch, greater even than in
war, shall on the festive day of his return to his royal city, steal away from
the loud acclamations and heartfelt exultations and blessings of the
multitude, to visit in solitude a neighboring field of battle, and calling the
adjacent peasantry around him, shall enquire with solicitude and earnestness
after their present situation, the number of cattle they now have and the
losses they have sustained by the operations of war; and alleviating, by every
means in his power, the distresses they have undergone, shall at night,
disdaining the offensive pomp of a triumphal entry, return to his palace by an
unfrequented and unsuspected passage.

The noblest pride can thus exist in monarchies, when the sovereign and his
administration are what they ought to be.

Chapter XVII. Reflections on some advantages and disadvantages of National
Pride, as founded upon real Excellencies.
I AM aware that many pointed, sarcastical remarks, occurring in this treatise,
will have called down upon my head the bitterest execrations of wounded pride,
which will have invoked heaven and earth, fire and water, hell and the devil,
and all their concomitants and dependants, to revenge its ideal wrong; and I
must still humbly solicit my pardon, for the wholesome but galling truths which
may now and then be found in this my last chapter.

An elevation of heart, reposing on a real and solid foundation, is certainly
of great utility in some cases, and is even sanctioned and approved of by
religion. Although we cannot boast of our merits before God, yet religion
inspiring us with the sense of the greatness of our destination, and the means
by which it may be attained, exalts our whole soul; while Divine Providence and
mercy infuse into us a steady confidence and renovated powers, to appreciate
and depend upon our own exertions, never leaving us to sink under the
weaknesses of human nature. Humility of heart can very well exist with
perseverance, resolution, elevation of soul, and, in general, with every
consequence of a cheerful consciousness of our good qualities and perfections;
provided we never lose sight of our dependence on God, and the consideration
that he is the mediate or immediate source of every good. A certain degree of
self-satisfaction too often, indeed, appears through the veil of humility; but
real humility does not require of us to deny the good we really possess, or to
prize it at a lower rate than it in fact deserves; so that religion, far from
condemning a noble elevation of heart, is rather a stable foundation for it,
since it does not require the knowledge of ourselves, only for the purpose of
subduing our vain glory, but for that of making us sensible of the faculties
and advantages we have received from the Creator, and exciting us to employ
them in a manner suitable to his glory and our own happiness.

A confidence in these faculties and advantages, and the firm belief in eternal
truth and justice arising therefrom, produces a strength and constancy of soul
which repels the ruling abuses and prejudices of a country; a courage to
withstand an universal hatred, and out of respect for truth, to set at naught
the opinions of the many.

This confidence in one's own resources begets that aspiring sentiment of
superiority, without which a man cannot attempt any noble deed; deprived of
this confidence, the bravest man sinks into a state of dullness and inactivity,
by which his soul is fettered and debased as in a narrow prison, where it
should seem to be endowed with power only to endure, where the heavy load of
calamity wholly presses down the heart, where every duty is a burden, the least
labor dreaded, and every future prospect gloomy and cheerless. Every path to
fame and honor is inaccessible to him, and his spirit lies motionless and
dejected, like the hardy polar navigator, who finds himself hemmed in and
surrounded on every side by a vast continent of ice. He arrives at nothing, for
he aspires to nothing; and he aspires not, because he is diffident of his
faculties. For this reason, we often see people of much lower merit, the
foremost in the road to fortune, only because their character is more
enterprising and undaunted.

It is from this same degrading and too low opinion of ourselves, that one man
becomes the slave of another. I see, with heartfelt sorrow, men of merit fall
into the extremest self-contempt, with regard to great men, on whom, perhaps,
sometimes their fortune depends; but who do not even require this abasement.

I have often heard a language held which is called humility, but is in fact,
abjectness of mind; which, for the sake of a livelihood hardly earned, or for
an ill-requited service, sets a great man in the place of a deity, and would
only be worthy of an Algerine slave, crouching before his Dey. Such language
penetrates my very soul, as it debases human nature itself; besides, more true
respect is ever shown to greatness, when we speak our sentiments freely and
nobly. Whoever falls into the fault, either in reality or in appearance, to
esteem himself less than he ought to do, becomes the slave of every one who
chooses to make him so. The fear of losing his daily bread deprives his soul of
all its energy, swells every guinea to a mountain's size, and stamps every
expression with the character of the most cringing servitude, unless a man be
unconquerably attached to his native liberty. With those who are so miserably
dependant on the smiles of the great for temporary sustenance, the opinion of
their own meanness swallows up all ideas of the innate dignity of human nature,
of nobility of sentiment, of self-confidence, and of their competence to judge
for themselves concerning what is right or wrong; they, at last, in reality,
turn the heads of those otherwise good natured nobles, by ever crouching before
them as before the throne of a tyrant, and by looking up to them with the same
fearful and sorrowful countenance as a friar does to his abbot under whose
tremendous censure he has fallen.

From this same too humiliating opinion of themselves, men become the slaves of
their passions and unfaithful to the purposes of their creation. More
confidence in their own powers would prove to them, that it is possible to be
virtuous amidst temptation, and that they may rise from the fascinating couch
of luxury and pleasure triumphant over both. Were the Ascetics endowed with
this confidence, they need not use such exertions to destroy the match at which
love takes fire.

We become unfaithful to the purposes of our creation when we do not possess
those solid principles which hardens us against suffering. Every man of
understanding is of no use to society, if, in a joyless retirement of the
world, he has not learned to bear with all that can wound the finer sentiments,
dissipate or oppose the softness of humanity, and pierce the tenderness of
heart arising from it. He ceases to exert his faculties, when he daily sees
people around him, who do not know that their understanding and taste may be
improved and sharpened, by a thousand things whose names they are even ignorant
of; and, who of course heartily hate the commanding influence of understanding
and taste. He snatches at momentary joys, and unnerves all the powers of his
soul, to be admitted into their society. He opposes the opinions of no man, let
them be ever so absurd. He pretends not to correct any prejudice or error,
determined, as Tristram Shandy very justly says to his mule, "never to argue a
point with any one of that family as long as he lives."

Except within the ever-cheering bounds of religion, it is impossible to find a
more powerful support under misfortune than in a reasonable self-esteem. Let a
worthy man, when persecuted and disgraced, only ask himself, who are they who
are always planning my destruction, who openly despise me, abuse, calumniate,
and scoff at me? Are they not, to a man, fools and blockheads? and such people
can be as little friends to enlightened minds, as thieves are to honesty: hence
it is an honor to be an object of their abuse. Every man of sense should
adhere to these sentiments; he should be conscious that he is above meddling
with this insect tribe. But if he has repelled their attacks, and sees that
slander now only dares whisper its malice, and dart its venom behind his back,
he will smile at its vain efforts, and think these people are heavily laden
with spite, and must discharge it at all events, or sink under it.

A reliance on good fortune, or that extraordinary concurrence of events we do
not foresee, supports a man in imminent danger, elevates his soul, and lessens
that dread which he otherwise would feel in his mind, when about to execute
some great achievement, he sees and weighs the difficulties and dangers he has
to encounter. This reliance on his good fortune produced that noble presumption
which Caesar, when yet but young, showed during his imprisionment in the island
of Pharmacusa among the pirates of Cilicia; who were then, by reason of their
large ships, and numerous fleets, masters of the sea, and, at the same time,
men of the most sanguinary character. Caesar sent all his attendants to the
adjacent towns to collect money for his ransom, and stayed accompanied only by
his physician and two servants, with these barbarians, whom he treated with
great contempt; often, when he went to rest, he ordered them to be silent, and
not to disturb his sleep. The Cilicians required twenty talents for his ransom,
and Caesar laughing at them, as if they did not know what a valuable prisoner
they had, promised them fifty: he continued perfectly easy and intrepid for
near six weeks, jesting and diverting himself with these rude outlaws; he
composed discourses and poems, which he read to them, and called such as were
not affected by them, barbarians and idiots: he went so far, as often to assure
them, with a laughing countenance, that he would have them all hanged; and, in
fact, he had hardly regained his freedom, before, taking some ships which he
found in the hardour of Melitum, he directly attacked these pirates close to
Pharmacusa, took the greatest part of them prisioners, and condemned them to be
crucified. This same reliance on his good fortune caused in this same Caesar
the memorable instance of intrepidity he showed a few days before the battle of
Pharsalia; when, disguised in the habit of a slave, he went in a little bark to
meet the fleet of Anthony, which was not come up: a violent tempest arose, and
threatened immediately to overwhelm them in the waves, when Caesar, taking the
trembling and desponding pilot by the hand, said, "Courage man! you carry
Caesar and his fortunes." Columbus conjectured that a new world might be
discovered, and persevering in his good fortune he discovered America.

One man thinks himself born to misfortune, another to happiness; just as a
gamester plays very badly the remainder of an evening, because he had begun by
playing unluckily: the first, always deterred by fear and irresolution, never
risks any thing, and will, therefore, certainly always remain in poverty, and
at the same time his irresolution will make him an object of contempt and pity
to others. The latter is fortunate, because he ventures as much as may be
without temerity, and a bright daybreak of good fortune immediately kindles in
his breast a higher degree of hope, which we call confidence, and procures him
the esteem and respect of others. Confidence in one's self produces the power
even of resisting time; an emulation of one's self, to surpass, by new deeds,
our former one's, and to eclipse, by greater merits, those which are already
acknowledged to belong to us; persevering in our career of fortune, till we
overtake the fickle goddess. But the greatest minds are those who, convinced of
the vicissitudes of human affairs, are never over-bearing in prosperity, nor
cast down in adversity.

Hence it appears, that a noble self-esteem actually gives us the power to
exalt ourselves above the weakness of human nature, to exert our talents in
praiseworthy enterprises, never to yield to the spirit of slavery, never to be
slaves of vice, to obey the dictates of our conscience, to smile under
misfortune, and to rely upon seeing better days.

It is of infinite consequence that this exaltation of human nature, this
confidence in our powers, should be imprinted in the bosom in the earliest
period of life. Young minds must be animated with the love of what is good,
noble, and great: virtue must be depicted to them in striking examples to make
them love virtue; we must inspire them with a high opinion of their faculties,
that they may venture to become virtuous and good; always teach them by
representation, impress them with the value of great deeds, by speaking
pictures, and encourage them to imitate what they see exhibted by sensible
objects. Lavater's national songs, and Solomon Hirzel's historical views of the
Swiss confederacy, are put into the hands of our Helvetian youth; these present
them with a picture of those times, when nobleness of soul was prised above
every thing; when virtuous manners found universal esteem, and heroic virtues,
universal renown. In youth, we are capable of catching that bright flame which
glowed in the heroes of former times, and of indulging the noble wish of
gathering laurels in the very places where our worthy ancestors reaped a
glorious harvest of them. The representation of noble achievements, and the
history of virtuous actions, have an electrical effect upon the pliant stem of
youth; they inspire the soul with admiration, and render the young men emulous
of these examples.

Great historical events, expressively delineated and conveyed to the heart in
glowing colors, the lives of famous men, such as those by Plutarch, and Casper
Hirzel, and the poems of Gesner, imprinted with the noble and indelible marks
of nature, have, therefore, astonishing effects on the minds of youth. I heard
my son once, in his fifth year, ask his mother, who pressed him to her maternal
bosom, while she explained to him Plutarch's lives, "Will my life, too, be
written?" Every child, nobly born, however poor his parents may be, will desire
to be great; when his heart is completely touched with the genius or virtues of
great men, the same virtues will germinate in his young mind, and he will burn
with impatience to fill, with regard to posterity, the same post of honor
which those eminent men have filled before him with such distinguished
splendor. This desire of emulation will frequently burst into tears, which
every father ought to reward by the fondest embraces.

Themistocles was very young when the Greeks vanquished the Persians at
Marathon, and hearing Miltiades, to whom they owed that victory continually
extolled, he became quite silent and pensive, and avoided all juvenile
diversions; his friends asked him the reason of this change, and this noble
youth answered, "the trophies of Miltiades will not let me sleep." Thucydides,
the historian, burst into tears when he heard, in his early youth, Herodotus
publicly read his history, amidst the universal applause of all Greece, in the
city of Olympia. Zeno exhorted those who looked upon the serious and
contemplative countenance of Pericles, as a proof of his insufferable
arrogance, to be animated with the same pride, in order to be inflamed with the
same love of the great and good, and that they might be insensibly accustomed
to the imitation of his virtues. Demosthenes was, when a boy, so struck with
the renown which Callistrates acquired by pleading, that, captivated by the
sublime power of eloquence, he immediately embraced the principles of Zeno, and
retired into solitude, abandoning every other study for that of rhetoric, to
which he entirely devoted himself. Homer was the author of much heroism among
the Greeks, as well as the father of poetry; it is well known how eagerly
Alexander read his sublime productions. When Caesar was reading the history of
that conqueror, during his residence in Spain, he shed tears, because Alexander
was at the same age so great, and Caesar yet so insignificant; not indeed,
virtuous tears, but those of ambition, which was the ruling passion of this
future destroyer of Roman liberty; as plainly appeared, when in passing through
a paltry insignificant village, he said, "I would rather be the first man here,
than the second in Rome."

These impressions on the minds of youth, constantly repeated, strengthen the
soul, multiply its springs, make every thing seem attainable to them, and
strongly excite that noble desire of fame which always is productive of great
actions when it is accompanied by virtue; while, on the other hand, an utter
insensibility toward the instances of nobleness of soul or superior merit,
which we meet with in history, is the surest presage that the youth on whom
they make no impression, will never be capable of any thing great. The Spartans
understood perfectly how to raise in their children this noble thirst of
honor; a reproach was the most poignant punishment they could inflict; and a
commendation was a rapturous reward; whoever showed himself indifferent and
unmoved by either the one or the other, was despised at Sparta as a mean,
little mind, unadapted to the exercise of any virtue. It is on this principle
that, very lately, a French minister of state, the Duke of Choiseul, has
commanded a man of learning, who possesses the feelings of a citizen, and the
penetration of a statesman, to make a collection of the fine sayings and
actions of French officers and soldiers, for the use of the military school at
Paris; and certainly this will be the best book that can be put into the hands
of a young French soldier.

All these reflections, taken collectively, lead to the conclusion of the great
consequence to a nation, of a noble self-esteem, and of the important advantage
resulting from it, owing to the close connection between a proper national
pride, and the love of one's country.

When the example of one single man taken out of a whole series of historical
relations, is sufficient to animate our hearts with such noble sentiments, how
much more must the accumulated examples of whole nations work upon our minds?
Great actions, in war or in the internal government of a commonwealth, fill our
bosoms with admiration of them and of our country, penetrating us with the
inmost veneration for those men who were sensible of the pleasure of dying for
their country; who did not withdraw from serving it, though their expectations
were defeated, though their disgust was ever so much awakened, their feelings
hurt, and their whole lives embittered by the sharpest stings of envy and
malice, which they magnanimously bore for the honor of virtue and of their
country's rights. It is for such men, that the reverence of a nation must be
excited, in order to beget in it a due respect for itself, which alone is able
to render it celebrated.

The pride arising from the merits of such men gives a nation a just claim to
immortality, when these great examples descending to posterity, unadulterated
by tradition, are admired and emulated. Hence came that great and noble energy
of soul and thought, with which the whole nation was animated, both among the
Grecians and the Romans. The love of their country was interwoven in their
religion, in their constitution, and in their manners; "Their Country" was the
soul of society, the universal topic of conversation, the word of battle, the
sound to rally by, the shout of victory in their bloody wars; it was the music
that charmed them in private life, the sinew of their actions; it inflamed
their poets, their orators, and their senators; it resounded from the stage, in
the forum, in all their public assemblies: it was brought home to the inmost
souls of their posterity, by the public monuments erected to its honor. But in
modern times, we often see whole nations devoid of this vivifying sentiment;
the love of their country has been transferred to the inhabitants of more than
one monarchy, and in more than one republic it seems to be considered as an
improper prejudice.

While whole nations placed their honor in liberty, and this in nothing but a
noble manner of thinking, the love of their country was the dearest sentiment
of their souls. Stronger than self-love, full of softness, loveliness, and
harmony; the love of their country included all that could touch the heart and
elevate the soul; it deprived death of its sting and luxury of its votaries:
the generous flame burned in every bosom, every heart glowed for its country.
Hardened to suffering, insensible to their own inconvenience, and
proportionably more zealous for the happiness of all, they were desirous of
nothing but what might tend to serve their country; preferring even its honor
to that of their own individual progenitors and the general good to private
advantage; they thought themselves sufficiently happy and honored, if the
republic was happy and honored. They laid aside their private animosities and
jealousies, and labored to promote the glory and interest of their greatest
competitors, when the public good seemed to require it. If injured by their
country, they readily forgot its poignant ingratitude, and served it even while
smarting under its sting; they submitted to its caprices, as a dutiful child
submits to the splenetic humor of its parent. Under every kind of hardships
they remained steadily and warmly attached to their country, and endeavored to
conceal their own sufferings from themselves, by fixing all their attention
upon the public welfare. They broke asunder, before the altar of their country,
the bands of affection, love, and tenderness, toward parents, children, wives,
and relations; they tore themselves away from every thing that could keep them
back in effeminate indolence; they were deaf to the voice of relationship and
love, and only listened to that of their country; they heard in the most
fearful sounds of war and arms, nothing but the thanks of their country on
their return; they never enquired after the number of their enemies, but where
they were. Each advanced with intrepidity to the post of honor, which perhaps
had been the grave of his gallant ancestors at some former period; each pressed
forward to assist in forming a rampart for their defenseless fellow citizens,
contented if, by his fall, he could give occasion to another to advance to the
same glorious death on the same spot; for, it was not the slain who lamented,
but those who ingloriously survived.

Hipperides, the orator, bit his own tongue off when on the rack, in order to
prevent the greatness of the torture, in which he died, from forcing him to
betray his country to Antipater.

Pedarates had not the good fortune to be chosen among the three hundred men
who enjoyed in Sparta a distinguished rank: and he went home perfectly
contented, saying, "I am uncommonly happy that Sparta possesses three hundred
men of greater merit than myself."

Before the battle of Marathon, the Athenians elected ten generals, who were
invested each in his turn, with the supreme command. The day approaching when
it belonged to Aristides to assume it, he generously yielded his authority to
the approved valor and experience of Miltiades. The other generals followed
the illustrious example, sacrificing the dilates of private ambition to the
interest and glory of their country; and the commander in chief thus enjoyed an
opportunity of exerting, uncontrolled, the utmost vigor of his genius.

Cimon, when banished by the Ostracism from Athens, joined the army of the
Athenians when they were about joining battle with the Lacedaemonians, who had
always been his friends, and with whom he was accused of carrying on a secret
and traitorous correspondence. But his enemies of the popular faction procured
an order of the council, forbidding him to be present at the battle; he retired
accordingly, but conjured his friends, who were likewise suspected of favoring
the enemy, to prove his and their innocence by deeds; and they, placing Cimon's
armor in the middle of their little battalion, fought and died in his stead
for their country.

The oath which every young Athenian was obliged to take, on the completion of
his twentieth year, when he was admitted among the number of citizens, was in
the following form: "I will never disgrace myself in war; I will never seek to
save my life, by an ignominious flight; I will fight for my country to the last
drop of my blood, in the ranks of my fellow citizens, or alone if circumstances
requires it; I will devote all the days of my life to the service of my
country; and Agraules, Mars, and Jupiter bear witness of my sincerity."

Thrasybulus, who, after the Peloponesian war, delivered his country from the
power of the thirty tyrants, animated his fellow citizens and fellow soldiers
with these words: "Let us fight like men, who can only by victory recover our
properties, our families, and our country; let every individual among us
conduct himself in such a manner as, without presumption, to think he owes
those great advantages, together with the honor of victory, to his own arm and
his own courage: he that outlives this day, and sees old age; he that can
behold the completion of his renown and his deliverance, will be happy; but he
who shall be liberated from his bands by death, will be no less happy, for no
monument is so glorious as the memorial of having died for one's country."

The Lacedaemonians were often unfortunate in their second war with the
Messenians: the courage of this warlike people began to sink, and the republic
thought itself near destruction. The Delphian oracle proposed the humiliating
expedient to the Lacedaemonians, to request a man from the Athenians to assist
them in this dangerous crisis, and who might support them by his counsel and
talents. Athens sent them, in derision, the poet Tyrteus: the Lacedaemonians,
however, received him as the sacred messenger of the divinity; yet they were
again defeated three times successively, and prepared to return to Sparta.
Tyrteus opposed this dishonorable determination with all his power, and
labored incessantly by his songs, filled with the most ardent glow of
patriotism, to rekindle the depressed courage of the Spartan troops; he soon
succeeded in regenerating in every heart the love of its country and the
contempt of death; their valor resumed its activity; they attacked the
victorious Messenians with an enthusiastic prowess, and were victorious in
their turn.

Epaminondas lay stretched on the ground, and mortally wounded in the breast by
a spear; but he was only uneasy for the fate of his arms and the event of the
battle. As soon as his shield was shown him, and he was assured that the
Thebans had gained the victory, he turned himself with a quiet and cheerful
countenance to the bystanders, and said, "My friends do not look on this day
as the last of my life, but as the first of my happiness and of the completion
of my glory; I leave my country victorious, the proud Spartans humbled, and
Greece emancipated from servitude;" then drawing the steel out of his wound, he
expired without a groan.

After the unfortunate battle of Leuctra, the Spartan mothers, whose sons had
died on the field of battle, joyfully went to the temple, crowned with garlands
of flowers, to thank the gods for having given them such noble children; while,
on the contrary, those mothers whose sons had saved themselves by flight,
concealed themselves in the inmost recesses of their houses, deeply sunk in
grief, and keeping a death-like silence; being ashamed to have borne children
who fled from their enemies.

The Spartan matron, who was told the death of her son in the service of his
country, nobly and stoically replied, "It was for that end he was born."

"O traveller, inform the Lacedaemonians, that we lie here, pursuant to the laws
of our country," was the truly laconic epitaph of those who fell at the battle
of Thermopylae.

For liberty and their country, those watch-words of every people not yet in
chains, the Privernates maintained a long and obstinate war against the Romans;
they were at length so weakened, that, forced to fly on all sides, they were at
last obliged to shut themselves up in their city, which was besieged and taken
by the consul Plautius. As this was the second revolt of the Privernates from
the dominion of Rome, they were deemed worthy of exemplary punishment; but
Plautius interceded with the senate for the innocent multitude, and
particularly for the prisoners taken in the war, whom he brought to the door of
the senate house; he did not, however, immediately draw the conscript fathers
over to his sentiments: they were divided in opinion. One of the Privernates,
by an haughty answer, endangered all his fellow-captives. Being asked by a
senator, "What punishment he thought the Privernates deserved?" -- "The same,"
said he, "which is due to men, who think themselves worthy of liberty, and who
persevere in every possible measure to preserve it." So daring an answer
exasperated some of the assembly; which Plautius perceiving, endeavored to
prevent the ill effects of it, by putting a milder question to the prisoner,
and which would naturally draw a softer answer from him: "Suppose," said the
consul, "we should grant you pardon and peace; in what manner may we expect you
will behave yourselves for the future?" The prisoner answered, "if the
conditions of the peace you may impose on us are just and humane, and if we
need not blush to have accepted them, we shall maintain it faithfully and
inviolably; and if it be a disgraceful peace, you must not hope that the
necessity which today compells us to subscribe to it, will tomorrow oblige us
to observe it." These words made different impressions upon the judges; some
construed them as menaces, and an indication of a disposition to a new revolt;
but the greater and wiser part applauded the magnanimity of the sentiments they
expressed. Those especially of the senators, who had filled the curule chair,
adhered to the opinion of Plautius, who loudly declared, and repeated it often,
"that a people, whose only desire was liberty, and whose only fear was that of
losing it, were worthy to be made Roman citizens." Accordingly, the senate
passed a decree in favor of the prisoners, and Privernum became a Municipium.

Examples of this nature shine in history as patterns to posterity. They awaken
in every noble mind an irrefragable sense of the duties we owe to our country;
and the preservation of the history of these examples is nothing more than the
propagation of that national pride founded on real advantages.

By the propagation, therefore, of a laudable national pride, the love of its
country is introduced into every heart. All breasts are accessible to this
pride, and they are all hurried away by the magic of these examples, to the
invincible attachment it generates. The continual retrospect of former times,
and the continual contemplation of futurity, are reciprocally the causes and
effects of this pride, and of this love. An honest patriot will sooner die than
commit any deed for which his children must blush when he is laid in his grave;
while nothing seems more noble or sublime to him than the thought that his
posterity will rejoice in his virtues and be respected on his account.

When, therefore, by the revival of these sentiments the principles and maxims
of a nation take a new turn, the actions of its citizens will likewise be
ennobled and will rise to the level of their acquired sensations. The man who
hopes to attain any post of honor in the commonwealth, without daring to think
on any subject with manliness, freedom, liberality, and penetration, will,
instead of succeeding in his views, be an object of derision and contempt.
Integrity will ever keep in mind the public welfare, and contribute its utmost
to the promotion of it, notwithstanding mean and little minds may call it
improvidence and indiscretion, whose views are directed wholly toward the
benefit of their families. Inequality of condition will lose its vexatious
nature, when there exists but one political virtue, and when all are united
under the noble appellation of citizen. The attachment to their country will no
longer depend merely upon the uncertainty of greater happiness in another (...)
will willingly live content with the (...) necessaries, rather than quit their
country in pursuit of the luxuries of other climes. Every (...) obey his
superior more from inclination than duty, more from affection than obligation.
The government will no more be the soul of many bodies, but rather the soul of
one body.

These advantages will be more discernible when I consider them in another
point of view, and prove how very impatient the cultivation of a noble pride is
to a nation palsied by the decay of its virtue.

The noble pride of a nation is diminished or annihilated when the advantages
gained by the virtues of their fathers are lost through the vices of their
descendants. Times are altered, is a common saying, and the conclusion to be
formed from it is neither difficult nor subtle. Times, to be sure, would be
much altered, with regard to a nation who depended on muscular strength of
body, if they were to be collected to fight but one battle now the art of
slaughter is brought to such perfection; yet no one doubts the indispensable
necessity of the modern art of war. But it is not only the knowledge of the
management of arms that is necessary to a freeborn nation; it must likewise
have an intellectual knowledge, and be endowed with principles and sentiments,
and these are not instilled by the blows of a cane or the sound of a drum.

In this respect, the change of times makes the resumption of ancient maxims
but too needful. Though courage and zeal in the service of the state are very
often out of fashion, yet they are never useless, always denoting vigor. When,
therefore a nation seems to loose its spirit, because its soil is no more dyed
with the blood of its sons; when the noble flame, formerly kindled by the love
of liberty, is smothered by an almost universal lethargy; when indolence is
chosen for the last intrenchment; when nursed in luxury and terror, the mind
looses the whole of its pith and strength; when enormous expenses make avarice
and the thirst of gold a necessary evil; when cowardice raises into
consideration, and valor depresses into misfortune; when men, not thinking
they stand any more in need of prowess, fall into every kind of profligacy;
when even the crimes which require a certain strength and elevation of mind are
not to be met with, when selfishness is no more thought a vice, and the timid
prudence of a moment no more a fault in politics; when ambition, instead of
endeavoring to excel its rivals, seeks only to blacken them by calumny: then,
I say, the revival of national pride would be a measure of no little efficacy
to rekindle the fire of ancient virtue, and reproduce the powers of youth and
manhood in the decay of age, when the nation seems to be near the last
struggles of dissolution.

All expectation of the revival of a noble pride, however, seems to be vain,
when, in a free nation, there are too many people in whose eyes Phocion was a
fool; too many who look down upon a hero with a haughty pity; who do not
believe that there ever existed any great men; who think fame an empty bubble,
because it has always proved impossible for them to do any thing worthy of it;
who contract their brows into the appearance of a frown, which visibly betrays
their timorous emotions, when the word freedom is pronounced by an adventurous
innovator in their presence; who would exclude from the press the most sublime
monuments of the honor of their formerly simple and unsophisticated nation, in
which the heroic deeds of their fathers are depicted in the most lively
colors, by which the love of virtue, of concord, of liberty, of religion, of
their country, and of the laws would, like a stream of fire, rush into every
heart, and awaken in it at the same time an utter aversion to the poison of
foreign manners, to prodigality, to effeminacy, and to avarice; adducing in
their support, this shameful and pitiful maxim, "That it is dangerous to pull
down an old house over your shoulders."

Thomas Abbt, a man of real genius, whom I cannot name without expressing my
reverence for his memory, says very pertinently, that the examples of patriots
appear with such luster in the annals of republics, since it is their interest
to procure the rewards due to their greatest worthies from posterity, because
their cotemporaries were too poor to afford them. The duties of remembrance, of
gratitude, and of emulation, are, therefore, imposed on us with respect to our
ancestors, and we can never fulfill these, if we look with indifference on what
is great and good in their manners and actions; if we turn away our eyes in
disgust from their contemplation, without deigning to be proud of them. It was
only the memory of their great men, that preserved among the Greeks the thirst
of honor, disinterestedness, and devotion to the public good.

The fate of this so necessary national pride depends upon that of the love of
one's country. There are many accidental occurrences by which this last is
sometimes carried to a genial warmth, whence the state receives the most
excellent fruits; sometimes to an immoderate heat, which entirely parches it
up; sometimes, in a people no longer susceptible of the love of liberty, it
will be so much refrigerated that its fruits cannot ripen. The chilling hand of
death stretched its baleful influence over the liberty of the Athenians, when,
in the days of their lethargy and weakness, they erected altars to the honor
of the harlots of Demetrius, and decreed, by a public edict, that all the
commands of king Demetrius should at Athens, be held sacred before the gods,
and just before men.

But emergencies sometimes arise, when the man who thought to plough his field
in quietness and ease, must grasp a sword instead of his instruments of
husbandry; when we are no more to confine our thoughts and cares to what
regards ourselves; when bullies, coxcombs, and idlers are called to other
business, than to loiter about from one company of females to another, boasting
of their amors, their inconstancies, and their idle pursuits; when those, who
know only how to command, must learn to obey; when it is not thought a
misfortune to have fellow citizens of genius and talents; when we wish to hear
the words liberty and my country repeated with ardour by every mouth; when
those are no more declaimed against as ridiculous enthusiasts who, in callous
times, have incessantly reminded their nation of its pristine glory, of the
time when its inhabitants were poor, virtuous, bold, and free; when fields were
cultivated by the victorious hands of the defenders of their country, and their
plough-shares encircled with laurels. There are times, I say, when those, whom
nature has gifted with energy and elevation of soul, and minds capable of the
sublimest virtues, are no longer watched as suspected and dangerous subjects;
when those who, in the career of youth, for the want of apprehensions and
timidity, miscalled moderation and prudence, which are too often the
consequence of experience, and have perhaps been impelled by an ardent
principle of patriotic virtue beyond the bounds of real prudence; who have
awakened the fear of their fellow-citizens, when they thought they beheld
impending or distant dangers threaten their country; and who have wanted only
an occasion to shed their willing blood in its behalf; are esteemed truly
patriots; when the empty applause of a few titled fools will not be procured at
the expense of turning into ridicule the noble enthusiasm and virtuous
principles of a whole nation; when hosts of foreign enemies assail it on all
sides, whose attack seems to threaten inevitable ruin.

A nation will therefore never loose its honor as long as virtue remains
unpolluted, and its virtue will never be tainted, as long as patriotism gives a
free and lofty flight to every sentiment of the heart.

Finally, national pride, founded on real advantages, has likewise its
defective side. A celebrated northern philosopher has made this important
remark, verified by daily experience, "That there are never any laudable
sentiments, any glorious talents or faculties in human nature, which do not at
the same time, by infinite gradation, degenerate into the very opposite
imperfections." Hence, it is evident, that the extremes of reasonable and
ridiculous pride often naturally run into each other.

The defects of great minds flow from their pride, when this degenerates into
vanity. Dazzled by the flattery of their admirers, these demigods shut their
ears as much to truth as the weakest princes; intoxicated with the sense of
their real advantages, they do not comprehend that these are not every where
current for them. Whoever always seeks applause, will always be liable to meet
with mortification in the extreme, and, in fact, will seldom escape it. He
will, at last, nearly look upon himself as the only being of consequence in the
world, and all its other inhabitants either as his admirers or his enviers; but
one of the ancients says exceedingly well: "If thou will not be just and
righteous without the ostentation of thy justice and righteousness, thou will
often be so with shame and derision." The secret of the most subtle vanity is,
on the other hand, nothing else than the art of making one's self prized,
without either appearing to be vain or self-conceited. Cicero was ignorant of
this art, or he would not have attracted the hatred of the Romans as he did, by
the ever-recurring praise of himself and his actions; it was the text of all
his orations, and never failed to offend his hearers, because he seemed to
esteem his services every thing, and those of other men as nothing.

Pride is always misplaced when it cannot command respect. It is very evident,
that a man who is constantly and habitually proud, cannot possibly be so, on
account of real advantages, since he disgusts all mankind by his pride, makes
himself despicable and ridiculous in every respect, and blinks through the
spectacles of self-conceit, until all around him are exasperated to hatred and
to goading sarcasm; and the contempt which is thus returned is generally much
stronger than that occasioning it. Astonished at his superiority over the rest
of the world, such a man endeavors to impress others with the same respect he
entertaias for himself, and of which he is so full; he accustoms himself to awe
freeborn men beneath his frowns, in the persons of his grooms and footmen; he
thinks that all beneath him, all on a level with him, nay his acknowledged
superiors, may be called the populace; but an author, the best acquainted with
man, the comic writer Stern, says, "In sober truth, it is but a scurvy kind of
a trick, (quoties voluit fortuna jocari,) when fortune, in one of her merry
moods, takes a poor devil, with this passion in his head, and mounts him up at
once as high as she can get him, for it is sure to make him play such fantastic
tricks as to become the very fool of the comedy; and was he not a general
benefactor to mankind in making it merry, I know not how spleen could be
pacified during the representation."

Nothing upon earth is perfect; virtue even has its vulnerable points, the sun
its spots, and a conscientious prude, who has passed the ordeal of grace, may
fall. We must not always judge of men who are thought great, by their writings
or their words, we must also view their every action; we must study them in
their lives, in their families, and in their houses; if we would rightly know
them. The old and rigid Cato had a concubine as well as the philosophical
emperor Marcus Antonius, and many a modern philosopher whom I know. The
greatest men are always connected with the rest of mankind by some foible or
other; and yet there are few of them who are so candid as Antigonus, who, on
Hermodotus saluting him as a deity and the child of the sun, told him very
judiciously "to ask the servant who emptied his close-stool his opinion upon
this subject."

The greatest talents assume a hateful appearance, when they are accompanied by
arrogance or break out in contempt of others. Contempt in an arrogant man
consists in the affection with which he shows, without reserve, his sense of
the real or imaginary inferiority of another. Contempt in a proud man consists
in the sense of the real inferiority of another, which he exposes when it ought
to be exposed, and conceals where it ought to be concealed. This sense is
inseparable from the noblest minds, and is ever just in itself, for it is
impossible that any one can mistake a cat for an elephant, or a gnat for a
mountain, but it is exceedingly offensive when it discovers defects where they
ought not to be observed.

A well founded and noble self-esteem degenerates sometimes into temerity and
presumption. Fanaticism is called a devout presumption, which by an excess of
pride and self-confidence, left to itself, pretends to approach the divine
nature, and to exalt itself by an astonishing flight above the usual and
prescribed order of things. It is greatly to be regretted, that sometimes the
moral writers, as they are called, abandon themselves to the giddy presumption,
when they do not sufficiently weigh against each other our duties and our means
of discharging them; when, in their reveries, they do not recollect that they
desire impossibilities, and that they rob virtue of its charms, by substituting
their rhapsodies and chimaeras in the place of virtue, while they endeavor to
deceive the public into an acquiescence with their eccentric ideas.

The well-founded pride of whole nations, likewise, has its blind side. No
nation can be with justice unboundedly proud; great virtues are accompanied
with great faults, every good with its attendant evils, and every advantage
with its inconveniences. It is no crime to expose this fact to a nation with
rational sincerity. My dear friend, Mr. Iselin, who well deserves attention,
says, in the preface to his beautiful but very short History of Helvetian
Virtue, "That every nation should promise a reward to those who shall display,
in the most obvious light, the defects of its Constitution and manners, and the
vices and faults of its progenitors, as well as their virtues."

People are often also proud of advantages, which though real, they do not owe
to themselves. The warmth or temperateness of a climate, the density or
rarefaction of the air, the nature of the soil, of the water and the winds,
together with the manner of living, and the customs, have all such a visible
influence upon the faculties of whole nations, that they ought not to ascribe
them solely to their own individual exertions. A worthy man may be proud of his
virtues, for they are his own, but why should we pride ourselves upon our
understanding, when the finest intellects are liable to be deranged by the most
trivial physical accidents. Independent of external circumstances; a little
extraneous air in the bowels, or an indigestible lump in the stomach, and lo,
the divine light of the soul is extinguished!

We but too seldom calculate how little of our own honor really belongs to
ourselves. There are few men so honest as Antiochus Soter, who wept for spite
on account of his victory over the Galatians, conceiving that he was not
indebted for it to his own prowess or conduct, but to the dreadful havoc made
by his elephants, and he, for that reason, caused trophies to be erected on the
field of battle not dedicated to himself but to these powerful four-footed
auxiliaries.

Yet there are many detestable vices which arise from a national pride not
altogether ignoble. The Canadian savage is extremely proud; he feels the full
worth of freedom, and is impatient of control, even in his infancy; restless
under the least constraint of education, he refuses to submit even to parental
authority; but a generous forgiveness of offenses is wholly unknown to him as a
virtue; he despises it as a miserable weakness: intrepidity is his greatest
merit, and the enjoyment of revenge his sweetest luxury.

The love of our country, too, requires sometimes a curb as well as a spur. It
has been very shrewdly remarked, that the lawgivers of ancient republics have
sought more eagerly to inspire the people with this noble sentiment, and to
extend and strengthen it in their hearts, than to set the bounds which reason
prescribes so as to render them perceptible to the multitude, and to make them
comprehend why it is necessary that the love of their country ought to be
circumscribed and governed by reason.

In their most exalted days, the Greeks held the love of their country as the
first civil virtue. We certainly owe a higher degree of that affection we ought
to bear toward all mankind, to our parents, our wives, and our children, than
to strangers; and a greater measure of the good will, which human nature in
general requires at our hands, to our own country, which is the proper seat of
our activity, the station appointed to us by Providence for the exercise of
every social duty. But this limitation, this contraction of our philanthropy,
often makes us narrow-minded, selfish, and unjust, nay, sometimes iniquitously
barbarous toward all other nations. As the love of mankind, like that of
beauty, seldom can be made to attach so forcibly to the absent, as to those who
are present, so we always esteem the Europeans more than the Africans, the
Asiatics, or the Americans, our own countrymen more than foreigners, and our
fellow-citizens more than our fellow subjects; but by thus gradually receding
from universal philanthropy, we are insensibly led to hate all that is not
immediately connected with us by the bands of interest or consanguinity, and
sometimes even snap these asunder: a convincing proof of a misanthropic
disposition not unfrequent in human nature. I know an European city, the
government whereof possesses an extensive and beautiful tract of land, which is
happy under its sway; but, unfortunately, the exclusive predilection in favor
of their fellow-citizens is so violent a passion in all the weak heads of this
city, that they deprive the inhabitants of all the towns in their territory of
emulation, excluding them from the enjoyment of all rewards or marks of honor,
and in the fits of their madness, would willingly drown them all if it was in
their power.

The more we cleave to the particular and individual interest of our own
country, the less philanthropic we most assuredly become. Such patriots act in
general most repugnantly toward foreigners, because they are so, and of course
are nothing in their estimation. The Jews of the old testament, were so much
attached to their country, that they neglected the duties of humanity toward
strangers. The Greeks despised all foreigners as barbarians, and thought them
destined to be their slaves, because nature had given them less genius and
understanding. The virtuous Spartans were unjust and fraudulent toward
strangers. A Japanese, who should chance to show the least esteem or friendship
for a Dutchman, would be pointed at as an enemy of his country, since he was
not attached to it in exclusion of the rest of mankind. They think it contrary
to the interests of Japan, to the commands of the emperor, to the will of the
gods, and to the dictates of their conscience, to feel the least inclination
toward a foreigner. This is in general the policy that may be said to actuate
the mercantile powers of Europe, who, considered in this point of view, seem
wholly to be animated with the meanest self-love; for they not only overlook
the depredations of the piratical states of Barbary upon the subjects and
property of those nations, who, both by every principle of religion and policy
are the eternal enemies of the crescent, but even form disgraceful alliances
with these freebooters, and submit to the grossest affronts and injuries from
them, seeming even to authorize what humanity shudders to think of, for the
sake of the pitiful advantage arising from the monopoly of the trade of the
Mediterranean.

But in our times, we have less to fear the evil effects of patriotism. I am
acquainted with men who are anxious to promote both the general and particular
welfare of their country, and aspire to this laudable pursuit at every step;
who divide their duties into tasks, and perform first those which are the most
universally benevolent, and produce the most general good to their country;
whose courage is not daunted when their friends weakly abandon them, either
from the bare view of the power of their antagonists, or of the menacing
authoritative frowns of the slanderers of their principles; who depart not for
a moment, from the line of their duties, either from interested or erroneous
motives; who feel that their souls are like lambent flames, which, tending in
their own essence upwards, can never sink to the bottom; whom no refusal can
intimidate, no opposition drive from their steadfast and noble purpose; who
never draw back; in whom the love of ease never renders the rational, but too
often useless combat, against the ignorance and depravity of mankind, a burden;
who, in a word, love their country with filial affection, forgive its injuries,
and excuse its errors, and would rather endure death, in a thousand shapes,
than once give room to think, that their zeal for their country would ever
abate on account of the disregard it may show to their personal merit. But the
number of anti-patriots seems in our days to have increased, and much more so
that of the hypocrites, who boast of their oaths and dearest duties, solely
because these are sometimes the only paths to honors, dignity, and riches;
while avarice and self-interest are the sole motives of all their actions. Many
a one exclaims that he loves his country, who loves nothing but himself; many a
one thunders forth his patriotism on all public occasions, while the cunning
villain secretly stretches out his itching palm to receive his yearly wages in
foreign gold. When here and there the torch of patriotism is uplifted, the
sparks generally fall on the fingers of the patriots, and this sentiment seems
sometimes to actuate every breast, while it is, in fact, only the fashionable
whim of the day; and our young fellows now travel to become patriots, as they
formerly did to become orators and cognoscenti.

Well founded national pride has thus both considerable advantages, as well as
evils proceeding from these very advantages. Virtues and vices are often called
into action by the same motives; it is the task of the philosopher to discover
these motives, and that of the legislator to make a proper use of the discovery.

Pride is therefore the source of so many beneficial talents, and of so many
virtues, that we ought not to endeavor to destroy it, but to make it
subservient to good purposes. Man would be a senseless block, if he were
forbidden every thing that could lead him astray. We must inevitably banish
good sense from a whole nation, if, more attentive to particular than to
general imperfections we were to attempt to command sentiments, rather than to
inspire them; and we should act against our own feelings, if, instead of
adapting faults to the good of the whole, instead of conducting mankind by
their passions, and of employing their foibles, even to lead them to good, we
were to smother principles and sentiments, which are able to animate a whole
nation, and to excite it to the noblest actions.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A
ABBT, Thomas, his saying respecting republics and the rewards of virtue Page
285 Abyssinians, their high idea of their own valor Page 121 Agesilaus,
embarked at Aulis when he went against Asia Page 191 Alembert, d', the freedom
of his writings Page 249 Alexander the Great, visited Ilium when he invaded
Asia Page 191 -- the veneration he expressed for Achilles ibid -- what he wrote
to Aristotle Page 204 -- his saying respecting Diogenes ibid -- the eagerness
with which he read Homer Page 270
Alkoran, precepts of Page 160 Anson, sailors of his ship, extinguished a fire
at Canton Page 147 Antigonus, his sensible reply to an egregious flatterer Page
291 Antioch, plains of, their desolate state Page 243 Antiochus Soter, anecdote
of Page 294 Apostle of Cracow, his pastoral letters Page 162 Appenzel, shrewd
remark of a peasant of that canton Page 232 Apraxin, Russian general, anecdote
of Page 85 Arabians, convinced of the infallibility of their caliph Page 110
Arabians, have not yet been subdued by the Turks Page 192 -- their martial
poetry Page 193
Arcadians, rejected astrology Page 90 Aristides, his noble disinterestedness
at the battle of Marathon Page 275 Aristocracies, preferable to the other
republican forms of government Page 234 Aristogiton, and Harmodious, their
statues highly honored at Athens Page 189 Aristophanes, the esteem he was held
in by a king of Persia Page 206 Armenians, victory over them by Lucullus Page
120 Arrogance and Pride, essentially different Page 179 Athenians, their vanity
Page 89 -- their veneration for their great men Page 189 -- their civic oath
Page 276 -- their degeneracy in the time of Demetrius Poliorcetes Page 287
Athens, famous under Pericles for the arts Page 209 -- personal security not
to be met with there Page 234
Augustus, a protector of the Muses Page 207 Ausburges, or alien, its degrading
signification in Switzerland Page 70 Austrians, their defeat at Sembach Page
200
B
Baden, Congress of, incident which happened there Page 64 Baillet, quotes a
scarrilous saying respecting the Germans Page 127 Baker's widow in Rome,
anecdote of Page 75 Basle, bravery of twelve hundred Swiss near Page 200 Bata,
inhabitants of Mount, their superstition Page 110 Beccaria, cited as an example
of Italian learning Page 216 Benedict XIV. his saying of the Jesuits Page 163
Bern, public stews established there in 1479 Page 173 -- Caterpillars which
ravaged that canton anathematized ibid
Bernier, his enquiries concerning the chronology of the Hindoos Page 92
Boileau, preferred by the French to Pope Page 79 Bramins, require their new
converts to eat cow dung Page 111 -- their great holiness in Tanjore Page 112
Budso, the new religion of Japan ibid Burgundians, their defeat at Murten Page
200
C
Caesar, his bold behavior while with the Pharmacusan pirates Page 265 -- his
memorable saying to the pilot of his boat on the river Aanicus Page 266 -- his
emotions on reading the history of Alexander Page 270 -- his famous saying
respecting the inhabitants of a small village Page 270
Calas, John, case of Page 166 Caligula, answer given to a very critical
question of his by Vitellius Page 126 Callistrates, the effect of his renown on
Demosthenes Page 270 Cambyses, subtle reply of his sages about the lawfulness
of his incestuous marriage Page 236 Campania of Rome, vanity of the peasants in
Page 73 -- its present deplorable situation Page 243
Canadian compliment to an European Page 80 -- savages are greatly proud Page
294 -- their unrelenting ferocity ibid
Carribbee Indians, think themselves the only men Page 80 Carnival, why
instituted at Venice Page 233 Cato, had a concubine Page 291 Ceramicus, of
Athens, filled with the busts, of deserving citizens Page 208 Chalotais, the
freedom of his writings Page 249 Charles III. of Spain, story of his confessor
at Florence Page 213 China, princes of the imperial blood in the condition of
porters Page 244 -- the despotism prevailing there ibid
Chinese, are vain of their antiquity Page 92 -- account of their antiquity
refuted by Nyen-Hy-Iao Page 92 -- their defective and preposterous geography
Page 129 -- their presumption respecting embassies to them Page 131 -- why they
have been supposed to excel in learning Page 137 -- their language very
difficult Page 138 -- their ceremonies pedantry Page 139 -- their constitution
and government very defective ibid -- their morality, defeats its aim Page 141
-- their ostentatious virtue Page 142 -- most of them are Atheists Page 143 --
their defective knowledge of astronomy ibid -- their real ignorance in medicine
Page 144 -- their art of war, despicable Page 145 -- their artists,
unskilfulness of ibid -- their music, almost as bad as the French Page 146 --
their painting, its defects ibid -- poetry, good for nothing ibid -- drama, not
beyond the first rudiments ibid -- their savage state in the reign of Fo-Hi
Page 147
Chinese, their foolish superstition Page 148 -- 150 -- almanac, what it
contains Page 150 -- the emperor absolute Page 243 -- their abject slavery Page
245
Choiseul, Duke of, his plan for correction of the abuses of government Page
249 -- collection made by his order for the military school at Paris Page 271
Chong-que, a name of China Page 130 Cicero, his offensive egotism Page 289
Cimon, his patriotism, and valor of his friends Page 276 Coffee-house, an
Italian publication extolled above the Spectator Page 216 Cole, William, wrote
a treatise against lawyers Page 135 Columbus, one of the founders of the modern
fame of Italy Page 215 -- his discovery of America, owing to his confidence in
his good fortune Page 266
Constance, ridiculous dispute between the Swiss confederacy and that city Page
176 Contempt, its nature defined Page 291 Corinthians, their noble sentiments
as expressed by Thucydides Page 189 Cosmo de Medicis, his own saying respecting
his government Page 233 Cossacks and Calmucks, despise the Russians Page 80
Crusades, view of the Page 159 Cubosama, the territorial lord of Japan Page 113
D
Dairo, of Japan, his pre-eminence Page 91 -- respect paid to him, etc. Page
112 -- his titles ibid
Dairo, is deified after his death Page 113 -- his court and dependants, vanity
of ibid.
Da^in's hypothesis concerning Sweden Page 94 Democracies, seldom admit of
personal security Page 233 Demosthenes, influence of his eloquence on the
Athenians Page 191 -- origin of his study of rhetoric Page 270
Descartes's opinions maintained by the French long after they were exploded
Page 169 Despotism, how produced Page 235 -- described Page 236 -- its effects
Page 237 -- most prevalent in Asia Page 242
Doge of Genoa, anecdote of one at Versailles Page 42 Du Halde's Chinese
history Page 92 Dutch, opinion of the English concerning them Page 77 --
obliged by the Japanese to throw their dead into the sea Page 113 -- their
equivocation in Japan respecting their religion Page 114

E
Edda and Wolupso, greatly reverenced by the Swedes Page 93 Egyptian chronology
Page 90 Encyclopedia, many of the writers determined republicans, Page 222
England, maintains forty thousand lawyers Page 134 English, the worthiest
nation of the globe Page 44 -- lover, story of one Page 49 -- their
prepossession against foreigners Page 75 -- against the Scotch and Irish Page
76 -- much duped at Rome ibid -- their opinions of other nations Page 77
English, the bluntness of their character Page 118 -- supposed indecorum among
them Page 119 -- animadverted on in a note ibid -- are universally assigned the
second place in literature by Europeans Page 128 -- think their common law a
wonder of perfection Page 134 -- and French greatly hate and contemn each other
Page 157 -- their drama formerly despised in France Page 172 -- are not vain
Page 183 -- their merits in the arts and sciences considered Page 216 -- their
liberal encouragement of merit Page 218 -- their freedom of disquisition ibid
-- their writings have infused a spirit of liberty into the French Page 222 --
preposterously think the French a nation of slaves ibid
Epaminondas, death of Page 278 Ephori, of Sparta, their capricious decrees
Page 229 Equality, defined Page 230 Euripides, his verses recited by the
captive Greeks, Page 206
F
Flattery, instance of gross Page 84 Florence, wine sold there by the bottle at
all the palaces Page 96 -- its flourishing state under the Medici Page 210 --
the great number of monuments erected there in memory of great men Page 211 --
esteem in which they are held Page 212
Florentine, noblesse their inconsistent pride Page 96 Fo-Hi, his reign begins
the Chinese history Page 92 Folly, the queen of the world Page 47 Fortescue,
Chancellor, his opinion respecting the common law of England Page 134
Franconian, catholic anecdote of one Page 106 Franks, their young women only
favored the brave Page 197 French, many individuals among them highly
respected by the author Page 44 -- their courtiers despised Peter the Great
Page 71 -- opinion of the English concerning them Page 77 -- their intolerable
self-conceit Page 78 -- they still foolishly boast of the capture of Mahon Page
86 -- culinary vanity of their generals Page 87 -- are all vain of the Siam
embassy Page 123 -- they even think their laws are superior to others Page 133
-- instance of the hatred existing between them and the Spaniards Page 157 --
their literary merits considered Page 219 -- Eulogium on their present literati
ibid -- their drama surpasses that of every other modern nation Page 220 --
their institutions and rewards for learning ibid -- their too great submission
to the caprices of the female sex ibid -- republicanism of some of them Page
222 -- the freedom of their parliaments ibid -- spirit of liberty of several of
their writers Page 249 -- Colonel, anecdote of one at Brussels Page 123 --
translator, his omissions and errors, his national pride, and religious
prejudices Page 86.88.100.146.159.167.172.197.221

G
Galeas, John, Duke of Milan, his candid avowal Page 242 Gallileo highly
honored at Florence Page 211 -- founder-of the modern fame of Italy Page 215
Genoa, Doge of, at Versailles, story of one Page 42 Genoese nobles, keep their
coasts in poverty and dependence Page 117 Germans, personal pride among them
Page 45 -- reproached for want of national pride ibid -- their character ibid
-- opinion of the English concerning them Page 77 -- saying of an Italian
writer respecting them Page 127 -- opinions respecting their literary merit
Page 128 -- their hereditary courage Page 197 -- 198
Gerundio of Campazas, title of a Spanish novel Page 173 Gesner's Poems,
recommended, Page 268 Goddess of Love how painted by some nations Page 64
Goths, their courage Page 196 Grecians, despised all foreigners as barbarians
Page 70.296 -- owed all their advantages to foreigners Page 72 -- their
historians seldom make use of foreign names ibid -- overvalued themselves on
their freedom Page 117 -- both hated and contemned the Persians Page 156 --
their high opinion of their sages Page 206
Greece, its modern inhabitants pride themselves on the former liberty of their
country Page 117 Greek church, warmth and violence of its sectaries Page 162
Greenlanders, their contempt for strangers Page 70 -- in particular for the
Danes Page 80

H
Harmodius and Aristogiton, their statues highly honored at Athens Page 189
Hatred defined Page 156 Hejaz, in Arabia, no Christian allowed to reside in
that district Page 109 Helvetians, their long struggles for liberty Page 199
Helvetius, the spirit of freedom of his writings Page 249 Henry VIII. anecdote
of his esteem for the painter Holbein Page 217 Hieronimus of Salamanca, his
bombastic praise of Torrubia Page 136 Hipperides, his stoic resolution Page 275
Hirzel, Casper, his lives recommended Page 268 Hirzel, Solomon, his historical
views of the Swiss confederacy recommended ibid History of the frogs, quotation
from the preface to Page 45 -- is an account of men's infirmities and defects
Page 51 -- of Helvetian virtue, quotation from the preface to Page 293
Holbein, anecdote of Henry VIII. concerning Page 217 Homer, the author of much
heroism among the Greeks Page 270 -- the eagerness with which Alexander read
his works ibid
Horace, declined being the favorite of Augustus Page 207 Humility, what is
falsely called so Page 261 Hump-backs, story of a nation of, in India Page 81
Huns, their martial ardour Page 199
I -- J
Japanese, deduce their origin from the gods Page 90 -- their dynasty of
heavenly spirits ibid
Japanese, their dynasty of demigods Page 91 -- their contempt for Christians
Page 113 -- are ignorant of geography Page 132 -- were formerly a warlike
nation Page 199 -- the punishments inflicted by the emperor are all capital
Page 243 -- their contempt and hatred of the Dutch Page 297
Jesuit, device of one to please the Chinese Page 130 Jesuits, the emperor
Yong-Tching's speech to them Page 131 -- could not persuade the Chinese to
receive an embassy from France ibid -- the church they had at Pekin with
difficulty allowed to be built after an European model Page 146 -- called
janisaries of the Holy See by Pope Benedict XIV. Page 163
Jews, refuse to receive wine from Christians Page 107 -- are universally
contemned and despised Page 156 -- their exclusive attachment to their own
nation Page 296
Ignorance of the law, prevails no where more than in England Page 134 Indians,
their mode of beatification Page 110 Individual pride Page 47 Indostan, its
inhabitants pretend to great antiquity Page 92 Insja-Fuse, a sect in Japan Page
111 Irish, averse to innovation Page 118 Isanagi-No-Mikotto, tradition
concerning him in Japan Page 91 Iselin, quotation from his preface to the
History of Helvetian Virtue Page 293 Isla, a Spanish jesuit, his satirical
novel Page 173 Israelites, their contempt for the Samaritans Page 107 Italians,
well worthy of regard Page 44 -- their vanity Page 72
Italians, opinon of the English concerning them Page 77 -- their cunning in
poisons Page 87 -- though notorious slaves, they still boast of their freedom
Page 117 -- saying of one of their writers respecting the Germans Page 127 --
long held all the Transalpine nations as barbarians ibid -- their preposterous
attachment to the observance of the laws of the church Page 165 -- their merits
in the arts and sciences considered Page 210
Jumonville, a French heroic poem, an instance of national hatred Page 157
Jurisdictions, petty ludicious image of their gravity Page 67
K
Khan, of Tartary, his vanity Page 124 Kouli-Khan, instances of the vicissitude
of fortune under his government Page 244 Kuni-Toko-Dat-Sii-No-Mikotto, the
first deity of Japan Page 90
L
Lacedaemonians, incident of their second Messennian war Page 277 -- epitaph of
those who fell at Thermopolae Page 279
Ladrones, the inhabitants of, think all other nations are dumb Page 84
Laplanders, their tradition concerning their origin and that of the Swedes Page
94 -- place their paradise in continual snow Page 155
Lavater's national songs, recommended Page 268 Laupen, bravery of the Bernians
there Page 200 Law, of nature and nations, little known in France Page 133
Laws, of England require twenty years study Page 135 Lawyers, England maintains
forty thousand Page 134 -- obtained an immunity from reformation of abuses in
1659 Page 135 -- this circumstance explained and animadverted on in a note ibid
Lefranc, is offended at the English for putting themselves on a level with the
French Page 79 Le Sack, a dancing master, story of Page 52 Leuctra, behavior
of the Spartan matrons after that battle Page 279 Liberty, definition of Page
227 Library of the Medici, stupidity of a friar on visiting it Page 213 Lobo,
father, story of, whilst in Abyssinia Page 121 Lodbrog, a northern chief, his
dying exclamations Page 196 Love of one's country, its effects among the Greeks
and Romans Page 272 -- sometimes requires a curb Page 294
Lucern, ridiculous dispute between that Canton and the city of Constance Page
176 Lucullus, his victory over Tigranes Page 120 -- victory of, compared to the
battle of Rosbach Page 121

M
Mably, the spirit of freedom in his writings Page 249 Madura, kings of, claim
their descent from a jack-ass Page 86 Mohammedan religion, inspires arrogance
Page 107 -- as much rent by sects and schisms as christianity Page 109
Mahon, the French foolishly boast its capture Page 86 Malabars, pretend to
great antiquity Page 93 Malacca, king of, his titles Page 122 Marathon, the
battle of, productive of the noblest emulation Page 190 -- the supreme command
there resigned to Miltiades Page 275
Marcus Antonius, had a concubine Page 291 Marmontel, the spirit of freedom of
his writings Page 249 Martinelli, what he says of Germany Page 128 Mentz,
Elector of, has founded a college of the Augsburgh confession Page 174
Mesopotamia, its present desolate state Page 243 Messenian war, second,
incident of Page 277 Metaphysician, definition of, by a mathematician Page 59
Milan, candid avowal of John Galeas, Duke of Page 242 Miltiades, effect of his
trophies on the mind of Themistocles Page 269 -- the supreme command resigned
to him at the battle of Marathon Page 275
Minorcans, averse to innovation Page 118 Mogul, the Great, his titles Page 122
-- those of the grandees of his court ibid
Monarchical pride Page 247 Monarchies, the best field for the exertion of
abilities Page 250 Montague, Lady M --. W --, quotation from her travels Page
159 Montesquieu, story from his Persian letters Page 124 -- his opinion of the
system of laws in France Page 134 -- the spirit of freedom of his writings Page
249
Moors, believe their country the finest in the world Page 154 -- their abject
submission to tyranny in Morocco Page 239
Morocco, account of the despotism prevalent there ibid Morocco, anecdotes of
one of the emperors Page 240, 241 Mount Bata, inhabitants of, their
superstition Page 110 Muley Ismael, emperor of Morocco, various anecdotes of
Page 240, 241 Muri, Abbot of, his ostentatious pride, Page 124 Murten, defeat
of the Burgundians by the Helvetians there Page 200 Myrmidons, their origin
Page 86
N
Natches, their laughable nobility Page 97 -- ridiculous pride of their chief
Page 123
National Pride in general Page 42.69 -- as arising from imaginary advantages
Page 83.153 -- from imaginary antiquity or nobility Page 89 -- liberty, valor,
or consideration Page 117 -- from ignorance of foreign affairs Page 127 -- from
ignorance in general Page 133 -- from real advantages Page 179.259 -- from the
heroism of our ancestors Page 187 -- from arts and sciences Page 203 -- from
government Page 225 -- in republics Page 227 -- in monarchies Page 247
Negroes, paint their devil white Page 64 -- are very vain Page 80 -- have a
multiplicity of gods Page 110 -- despise the Europeans for having but one ibid
Newton, despised in France Page 79 -- extraordinary honors conferred on him
in England, Page 218
Nice, custom there Page 175 Nicias's Sicilian expedition mentioned Page 206
Nile, both Jews and Christians prohibited from being present at the opening of
its canals Page 109 Niphon, a name of Japan Page 132 Nostalgia, a disease
almost peculiar to the Swiss Page 201
O
Octavia, greatly affected by Virgil's poetry Page 207 Odin, his Wolupso, his
heaven and hell Page 194 -- his death Page 195
Ohio, Indian tribe on its banks with long hair Page 84 Omar, the reason he
gave for destroying the Alexandrian library Page 61 Osman, made a gardener
viceroy of Cyprus Page 85 Ostracism, why introduced at Athens Page 134 Oxford,
public disputation there on Ash Wednesday ridiculed Page 129
P
Palestine, its present desolate state Page 243 Paraguay, opinion held there
respecting the moon Page 93 Paris review, reply to remarks in one Page 45 --
custom there of going a hunting in a coach Page 64
Parisian, stupidity of one Page 63 -- of a bookseller there Page 127 -- their
presumptuous vanity Page 177
Parliaments of France, the noble freedom they begin to assume Page 222
Partiality of historians Page 166 Patin, his abuse of the English Page 79
Pausanias, his travels through Greece Page 209.212 Pedaretes, his noble
disinterestedness Page 275 Pericles, encouraged the arts Page 239 -- the
emulation of his virtue recommended by Zeno Page 269
Persian letters, story of a negro king taken from them Page 124 Persians,
their annual festival in honor of Ali Page 109 -- the contempt in which they
are held by the Turks Page 109 -- their great ignorance respecting Europe Page
129 -- the absoluteness of their kings Page 243
Peter, the Great despised by the French courtiers Page 71 Pharmacusa, anecdote
of Julius Caesar while a prisoner there Page 265 Physical History of Climates
ridiculed Page 85.87 Piedmont, mountains of, contain many reduced noble
families Page 97 -- story of a traveller through them ibid
Plutarch, what he relates concerning the Jews Page 204 -- his lives,
recommended for the instruction of youth Page 268 -- sentiment raised in the
author's infant son by listening to them Page 269
Poets, their vindictive spirit Page 60 Politics, little known and understood
in China Page 141 Portuguese, opinion of the English Concerning them Page 77 --
their laughable pride respecting their complexion Page 84
Pride, of individuals Page 47 -- of whole nations Page 69 -- arising from
imaginary advantages Page 73.153 -- from imaginary antiquity or nobility Page
89 -- liberty, valor, power, and consideration Page 117 -- from ignorance Page
127.168 -- from ignorance in general Page 133.199 -- from real advantages Page
179.249 -- from heroism and valor Page 187 -- from the arts and sciences Page
203 -- from the form of government Page 125
Pride, in republics Page 127 -- in monarchies Page 247
Primitive Christians, calumniated by the heathens and the Jews Page 105
Privernates, reduced by the Romans Page 279 -- noble reply of one of them Page
280 -- made Roman citizens in consequence ibid
Privernum, made a municipium ibid Professions, mutually despise each other
Page 58 Ptolemy Philadelphus, his encouragement of the arts and sciences Page
206 Pythagorus, his sentiment of the sense of inward worth Page 281
R
Rabenius, his opinion respecting the peopling of Sweden Page 94 Raphael,
called poor and spiritless by the French Page 79 Reflections, on national
pride, founded on imaginary advantages Page 153 -- on real advantages Page 259
Religious pride Page 99 -- its bad consequences Page 158
Republican pride Page 227 Republican, definition of one ibid Resewitz, Dr. his
report of bigots Page 164 Rheinthal, laughable complaint of its inhabitants
Page 70 Romans, their enthusiastic persuasion of the pre-eminence of Rome Page
192 -- their enthusiasm on beholding the images of their ancestors Page 208
Rome, its senate to what dwindled Page 73 -- rangers of all religions are
tolerated there Page 174
Rome, arose from conquest to literature Page 207 Roncalli, his ignorant
assertion respecting inoculation Page 128 Rudbeck, gives the Swedish monarchy a
great antiquity Page 94 Russian nobleman, story of one, viewing a collection at
Florence Page 213
S
Salamis, incident after the battle of Page 52 Saint Marino, its citizens
compare their republic with ancient Rome Page 117 -- think themselves the only
good and honest men Page 155
Scandinavian poets, their martial ardour Page 195.197 Scythians, their
resemblance to the Greeks Page 194 Sembach, defeat of the Austrians there by
the Swiss Page 200 Senate of Rome, to what now dwindled Page 73 Sextus V. his
embellishment of Rome Page 211 Sinto, primeval religion of Japan Page 111
Smollet, Dr. quoted Page 155 Spalding, has inveighed against pride Page 180
Spaniards, opinion of the English concerning them Page 77 -- their laughable
pride respecting their complexion Page 84 -- their pride of ancestry Page 94 --
their peasants too proud to work Page 95 -- think the French beggars Page 96 --
many men of genius among them Page 135 -- are great lovers of the mavelous
Page 136 -- the sciences in a wretched state among them ibid -- believe that
God conversed with Moses in Spanish ibid -- the inflated appellations of their
colleges ibid -- instance of the hatred between them and the French Page 157
Spaniards, their cruelties in America Page 163 Spanish preacher, his
blasphemous exclamation Page 80 -- eulogist of St. Reche, his absurd
nationality Page 177
Spartans, their bravery and attachment to liberty Page 177 -- the willingness
and readiness with which their laws were required to be observed Page 229 --
they raised emulation in their children Page 271 -- were unjust and hard
toward strangers Page 296
Spartan, matrons, their behavior after the battle of Leuctra Page 279 --
heroic reply of one, on being told the death of her son ibid
Stern, has inveighed against pride Page 180 -- quotation from his sermon on
that subject Page 296 -- from Tristram Shandy Page 264
Sunni and Schias, sects of Mahometans Page 108 Swedes, carry back the history
of their kings to Noah Page 94 -- Lapland tradition of their origin ibid --
Rabenius and Dalin's opinion concerning their antiquity ibid
Swiss, reply of one, on the subject of regal magnificence Page 64 -- of
another to the solicitations of a German prince for his daughter Page 70 --
esteemed brutes, at Paris, Vienna, and Rome Page 71 -- opinion of the English
concerning them Page 77 -- Roman Catholics emigrate to Spain Page 96 -- prefer
their barren mountains to the plains of Lombardy ibid -- instances of their
courage Page 199 -- their victory at Laupen Page 200 -- over the Austrians at
Sembach, ibid -- battle with the French near Basi^ ibid
Swiss, their victory over the Burgundians at Murten Page 200 -- Nostalgia, a
disease almost peculiar to them Page 201

T
Tacitus, says the Jews adore an ass Page 104 Talmud, precepts of, relative to
the salutation of Christians Page 107 Tanjour, holiness of the Bramins there
Page 112 -- mildness of the reign of one of its kings Page 245
Tartars, think their Lama infallible Page 110 -- how they secure their
beatification ibid -- vanity of their Khan Page 124
Tching-Tsong, emperor of China, a great encourager of superstition Page 149
Tenka, a name of Japan Page 132 Tenka-Sama, one of the titles of the emperor of
Japan, ibid Tensio-Dia-Dsin, commenced the dynasty of demigods in Japan Page
91 Themistocles, unanimously allowed the second palm after the battle of
Salamis Page 52 -- his saying respecting the trophies of Miltiades Page 269
Thermopylae, epitaph of the Spartans who fell there Page 279 Thomas, his poem
of Jumonville reprobated Page 157 -- the spirit of liberty of his writings Page
249
Thrasibulus, his speech on delivering Athens from the thirty tyrants Page 277
Thucydides, speech of the Corinthians in his history Page 189 -- his admiration
of Herodotus Page 259
Tien-Hia, a name of China Page 130 Tigranes, his indolence and security when
attacked by Lucullus Page 120 Torrubia's natural history of Spain lavishly
praised Page 136 Toulouse, bigotry of the parliament and inhabitants there in
the case of Calas Page 166 Trastaverini, in Rome, their vanity Page 74 Tristram
Shandy, quotation from Page 264 Turks, their inconsistency in distributing
offices and places Page 85 -- believe all the patriarchs and prophets were
Mussulmen Page 104 -- greatly contemn the sect of Ali Page 108 -- seldom affirm
notorious falsehoods ibid -- look on all who are not true believers as dogs
ibid -- their ludicrous idea respecting the Persians Page 109 -- upbraid us
with polytheism Page 110 -- foolishly called pagans ibid -- unconscionable
oppression and extortion of their bashaws Page 242
Tyrteus, sent by Athens to the assistance of the Lacedaemonians Page 277 -- his
great utility to them Page 278

U and V
Vanity, of some families at Rome Page 75 -- of a Negroe king Page 124
Venice, why the carnival was instituted there Page 133 Venetians, curious
reason they once gave for condemning one of their magistrates to death Page 132
Verona, decayed noblemen there Page 97 Versailles, Swiss halberdiers at Page 71
Villars, marshal, anecdote of Page 64 Virgil, thought a saint by the peasants
round Naples Page 104 -- the honors he enjoyed Page 207
Vitellius, his answer to a critical question of Caligula Page 126 Viviani, his
house at Florence described Page 211 Universality of pride Page 41 Voltaire,
supports the chronology of the Chinese Page 92 -- calls Fenelon a deist Page 204

W
Welsh, their genealogical pride Page 95 Xerif of Mecca, his obligation to
interdict infidels the entrance into a consecrated tract Page 108 Xerxes, his
pride of power Page 122
Y
Yorkshire fox-hunter, reasons of his vanity Page 76 Yong-Tching, emperor of
China, his speech to the Jesuits Page 131
Z
Zealots, gloomy, their character Page 55 Zell, strange instance of French
vanity at that court Page 70 Zeno, his exhortation to the disparagers of
Pericles Page 269 Zurick, anecdote of a man of learning coming to reside there
Page 171 Zuricker, his reproof of marshal Villars Page 64
NEW PUBLICATIONS PRINTED FOR H. CARITAT, BOOKSELLER, STATIONER, and LIBRARIAN,
No. 143, BROADWAY.
WIELAND, OR THE TRANSFORMATION; AN AMERICAN TALE. By a Citizen of the United
States. Price one dollar, neatly bound. CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY; A TALE, (IN FOUR
VOLUMES, BOUND IN TWO,) By Regina Maria Roche, Author of the Maid of the
Hamlet, etc. Price two dollars, neatly bound. ORIGINAL LETTERS OF THE
UNFORTUNATE LOVERS, FERDINAND AND ELIZABETH; Who lately killed each other in
this City. By an English Gentleman. Price seventy-five cents, neatly bound, and
fifty-six cents, in paper. ORMOND; OR, THE SECRET WITNESS. By the Author of
WIELAND, or THE TRANSFORMATION. Price one dollar, neatly bound.

