A BRIEF HISTORY OF EPIDEMIC AND PESTILENTIAL DISEASES; WITH THE PRINCIPAL
PHENOMENA OF THE PHYSICAL WORLD, WHICH PRECEDE AND ACCOMPANY THEM, AND
OBSERVATIONS DEDUCED FROM THE FACTS STATED.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

BY NOAH WEBSTER, Author of Dissertations on the English Language and several
other Works -- Member of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences -- of the
Society for the Promotion of Agriculture, Arts and Manufactures, in the State
of New York -- of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and corresponding
Member of the Historical Society in Massachusetts.

VOL. I.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. 1799.

[PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE work quoted under the title of "Magdeburgh History," is a compilation of
Ecclesiastical History made by several writers at Magdeburgh, and divided into
centuries.

The work quoted under the title of "Hist. August." is a collection of the
histories of the Roman affairs under the Emperors.

The work cited under the title of "Angl. Script," is a collection of the early
historians of England.

The work cited under the title of "Germ. Script," is a collection of the
ancient histories of Germany, by Pistorius.

In a f^w instances, authors are cited without the page or chapter. This has
arisen from the manner in which my materials were obtained -- which was to
transcribe passages from books wherever I found them, in public or private
libraries, and sometimes, when books fell in my way by accident, without the
intention of using them as authorities. The instances however are not numerous,
and the passages may generally be found with ease by the index or chronological
order of the work. Since I have had it in view to publish this treatise, and
especially since discovering a disposition in some persons to decry this
attempt to investigate truth, by charging me with a design to collect facts for
the purpose of supporting preconceived opinions, I have been more careful to
note my authorities. This must be my apology for citing so many authorities,
which might otherwise appear like affectation.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
INTRODUCTION, Page v. SECTION I. Of the diversity of opinions respecting the
cause and origin of pestilence. Page 9. SECTION II. Historical view of
pestilential epidemics, and the phenomena in the physical world which precede,
attend or follow them, from the earliest accounts to the Christian era, Page
24. SECTION III. Historical view of pestilential epidemics, from the Christian
era, to the year 1347, Page 65. SECTION IV. Historical view of pestilential
epidemics, from the year 1347 to 1500, Page 133. SECTION V. Historical view of
pestilential epidemics from the year 1500 to 1600. Page 151. SECTION VI.
Historical view of pestilential epidemics from the year 1600 to the close of
the year 1700, Page 171. SECTION VII. Historical view of pestilential epidemics
from the year 1701, to the year 1788, Page 216. SECTION VIII. Historical view
of pestilential epidemics from the year 1788 to the year 1799, including the
last epidemic period, Page 283.
ERRORS.
PAGE 37, line 9, from bottom, read siccitate. 44, line 10, read metu. 76, line
16, read Lampridius. 87, line 3, from bottom, after cold, place a comma. 104,
line 22, read deacon. 106, line 2, read inguinaria. 156, line 9, read Alcmar;
also in page 174, line 12. 169, line 4, from bottom, read Penrith. 204, line
18, after petechial, read fever. 241, line 3, read 1750. 260, line 18, for of
read or.
IN page 255 a fact is stated which contradicts the statement respecting the
planet Mars in page 241. There is an error in one of the statements; and I
leave astronomers to determine by calculations which of the authorities, Ames'
Almanac for 1750, or the Annual Register, is wrong. The error is not material
to my subject. The only question of consequence, is, whether the near approach
of Mars had any influence, in producing the extreme heat of 1749 and 1766 -- a
question I pretend not to determine.

INTRODUCTION.
A PUBLICATION on the subject of diseases, from the pen of a man who has never
before turned his attention to medical science or to chemistry, is a
circumstance, which, if it does not require an apology, demands at least an
explanation.

The prevalence of the catarrh, commonly called influenza, in the years 1789
and 90, first awakened my curiosity on the subject of epidemic diseases. A
journey which I made in October 1789, from Hartford to Boston; and another in
March 1790 from Hartford to Albany; led me to observe the progressiveness of
that disease, with its other phenomena.

The appearance of the scarlatina anginosa in 1793 revived my curiosity, and a
similar circumstance, a journey from Hartford to New York in April of that
year, led me to observe a progression in that disease from West to East. A
slight attack which my own children suffered, in May following, together with a
similar attack of many other children in Hartford, and its more violent effects
some months after, convinced me that the epidemic was progressive in
malignancy, as well as in regard to place.

Had no other epidemic appeared, my curiosity would probably have subsided and
been extinguished. The malignant fever in New York in 1791, had excited alarm
in that city, and was a subject of notice in Hartford where I then resided; but
no idea had been conceived, that it was connected with a pestilential state of
the air, in the United States, which was afterward to produce more serious and
general calamities.

In autumn 1793 however that pestilential state of air arrived to its crisis in
Philadelphia, where the mortality occasioned by the yellow fever, spread
destruction and dismay, from August to November. The fatality of the disease
spread consternation through the United States, and excited apprehensions in
Europe.

No American citizen could be indifferent to the prevalence of this disease in
his own country. Still it was conceived that the distemper might have been
produced from imported infection, and that a more rigid execution of the laws
relating to quarantine, might prevent a repetition of the calamity. Here rested
apprehension and enquiry.

But this tranquillity was of short duration. The appearance of the same
disease in New Haven in 1794, and in New York, Baltimore and Norfolk in 1795,
revived my curiosity, with double zeal to search out the causes of these
phenomena, so unusual in this country. The facts which had come to my
knowledge, relating to the origin and propagation of this disease, led me to
suspect the common theory of infection to be ill-founded. But as a preliminary
to all other enquiries, it appeared necessary to settle the controversy
relative to the imported or domestic sources of the distemper; for without, a
decision of this question, legislative and police-regulations, for preventing a
return of the evil, or mitigating its severity, would probably be fruitless.
The question appeared to be extremely important, and the differences of opinion
on the subject, among medical gentlemen, seemed to preclude the possibility of
a decision among them, that should silence doubts in the public mind.

In this situation of the controversy, I resolved to make an effort to obtain
evidence which might decide the point, in one way or the other; and as facts
only can be relied on as a sure basis of principles and theory, I determined to
make a collection of facts, from all parts of the United States, where the
yellow fever, or other malignant fevers had prevailed, during the preceding
years. For this purpose, on the 31st of October 1795, I addressed a circular
letter to the physicians of Philadelphia, New York, Baltimore, Norfolk,
New Haven, and in general, throughout the United States, requesting them to
communicate to me whatever facts had come within their observation, which could
throw light on the question of the foreign or domestic origin of the yellow
fever. In consequence of which I received a number of communications, which
were published in 1796, and to which is prefixed my circular letter.

These communications, tho less numerous and satisfactory than were desirable,
united with a multitude of facts within my own observation, convinced me of the
fallacy of the vulgar opinion, respecting the origin of the yellow fever in the
United States, from imported sources. I found repeatedly that the reports of
persons taken ill, in consequence of intercourse with vessels from the
West Indies, or with diseased seamen, infected cotton or clothing, or the like
causes, were mere idle tales, raised by the ignorant or interested, and wholly
unsupported by evidence. Scarcely an instance could be found, in which the
evidence of the propagation of disease, from imported infection, was sufficient
to render the fact even probable.

On the other hand, the evidence of the origination of the disease in New York,
Baltimore, Norfolk, Newburyport, Boston and Charleston, appeared to be clear
and satisfactory. In most of those places, the fact has never been questioned.

When the same disease appeared in Philadelphia in 1797; the question of
importation or domestic origin, again agitated the faculty and the public. The
revival of the discussion, and particularly, certain publications of Dr.
William Currie, in the Philadelphia prints, called forth my exertions to unite
opinions and save the citizens of this country from the distraction of
measures, which must necessarily follow a division of opinions. I considered
and still consider the question as resting principally on fact, and not on
medical skill; therefore proper to be investigated and discussed by any man who
has leisure and means, as well as by physicians.

These considerations gave rise to the observations which I addressed to Dr.
Currie, through the medium of the public papers, in the months of October,
November and December 1797. The design of these observations was originally
limited to the purpose of proving the yellow fever of our country to be
generated by local and domestic causes, by laying together the facts which I
had collected from various parts of the United States, without any intention of
examining the history and phenomena of pestilential diseases in other
countries, and other periods of the world.

In pursuing this object however, I was led insensibly to examine all the books
I could find, on the subject of the plague; and the subject being new, I found
too much pleasure in prosecuting it, readily to abandon the pursuit. Facts
which were new to me were daily presenting themselves to my mind; and after
three months investigation, I was persuaded that those facts are of too much
importance to philosophy, to medicin and to human happiness, not to merit
publication. Such is the origin of the present treatise.

When I began my enquiries into the origin of the yellow fever, in 1795, I had
no preconceived system to maintain. My view was to collect facts and from them
to deduce TRUTH. It is not my intention to advance theory over fact; but as far
as just philosophy and sound logic will permit, draw theory from facts, and if
possible, by fair reasoning, from the uniform operations of nature, to arrive
at fixed principles. If conjectures should in any instance be advanced, they
will be offered as such, and not as the basis of practice.

As there is a difference of opinion in regard to the causes of the plague, and
other pestilential diseases, as well as in regard to the identity of the yellow
fever and plague, I shall define my manner of using certain terms, which will
often occur in the following work.

That pestilential disease which usually, in the Levant, produces swellings in
the glands, as buboes, I shall call the glandular or inguinal plague.

The pestilential disease which has afflicted some of the cities in America,
and is usually called yellow fever, I shall denominate, the bilious or American
plague.

In the Levant plague, swellings in the groin, in the armpits, and behind the
ears, do not, in every case, appear; but they are the general distinguishing
marks of the true pestis or plague.

In the yellow fever, the skin is not, in every case, marked by a yellow color;
but it is generally the fact, and therefore this form of pestilence may very
well take its denomination from that circumstance of its bilious appearance.

Whether these are disease specifically distinct, or only the same disease
varied and modified by climate, season or other circumstances. is a question
that belongs to the faculty. It is sufficient for my purpose to observe, that
in most of the symptoms, they agree -- that they are pestilential and greatly
to be dreaded by mankind. I shall therefore treat them as different forms of
the same disease. There may be some cause for believing that the moisture of a
country, abounding with woods, and marshy grounds, may occasion the difference
in the color of bodies which fall victims to pestilence.

The words infection and contagion, are used by medical writers and in popular
custom, as synonymous, and their etymologies warrant the practice. But I
conceive there are distinctions in this quality or power of diseases, of
communicating themselves by contact or near approach, which require to have
each its appropriate language.

That quality of a disease which communicates it from a sick to a well person,
on simply inhaling the breath or effluvia from the person of the diseased, at
any time and in any place, maybe called specific contagion. Such is the
contagion of the smallpox and the measles, which are therefore called
contagious diseases.

That quality of a disease which, tho insalutary will not communicate it,
without the aid of other causes, as warm weather, or peculiar situation and
habit of body, and which requires the healthful person to be a considerable
time, under its influence, to give it effect, may be called infection. Such is
the quality of the plague, in all its forms, dysentery, and all typhus fevers.
It may perhaps be possible for the effluvia of those who have these diseases,
to be so concentrated and virulent, as to communicate them to a person in
health, by a single inspiration of air into the lungs. But if such can be the
case in any instance, it is not the ordinary state of those diseases. Even in
the plague, many attendants on the sick never receive the disease at all; and
in most cases, healthful persons may, for hours, breathe the air of the rooms
where the patients are, without any injury.

Hence infection is capable of all degrees of activity and force, from a slight
impurity of air, which affects no person in health, to that virulent state of
air, which will produce vomiting in a person suddenly exposed to it. Infection
is usually rendered inactive by severe cold; specific contagion is never
destroyed, but often rendered more active by cold. Hence the winter in northern
latitudes usually puts an end to the plague, but makes no favorable alteration
in the smallpox. There are some exceptions to this remark, as it regards the
plague, which will be noticed in the following work.

These distinctions, which will appear, in the course of this treatise to be
well founded, have never been defined or used by European physicians, so far as
my information extends; and to the want of them, are to be ascribed many errors
and absurdities in opinion, as well as warm controversies in regard to the
contagion of the plague.

That state of our atmosphere which produces disease, or disposes the body to
disease, independent of other causes, I call general or primary contagion.
Synonymous with these phrases, will be used a pestilential state or
constitution of the air.

The word pestilence may be used as synonymous with plague; or as expressing
all kinds of contagious and infectious epidemics. I have used it in both
senses; and often to express an idea of that series of epidemics which are
closely connected with the plague.

Whether these distinctions are just or not, is not very material; it is
sufficient that they will express my ideas in the following treatise.

SECTION I. Of the diversity of opinions respecting the cause and origin
pestilence.
FROM the date of the earliest historical records, the opinions of men have
been divided on the subject of the causes and origin of pestilential diseases.
All enquiries of the philosopher and the physician have hitherto been baffled,
and investigations, often repeated, have ended without leading to satisfactory
conclusions.

In the history of opinions on this mysterious subject, there is a remarkable
distinction between the ancients and moderns. The ancients derived most of
their knowledge and science from personal observation, as they had very few
books and little aid from the improvements of their predecessors. The
philosophers of antiquity, attentive to changes in the seasons and to the
revolutions of the heavenly bodies, attempted to trace pestilential diseases to
extraordinary vicissitudes in the weather, and to the aspects of the planets.
Modern philosophers and physicians, on the other hand, unable to account for
pestilence on the principle of extraordinary seasons, and disdaining to admit
the influence of the planets to be the cause, have resorted to invisible
animalculae, and to infection concealed in bales of goods or old clothes,
transported from Egypt or Constantinople, and let loose, at certain periods, to
scourge mankind and desolate the earth.

In both periods of the world, the common mass of people, usually ignorant and
always inclined to believe in the mavelous, have cut the Gordian knot of
difficulty, by ascribing pestilence to the immediate exercise of divine power;
under the impression that the plague is one of the judgments which God, in his
wrath, inflicts on mankind to punish them for their iniquities.

Without deciding on the comparative merit of these respective opinions, it is
sufficient to observe, that they are all probably incorrect; and those of the
philosophers, altogether inadequate to explain the origin of pestilential
Epidemics.

It may however be of use to insert, in this place, the explanations of the
cause of pestilence, given by some of the principal writers on the subject.

Hippocrates, the father of medical science, and a man of very acute
observation, considered pestilence as the effect of particular seasons and
winds. A pestilential state or constitution of air he describes, as occasioned
by a continuation of southerly winds, and a warm, humid, clouded atmosphere.

De morbis vulgaribus, lib. 3. Galen followed the same theory. He says that
pestilent diseases arise from a putridity of the air; and in another place, a
coeli statu, from the state of the air or weather.

p. 627, in Hippoc. -- It will at once occur to an intelligent reader, that a
particular description of weather, producing pestilence, must be principally
calculated for a particular country or latitude. The state of seasons which
Hippocrates calls pestilential, is evidently calculated to produce or augment
autumnal diseases in temperate latitudes; and is precisely the state of weather
which existed in the United States in 1795, when the bilious plague prevailed
in the cities of New York, Baltimore and Norfolk. But it does not correspond
with the season in 1793, when the same disease raged in Philadelphia; for that
was excessively dry, nor with the summer of 1797, which was temperate, in
respect to heat, cold and moisture.

Hippocrates indeed seems to have been aware that the seasons alone were not
sufficient to account for pestilence, for he speaks of to theion, some divine
principle in the air, by which modern writers of celebrity suppose to be
intended what is now called an epidemic constitution, resulting from changes in
the atmosphere produced by unknown causes. Aristotle prob. 1. relates that a
hot and dry south wind will produce pestilence.

The philosophical warrior and historian, Ammianus Marcellinus, after
mentioning a plague which broke out in Amida, a city of Persia, when besieged
by Sapor A. D. 359, from the corruption of numerous dead bodies which lay
unburied in the streets, proceeds to unfold the causes of pestilential
distempers, in the following manner.

"Philosophers and eminent physicians have taught that pestilence is produced
by excess of heat or cold, of drouth of moisture. Whence it is that those who
live near wet and marshy places are subject to coughs, diseases of the eyes and
the like. Those, on the other hand, who reside where the heat is great, are
troubled with febrile complaints; and in proportion as the matter of fire is
more active, drouth is more rapid in destroying life. Hence, during the war of
ten years in Greece, this species of disease prevailed, and it was said that
men perished by the weapons of Apollo, by which was supposed to be meant, the
heat of the sun. And, according to Thucydides, the mortality among the
Athenians, in the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, was occasioned by an
acute disease, which proceeded from the fervid regions of Ethiopia, and
gradually extended to Attica.

"Others are of opinion that air, like water, vitiated by the effluvia of dead
bodies, or similar substances, is deprived of its salubrity; or at least that a
sudden change of air will product the more slight complaints. Some also affirm
that the air, rendered gross by a denser vapor from the earth, closing the
pores of the body and checking perspiration, becomes fatal to the lives of
some; for which reason, other animals than man, which are continually bending
toward the earth, are the first victims to pestilence, as Homer testifies, and
which is proved by many examples, during the prevalence of pestilential
diseases.

"The first species of plague is called pandemic, and this afflicts most
severely those who are subject to excessive heat, in hot regions. The second is
denominated epidemic, which when it rages, obscures the sight and excites
dangerous humors. The third Lamodes, which is temporary, but produces sudden
death."

Lib. 19. The historian has here explained the causes of ordinary diseases,
occasioned by extremes of weather, marsh effluvia, vitiated air, and the direct
action of violent heat, or stroke of the sun. No person will dispute the
justness of his remarks, for the same causes, at this day, produce the same
effects. But the causes assigned are not adequate to all the effects, which we
wish to explain. They do not uniformly occasion pestilence; and on the other
hand, pestilence sometimes rages without the influence of those causes.

Aetius, an eminent physician, about the close of the 5th century, compiled the
opinions and methods of cure practiced by the most celebrated of his
predecessors. In this compilation, entitled "Tetrabiblos," chap. ix. we find
the following paragraph on the subject of Epidemic diseases.

"Those are called popular or epidemic diseases, which spring from a common
cause, as bad food or water, immoderate grief or want of customary exercise,
hunger or repletion, especially when abundance succeeds extreme want. But the
nature of the country often causes epidemic diseases: the air we breathe being
vitiated by the evaporation from putrid substances. These substances are
multitudes of dead bodies after battles, marshes or stagnant water in the
vicinity, which emit poisonous and fetid vapors. -- This cause is in continual
operation. And the air which surrounds us, always changes its temperament, when
it becomes immoderately hot or cold, dry or humid. To other causes we are not
all equally exposed, nor at all times; but the circumambient air, when we are
abroad, surrounds us all alike, and is inhaled with the breath.

"Sometimes the surrounding air, becoming unusually humid and hot, induces a
pestilential constitution; and as humors, tending to putrefaction, are
collected in the body by eating unwholesome food, this air becomes the source
of a pestilential fever. Therefore if a person takes moderate exercise, and is
temperate and regular in his diet [victu modesto ac castigato] he wholly
escapes all affections of this kind."

Such were the opinions of the physic^s and philosophers of antiquity. No
distinction appears to have been made by them, between the plague and other
pestilential diseases. All were ascribed to the same causes.

At what time the distinction between Pestis and Pestilentia was first made,
has not occurred to my enquiries. But I find it in the writings of Prosper
Alpinus, a Venetian physician, who wrote about the close of the 16th century,
and who had been, for some years, a practitioner in Egypt. This author
maintains that pestilent fevers are occasioned by local causes, as vitiated
air, and by peculiarities of season, as extreme heat and humidity. But he
asserts that the plague in Egypt rarely proceeds from corrupted air, and never,
except after an unusual overflowing of the Nile, when that river has exceeded
its common bounds. He contends that if this disease was produced by noxious
exhalations from putrid and stagnant water, and marshy places, it would occur
every year. He therefore concludes for certain that the plague is usually
imported from Greece, Syria, Barbary, or Turkey. "Plerumque igitur id genus
morbi ibi contagio ex aliis locis asportari solet." The contagion of the plague
is usually imported from other countries.

Rerum. Egypt. vol. 2, p. 73, vol. 3, 61, and vol. 4, 299. The same author
asserts that the plague brought from Barbary is more malignant and of longer
duration, than when brought from Greece or Syria.

Diemerbroeck, an eminent Dutch physician of the last century, has recorded an
account of a violent plague in Nemueguen in 1636, and subjoined to it the best
treatise on the origin of that disease, which I have been able to find, tho in
one or two particulars, his ideas are very inaccurate. This author, whose
treatise, I am surprised to find, is little known in this country, assigns
three causes of the pestis or true plague. First, the just anger of heaven,
provoked by the exhalations from the sinks of our sins and abominable deeds.
Secondly, a most malignant, poisonous, and to human nature, deadly pestilent
germ, [seminarium] like a subtle fermentum or leaven, sent from heaven, in a
very small quantity, diffusing itself through the air like a subtle gas, and
rendering it impure. This gas, he supposes to spread over many regions its
numerous particles, and to impress on the air an infection like poison, which
often affects not only many persons, but almost the whole world.

However whimsical we may think this author's explanation of the pestilent
principle; that some such general cause exists in the atmosphere, at certain
periods, will be rendered very probable, if not certain, by the facts hereafter
to be related.

The "seminarium e coelo demissum" of Diemerbroeck seems to be the to theion of
Hippocrates. In what the essence of this principle consists, is not known; but
there must be an alteration in the chemical properties of the atmosphere to
solve the difficulties that attend our inquiries into the cause of pestilence.
-- That this alteration is the effect of a poison, "e coelo demissum," is an
hypothesis unsupported by facts and wholly incredible.

The third cause of pestilence, mentioned by this author, is infection.

Diemerbroeck also maintains the distinction between pestis and pestilentia.
The latter is supposed to proceed from foul exhalations, intemperate seasons
and the like. But the plague, he contends, cannot be occasioned by those
causes, tho these may aid the seminarium or general cause.

Van Helmont, a Flemish writer of some celebrity, in the last century,
maintains that the plague cannot be ascribed to the "importunate and
unseasonable changes of times, nor to putrefaction;" that the "poison of the
plague is a fa^ secret one from any other;" that the "matter of that disease is
a wild spirit tinged with poison, exhaling from a diseased person, or drawn
inwards from a gas of the earth putrified by continuance, and receiving
internally an appropriate ferment, and by degrees attaining a pestilent poison
in us." "The remote, crude and first occasional matter of the pestilence, is an
air putrified through continuance, or rather a hoary putrified gas, which
putrefaction of the air, has not the 8200th part of its seminal body." This
explanation seems to be hardly intelligible.

Works, Land. Edit. 1662, p. 1085, 1090, 1102, 1125. This author contends that
"the pest is not sent down from heaven, but that popular plagues do draw their
first occasional matter from an earthquake, and from the consequences of camps
and sieges."

p. 1125. Hodges, who wrote a treatise on the great plague in London in 1665,
observes that the air suffers some essential alteration which is necessary to
favor the propagation of pestilence. The nitro-aerial principle, which causes
or in vigorates vegetable and animal life, sometimes becomes imperfect,
degenerate or corrupt, being tainted with something pernicious to vitality. He
calls it poisonous, and observes that it proves injurious to trees and cattle,
as well as to man. He supposes the corrupting principle to be a subtle aura or
vapor extricated from the bowels of the earth. To this cause also he ascribes
the death of fish during periods of pestilence. At the same time he contends
that the infecting principle is generated in Africa or Asia, and conveyed to
other countries. The seat of the disease he supposes to be in the animal
spirits.

Van Swieten maintains that the cause of Epidemics is in the hidden qualities
of the air, and inexplicable. He supposes it not impossible that exhalations in
earthquakes may augment or lessen the deleterious quality of the air in
pestilence.

Com. vol. 16, 47. Sydenham not only agrees with Diemerbroeck, Van Swieten, and
others, in ascribing pestilence to occult qualities in the air, but has entered
into the subject of explaining the peculiar symptoms of diseases by the
influence of an Epidemic constitution of the air. His occult qualities have
been ridiculed by later physicians, and so far as his theory, in this respect,
has been neglected, the science of medicin has degenerated. If I mistake not,
it can be made evident, that one of the most important, as well as most
difficult branches of medical science, is to ascertain the effect of the
reigning constitution of air, on prevailing diseases, and to apply that
knowledge to the cure of those diseases.

Dr. Mead's treatise on the plague has been much admired and celebrated; yet I
will assert, that next to the "Traite de la peste," a treatise in quarto on the
plague of Marseilles, published by royal permission, it is the weakest and
least valuable performance on that subject now extant. The author acknowledges
he had never seen the disease of which he wrote; and therefore must have formed
his opinions on the observations of others.

His essay is intended to demonstrate that the plague is propagated by specific
contagion only, and he attempts to prove that this disease, like the smallpox
and measles, has been bred in Egypt or Ethiopia, and thence propagated and
entailed on Europe.

Works, p. 242 and 3. In support of this theory he even goes so far as to call
in question the unanimous testimony of historians, who relate that the terrible
plague of 1347, 8, 9, and 50, began in Cathay, China. In opposition to which he
"questions not," that that pestilence originated in Egypt. He alleges that we
must seek the cause of plague in Egypt and no where else.

p. 246. He ascribes the plague to the putrefaction of animal substances and
unseasonable moisture, heats and want of winds; but says "no kind of
putrefaction in European countries is ever heightened to a degree capable of
producing the true plague."

p. 247 and 8. This author assigns three causes of plague, 1st. Diseased
persons: 2d. goods transported from infected places; 3d. a corrupted state of
air.

p. 250. He thinks the causes mentioned so obvious that he wonders at authors
who resort to hidden qualities, such as malignant influences of the heavens,
arsenical, bituminous or other mineral effl^via, with the like imaginary or
uncertain agents.

p. 249. He does not however deny all latent disorders in the air, but
considers them as secondary causes only, increasing and promoting the disease
when once bred, but he thinks infection to be the means of its propagation. In
this he differs widely from Diemerbroeck who utterly denies that the disease is
originally derived from infection, although he agrees that it may be afterward
communicated from person to person by contact or near approach. Diemerbroeck
also maintains the latent qualities of the air to be the principal cause of the
plague; or cause sine qua non -- a point which the facts to be hereafter
detailed will most clearly demonstrate.

Dr. Mead says, "the plague is never originally bred with us, but is always
brought accidentally from abroad."

p. 261. The same opinion is asserted most positively in James' Medical
Dictionary, and in most modern publications on the subject. The compilers of
the Encyclopedia say, "the plague, as is generally agreed, is never bred or
propagated in Britain, but always imported from abroad," especially from the
Levant, Lesser Asia or Egypt where it is very common." Such also was the
opinion of the celebrated Cullen.

Encyclop. art. plague and medicine no. 221. The following sentence in Dr. Mead
is very exceptionable, as it is calculated to check a spirit of free enquiry --
a spirit to which mankind are greatly indebted for improvements in science.

"It may be justly censured in those writers that they should undertake to
determine the specific nature of these secret changes and alterations which we
have no means at all of discovering," alluding to changes in the air.

p. 249. In opposition to all these great authorities, it will probably be
proved, that the plague generally, if not always originates, in the country
where it exists as an epidemic. The common opinion of the propagation of
pestilence solely by infection, has had a most calamitous effect on medicin and
on human happiness. It has prevented the researches of acute modern
philosophers and physicians, who might have been able, by diligence and a
comprehensive view of the subject, to trace pestilence to its real causes, and
to suggest the true means of avoiding this terrible scourge.

Thompson who traveled in Egypt about the year 1734, and whose account of that
country has not been mended by modern travelers, observes, "The coming and
going of the plague are two things not easily to be accounted for,
notwithstanding we are assured of the facts in a most unquestionable manner.
That the infection is propagated in the air, and thereby transferred from place
to place, seems to be a matter out of dispute; but how it is generated therein,
we are much at a loss to determine." He proceeds to state, like many others,
"that the plague is generally brought into Egypt from Constantinople or by
Caravans from the southern countries." And on the whole he thinks it rarely
generated in that country.

Travels, vol. 2, p. 194 and 5. In the Monthly Review vol. 33, there is an
account of the plague in Constantinople, by Dr. Mackenzie, in which are some
passages worthy of notice. After asserting his opinion that this distemper can
be communicated only by the touch or near approach, he adds, "that both here
and at Smyrna, the plague breaks out, in some years, when it is not possible to
trace whence it is conveyed." He supposes the disease to proceed from "venomous
moleculae lodged in wool, cotton, hair, leather and skins," in houses not well
cleansed after pestilence; but that the plague from this source is not so fatal
as when it comes from abroad. The air he thinks no otherwise concerned in
producing the disease, than as "a vehicle to convey the venomous particles from
one body to another."

Dr. Chandler, in his account of a plague in Smyrna, has nearly the same idea,
as Mackenzie, with respect to the origin of the disease. He says "the plague
might perhaps be truly defined, a disease arising from certain animalculae,
probably invisible, which burrow and form their nidus in the human body. These
whether generated in Egypt or elsewhere, subsist always in some places suited
to their nature. They are imported almost annually into Smyrna, and this
species is commonly destroyed by intense heat. They are least fatal at the
beginning and latter end of the season. If they arrive early in the spring,
they are weak; but gather strength, multiply and then perish. The pores of the
skin, opened by the weather, readily admit them."

Baron de Tott in his memoirs observes* The researches I have carefully made
concerning the plague, which I once believed to originate in Egypt, have
convinced me, that it would not be so much as known there, were not the seeds
of it conveyed thither by the commercial intercourse between Constantinople and
Alexandria. It is in this last city that it always begins to appear. It rarely
reaches Cairo, though no precaution is taken to prevent it; and when it does,
it is presently extirpated by the heats, and prevented from arriving as far as
the Said. It is likewise well known that the penetrating dews, which fall in
Egypt about midsummer, destroy, even in Alexandria, all remains of this
distemper."

Vol. 4. page 70. In vol. 1, p. 38 he says, "that the researches into the
nature of this distemper have only produced opinions which are
self-contradictory or unsupported by facts." -- "There is no difficulty with
respect to the causes which preserve and propagate it. Both the one and the
other may be referred to the dealers in old clothes in Constantinople."

Du Pauw, in his Philosophical Dissertations on the Egyptians and Chinese,
speaks of the plague as a disease of Egypt; and supposes the plague at Vienna
in 1680, to have been imported from that country. -- "Egypt is the hot-bed of
the plague -- this disorder is not produced by famine -- by exact annotations
continued during twenty-eight years, we find that it raged five times, without
being preceded by any scarcity of food, and contrary to what I once suspected,
unrestricted to a periodical course."

Vol. 1. p. 87, 89. Savary alleges, in opposition to the last mentioned
author, that the pestilence is not native in Egypt, and that he consulted
Egyptians and physicians who had lived there 20 years, who informed him that
the plague was brought thither by the Turks. He supposes Constantinople to be
now the residence of this dreadful affliction, which is preserved in existence
by means of old clothes, which, after a plague has ceased, are distributed and
sold very low by the Jews, and thus the disease is propagated.

Dr. Alexander Russel has given an account of the plague in Aleppo in 1742 and
3, and endeavored to ascertain from what quarter the disease originated and
invaded that city. He seems to think, it always appears first at Tripoli,
Sidon, or on the Sea Coast. It was asserted that the great plague of 1719 came
from the northward; but as this fact does not suit his theory, he, like Dr.
Mead, in the case before mentioned, gives no credit to the assertion, but
adheres to his opinion that all plagues originate in Egypt. -- At the same time
he is puzzled to trace the disease, in any instance, to that country.

Sec his hist. of Aleppo. Dr. Patrick Russel has published a quarto volume on
the plague of Aleppo in 1760, and the subject of quarantine. In this work, he
has preserved a number of important facts, but without understanding the
subject sufficiently to apply them to useful purposes. All his theory and
practical remarks are founded on the vulgar supposition of the origin of that
disease in one or two cities only, and its propagation by specific contagion --
a supposition totally unfounded; his treatise of course will be found of little
value, in this respect.

Mr. Volney. with all his philosophy and several months residence in Egypt,
furnishes no additional light, on the subject of the origin of pestilence. He
says, "some persons have attempted to establish an opinion, that the plague
originates in Egypt; but this supposition, founded on vague prejudices, seems
to be disproved by facts." This is an extraordinary assertion for a man who has
the character of a philosopher. And on what authority does it rest? Simply on
the declaration of European Merchants who have been settled for many years at
Alexandria, and of the Egyptians, who say that the disease first appears in
Alexandria, and that it is invariably preceded by an arrival from Smyrna or
Constantinople. Therefore this philosopher concludes, "that the disease
certainly originates from Constantinople, where it is perpetuated by the absurd
negligence of the Turks, who publicly sell the effects of persons who die of
that distemper." Here we have another great man ascribing this vast effect, an
epidemic pestilence, to so trifling a cause, as infection preserved in furs,
woolens, and old clothes!

What is still more astonishing, the same author adopts the ideas of the
Egyptians, which Prosper Alpinus had adopted before him and which he has
evidently copied from Alpinus, that a plague coming from one country is less
malignant than when it comes from another, as tho there could be a difference
in the specific contagion of the disease, when produced in different countries.
Volney says "when brought from the Archipelago, or even from Damietta, into the
harbors of Latakia, Said or Acre, it will not spread; it rather chooses
preliminary circumstances, and a more complex route; but when it passes
directly from Cairo to Damascus, all Syria is sure to be infected."

Travels in Egypt and Syria vol. 1. 253. et seq. It is really surprising that,
if the fact is well evidenced, that a plague proceeding from one country is
more malignant than one proceeding from another, men of extensive erudition and
observation should not undertake to assign some rational cause for the
phenomenon, rather than to propagate the vulgar tales and opinions of the
Egyptians.

From this lengthy statement of opinions in regard to the origin and causes of
pestilence; opinions weak, contradictory, absurd or inaccurate, what conclusion
shall be drawn. This, most evidently, that the subject is not understood.
Perhaps it never will be understood. But surely a subject so interesting to the
life and happiness of man, deserves most critical and laborious enquiry. A
subject which concerns the lives of millions of the human race ought not to be
abandoned by the man of science, until every effort to find the truth shall
have been exhausted. Yet strange as it may appear, even a history of pestilence
that all devouring scourge which has swept away a large portion of the human
race in every age, is yet a desideratum in our libraries.

To supply in part this defect, and to stimulate further researches into the
origin of this frequent and formidable calamity, I will recite such historical
accounts of the plague, as an imperfect examination of authors has enabled me
to collect. And as the most accurate observers of the operations of nature,
have suggested the probability that pestilential epidemics are caused by some
occult qualities in the air, or by vapor from the internal parts of the earth,
or by planetary influence, it is absolutely necessary to enquire how far such
suggestions are supported by facts. For this purpose, I shall note, as I
proceed, any extraordinary occurrence or phenomena in the physical world, as
earthquakes, eruptions of volcanoes, appearance of comets, violent tempests,
unusual seasons, and other singular events and circumstances, which may appear
to be connected with pestilence, either as cause or effect, or as the effect of
a common cause.

The result of this process will probably be a refutation of some of the
foregoing opinions, and the establishment of such as are more rational and
philosophical.

It is proper however to premise, that this investigation, which has been
pursued but a few months only, amidst other occupations, has been subjected to
inconveniences peculiar to the United States. No man can find in this country
all the books necessary for a complete examination of a historical or
scientific subject. The public libraries in New York and New Haven, tho very
valuable, are deficient. Those of Harvard College and Philadelphia, are more
extensive, but incomplete. I have examined them all, tho in some of them I
could spend but little time; yet in none of them could I find all the
authorities which it was my wish and intention to consult.

It is further to be premised, that I have, as far as it could be done,
resorted to original historians for my facts and authorities. This is certainly
the only safe method for a compiler; but in the United States, it cannot be
pursued with complete success, for want of the original writers of the local
histories of countries. Most of the Greek and Roman authors are to be obtained
in our public or private libraries; but some of the best historians of Italy,
Germany, the Baltic nations and Spain, who have lived within the last four or
five centuries, are not to be found; others are in the original languages,
which I do not understand.

As to the modern historical compilations in my native language, they are
almost useless on this subject. The most able and celebrated of them, Hume,
Robertson, Smollet, Rapin and Gibbon, have passed over most of the plagues
which have desolated cities and countries, without notice, or with some general
remarks which afford little light on the subject of their origin.

Most modern writers appear to think every thing beneath their notice, except
war and political intrigues. They detail, with disgusting minuteness, whatever
relates to the definition or annoyance of mankind by the ambition of princes
and demagogues; while they omit or slightly mention whatever regards the civil
and domestic economy, the private manners and habits, the arts, the health, and
the social happiness of nations. To this description, Dr. Henry's History of
England, is an exception.

Nor have modern travelers furnished us with many valuable materials to supply
the defects of our histories. They pass from country to country; examine and
describe a few external objects, such as cities, buildings, paintings and
statues, but leave more useful subjects unexamined, and return home with a book
of vulgar tales and errors.

In respect to useful history, the ancient authors have the preference over the
modern. Modern compilers appear to have written for fame or for money, rather
than for the sake of enfolding and diffusing truth. Hence they have principally
attended to those animated periods of the world, which were distinguished for
great achievments; or those prominent events, a description of which would
interest the passions of their readers: Or they have selected for description
such parts of the history of nations as would enable them to adorn their works
with an elevated style; omitting a multitude of subordinate facts, as below the
dignity of history. Others appear to have undertaken historical compilation,
solely or principally to support some preconceived system of government or
religion; and have studied to bend the evidence of facts, to the accomplishment
of that purpose.

These observations have arisen out of my enquiries, relative to pestilential
diseases. I have discovered that many of the histories or rather abridgements
and compilations which are almost the only authorities consulted by American
readers in general, are very incomplete; and no man who relies on them only,
and neglects original writers, can acquire an accurate and comprehensive
knowledge of history.

SECTION II. Historical view of pestilential epidemics, and the phenomena in
the physical world, which precede, attend or follow them, from the earliest
accounts, to the Christian era.
IT is an agreed point that the five books of Moses are the most ancient
authentic history now extant. In the very threshhold of this genuine history,
we meet with accounts of the plague in Egypt. In the fifth chapter of Exodus,
the pestilence is mentioned as a formidable calamity.

It is remarkable, that throughout the history of the Jews, and in the
prophets, pestilence, famine and the sword are often mentioned in connection
with each other, and described as the most dreadful calamities that can befall
mankind. It will probably appear that famine and pestilential diseases do at
times reciprocally produce each other, and that war not unfrequently occasions
both. But there is ground to believe that famine and pestilence are usually the
effects of one common cause. In the Bible, as in other ancient writings, no
distinction is made between general pestilence which spreads over whole
countries, and those autumnal epidemics, which are evidently produced by
powerful local causes. There are however many passages in scripture that
corroborate the principles respecting pestilence, which are still observed, and
which doubtless depend on established laws of nature.

When David was summoned to receive his punishment for numbering the children
of Israel, he was permitted to elect one of the three calamities, famine, the
sword or pestilence. For a pious reason, he preferred pestilence, and seventy
thousand of his subjects perished.

2 Samuel xxiv. The prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel, in their denunciations, speak
often of these three judgments, and in a way that authorizes the opinion, that
they considered them all to be closely connected. It is however remarkable that
pestilence is every where mentioned as the peculiar scourge of cities.

In the 21st chapter of Jeremiah, the siege of Jerusalem is foretold. "I will
smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; they shall die with a
great pestilence. He that abides in this city shall die by the sword, by the
famine and by the pestilence; but he that goes out, and falls to the
Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be to him for a
prey."

Ezekiel v. 12. declares that a third part of the inhabitants of Jerusalem
shall die by pestilence. This is a proportion which is not uncommon, in violent
plagues. In the seventh chapter, the same prophet says, "The sword is without,
and the pestilence and famine within; he that is in the field, shall die with
the sword; and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him."

Another passage in the same prophet deserves notice. Chap. xxxiii, it is said,
"Thus says the Lord, as I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall
by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to be
devoured, and they that be in the forts and the caves shall die of the
pestilence."

In these passages, we have proof that in the time of these prophets, it was
considered as a well known fact, that pestilential diseases are the effect of
crowded propulation, raging peculiarly in cities, forts and other confined
places. No evidence appears, in these early records, that the ancients, who
lived in countries subject to plague, and near to Egypt, had any idea of the
conveyance of the distemper from place to place by infection. It was considered
as a judgment of heaven; and piety still recognizes this idea; to which, in a
moral and religious view, there can be no objection. But philosophy endeavors
to trace the hand of heaven through the medium of second causes; and the facts
recorded of pestilence in scripture, lend their aid to accomplish the object.

In 1 Samuel v. and vi. we have an account of the pestilence among the
Philistines, inflicted on them as a punishment for the king the ark from the
Jews, in which fifty thousand of the inhabitants of Beth shemesh perished. This
plague is called emerods and a deadly destruction. This passage is noted on
account of the specification of the time of the year, when the disease
prevailed. It is said, the ark was in the country of the Philistince seven
months, and was returned, during wheat-harvest, soon after which it is
understood, the plague ceased. Now wheat harvest, in Syria, is in May; and it
may be supposed, the pestilence was most violent in the period next preceding
that time, viz. April, or during the month of May, for it was the severity of
the disease which induced them to send back the ark. -- This account
corresponds with the modern course of pestilence in that country. It appears in
February or March, increases till May or June, then gradually disappears.

See A. Russel. Hist. of Aleppo. P. Russel on the plague at Aleppo. In this
case, modern facts confirm the accuracy of the scripture-history; at the same
time, they establish the identity of the disease with modern plague, and the
uniformity in the operations of the laws of nature. They prove further that the
climate of that country has suffered no material alteration.

In the eleventh chapter of Numbers, we have an account of a plague among the
Israelites, occasioned by their eating great quantities of the flesh of quails,
after being some time destitute of animal food -- an obvious effect in the hot
climates of Egypt and Arabia.

The scripture-history also furnishes us with ample proof that Egypt was, in
early times, the nursery of plague -- known and considered as such, centuries
before the foundation of Smyrna, Constantinople, or other large cities in
Greece or Asia Minor.

In Deuteronomy xxviii. the Israelites are warned against disobedience to the
laws of Moses, and in case of disregarding them, are threatened with the
diseases of Egypt, the botch, the emerods and the scab. These are still
prevailing disorders in that country under the names of leprosy, elephantiasis,
plague, etc. In verse 60 of the same chapter, it is denounced, "Moreover he
shall bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, of which thou wast afraid."

Amos lv. 10. "I have sent among you the pestilence, after the manner of Egypt."

These authorities of high antiquity leave no room for doubt or controversy, on
the question, whether Egypt originates the plague. The evidence is decisive
against those modern superficial philosophers, who hold in contempt the most
authentic ancient history, because it has claims to inspiration. Yet infidels,
if they were not too wise to read, examine and be informed, might be convinced
of the authenticity of the scripture history, by comparing the facts related,
with the present state of the world. The present endemical and other diseases
which often occur in Egypt, answer so exactly to the description given of them
in the books of Moses, as to leave no room to question the genuineness of those
books. It was the peculiar climate of Egypt, and the usual prevalence of
scorbutic and malignant complaints, in that country, which occasioned all the
minute injunctions of Moses, in regard to washing, cleansing and purifications.
The same or similar regulations were enjoined by the laws of Egypt. It has been
controverted whether Moses borrowed his system of purification from the
institutions which he found in Egypt; or whether the Egyptians borrowed the
idea from the laws of Moses. Nothing can be more idle than such a dispute. The
experience of men would very readily suggest the necessity and utility of great
cleanliness, to preserve health in the climate of Egypt. The custom of
circumcision was established among the Egyptians, as well as among the
Israelites; and Herodotus who visited Egypt to collect facts, expressly
declares that the "Egyptians circumcised their children for the sake of
cleanliness." -- There is not the least reason to suppose that the Egyptians
borrowed this custom, or others respecting cleanliness, from the Israelites.
Nor does it vary the question, that the laws of Moses were the commands of God.
Divine commands have rarely introduced a new principle of right and wrong. Most
of them are injunctions on man to conform to principles of moral fitness or
utility, which existed anterior to the commands. They unfold to human view, and
enforce the practice of those principles; but do not create them. They add the
strong authority of positive, to the feebler authority of implied divine will;
and are thus of the highest importance to mankind.


In the Bible also we find evidence of the prevalence of pestilent epidemics
among cattle. A murrain is among the ten plagues mentioned in Exodus, and
Ezekiel xiv. 21 says, "If I send a pestilence into that land, to cut off from
it man and beast."

We find the same fact in Homer; where also we observe pestilence ascribed to
extreme heat, under the allegorical name of Apollo, or the supposed influence
of the dog star.

"On mules and dogs, the infection first began,
And last the vengeful arrows fixed in man."
"But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
Explore the cause of great Apollo's rage."
"If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid;
So heaven atoned shall dying Greece restore,
And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more." Pope's Version. Iliad 1. 69, 83,
87.
In the following passage, pestilence is ascribed to heat and south winds,
according to the opinion of Hippocrates.

As vapors blown by Auster's sultry breath,
Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death;
Beneath the rage of burning Syrius rise -- Book 5. 1058.
"Like the red Star, that from his flaming hair,
Shakes down diseases, pestilence and war." Book 19. 412. This evidently
alludes to the received opinion among the ancients, that comets have an
influence in producing pestilence. In the course of this work, we shall have
some grounds to determine which is most correct, this opinion of antiquity, or
that of the moderns who hold it in contempt.

It is to be observed that the idea of comets producing diseases, is not in
Homer, in the passage from which these lines are taken, but is a license of the
translator, Mr. Pope, and the sense and almost the words, are borrowed from
Milton. Book 2. l. 710.

" -- And like a comet burned
In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair,
Shakes pestilence and war."
It is certain however that the ancients believed comets to be the cause of
pestilential diseases.

It is further remarkable that, in the pestilential period to which Homer here
alludes, which happened during the siege of Troy, Etna was in a state of
eruption; or rather at the close of the period: For Eneas, when driven from
Troy, sailed with his fellow citizens to Sicily, but was frightened away by a
violent explosion of Etna. See a forcible description of this eruption in
Virgil lib. 3.

Dyonisius Hallicarnassus informs us that the Pelasgi, who settled in Sicily,
soon after the Trojan war, were affected with pestilence. Book 1.



"Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,
Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
Orion's dog (the year when autumn sways)
And over the feebler stars exerts his rays:
Terrific glory! for his burning breath,
Taints the red air, with fevers, plagues and death." Book 22. 37.
The circumstances to be noted in the foregoing extracts, are, first that the
pestilence among cattle preceded that among men. This is a common fact, but not
always the case. Secondly, that heat and moisture, with a south wind were
productive of pestilential diseases. Thirdly, that such diseases raged in
Greece during the autumnal season, and were ascribed to the influence of
Syrius, or the dog star.

We read of a terrible pestilence in the island of Aegina, to the southward of
Athens, in the reign of Aeacus, grandfather of Achilles, about sixty years
before the Trojan war; a plague which depopulated the island. Of this calamity,
Ovid has given a most affecting account Metam. lib. 7. 523. He represents the
earth as covered with clouds, darkness and suffocating heat; the south wind
blowing for four months, the lakes and fountains being infected, and the earth
overspread with poisonous serpents. The disease first invaded dogs, birds,
sheep and oxen; then mankind. Death was sudden; and the streets loaded with
dead carcases. The symptoms began with heat in the bowels, slushings of the
face, difficulty of breathing, etc. How far the poet was authorized by history
in this description, I do not know; but the whole passage is worth the
attention of the learned reader.

Our next accounts of the plague are in the histories of Rome; for although Greece
contained the older states, and had large cities, before the foundation of
Rome; yet the most populous parts of Greece, Attica and Lacedemon, are dry,
rocky countries; not calculated to generate pestilence nor to favor its
propagation.

Rome, on the other hand, is situated in a level country, on the banks of a
river, and not far from extensive marshes. Under the influence of powerful
local causes, this city felt every derangement of the atmosphere, by
intemperate seasons, or other causes.

The first plague in Rome happened about the 16th year from its foundation,
soon after the murder of Tatius, and in time of peace. "It killed instantly
without any previous sickness. Even trees and cattle were not exempt from the
malignity of its influence; but all nature lay one desolate and abandoned
waste. It was even said to rain blood." This was 738 years before the Christian
era.

Plutarch's life of Romulus. Zonaras says that Rome was laid waste by disease,
and the earth and cattle were barren. "Sterilitas agrorum et pecudum."

Lib. 7. This pestilence must have been of the most malignant kind, and by the
effect on cattle and trees, it was obviously during a pestilential state of the
atmosphere, when there was a defect in the powers of vegetable as well as
animal life -- many similar instances will occur in the course of this history.
It is to be remarked that Rome was then in its infant state, containing few
people, and few of the artificial causes of disease. Of course the sickness
must have been caused by general contagion, or that state of air which is
unfavorable to the preservation of healthy life.

In the reign of Numa Pompilius A. R. 46, Italy was afflicted with severe
pestilence; on which occasion Numa instituted the Salii, twelve dancers who had
the care of the brazen target, which was supposed to descend from heaven into
the hands of Numa, and to check the pestilence. See the institution and annual
ceremonies of the Salii, described in Plutarch's life of Numa, and Kennet's
Antiquities, part. 2. b. 2.

Another plague attacked Rome in the reign of Tullius Hostilius, about the year
110 or 112, and B. C. about 640. No important particulars are related, except
that the sickness relaxed the martial spirit of the citizens. To prevent this
effect, that warlike prince gave the soldiers no rest, judging "salubriora
militiae, quam domi, juvenum corpora esse," that the young men would be more
healthy in the army abroad, than at home.

Livy b. 1. 32. In this opinion, the King of Rome was probably well founded;
for it appears from facts hereafter to be related, that Rome was most subject
to pestilence in time of peace, when the soldiers were at Rome, augmenting the
population of the city, and indulging in ease and luxury.

In the reign of Tarquin, the last King of Rome, about the year 240 and B. C.
514 a violent plague infested the city. Zosimus however places this event,
after the expulsion of Tarquin.

Hook, vol. 1. 109. Zosimus lib. 2. In the year of Rome 261, there was a famine
and pestilence in the city, and the plague depopulated Velitrae, a city of the
Volsci, who applied to the Romans for inhabitants to re-people the place.

Muratori. Tom. 1. 5. Hook, vol. 1. 196. Functius Chronol. Soon after this, we
read of a contagious distemper among cattle, but not very fatal.

Dion. Hal. lib. 7. In the year of Rome 281 and B. C. 473, a plague raged in
the city and country, but was most fatal in the city, sparing no age nor sex,
and yielding to no remedies. It came suddenly and suddenly disappeared. This
account seems to contradict the doctrine of a progression in the pestilential
principle. Thucydides remarks also that the plague invaded Athens suddenly.
Such is the effect of superficial observation. So in 1794, the people of
New York alleged the city to be very healthy; when in fact the bill of
mortality was higher by one fourth than usual. So the invasion of New London by
the fever in 1798 appeared to be sudden; although in fact the bills of mortality
show a most sensible increase in the force of the destructive principle, two
years previously to the attack.


Dion. Hal. lib. 1. There was an eruption of Etna, according to common
chronology, in the year of Rome 277, and B. C. 477. This circumstance is strong
evidence that the chronology is not quite correct. The eruption took place
unquestionably during the pestilential period, to which this plague in Rome
belonged. It might not have been the very year of the plague in Rome, but
probably was not so distant as four years. To which event, the plague or the
eruption, a wrong era is assigned, I shall not determine. The early history of
Rome, from the destruction of the ancient records, by the burning of the city,
when taken by the Gauls under Brennus, in the year 365, is subject to great
uncertainty, and authors do not agree on the chronology of that part of the
Roman story.

Since writing the foregoing remarks, I have discovered a fact which may serve
to aid us in fixing the period of the events abovementioned. In the course of
this work it will be proved beyond doubt, that the approach of comets to our
system, has a prodigious influence on the elements of this globe. At present I
shall assume the fact, that the eruption of Etna abovementioned, was nearly
cotemporary with the appearance of a comet, during this period of pestilence.
In looking into Pliny's Natural History, lib. 2. ca. 25, I find that a comet
was visible, at the time of the battle of Salamis. Speaking of the different
species of comets he says "Ceratias Cornus speciem habet, qualis fecit cum
Graecia apud Salamina depugnavit." "A comet in the figure of a javelin, like
that which appeared when Greece fought at Salamis." This battle is fixed by
authors in the year B. C. 480, and consequently in the year of Rome, by common
chronology 274. It appears to be a general law of nature that the approach of
comets to this earth, calls into action the subterranean fire, and volcanoes
discharge their contents, during or within a few months of the appearance of
comets. We may safely conclude therefore that the eruption was within a year or
two of the battle of Salamis. This is not certain, but probable; and I am
inclined therefore to believe that Hook and others have placed the plague in
Rome three or four years too late, or that the eruption is placed too early.
Brydone mentions an eruption in the 77th Olympiad, comprehending the years of
Rome from 282 to 285 inclusive, which it doubtless the same abovementioned.


The army of Xerxes, retreating into Asia, after the loss of the engagement
near Salamis, suffered extremely by pestilential diseases. And it will
hereafter appear that during periods when the pestilential state of air is
evidenced by the existence of plague in cities, armies in the field and seamen
on the ocean are much more subject to epidemic complaints, than at other times.

The land forces which Xerxes left behind him under Mardonius, fell a prey to
famine and pestilence. The highways were strewed with dead bodies, and wild
fowls and beasts devoured them.

The same period was distinguished by tempests and inundations -- the constant
attendants on comets. A violent storm had destroyed the famous bridge built by
the great monarch over the Hellespont, before he returned from Greece; and
while the troops under Mardonius were besieging Potidea, an inundation of the
sea broke into their trenches, drowned some soldiers, and compelled them to
raise the siege.

Herodotus lib. 8. 115, 129. Justin lib. 2. cap. 13. These great phenomena,
without any historical account, would make it nearly certain that a comet
appeared at that time, and the pestilence undoubtedly happened within a short
period of its approach.

A more terrible pestilence invaded the Roman city and territory, in the year
290, and B. C. 464. Several facts in regard to it, deserve particular notice.
"Grave tempus et forte annus pestilens erat urbi, agrisque, nec hominibus
magis, quam pecori; et auxere vim morbi, tenore pupulationis, pecoribus
agrestibusque, in urbem acceptis. Ea colluvio mixtorum omnis generis
animantium, et odore insolito urbanos, et agrestem confertum in arcta tecta,
aestu ac vigiliis angebat, ministeriaque in vicem ac contagio ipsa vulgabant
morbos."

Livy. lib. 3. 6. Dion Hal. lib. 10. "This was an unhealthy time and a
pestilent year in town and country, affecting equally men and cattle; and the
disease was augmented by crowds of countrymen and herds of cattle, which were
received within the walls of the city, for fear of being plundered or destroyed
[by the Latins and Hernici, who then ravaged the country.] That collection of
all kinds of animals in the city, and the unusual stench occasioned by them,
severely affected both the citizens and the country people, crowded into close
buildings, depressed by heat and watching; and their fatigue and the contagion
spread the sickness into every quarter."

This is Livy's representation. Dionysius Hallicarnassus mentions that the
disease seized studs of mares, herds of oxen, and flocks of goats and sheep; by
which expressions we are perhaps to understand, that the distemper either did
not seize those animals, except in collections, or was remarkably fatal to them
in numerous bodies -- an idea warranted by modern facts. It is generally true
of cattle as of men, that pestilential diseases are most destructive, where
many are collected together; not only by reason of infection from the diseased,
but by the diminution of the vital principle of the air by respiration and
perspiration.

Orosius lib. 2. 12. adds other circumstances. He says there was a short
suspension of war, when a grievous pestilence, which never failed to compel the
Romans to a truce, or to interrupt it, if made, raged violently through all the
city. Many of the patricians were victims, but it was most fatal to the poor.

It is stated that this pestilence began about the calends of September and
raged in city and country. By country, agris, the Roman writers meant the
ancient Latium, the modern Compagna di Roma, which was naturally unhealthy;
tho, in the flourishing ages of Rome, extremely populous.

That the Roman territory should be subject to autumnal complaints, is not at
all surprising. At the port of the Tyber there were unwholesome marshes, called
by Tacitus, Annals 15. 43. "Ostienses paludes." The shore to the southward,
bordering Campania, is called by the same historian, "squalente littore." To
the southward of Campania were and still are the extensive marshes, called
"paludes pomptinae," which are so noxious as to create disease in a single
night, and which have caused the Appian way in modern times to be neglected,
and the road to Naples to be carried round the marshes on the east. In the
epitome of the 46th book of Livy, which book is among those which are lost, I
find it related that the Pontine Marshes were drained or dyked [siccatae] and
converted into cultivable land, by the Consul Cornelius Cethegus, about the
year of Rome 572. The Romans were convinced that the marshes were very
unwholesome, and they took incredible pains to render their city and territory
healthful, by draining off all stagnant waters.

It is much to be regretted that we have not this book of Livy, to give us
further information in what manner the draining of the marshes was effected. It
is considered by the moderns as impracticable.

The opinion of the ancients as to the unhealthfulness of Rome may be
understood from the following Tetrastichon, which is preserved by Baronius.

"Roma vorax hominum, domat ardua colla virorum;
Roma ferax febrium, necis est uberrima frugum;
Romanae febres stabili sunt jure fideles;
Quem semel invadunt, vix a viventi recedent."
The brief translation of which is "Rome subdues men by the sword, and kills
them with fevers."

Horace book 2. ode 29. gives to the Tyber, the epithet udus, wet or marshy.




The territory next to the city of Rome is described by Livy, b. 7. 38. in
these words "in pestilente atque arido circa urbem solo" -- a dry plain, but
indented with lakes, bordered with marshes, and subject to be overflowed by
every uncommon rise of the Tyber, or by streams from the distant hills. Many
epidemic diseases have been distinctly traced to stagnant waters on this plain,
after an inundation.

Avernus, a lake of Campania, near Baiae, emitted such a poisonous vapor, that
no birds would frequent its banks, and the ancients, in their flights of fancy
called it, the road to Hell.

It was this situation of Rome which gave rise to the Cloacae, immense sewers
or drains, which penetrated the city and neighborhood -- Vast works intended to
drain off the stagnant waters; and while these were preserved in good repair,
the city was obviously more healthy.

This plague in the year 290 proved fatal to both of the Consuls Servilius and
Aebutius, to many illustrious Romans, and to a countless number of the
Plebeians. The Senate and people, in despair part had rccourse to prayers and
supplications, the temples were filled with men, women and children, asking
forgiveness and favor of heaven.

This violent plague was followed, anno Urb. Con. 292 by a violent earthquake.
"Terra ingenti concussa motu est," says Livy, lib. 3. ca. 10. He expressly
mentions this to have been in the consulate of P. Voluminous and Serve.
Sulpicius, which was the second Consulate after the pestilence. An eruption of
Etna is mentioned in the tables under the year of Rome 288, two years before
the pestilence and four years before the earthquake. But there is probably a
small variation in the chronology. The earthquake was probably at the time of
the eruption, especially as Livy mentions, that in the same year, "Coelum
ardere visum," the heavens appeared to be in a flame.

Functius places these events one year later.

By this earthquake Locris, on the gulf of Corinth, was rent from the main land
and turned into an island. Afterward Locris was destroyed by another
earthquake.

Severe drouth marked this period.

In the year of Rome 300 according to Livy and the common chronology and B. C.
454, another terrible pestilence invaded Rome. The country was desolated, and
the citizens were exhausted with continual burials. "Urbs assiduis exhausta
funeribus." Famine accompanied this calamity, and cattle were victims, as well
as men. This plague took place in time of peace -- "ab host otium fuit," and
in the absence of the ambassadors who were sent to Athens to collect the laws
of Solon and the Grecian institutions.

Livy b. 3. 32. With this period corresponds an eruption of Etna, which authors
place in the year of Rome 304; of course, it was at the close of the
pestilential period.

In the year 315 of Rome and B. C. 439, according to Paulus Diaconus,
tremendous earthquakes shook Italy at intervals for a whole year, so that
"assiduis Roma, nuntiis fatagareter," Rome was fatigued with messengers who
were continually arriving with news of towns and villages demolished.

The chronology of P. Diaconus rarely agrees with that commonly received. The
earthquakes here mentioned probably ushered in the long and formidable calamity
which was to follow -- and were probably cotemporary with the beginning of the
plague next to be mentioned.

In the year of Rome 317, and B. C. 437 commenced a peslential state that
afflicted Rome for five years, or five seasons successively. The historian
relates that the first year "a pestilence invaded the people," and as the
disease increased, prodigies alarmed them and frequent earthquakes overturned
houses in the country. The next year the disease was more mortal: "pestilentior
inde annus." In 320, the disease was so fatal as to suspend all ordinary
concerns. The people resorted to their prayers, and the Sybilline books were
consulted and obeyed, to appease the Gods and avert the plague from the people.
For fear of famine, corn was purchased in Etruria, the Pontine territory and in
Sicily. The mortality extended also to cattle. In 321, the disease was
mitigated and afterward subsided.

Livy b. 4. 21, 25. This is the first instance, in which I am able to trace
distinctly a progression in the malignancy of the plague. That this is an
important fact, in all plagues, will hereafter appear. But on this point,
ancient history affords very scanty materials. This was a period of universal
pestilence for many years, and was marked with all the great phenomena of
nature. The last year of the plague in Rome 321, corresponds with the year B.
C. 433, two years before the plague of Athens. In the year of Rome 325,
according to Hook, there was a most grievous famine, occasioned by a severe
drouth in all the Roman territory. "Siccitas eo anno plurimum laboratum est;
nec caelestes modo defuerunt aquae, sed terra quoque, ingenito humore egens,
vix ad perrennes subfecit amnes." By this, we are led to believe, that the
drouth was not solely caused by a want of rain, but by an unusual defect of
subterranean springs and moisture. The expression, "ingenito humore egens,"
contrasted with the usual source of water, rain, evidently carries with it an
idea that the evaporation from the earth was unusual; and this may easily be
accounted for, by the violent action of internal heat or electricity which
distinguished this pestilential period, and was evidenced by tremendous and
universal earthquakes, and a great eruption of Etna.

The drouth in Rome was extreme -- multitudes of cattle thronged round the arid
fountains, and perished with thirst. Diseases followed, first invading cattle,
and the lower classes of people and the countrymen, then extending to the city.

Livy b. 4. 30. Thucydides relates b. 1 and 3, that earthquakes affected the
largest part of the globe, and shook it with the utmost violence. In many
places, there was severe drouth and a subsequent famine. In some places, the
earthquakes produced alarming inundations of the sea; as in Euboea and Atalanta
-- the Prytaneum, or townhouse in Athens, the fortifications and some
dwelling-houses were demolished. These events were in the fifth and sixth years
of the Peloponnesian war, answering to 427 and 426 B. C. and consequently were
at the close, or subsequent to the pestilence. About the same time there was a
violent eruption of Etna; such as had not been known for fifty years preceding.
This period was also marked by the approach of a comet, but I am not clear that
it was in the year B. C. 431, as stated by Dr. Priestley in his Lectures on
History. The drouth was probably within a few months of the appearance of the
comet, according to numerous observations in late periods of the world: By
which it would seem to be a law of the physical system, that preceding, during
and following the approach of those erratic bodies, this earth is affected
alternately with great rains and snows, drouth, violent tempests, high tides
and earthquakes: Many instances will hereafter occur. We are sometimes
embarrassed with the differences in the chronology of different authors. But we
have, in this place, data that will fix certain points.

From the uniform operations of nature, there can be very little doubt, that
all the great events of the physical world, in this period, happened within
twelve or eighteen months of each other. The extreme drouth in Italy and
Greece, mentioned by Livy and Thucydides, unquestionably occurred, at both
places, in the same year. Livy places this under the consulship of A. Cornelius
Cossus and T. Quinctius Pennus, which Hook arranges under the 325th year of
Rome, and Lempriere, under the 327th.

Now Thucydides expressly relates, that the great earthquake which injured
Athens, and produced the inundations in the Corinthian Gulf and the Sea of
Euboea, rending Atalanta from the main land, and swallowing up a town in
Euboea, happened in the spring or summer of the sixth year of the Peloponnesian
war. This war commenced in the second or third year of the eighty-seventh
Olympiad, corresponding with the years of Rome 323 or 324. The sixth year then
will be the 328th or 329th year of Rome. These data bring the drouth in Rome to
one of those years; at least they will not admit of its being placed earlier
than the year 327, the year preceding the earthquake. It is probable therefore
that Lempriere is right, in the arrangement of the consuls. This is rendered
more probable, by the eruption of Etna, in the spring of the same year; as it
is a known and common fact, that earthquakes and eruptions of volcanoes are
preceded by excessive drouth; owing probably to a gradual increase of
subterranean heat, or unusual electrical discharges and evaporation, some
weeks, or months, before the explosion.

The comet undoubtedly appeared either in the year, preceding, during or
following the drouth; that is, in the year of Rome, 327, 328, or 329,
corresponding with year before the Christian era, 427, 426, or 425. It was most
probably in the year of the drouth, and in the fifth year of the war, A. U. C.
327, and B. C. 427; the earthquakes and volcanoe followed in the spring of the
next year.




The plague in Athens broke out in the second year of the Peloponnesian war,
when all the inhabitants of the Athenian territory, were crowded into the city,
to avoid the destructive ravages of the Lacedaemonians. This circumstance alone
would account for the production of pestilential diseases in the city. But it
is probable that had the same event happened in a period of general health, the
sickness in Athens would have been limited to the dysentery, the more violent
camp fevers or common typhus.

But unfortunately this war broke out at a time of universal pestilence, when
the diseases of the healthiest countries assume new and more malignant
symptoms, and hence we account for the duration and the violence of the malady.
This idea seems to be important, and the only material one to be added to the
excellent philosophical account of the plague at Athens by Dr. Elihu H. Smith,
late of New York. Medical Repository, vol. 1, art. 1. The origin of this
pestilence is stated by the historian to have been in that part of Ethiopia
which borders on Egypt; thence extending to Egypt, Lybia, the King's dominions
or Persia, and to Greece. Some of the more violent of modern plagues have first
appeared in the same region. But we are not to conclude from this description
that the disease is propagated by infection from person to person. It appears
first where the original or secondary causes, that is, general and local
contagion, are the most powerful. If the state of the atmosphere over the
world, at any one time, is equally vitiated by some unknown cause, its effects
will first appear in places where that state of air is most powerfully aided by
local vitiation, as in cities or marshy grounds. Of this we have numerous
proofs. But, in modern times, whenever the general contagion, united with local
causes, produces plague in Egypt or Constantinople, it produces some milder
epidemic in the neighboring countries, and often, its effects are visible, at
the same time, in most parts of the world.

The Abbe Barthelemy, in his elegant Travels of Anacharsis, speaking of the
plague in Athens, says, "it was doubtless bro't into Greece by a vessel from
Egypt." It is to be regretted that such an accurate and judicious writer should
have indulged conjecture on this interesting subject. He quotes no authority
for his opinion, and the words of Thucydides oppose the supposition. The
disease first appeared in the Piraeus, the harbor; and so ignorant were the
people of the cause, that they ascribed it to the poisoning of the wells by the
Lacedaemonians. Besides Thucydides impliedly acknowledges that he and others
knew nothing of its origin; for he calls on "every one, physician or not, to
assign any credible account of its rise, or the causes powerful enough to
produce it."

Plutarch, in his life of Pericles, says "the enemies of Pericles, attributed
this disaster to the multitude of people he had collected into the city, during
the heat of summer" -- a charge in which there was much truth.

But when we attend to the violent concussions of nature, that accompanied and
followed the pestilence, and its general prevalence in the world for a series
of ten or twelve years, all attempts to trace its origin to infection, dwindle
into puerilities; and the occasional causes of sickness, crowded population,
heat and bad diet, tho powerful as auxiliaries, could not be adequate to the
violent and continued effects in Athens, and the neighboring cities.

The symptoms of that disease in Athens, as described by Thucydides, are known
to every medical man. They correspond in all the essential particulars, with
those of the Yellow Fever in its worst forms, and the disease was probably what
I call the bilious plague. There is the more reason to believe this
supposition, as Thucydides has not mentioned, among the symptoms, the buboes
and other swellings of the glands, which distinguish the inguinal plague. The
critical days were the seventh or ninth, as they have most frequently been in
the bilious plague in America.

The disease extended to other towns in Attica, especially to those which were
most populous, but Lacedemon escaped. It raged in Persia at the same time, and
it is said, the King of Persia sent for Hippocrates to lend his aid in
arresting the progress of the pestilence, but the latter declined leaving his
own country.

It has been supposed that Hippocrates was in Athens during this plague; but
this must be a mistake. He was probably at Thasus, an island, near the coast of
Macedonia. The four epidemic years, which he has described, were cotemporary
with the pestilence in Athens; and this proves what will hereafter appear more
fully, that in all great plagues, the epidemic or pestilential principle
extends to different countries, and often over the whole earth.

In this pestilence, as we shall have occasion to observe in many subsequent
instances, the birds abandoned the infected atmosphere.

In the year of Rome 341, and B. C. 413, a pestilence arose which the historian
represents as more alarming than fatal, "minacior tamen quam perniciosior."
This circumstance affords ground to believe the pestilence to have been a
violent autumnal bilious fever, and not rising to the utmost malignity of the
plague.

The pestilence of that year was followed by famine in the next; owing to a
neglect of agriculture; the people having been principally occupied with
sedition, under their ambitious demagogues. It will be remarked that the famine
was not the cause of the epidemic, for it succeeded it.

Livy, lib. 4. 52. It is proper to remark here that all the preceding deadly
plagues which had at times almost desolated Rome, were certainly the produce of
the country. The Romans were not a commercial people, nor had they any
commercial intercourse with Egypt, till the conquest of Carthage, two centuries
and a half after this period. It was not till one hundred and forty seven years
after the time now under consideration, that the Romans owned a single ship.
When they transported troops into Sicily, they hired or borrowed vessels for
the purpose. Egypt was a granary of corn, but until after the conquest of
Carthage, the Romans drew their supplies wholly from Italy and Sicily. There is
no pretense therefore for supposing the plague ever imported into Rome; nor is
there a suggestion in history, that its origin was ever ascribed to that source.

In the year of Rome 353, and B. C. 401, happened a most severe winter. The
Tyber was frozen over, and the highways rendered impassible by deep snow.
These were unusual phenomena and deemed prodigies in that city. On the opening
of spring, the weather changed suddenly from severe cold to great heat and
drouth, and a mortal pestilence ensued among men and cattle. The historian says
nothing more of the cause of the mortality, than "Sive ex intemperie coeli,
raptim ex mutatione in contrarium facta, sive alia qua de causa, gravis
pestilensque omnibus animalibus aestas excepit, cujus insanabili pernicie
quando nec causa nec finis inveniebatur, libri Sibillini ex senatus consulto
aditi sunt." On this melancholy occasion was instituted the ceremony of the
Lectisternium to appease the Gods and solicit the restoration of health.

Livy. b. 5. 13. 14. 15. Plut. Life of Camillus. Zosimus. lib. 2. With this
period of pestilence corresponds the dreadful plague which about 404 B. C.
almost depopulated Carthage. The disease on the coast of Africa preceded its
appearance in Rome, as it usually does in modern times.

Soon after, the Carthaginians under Imilco, who were sent to reduce Sicily
which had revolted, were seized with the plague and the army was so weakened,
that Imilco was compelled to abandon the island. Just before Imilco's arrival,
an eruption of Etna laid waste the neighboring country. By an expression of
Justin, we have ground to believe a comet appeared about the same time.
"Imilco, qui multas civitates cepisset, repent pestilentis sideris vi,
exercitum amisit."

Justin. lib. 19. c. 2. Diod. Si^. lib. 13. 14. Roll. An. Hist. b. 2. and 11.
This plague was remarkable for its symptoms, such as violent dysenteries,
raging fevers, burning entrails, acute pains in every part of the body; and
many were seized with madness, so that they sallied forth into the streets, and
tore to pieces those who fell in their way.

It was during the dry season above mentioned that the Lake of Alba rose
suddenly, without apparent cause, and overflowed its banks -- an event that
caused great consternation in Rome, but one that might well happen by a
subterranean discharge of some water-fountains in the high adjoining hills.

This is one of the instances which will often occur, of a hard winter,
followed by a dry hot summer, and therefore deserves particular notice; for
such excesses in the temperature of the seasons are among the causes of
pestilential diseases.

A pestilence broke out in the armies of the Romans and Gauls, while the
latter, under Brennus, were besieging Rome, Anno Romae 361, B. C. 393. The
Gauls, unaccustomed to such heat, and placed between hills, where they were
exposed to a burning sun, vapor and smoke, perished in such multitudes, that,
weary with burying dead bodies, the survivors burnt them in piles.

Livy b. 5. 48. Pliny, lib. 2. 26, mentions the appearance of a comet, or light
in the heavens, called by the Greeks docus or doces, and by the Romans trabs,
from its resemblance to a beam, at the time of the defeat of the Lacedemonian
fleet -- "Cum Lacedemonii, class victu, imperium Greciae amisere," By the last
expression, "the loss of the empire of Greece," I suppose he refers to the
defeat of the fleet by Conon and the Persians in the year of Rome 360, and B.
C. 394. If so, the appearance of this comet, corresponds in time with the
period of pestilence last named.

A plague, occasioned by dearth, is mentioned to have happened in the year of
Rome 371, B. C. 383, but no particulars, worthy of notice.

A great earthquake in Peloponnesus is mentioned under the year B. C. 373.

Encyclopedia, art. Chronology. In the year of Rome 388, B. C. 366, commenced a
most desolating plague of three years duration. This was a time of profound
peace, "ab seditione et a bello quietis rebus, ne quando a meter ac periculis
vacarent, pestilentia ingens orta." It seemed to be the destiny of Rome never
to be exempt from fear and dangers; for when war and sedition ceased,
pestilence arose.

Livy b. 7. 1. In this horrible plague, perished the great Camillus, and it is
related that, in the height of the disease, 10,000 citizens died in a day.

On this occasion, recourse was had to the ceremony of the Lectisternium, This
ceremony consisted in placing the statues of Apollo, Latona, Diana, Hercules,
Mercury, and Neptune, on three beds, and serving them with magnificent repasts
for eight days -- a mode of checking the pestilence, about as rational as the
modern scheme of confining it to the infected place by bodies of armed men,
which is much praised by Montesquieu!
and to the institution of new games to appease the wrath of the Gods, but
without success. Some old citizens mentioned an ancient practice, in such
calamities, of driving a nail into the wall of a temple. This law was now
revived, and a nail driven into the wall of Jupiter's temple. The time of the
year, in which the law directed this ceremony to be performed, the ides of
September, indicates the period when pestilence began in Rome to be alarming
and violent.

Functius, in his chronology, assigns the absorption of Helice and Bura, two
towns on the Gulf of Corinth, to the year of Rome 373, the year of the great
earthquake in Lacedemon -- in which case that catastrophe would make a part of
the events of the pestilential period of 371, just mentioned.

Muratori and Paulus Diaconus seem not to differ essentially in arranging that
event under the same period. "Saevissimo terraemotu Achaia universa commota
est, et duae tunc civitates, Bura et Helice, abruptis locorum devoratae.

Muratori, Genesis Hist. vol. 1. 7. Other authors refer this catastrophe to the
period of pestilence last mentioned, which some writers place in the year of
Rome 388, and others, in 384; but all agree that it was during the
approximation of a comet. This last pestilence was dreadful in the extreme,
sparing no age or sex. The year after it, the earth opened and exhibited a vast
chasm in the midst of Rome, into which M. Curtius precipitated himself for the
salvation and prosperity of the city.

Livy, b. 7. 7. P. Orosius and P. Diaconus, followed by Muratori, place the
commencement of this plague in the year of Rome 384. Orosius says that "in the
103d and 105th Olympiad, Italy was shaken a whole year, by tremendous
earthquakes. The hundred and third Olympiad, according to our common
chronology, comprehends the years of Rome from 386 to 389, inclusive. It is
probable that is one of the shocks of this series of earthquakes, the chasm was
made in Rome as already related. It will be observed that this event followed
the pestilence.

The comet that appeared, during this calamity, was probably that mentioned by
Aristotle, Meteorol. lib. 1. ca. 6, of which he was an eyewitness.

But I must not omit what authors relate concerning the peculiar character of
this plague. Orosius says, it was not such a pestilence, as usually proceeded
from irregular seasons, extreme drouth, sudden heat of the spring, unseasonable
moisture of summer and autumn, or the impure air blown from the Calabrian
groves; but severe and continued, attacking all descriptions of people, and
either destroying their lives, or leaving them in a weak and miserable
condition.

The winter when the comet appeared Aristotle relates to have been cold; but
the severity and duration of the plague cannot be accounted for on the
principle of changes or irregularities in the seasons. It was one of those
violent epidemics which never afflict mankind, without some essential
alteration in the invisible properties of the atmosphere, or a peculiar effect
of the atmosphere on living bodies.

Seneca, (...) the authority of Aristotle and Calisthenes expressly ascribes
the inundation to the approximation of a comet. "Cometes ingentis rei traxit
eventus, cum Helicen et Burin orto suo mersit."

Not. Quest. lib. 7. 16. The symptoms of this approaching calamity are
described to have been these. "For several months the w^ters of heaven deluge
the earth or withhold their beneficial effects; a dimness obscures the splendour
of the sun; (...) his disk appears like a burning brazier; impetuous winds
ravage the country; and streams of fire are seen to shoot in the air." See
Travels of Anacharsis, vol. 3. 404, cited from Pausanius, lib. 7. ca. 24.

Some of these phenomena, excessive rains and drouth, tempests, celestial
lights, and singular appearances of the sun, always attend the approach of
comets; and it is surprising that the moderns have taken little or no notice of
the fact.

The catastrophe of Helice and Bura was occasioned by violent shocks of
earthquakes, with contrary and conflicting winds, which swelled the water in
the Corinthian gulf, above the tops of trees on the shore. This was in the
winter, during the night, and just before the battle of Leuctra. It is
fortunate for us that we have a correct account of this inundation; for it
perfectly unfolds the true history of the deluges in the time of Ogyges and
Deucalion.

In the year of Rome 391, there was an extraordinary darkness in Italy, during
the greatest part of the day; dilata nox usque ad plurimam partem diei;" and a
singular hail storm.

Muratori, vol. 1. 11. In the year of Rome 405 and B. C. 349, a pestilence is
mentioned, but with no circumstances that deserve notice, except that it was in
time of peace and internal tranquillity. "Quum et foris pax et domi concordia
ordinum otium esset, ne nimis laetaeres essent, pestilentia adorta" -- and
recourse was had to the Sybilline books and the Lectisturnium. The circumstance
of the prevalence of plague in time of peace, will be often noted, to refute
the idle notion, that pestilential diseases are generated and propagated
principally by armies in time of war.

After writing the foregoing, I found in Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 2. 25, an
account of a comet in "the hundred and eighth Olympiad, and year of Rome 398."
It resembled at first a crest, but changed into the form of a spear. Now, the
first year of the 108th Olympiad, according to common chronology, corresponds
with the year of Rome 406. There is therefore a difference between the common
mode of reckoning by the Olympiads, and Pliny's mode, of at least eight years
or two Olympiads. -- By following the common mode, and placing the first year
of the 108th Olympiad, against the 406th year of Rome, the appearance of this
comet will coincide with the general tenor of facts, hereafter to be related,
and correspond nearly in time with the plague in Rome, mentioned above.

Nearly at the same time, there was an eruption of Etna, placed by authors in
the year B. C. 350, corresponding with the year of Rome 404. It is probable
this eruption was within a year or two of the appearance of the comet;
according to many modern facts of the same kind.

In the year of Rome 422, a violent plague arose, which, says P. Diaconus, was
supposed to proceed from corrupt air, until the conspiracy of the Roman women
to poison their husbands was detected; after which it was ascribed to that
cause. Livy does not appear to credit popular opinion on this occasion. He
says, "Foedus insequens annus; seu intemperie Caeli, seu humana fraud fuit" --
Recourse was had to the usual remedies, driving the nail, and the Lectisternium.

Livy b. 8. 18. August. Hist. P. Diac. A pestilence again appeared in Rome in
the year 440, but no particulars are stated.

Livy 9. 28. In the year preceding, there was an inundation at Rhodes.

In the year of Rome 458, B. C. 296, commenced a most severe pestilence which
continued for three or four years. In the third year, a hard winter appears to
be related by Livy, who says, "the snow filled all places, nor was it possible
to endure the weather abroad." This was however in the mountainous country of
the Samnites. The Roman consuls celebrated their triumphs over the Samnites,
during this mortal epidemic, and it was a curious spectacle to behold at the
same time, triumphal and funeral processions, and lamentations for the dead,
mingled with acclamations of joy.

Orosius, b. 3. 21. Livy, b. 10. 31 et seq. This plague commenced with many
alarming prodigies, and violent tempests. A remarkable cloud and extreme
darkness, for the greater part of a day, is mentioned by Livy, under favor of
which the Samnites attacked the Roman lines. This darkness is mentioned, on
account of the frequency of the phenomenon, during pestilential periods. --
Perh^ps this appearance may be connected with the cause of pestilence.

The violence and duration of this plague induced the Romans to send to
Epidaurus for Esculapius, which they imported in form of a serpent, and in the
island of the Tyber, where it was first landed, they consecrated a temple to
the God of Physic.

Livy, Epit. 11. It is not improbable, that the first eruption of Lipari,
recorded in history, happened during this period; as it was in the reign of
Agathocles, who died a few years after the time of this pestilence. The
eruption is mentioned by the historian Callias whose works are lost; but the
authors who cited them, have mentioned these particulars, that the eruption
continued for several days, throwing great stones to the distance of a mile;
and the sea boiling all round the island.

In the year of Rome 477, and B. C. 277, happened that remarkable plague which
is often mentioned, as particularly fatal to pregnant women and breeding
cattle. "Gravis pestilentia urbem ac fines ejus invasit; quae, cum omnes,
praecipue mulieres pecudesque corripiens, necatis in utero fooetibus, futura
prole vacuabat."

Orosius, lib. 4. This also happened in time of peace. The words of the
historian are remarkable. "Sed Romanorum miseria nullis cessat induciis.
Consumitur morborum malis intercapedo bellorum; et cum foris cessatur a
proeliis, agitur introrsum ira de coelo." The miseries of the Romans have no
truce. The intervals between their wars are wasted with the calamities of
sickness; and when they are exempt from war abroad, they are afflicted by the
wrath of heaven at home.

Short on air has placed this disease in the year of the world 3712,
corresponding with the year of Rome 462, but his chronology is often inaccurate.

In the year of Rome 482, a pestilence broke out in Rome, and raged two or
three years, carrying off countless multitudes of people. This was preceded by
an eruption of fire at Calenum, which continued for three days and nights,
destroying the soil for a considerable extent. This period also was
distinguished by earthquakes, in the third year of the pestilence.

Orosius. b. 4. P. Diaconus. This period was memorable for a severe winter. The
snow, to a prodigious depth, lay in the forum for forty days.

It will be found as we proceed with this history, that most of such
extraordinary seasons and unusual concurrence of great agitations in nature,
happen during volcanic eruptions and the approach of comets to the solar system
of which this globe is a part. That comets were visible, during the calamitous
periods mentioned in the Roman history is probable; but unfortunately few
instances are recorded, until after the Christian era. -- Not an eruption of
Vesuvius is mentioned, and I cannot find more than fourteen instances of
eruptions from Etna, anterior to the same era. This defect of history is of no
small concern in a treatise of this kind.

In the year of Rome 529 and B. C. 225, the Roman armies which were marching
into Gaul, were retarded by violent rains, and the plague which infected the
soldiers. The Romans were, as usual on such occasions, frightened at numerous
prodigies. In Hetruria, uncommon lights were seen in the sky. Meteors were seen
at Ariminum, and the waters of a river in Picenum appeared like blood. A
violent earthquake overturned the famous Colossus of Rhodes, and the shock was
felt in Italy. The compilers of the Encyclopedia, Dufresnoy and Functius, place
this event in the year B. C. 224, and Rollin and Universal History in 222.

Rome was overflowed, according to Universal History in 231 B. C. This event
may belong to the same period: but the compilers of that history differ in
chronology from Hook and the common chronology which I have followed.




Plut. Life of Marcellus. Orosius. b. 4 P. Diac^nus. Muratori vol. 1. 16. Some
of the prodigies, mentioned by Roman historians, and which have been ridiculed
by moderns who are too wise to study the operations of nature, aad too proud to
believe in extraordinary occurrences, will be hereafter explained.

During the battle near the Lake Thrasamene, a severe earthquake was
experienced, which, it is said, the armies did not perceive. Pliny Not. Hist.
lib. 2. 84. This was in the year of Rome 536, and B. C. 218; in which year,
Livy relates, b. 21. 61, there was a severe winter. Scipio was besieging a town
in Spain, near the present Barcelona* and for thirty days, the snow was four
feet deep. This is mentioned as a circumstance very unfavorable for the
besiegers. I cannot help remarking how closely connected in time are great
frosts and violent earthquakes. This was the winter in which Hannibal crossed
the Alps and entered Italy. He reached the Alps early in November and was nine
days in arriving to the summit. His army suffered incredible hardships and
losses from deep snow, bad roads, and the natives who killed many of the
troops. At the end of fifteen days, he gave his troops rest, on the hills near
the foot of the Alps, and although the snow was deep on the mountains, he found in
the vales, pasturage for his horses and elephants. He prosecuted his route in
the winter, suffering great hardships from snow, and more from rains, which
swelled the rivers. Early in the spring he crossed the Appenine, and here his
troops again suffered from a snow storm.

See Livy. lib. 21. Polybius. lib. 3. At the siege of Syracuse by Marcellus in
the year of Rome 541 and B. C. 213, happened a remarkable mortality, among the
troops, but especially among the Cathaginians, who all perished with their
Generals, Hippocrates and Himilco. Of this pestilence, Livy gives the following
account, b. 25. 26. "A pestilence broke out in both armies, which diverted
their minds from the concerns of the war; for it was in autumn, and in a
situation naturally unhealthy. The heat, which was more severe without the city
than within, affected almost every person in both the camps. At first, persons
sickened and died, by reason of the unwholesomeness of the place; afterward
the diseases spread by infection, so that those who were seized, were
neglected, or abandoned and died, or their attendants contracted the same
disease. Daily burials and death were before their eyes, and day and night
their ears were assailed with lamentations. At length the survivors became
hardened; they neither grieved at the death of others, nor took pains to bury
the dead; and the bodies of the deceased lay scattered along the streets, in
sight of those who were expecting the same fate. The dead infected the sick,
and the sick, those in health, with terror and pestiferous stench; and some,
preferring death by the sword, rushed on the posts of the enemy.

But the disease was much more severe and fatal to the Carthaginians, than to
the Romans, who, in this long siege, had become accustomed to the air and
water. The Sicilian troops, on the first breaking out of the disease, abandoned
their allies, and returned to their homes. The Carthaginians, who had no means
of shelter, all perished. Marcellus, to avoid the evil, drew his troops into
the city, where their enfeebled bodies were refreshed by the shades of the
houses. Many however of the Roman army, died of the same disease."

It is observable that heat and position augmented the disease among the
Carthaginians. They were encamped near a marsh or low ground; and exposed to
the direct rays of a burning sun. The Romans had possession of one part of
Syracuse, and had shelter under the buildings. These circumstances, and their
not being accustomed to the air of the place, proved fatal to the whole
Cathaginian army. Mr. Brydone learnt in Sicily from the historiographer of
Etna, Recupero, that there was a great eruption of Etna, during this siege of
Syracuse. I have not met with an account of it in the original histories I have
consulted.

In the same year, that this pestilence raged in Syracuse, a severe
pestilential epidemic prevailed in Rome. "Eo anno pestilentia gravis incidit in
urbem, agrosque; quae tamen magis in longos morbos, quam in perniciales,
evasit."

Livy, 27. 23. This fact is evidence of what will be fully proved in later
periods of the world, that a pestilential state of air extends, at the same
time, over many parts of the world; and that if a violent plague is raging in
one place, malignant diseases, if not plague, prevail in other places.

Another important fact related in the last quotation, is that the pestilence
in Rome was the bilious plague, as it was not so mortal, as it was troublesome,
by running out into long diseases.

It is a known fact and not unfrequent, that the Yellow Fever, in our climate,
is reduceable to a bilious remittent and even to an intermittent; the
pestilence on board the ships at Bulama often ran out into long and obstinate
intermittents. The fever in Baltimore in 1797 began in the form of a bilious
remittent, and continued in that form for many weeks, before it assumed the
symptoms of a malignant Yellow Fever.

The Roman and Carthaginian armies in Bruttium, a town in the southern part of
the Kingdom of Naples, suffered greatly by a pestilential disease, in the year
of Rome 548; but no particulars worthy of notice are recorded.

Livy, b. 28. 46 It is however to be remarked that this period of pestilence
was distinguished by the appearance of immense swarms of locusts, which
overspread the whole country about Capua. Their appearance was subsequent to
the plague mentioned in the armies. We shall have frequent occasion to mention
the same phenomenon in the natural world, as cotemporary with pestilence. But
clouds of these animals rarely or never appear at any other time, than during
or near the time of the prevalence of plagues; and by comparing the dates of
their appearance, it will be found, that they are not, unless by accident, the
cause of plague, nor the effect; but, like other animals which are generated in
myriads, during pestilence, the produce of some general cause, and probably of
that state of the elements, which occasions the diseases of the human race.

Livy, 30. 2. During the war between the Romans and Antiochus, king of Syria,
in 563, an event took place, similar to many instances related by Dr. Lind. The
Roman fleet, with that of the Rhodians, in search of the Syrian fleet, put into
the gulf of Pamphylia and anchored at Phaselis. But it was in the midst of
summer, and the place unwholesome; and the men, unaccustomed to the air, were
seized with a pestilential disease, especially the rowers. Why the rowers?
evidently because they were more exposed to a hot sun, to the air and to
fatigue, than the troops on board. This sickness induced the commander to quit
that station, and we hear no more of the epidemic.

Livy, b. 37. 23. In the year of Rome 571 and B. C. 182 commenced a violent
plague, which lasted several years, and ravaged Rome and all Italy so that the
Romans could not enlist 8000 soldiers to quell a revolt. In the next year, Livy
mentions a drouth of six months, and a consequent dearth of corn.

It will be remarked by any man who reads history with attention, that during
pestilential periods, all the ordinary operations of nature acquire unusual
strength and magnitude. Earthquakes and tempests are vastly more violent, than
at other times. The ancient historians, evidently without design, have left
proofs of this fact. Thus Livy mentions, that during the period under
consideration, the operations of the war in Spain ware retarded by continual
rains, which swelled the rivers, and Flaccus, the Praetor, was compelled,
tempestatibus foedis, terrible storms, to order his whole army into a city in
the neighborhood.

Livy, b. 40. 33. and sec. 29. 36. The spring of the year 571 was remarkably
tempestuous, and Livy gives a frightful account of a storm in Rome which did no
small injury to the public buildings.

B. 40. 2. Short has placed this pestilence in the year of the world 3763,
corresponding according to Usher with the year of Rome 507. But Short's
chronology is wretched. He mentions a large comet six years after this period,
of the size of the sun and of a fiery color. Of the appearance of a comet at
the period under consideration, there can be no doubt, tho I have not found the
original writer who mentions it and Short quotes no authority but Pozel. He
however has made an egregious blunder in the time, as he has in many other
instances of facts which he relates, of high antiquity.

The order of the great phenomena of nature seems to be that violent storms,
rain and a cold winter, are followed the next year with excessive heat and
drouth and vice versa. Violent storms however occur at all times during these
periods. It will be noted, that the pestilence above mentioned could not be
occasioned by the drouth and dearth of corn, for it broke out in the year
preceding. The same fact often occurs, and proves that great pestilence is not
solely the effect of intemperate seasons, but that both are the effects of
another cause.

The present instance is one, in which a most severe winter followed the other
unusual seasons. In the year 574, according to Hook, and the consulship of Q.
Fulvius and L. Manlius, the winter was remarkable for deep snow and every kind
of tempest. It continued longer than usual, and trees, exposed to the weather,
were blasted. An earthquake happened, in the following year.

Livy, b. 40. 45. 59. This then fixes the year of the appearance of the comet,
mentioned by Short. That he refers to the same period is certain from his
mentioning the circumstance of the inability of the Roman senate to raise a
body of 8000 men; a fact assigned by Hook to the year 571, and which can belong
to no other period. But from his description of this star, I am inclined to
believe he refers to that which is hereafter mentioned, under the great
pestilence of 610, and which Pliny has well described.

This uncommon season was succeeded in 576 by pestilence among cattle, and the
next year, followed the plague, which made dreadful havoc in Rome. Some facts
stated by the historian deserve particular notice. "Pestilentia, quae priore
anno in boves ingruerat, eo verteret in hominum morbos. Qui inciderant, haud
facile septimum diem superabant: qui superaverant, longinquo, maxim quartanae,
implicabantur morbo. Servitia maxim moriebantur; eorum strages per omnes vias
insepultorum erat. Ne liberorum quidem funeribus subficiebat. Cadavera, intacta
a ^inibus ac vulturibus, tabes absumebat: satisque constabat nec illo, nec
priore anno, in tanta strage boum hominumque vult^^ium usquam vis^m."

Livy b. 41. 21. It is not easy to do justice to this energetic description of
the historian, but the following is the sense of the passage. "The pestilence
which had affected cattle in the former year, now turned into diseases of men.
Those who were seized scarcely lived beyond the seventh day; those who survived
that day, were afflicted with tedious dist^^pers, especially the quartan ague.
The disease made its most fatal ravages among the slaves, whose dead bodies lay
unburied along the highways. It was not possible to bury the bodies of the free
citizens. Their corpses lay unburied, untouched by dogs and vultures, and
wasted away by corruption. It was evident that in this and the former year,
during the great mortality among men and cattle, no vulture was seen."

In this account, the following particulars are noticeable.

1st. That the pestilential air first produced its effects on cattle.

2d. That the seventh was the critical day -- as it usually is, in modern
bilious plague.

3d. That if the disease had a favorable crisis on the seventh day, the patient
survived, but the distemper changed into an autumnal bilious fever of the
quartan type, and long duration -- a strong evidence of what I have before
remarked that, if pestis and pestilentia are diseases of a distinct species,
the Roman pestilence was the bilious plague.

4th. This pestilence was, as usual, most mortal among the lower orders of
people.

5th. Carnivorous animals would not touch the dead bodies, and vultures
deserted the atmosphere of Rome.

The last fact is common in great plagues; but in plagues of a less malignancy,
animals do not quit the infected places. These facts seem to indicate that
birds perceive the pestilential state of air, before it becomes sensible to the
human species. It seems that the vultures disappeared, the first year, while
the pestilence was confined to cattle; and there can be little doubt, that the
delicate organs of fowls perceive the derangement of the air, whether the cause
may be, the infusion into it of a pestiferous vapor, of the abstraction from it
of a portion of the vital principle, before its effects are visible in larger
animals, and before the air is rendered offensive by the carcases of diseased
and dead animals.

This was one of those violent and long continued plagues of which history has
recorded many instances; and the Romans on this occasion, saw many prodigies.
It is difficult, in some cases, to distinguish, in the relations of historians,
truth from vulgar report; and philosophy must guard against the illusions of
credulity and terrified imaginations. I take no notice of the monsters born,
and an ox's speaking, on these occasions. At the beginning of the late American
war, many similar prodigies were announced and believed by the ignorant and
credulous. But some of the phenomena, enumerated by Livy among prodigies, in
all probability, had a real existence, for it will be related hereafter that
similar appearances have been observed, in modern times, during pestilence, and
appear evidently to have a connection with its causes.

During the plague above mentioned, a bow was seen in the sky, in a serene day,
extended over the temple of Saturn in the Roman forum; three suns or haloes
appeared, and at night many torches, or meteors descended in Lanuvium. There is
strong evidence for believing these phenomena to be occasioned by a vapor
emitted from the earth, in superabundant quantities, and which there is reason
to think, may be the cause of pestilential diseases; or there may be some
changes in the combination of substances composing the atmosphere.

At the close of this pestilential period, in 581, Apulia was deluged by swarms
of locusts; as the Pontine territory had been the year before. So destructive
were their ravages, that the Praetor Sicinius was sent with an army to drive
them away.

Livy, b. 42. 2 and 10. Orosius b. 4 relates, that a most violent plague
desolated Rome in the year 610 and B. C. 144. The dead bodies lay putrefying in
the houses and streets, and rendered it impossible to approach the city. In the
preceding year appeared a remarkable comet. As we come down to the more
authentic periods of history, this phenomenon will more frequently occur.

It is again necessary to remark a difference in the chronology of different
authors. Seneca places the appearance of this comet, which he describes to have
been as large and luminous as the sun, "Post mortem Demetrii Syriae Regis,
paulo ante Achaicum Bellum" -- after the death of Demetrius, king of Syria, and
a little before the Achean war.

Not. Quest. lib. 7. 15. Demetrius was slain, B. C. 151, according to common
chronology, and the Achean war was in the year when Carthage was taken and
destroyed by Scipio, B. C. 146. The appearance of the comet therefore should be
placed in the year preceding, or 147, corresponding with the year of Rome, 607.
And this is probably correct, for it is agreeable to general observation, that
a comet appears early in the pestilential period, and often precedes its most
calamitous years. -- The Encyclopedia assigns it to the year 146.

Seneca remarks that at first it appeared fiery and red, emitting a bright
light, so as to overcome the darkness of the night. Gradually its magnitude
lessened and its brightness vanished.

This plague was still more deadly than that in which Camillus died.

Muratori, vol. 1. In the year of Rome 628, and B. C. 126, historians relate,
that a most dreadful pestilence arose in Africa, from dead locusts. These
animals were brought toward Numidia and Utica, by a strong east wind, in such
innumerable multitudes, that they devoured every green thing -- not sparing
even the bark of trees. They were driven by the south wind into the
Mediterranean, and being washed on shore, in the hot season, they putrefied,
and caused a most deadly plague. It is related that 800,000 persons perished in
Numidia alone; 200,000 on the sea coast of Carthage and Utica, and 30,000 of
the Roman troops. No less than 1500 dead bodies were carried out of one gate of
Utica, in a single day.

Livy, Epit. 60. Orosius, lib. 5. P. Diac. August. Hist. 813. Authors ascribe
this plague to the dead locusts; and doubtless that cause had its influence. At
the same time, there is no necessity of resorting to the locusts, for this was
a time of general pestilence. The same state of air or other elements which
favored the generation of disease, first existed, and produced this unusual
number of locusts. This will appear in subsequent parts of this history.

Orosius gives a most hideous account of the pestiferous state of air from the
locusts. He avers that birds, cattle and wild beasts perished by means of the
corruption of the air, and thus increased the evil. He remarks further that,
although locusts had often appeared in his days, in great numbers, yet they never
before had done more mischief when dead, than when living, so as to cause
mankind to wish they had not perished.

We must accede to the opinion of the ancients that the stench of the locusts
was one cause of the pestilence; it is possible that no epidemic disease would
have been excited without that cause; but it is equally true, that in a healthy
state of the atmosphere, no putrefaction of dead bodies has ever been known to
produce an epidemic pestilence. It may be powerful enough to excite disease
within a small extent of its own atmosphere; but if no other cause of disease
exists, it will not extend beyond that infected atmosphere.

The appearance of immense multitudes of locusts, during pestilence, is a
curious fact in natural history, and well deserves investigation; but these
animals do not always precede the appearance of the diseases of the same
period, nor do they often perish in such collections as to be the cause of
those diseases. The common idea in Arabia, is, that they are generated by heat
and drouth. Cold and rains are supposed to destroy their eggs.

About the beginning of this destructive period, appeared a comet. The
Encyclopedia mentions two, in the year of Rome 629, and B. C. 125. But it is
probable this is a mistake of the compilers. The universal history places one
under the year 630, and a second under the following year, quoting Justin, for
authority. But Justin mentions two comets, one at the birth of Mithridates,
another in the year he began to reign. Now Mithridates was about eleven or
twelve years old when he came to the throne, in the year of Rome 631, and B. C.
123. Of course the first comet must have been about the year 620, and B. C. 134.

It is no inconsiderable proof of the truth of Justin's account, and of the
accuracy of our chronology in this particular, that there was an eruption of
the great volcano of Sicily, in both the periods when these comets are said to
have appeared. In the year 620, and B. C. 134, there was an eruption of Etna,
tho not mentioned by Justin; and this was the year of the first great comet,
and of the birth of Mithridates. Nine years after, in 629, there was a second
eruption of Etna. The last year corresponds nearly with the period in which
Mithridates began to reign, allowing him to be eleven years old, and with the
approach of the second comet.

This last comet produced most tremendous effects, as we might expect from its
magnitude, and proximity to the earth. The following is Justin's description of
it. "Nam et eo quo genitus est anno, et eo quo regnare primum coepit, stella
cometes, per utrumque tempus, 70 diebus ita luxit, ut coelum omne flagrare
videreter." For 70 days the heavens appeared to be in a flame.

Lib. 37. 2. The eruptions of the volcano were equally remarkable.

The lava from Etna laid waste the city and suburbs of Catana.

Aetna ultra solitum exarsit, says the historian; Catanam urbem ^inesque
oppressit."

Orosius, lib. 5. In Paulus Diaconus we have a relation of singular facts in
regard to the eruption of Etna. Globes of fire were thrown from the Crater.
Lipari, a small volcanic island on the north of Sicily, became so heated,
during the eruption, that the rocks were dissolved, tho it is not said that
this island discharged any fire. The water of the neighboring sea was so heated
as to kill the fish, and melt the pitch on the decks of vessels. Dead fish
appeared on the surface of the water, and many persons, who were near the
island, were suffocated with heat.

This author places the appearance of the locusts which caused the plague in
Africa, in the year after the eruption of Etna. Others place this event, a year
before the eruption. It is much to be regretted that authors have been so
careless of the chronology of important phenomena, on the order of which may
depend important principles. This however is certain, that all the great
agitations of nature here related belong to the same period, and it is not
surprising that they were attended with most mortal pestilence.

For authorities see Livy, Epit. 60. Orosius, lib. 5. P. Diaconus, in August.
Hist. 813. Justin, lib. 37. 2, 3. Usher's Annals, 498. Muratori, vol. 1, p. 26.
The foregoing period of pestilence was one of the most dreadful on record.

It will be found invariably true, in every period of the world, that the
violence and extent of the plague has been nearly proportioned to the number
and violence of the following phenomena -- earthquakes, eruptions of volcanoes,
meteors, tempests, inundations

During the civil wars excited by Sylla and Marius, the armies lost ten
thousand men by the plague, in the year of Rome 665, and B. C. 89.

Universal Hist. vol. 13. 59. Vel. Paterc. lib. 2. 21. It must have been during
this period that the comet appeared which is mentioned by Pliny. Not. Hist.
lib. 2. cap 25. "Civili motu, Octavio Consule," for this was the year, in which
Octavius was Consul. This period was preceded by an extraordinary collision and
disrupture of two mountains, and the bursting of fire from the chasm, in the
territory of Modena. Pliny assures us, this was seen from the Emilian way, by
an immense number of Roman knights and others.

Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 2. 83. With this period corresponds the eruption of a
volcano in Hiera, one of the Aeolian isles, north of Sicily, now called Lipari,
which burnt for several days, and the very sea around it appeared to be fire.
Pliny says this was during the Social War.

Lib. 2. 106. The year B. C. 44 was distinguished by the death of Julius Caesar,
by the hands of conspirators; soon after which appeared a comet, supposed to be
the same which appeared in 1680, whose period is calculated to be 575 years. If
this is its period, it must have been seen in the year B. C. 1767, in the reign
of Ogyges, when Attica was inundated and rendered barren for a number of years;
and when the planet Venus is said to have changed her figure, color and course.
When we survey the uniform effects of comets in tempests and floods, and
compare the traditional account of that event with the terrible inundations
which have happened in Greece at other times, and especially with that in the
time of Thucydides, which rent Atalanta from the main land; which events all
took place during the approach of comets; we are constrained to believe the
fact of the Ogygean deluge, and fable rises to the dignity of authentic
history. This inundation might have happened during the approach of some other
comet, but the probability is, that it was during that of the comet under
consideration, which fixes the time of the Ogygean flood, in the year B. C.
1767. This circumstance may serve to correct the chronology of the early events
in Greece.

See Jackson's chronology vol. 3. 312. Its next appearance must have been in
the year A. C. 1193, when Electra, one of the pleiads, abandoned her sister
orbs, and fled from the Zodiac to the north pole.

Its third appearance corresponds with the year A. C. 618, the year of the
terrible comet of the Sybill, says Gibbon; and its fourth, is the one under
consideration. Its subsequent appearances A. D. 531, 1106 and 1680 will be
hereafter mentioned. All the periods here named, which come within the limits
of authentic history, have been remarkable for pestilence, earthquakes,
inundations or other great phenomena. Such was the fact in 44 and 43. There was
a terrible inundation of the Tyber, a violent earthquake, many unusual
pheno^ena in the sky, and in the year 43, a violent eruption of Etna --
Pestilence, as usual, accompanied these events.

But another phenomenon, the paleness or defect of light, in the sun, deserves
more particular attention. Pliny asserts that this pale color lasted almost a
year. His words are, "Fiunt prodigiosi et longiores solis defectus, qualis
occiso dictatore Caesare et Antoniano bello, totius pene anni pallore
continuo." Not. Hist. lib. 2. 30. -- Virgil and Ovid, who were eye witnesses of
this phenomenon, have both described it, with the other prodigies of this
period.

"Ille (sol) etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam,
Cum Caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit." -- Georg. lib. 1. 466.
"Phoebi quoque tristis imago
Lurida sollicitis praebebat lumina terris." Metamorph. lib. 15. 785.
The words ferrugo and luridus give us an exact idea of the color -- a paleness
tinctured with the color of rust. A similar defect of light in the sun occurred
at the time of the next appearance of this comet, A. D. 531, as will be
hereafter related. The fact is curious. It is well known that this comet
approaches very near to the sun; but whether the defect of splendour in the sun
was the effect of the attractive powers of the comet, or of an alteration in
the electrical atmosphere of these bodies; or whether it was occasioned by an
alteration in the terrestrial atmosphere, is a question not easily solved. It
might have been owing to a vapor, like that which overspread Europe in 1783.

This period was marked with famine also, with shooting stars, and numerous
prodigies.

See Virgil and Ovid in the passages quoted. See also, Zonoras' Annals, lib.
10. Usher's An. p. 680. The comet appeared in 44 and also the pestilence -- the
eruption of Etna in 43 B. C. and therefore subsequent to the other events.
Indeed it is more generally the case, that the volcano does not emit fire until
some time after the appearance of the plague. To this however there are
exceptions. Most of the great plagues appear two or three years, with different
degrees of violence; and during this period, volcanoes discharge immense
quantities of lava.

By a paragraph in Usher's Annals, p. 684, it appears the winter following the
appearance of this comet, was severe.

The next pestilential period commenced in the year 30 B. C. An eruption of
Etna, which laid all the neighboring towns in ruins, marked the commencement of
this period, which however was preceded in 31 by an earthquake in Judea, in
which thousands of people perished in the ruins of their houses. About the same
time appeared, says Dion Cassius, "those meteors which the Greeks call comets."
These phenomena were followed by a pestilence in Jerusalem, which destroyed a
great part of the nobles and people of the Jews. The same period was marked by
a great inunda^^ of the Tyber, which spread over the low grounds of Rome, and
was considered as an omen of the future power of Augustus.

Dion Cassius' Univ. Hist. 10. 415. Usher's Annals, 766. By a curious
circumstance, we learn that a hard winter and pestilence afflicted Rome at this
period. The Emperor Octavius Augustus, in his 5th Consulship, B. C. 29, had
formed the design of resigning the empire. Horace, the Poet, his friend and
flatterer, endeavored to dissuade him from this purpose, on account of the
prodigies which happened at the beginning of the year, which was the winter of
the year 30 B. C. and corresponds exactly with the appearance of the comet.
Among these prodigies, the poet enumerates an abundance of snow, terrible hail,
thunder and lightning, and a destructive inundation of the Tyber.

"Jam satis terris nivis, atque dirae
Grandinis misit Pater -- etc."
See the 2d Ode of the first book, which is worth the notice of the philosophic
reader, on account of the description of the inundation, which proceeded from a
swell of the sea.

"Vidimus flavum Tiberim, retortis
Littore Etrusco violenter undis."
It is a fact of which there is full evidence, that during the approach of
comets, not only tempests are more violent, than at other times, but the ocean
swells without winds -- the tides are much higher and high tides are more
numerous. The ancients took notice of this fact, and it came under my own
observation, during the approach of the comet in 1797.

In the 21st ode of the same book, Horace addresses Apollo who "drives war,
famine and pestilence from the Roman people and the Emperor, to the Persians and
Britons."

This passage is proof that the Romans found pestilence in Britain; but the
Britons, at that time, had no trade, except with the coast of France. How or
from what quarter, they imported the infection, is left for the solution of Dr.
Mead's followers.

In the year B. C. 25, according to the Universal History, a violent pestilence
raged in Rome, an inundation laid a great part of the city under water, lands
were left untilled and a famine ensued.

The same year, the plague raged in Palestine, which was preceded by a severe
drouth and a dearth of corn. A hard winter is mentioned about the same time,
but the order of this event is not recorded.

Universal Hist. vol. 13. 502. Usher's Annals, 772. Dufresnoy's Chro. This
pestilence was preceded the year before, by "epidemic distempers which proved
fatal to many." This fact is important, and will hereafter be found very
material in determining the causes of epidemic pestilential diseases. It goes
to prove a progressiveness in the pestilential state of air, or general
contagion. And this instance, among many to be hereafter specified, demonstates
that the plague was not produced by the famine, according to vulgar opinion in
almost all cases of this kind. Had no malignant disease preceded the plague,
and had the plague followed close on the heels of famine, we should have strong
ground to believe famine to be the cause of the plague; and a series of similar
facts might establish that as a principle or law of nature. But it appears,
that the malignant distempers, which are found to be the constant precursors of
pestilence, were epidemic, in the year preceding the famine -- a demonstration
that the general cause, in the state of air, existed anterior to the dearth.

SECTION III. Historical view of pestilential epidemics from the Christian era,
to the year 1347.
AT the close of the reign of Augustus, about the year 14 or according to some
authors 16 of the Christian era, there was a great famine in Rome, and a comet
is mentioned, near the same time, by Dion Cassius. This was followed by a most
terrible pestilence in the east, during which twelve cities of Asia Minor were
overthrown by earthquakes. Of these calamitous events, the following is the
account recorded by Tacitus, An. lib. 2. 47. "Eodem anno, duodecem celebres
Asiae urb^s conlapsae nocturno motu terrae, quo improvisior graviorque pestis
fuit. Neque solitum in tali casu effugium subveniebat in aperta prorumpendi,
quia diductis terris hauriebantur: Sedisse immensos montes, visa in arduo quae
plana fuerint, effulsisse inter ruinam ignis memorant."

It is a circumstance not to be overlooked that the plague was prevalent,
anterior to this dreadful earthquake, as the historian remarks that this
catastrophe rendered the sickness more severe and less tolerable. Such is the
usual course of these calamities; the pestilence appears, before the most
destructive shocks of the earth, which rarely fail to occur, during its
prevalence. It is to be observed also that men obtained no security, in this
instance, by flying to open places, for the earth opened and swallowed them up
-- fire also issued from the earth. Large mountains subsided to plains, and
plains were thrown into mountains.

Tacitus An. lib. 2. 47. Plin. lib. 2. 84. Eusebius. Chron. 201. Usher's Annals,
811. In the year 40 of the Christian era, there was an eruption of Etna, which
frightened Caligula out of Sicily and which was followed by universal famine in
Rome and the east. Short places this in the 49th year of the Christian era;
although Caligula was killed in the year 41. No dependence can be placed on the
dates of events, found in Short on Air; and I cannot vouch for their
correctness, where I have not other authority.
This was the famine foretold by Agabus in Acts xi. 28, in the reign of Claudius
Caesar. A pe^tilence, at the same time raged in Babylonia, and multitudes of
Jews, on account of it, withdrew to Seleucia.

Suetonius in Calig. Univ. Hist. vol. 14. Usher's An. 864, 868. During this
famine and pestilence, a comet was visible in the year 42.

Short on Air, vol. 2. 170. The close of the reign of Claudius and the
beginning of the reign of Nero, A. D. 53 and 4, were marked by a similar train
of phenomena and calamities. A comet is noted by Suetonius and Pliny about the
year 54, the year in which Claudius was poisoned. Tacitus relates that people
were alarmed by frequent shocks of earthquakes, which demolished many
buildings, and great dearth of corn prevailed in Rome and Greece. Pliny records
that thr^^ suns, by which are doubtless intended, halos or mock suns, appeared
the same year. These were considered by the ancients as prodigies; but tho
common phenomena, they are remarkably luminous, and frequent in the periods of
pestilence.

Tacitus Annals, lib 12. 43. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. 31. Suet. in Claud.
Functius Chronol. This period was sickly, tho not recorded as pestilential.
Suetonius remarks, "Ex omnium Magistratum generi, plerique mortem obierant."
Many of all kinds of public officers died; by which we infer that the year was
sickly.

In the reign of Nero occurred the next pestilential period. Two comets are
noted, one A. D. 62 and a second in 66. In the year 62, Laodicea was
overwhelmed by an earthquake. In the year 68, occurred a most violent tempest
in Campania which destroyed villages, trees and grain; and a violent
earthquake. At the same time, raged a mortal plague in Rome, which is said to
have carried off 30,000 people; but by the description of its ravages, it is
probable the number was much greater. Tacitus remarks that the "houses were
filled with dead bodies and the streets with funerals; neither age nor sex was
exempt; slaves and ingenuous plebeians were suddenly taken off, amidst the
lamentations of their wives and children, who, while they assisted the sick, or
mourned over the dead, were seized with the disease, and perishing, were burnt
on the same funeral pile. To the knights and senators, the disease was less
mortal, tho these also suffered in the common calamity."

As Rome, at the time under consideration, contained more than a million of
inhabitants, so mortal a plague must have extinguished a much larger number
than 30,000 people -- it is not improbable, a numeral or figure has been
omitted by the transcribers of the original history.

The earthquakes of this period were experienced in Asia Minor, at Laodicea and
Hierapolis.

Seneca mentions that a flock of 600 sheep were killed by the pestiferous
vapor, discharged during the earthquake in Italy.

Dion Cassius relates, that at this period, a most formidable inundation laid
waste the Egyptian coast.

It must not be omitted that the violent tempest in which St. Paul was
shipwrecked on the island of Melita, now Malta, was in the year 61 or 62,
during the approach of the first comet.

Tacitus remarks, that no visible cause could be assigned for the pestilence of
this period; "Nulla Coeli intemperie quae occurreret occulis." No remarkable
season had occurred, to which this distemper could be ascribed. We shall find,
in subsequent periods, distinguished writers making similar remarks. The reason
is, these authors did not take a view sufficiently comprehensive of the
operations of nature; and if the cause of plague could not be found, very near
in time and place, they did not observe it. It is true, that an extraordinary
season does not always precede or attend pestilence, in a particular place; but
by extending our view of the subject, to general causes, operating over whole
quarters of the globe, and perhaps over the whole globe; and considering the
causes, as invisible, and acting for a series of years, the whole mystery is
unfolded. -- Such may be the result of this investigation.

For authorities respecting the last period of pestilence here noticed, see
Tacitus* An. lib. 15. 47. lib. 16. 13. Suet. in Nero. Seneca, Not. Quest. 6 and
7. Baronuis, vol. 1. 620. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. 83. Usher's Annals, 892.
Funct. Chron. Oros. lib. 7. Universal Hist. vol. 14. 439. Magd. Ec. Hist. lib.
2. 13. Seneca places the great earthquake in Campania under the Consulship of
Regulus and Virginius, which, according to common chronology, was in the 65th
year of the Christian era.

The next pestilential period is one of the most remarkable in all the
circumstances, that is recorded in History.

In the year 79 [some authors say a year later, but the difference is of no
moment, as they agree in the order of the events related] just before the death
of Vespasian, appeared a comet with a long coma in the month of June. On the
first of November following, a most tremendous ebullition of fire and lava
issued from Vesuvius and laid waste the neighboring country. At the same time,
happened a violent earthquake, which buried the cities of Herculaneum and
Pompeium; and so sudden was the shock, that the people, who were attending a
play, had not time to quit the theater, and were all buried in a mass.

This dreadful catastrophe was preceded by rumbling noises in the earth, and
the earth was heated to a great degree. Violent agitations of the sea, thunder
and lightning also announced the approach of some dreadful event.

The eruption lasted three days, during which time such immense quantities of
ashes and smoke were discharged, that day was turned into night, and the ashes
were driven by different winds to Rome, Syria and Africa.

The agitations of the earth and the elements were tremendous and frighful.
Baronius remarks, that some persons supposed the world would be reduced to
chaos, or consumed with fire. The fish in the neighboring seas were destroyed.

This explosion of subterranean fire was preceded by a severe drouth in Italy.
The next year, 80, was remarkable for a terrible inundation in England; the
Severn overflowing a large tract of country, and destroying multitudes of
cattle.

These violent effects of subterranean fire were attended by one of the most
fatal plagues recorded in history. A remark of Dion is here very important. He
says that the "Ashes from Vesuvius caused, at the time, only slight
indispositions or diseases; but afterward produced an Epidemic distemper," The
remark is incorrect, in ascribing even slight diseases to ashes; but it leads
to a conclusion, which is of moment. The slight complaints which prevailed in
the autumn of the year of the eruption, compared with modern observations,
appear to have been the precursors of the plague, which broke out the next
year, and as authors assert, destroyed, for some time, 10,000 citizens of Rome
in a day. -- The same year, while the Emperor Titus was viewing the ruins in
Campania, a fire broke out in the city, which laid in ashes a great number of
buildings.

The order of the events in this period was, a comet, drouth, slight diseases,
and an eruption of Vesuvius, with the earthquakes, the first year. -- In the
second, appeared the pestilence with its most malignant effects.

In this eruption of Vesuvius, the first recorded in history, perished the
elder Pliny; and the Emperor Titus fell a victim to his paternal care of his
subjects.

Suetonius, 23. Aurel. Victor. Epit. Dion Cassius. Pliny Epis. Baronius An.
vol. 1. 713. Magd. lib. 2. 14. In the year 90 appeared a comet. The plague is
said to have appeared in the north of England in 88, and in 92, to have
destroyed 150,000 lives in Scotland.

Short, vol. 2. 207. In 102 a plague is said to have arisen from dead fish
driven on shore, but I have no other particulars.

In the year 107 four cities of Asia, two in Greece and three in Galatia, were
overwhelmed by an earthquake. A comet is mentioned by Short in 109* but as I
have not found the original authority, I cannot depend on the accuracy of the
chronology. It is probable that these phenomena occurred within the same year;
and there is the more reason to believe this, as different and respectable
authors differ two or three years in the chronology of Roman history. The next
event to be related, is a remarkable instance of the truth of this observation.

Short mentions a plague in Wales in 114 which destroyed 45,000 lives; but I
have not the history of the facts.

In the reign of Trajan, the city of Antioch was almost totally demolished by
an earthquake. This emperor was in the city at the time, and narrowly escaped
with his life. Some authors place this event in the year 114; others in 115;
but Baronius has proved by an ancient inscription, that it happened under the
consulate of P. Vipstanus Messala and M. Virgilianus Pedo; which brings the
event to the year 117. A comet was visible the same year.

The earthquakes of this period were extremely violent -- many cities were
overthrown, mountains sunk, rivers were dried up and new fountains appeared.

Aurelius Victor adds to these calamities a great inundation of the Tyber,
violent pestilence and famine; but to which of the periods, the year 107 or 117,
he alludes, is not quite certain, tho probably to the latter. "Terrae motus
gravis per provincias multas, atroxque pestilentia, famesque et inundia facta
sunt."

To remedy the danger from fire and earthquakes, Trajan limited the height of
houses in Rome to 60 feet; and for that regulation obtained the title of
"Father of the Country."

The great earthquake at Antioch was accompanied with fierce winds, a
circumstance not very common; it being more usual that shocks of the earth
happen during a perfect serenity and tranquillity of the atmosphere, unless in
the vicinity of volcanoes.

Aurel. Victor. Epit. Trajan. Dion Cassius. Baronius vol. 2. 55. Echard's Romans
Hist. vol. 2. 276. During the time that Trajan was making war on the Agarini, a
people of Arabia, which had revolted from the Roman government, flies in
myriads appeared and covered every vessel and utensil, so that the Emperor was
compelled to abandon the expedition. This was near the time of the earthquake
which destroyed Antioch.

Baron. 2. 54. Magd. Cent. 2. 13. This fact ought not to be omitted; as the
generation of innumerable insects is one of the phenomena which generally
attend a great pestilence -- The same season was marked by terrible storms of
wind, rain and hailstones of unusual size. The winter succeeding that in which
Antioch was destroyed, was so tempestuous, and the Tigris so swelled by deluges
of rain, that Trajan's army suffered extreme hardships and great losses, in his
expedition into Assyria.

Under the year 115, I find mentioned a sudden and violent inundation of the
Severn in England, which drowned people in their beds, and destroyed 5000 head
of cattle. Perhaps philosophy will place this event, under the year of the
earthquake at Antioch; whichever may be the true year, 115 or 117.

In the chronological tables, a great earthquake in China is mentioned under
the year 114 -- the year of the plague in Wales.

Under the Emperor Adrian, say the compilers of the Magdeburgh history, from
Eusebius, the greatest part of Nicomedia and Nicea was overthrown by
earthquakes; and not long after, Nicopolis and Cesarea were totally
overwhelmed. Functius assigns the fate of Nicomedia to the year 121, and that
of Nicopolis to 129. By another writer is noted a comet in 127, and a plague in
Scotland.

Short, vol. 2. 207. In 137 appeared a comet, followed by the plague. -- In
this year or the subsequent one, the Thames was almost dry.

The plague again made great havoc in Scotland in 146. -- An eruption of fire
from Lipari happened in 144.

In the year 153 happened a severe winter of three months, which covered the
Thames and all rivers with ice.

In the reign of Antoninus Pius, A. D. 154, occurred an earthquake which
prostrated some towns in Asia and Rhodes. A comet appeared nearly at the same
time, and a pestilence in Arabia, together with an inundation of the Tyber.

Julius Capitolinus. Magdeb. Cent. 2. 13. Baronius vol. 2. 130. Of the general
and fatal pestilence in the reign of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus and Lucius
Verus, we have many accounts. It appeared in Rome in 167, but its origin was in
Asia, a year or two earlier. Ammianus Marcellinus, the philosophic soldier,
relates that this plague originated from the foul air of a small box or chest,
which a Roman soldier had opened, in search of plunder, after the taking of
Seleucia. Julius Capitolinus mentions the same fact on the authority of mere
vulgar report or tradition. "Et nata fertur pestilentia in Babylonia, ubi de
templo Apollonis ex arcula aurea, quam milis forte inciderat, spiritus
pestilens evasit, atque inde Parthos orbemque complesse."

A. Marcellinus gives a more particular account of this event. "Milites fanum
scrutantes, invenere foramen angustum, quo reserato, ut pretiosum aliquid
invenirent, ex adyto quodam concluso a Chaldoeorum arcanis, labes primordalis
exsilivit, quae insanabilium vi concepta morborum, ejusdem Very et Marci
Antonini temporibus, ab ipsis Persarum ^inibus, adusque Rhenum, et Gallias
Cuneta contagiis polluebat et mortibus."

That a close box or other confined place, which might have been shut for ages,
should contain a pestiferous vapor which might destroy the life of the man that
first opened it, is not only possible, but very probable. But that this
trifling quantity of noxious air should be sufficient to generate a universal
pestilence from the confines of Persia to Gaul, is a vulgar notion, precisely
resembling the modern opinion that the plague is conveyed from country to
country, in bales of goods.

The historian adds, that the Emperor returned to Rome, and "luem secum defer
videreter," seemed to carry the plague with him. But the Romans passed only
from Seleucia to Rome; whereas the plague raged over the whole earth; so that
the disease must have originated in other countries, through which the Emperor
did not pass, and from other causes than the noxious air of a little box. It
raged in Gaul and in Scotland.

By attending to the phenomena of the physical world, during this period, we
shall find causes fully adequate to the effect, without resorting to the temple
of Apollo in Seleucia. The state of the elements was deranged, and nature was
every where agitated. An inundation of the Tyber at Rome laid all the low
grounds, and a part of the city under water, sweeping away people, buildings
and cattle, and desolating the fields. Famine and earthquakes marked the same
period. The air became insalubrious, and myriads of caterpillars and other
insects overran the earth and devoured vegetation.

The pestilence was violent and mortal, corresponding with these symptoms of
derangement in the elements. In Rome, at one time, it is related, that the
mortality extended to ten thousand persons in a day. Its precise duration, I do
not find to be specified by the historians; but it continued for a number of
years; in the midst of which appeared a comet, about the year 169.

See Am. Marcellinus, lib. 23, and Julius Capitolinus, in Vero. Aug. Hist. 580.
Hist. of Emperors by Pedro Mexiae, p. 172. Echard's Romans Hist. vol. 2. 315 to
322, who is more correct than Gibbon. Of the symptoms of this desolating
plague, I find no account, except that the patients had a light fever, and a
gangrene appeared on the extremities of the feet.

It is proper here to notice a passage in Gibbon's Hist. vol. 1. chap. 3, which
describes, as halcyon days, the period of the world in which this calamity
occurred. The following are his words. "If a man were called upon to fix the
period in the history of the world, during which the condition of the human
race was most happy and prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that
which elapsed from the death of Domitian to the accession of Commodus;" that
is, from the year 96 to 180.

It is certain that, at this time, the Roman Empire was in its glory, and
governed by a series of able and virtuous princes, who made the happiness of
their subjects their principal object. But the coloring given to the happiness
of this period, is far too brilliant. The success of armies and the extent of
empire do not constitute exclusively the happiness of nations; and no historian
has a title to the character of fidelity, who does not comprehend, in his
general descriptions of the state of mankind, moral and physical, as well as
political, evils.

During the period mentioned by Gibbon, not only Antioch, with the loss of most
of its inhabitants, amounting probably to more than 100,000, but thirteen other
cities were demolished by earthquakes. In the famous revolt of the Jews under
Trajan, historians relate that 450,000 Romans were massacred in Syria, Cyprus
and other countries; and in the wars undertaken by Adrian to subdue them, it is
estimated that 50 cities and 985 towns were destroyed, and 580,000 men lost
their lives by famine, disease and the sword. The reign of the Antonines was
distinguished for multifarious and severe calamities. The description of them,
by Aurelius Victor, ought to be given in his own words. Speaking of the Emperor
M. Antonine, he says, "Nisi ad illa tempora natus esset, profecto quasi uno
lapsu ruissent omnia status Romani. Quippe ab armis nusquam quies erat: perque
omnem orientem, Illyricum, Italiam, Galliamque bella fervebant. Terrae motus
non sine interitu civitatum, inundationes fluminum, lues crebrae, locustarum
species agris infestae, prorsus ut prope nihil, quo summis angoribus atteri
mortales solent, dici seu cogitari queat, quod non illo imperante saevierit."

Epit. of the lives of the Emperors. "Unless he, M. Antonine, had been born at
that juncture, the affairs of the empire would have fallen into speedy ruin:
for there was no respite from military operations. War raged in the east, in
Illyricum, in Italy and in Gaul. Earthquakes, with the destruction of cities,
inundations of rivers, frequent plagues, a species of locusts ravaging the
fields; in short every calamity that can be conceived to afflict and torment
men, scourged the human race, during his administration."

How can that be a "happy and prosperous condition of men," in which they were
subject to continual wars, to massacres, to the ravages of insects, and to a
series of plagues, which destroyed probably one fourth of the inhabitants of
the globe; and when the Roman empire was upon the brink of ruin? And how can a
writer be esteemed as a historian, who substitutes the flowers of rhetoric for
sober truth, and sarifices fact to embellishment?

In the year 173 a pestilence raged in the Roman armies, which threatened them
with extermination. -- This appears to have been a continuation of the plague
before described. It prevailed in Rome in 175 and 178.

Funct. Chronol. Short, vol. 2. A severe winter in 173 produced famine in
England, where the snow covered the earth for 13 weeks.

In 181 a comet was visible, and in 182 Smyrna was almost ruined by an
earthquake. The plague prevailed in Rome in 183.

Ibid. In the reign of Commodus, about the year 187, Rome was again afflicted
with a severe plague, which was felt also in all parts of Italy, tho with less
mortality than in the city. Herodian, lib. ^, gives the following account of
it. "A great pestilence raged throughout Italy at that time, but with most
violence in the city, by reason of the great concourse of people assembled from
all parts of the earth. The mortality among men and cattle was great. The
Emperor, by advice of certain physicians retired to Laurentum, on account of
the coolness of the place which was shaded with laurels, from which
circumstance it derived its name. It was supposed also the effluvia from the
laurels acted as an antidote against the contagion of the distemper. The people
in the city also, by advice of physicians, filled their noses and ears with
sweet ointments, and constantly used perfumes, for in popular opinion, they
occupy the passages of the senses, with these odors, and shut out the corrupt
air; or if they do not wholly exclude it, they overpower its influence by
superior force. But these things did not check the progress of the disease, and
men and cattle continued to perish."

The deaths amounted, in Rome, to 5000 in a day, for a considerable time. A
famine prevailed at the same time, and historians ascribe it to Cleander, the
minister of Commodus, who had monopolized the corn, to compel people to
purchase of him at an advanced price. Dion Cassius however says, the year had
been unfruitful. The pestilence continued three years. Indeed we may here
remark once for all, that when we read of a plague of great extent and violence
in any part of the world, under the date of a particular year, we may always
consider that or other pestilential diseases, as prevailing at least three
years. Rarely are great plagues of less duration, but often of greater.
Historians seldom mention the pestilence, except in the year of its greatest
violence, but no plague, I will assert, ever yet infested a particular city or
country, without precursors of a very malignant type. When therefore we speak
of pestilence, as prevailing in a particular year, we are to consider the
epidemic as extending to a period of three, four or five years, perhaps to a
much longer period, either in the form of ^^ague, a deadly petechial fever, or
other fatal disease.

In the foregoing description of the disease under Commodus, we notice the
vulgar modes of guarding against contagion, by stuffing the nose and ears with
aromatics -- a practice that in part subsists at this day, although constant
experience proves it to be utterly ineffectual.

It appears from Herodian that a comet appeared at this period, or other
singular heavenly phenomena. He says, "Ea tempestate stellae per diem perpetuo
apparuerant, quaedamque ex iis in longum productae medio quasi aere suspensae
videbantur." Comets are sometimes visible in the day time, and it is well known
that many of the ancients considered them as meteors, floating in the earth's
atmosphere, as we see in Aristotle, Seneca and Pliny, who have discussed and
refuted those opinions. See also Sampridius who mentions the comet and unusual
darkness, at this period.

Another circumstance mentioned by Herodian deserves notice. He says, that
animals at this time grew out of their usual size, assuming an extraordinary
figure and disproportioned in their parts. "Preterea animalia, genus omne,
minime suam naturam servantia, cum figura corporis prodigiosa, tum membris
haudquaquam congruentibus edebantur." This fact the writer arranges under the
head of prodigies; but numerous modern observations confirm the veracity of the
historian. In many plagues, to be hereafter mentioned, myriads of unusual
animals have appeared, and many common animals and insects have grown to an
unusual size. With this fact almost invariably attending pestilence, and before
the eyes of every man of science in well attested accounts; a fact that
demonstrates a prodigiously pestilential state of the elements, modern
philosophers, physicians and rulers have been tracing all the plagues of the
earth to one or two little spots in Egypt and the Levant -- This circumstance
is hardly credible; yet is true, and indicates (...) lamentable decline of
sound philosophy.

A slight shock of an earthquake is mentioned incidentally by Herodian, after
the plague. Speaking of the burning (...) a temple in Rome, he says "there had
been no storm or clouds, but a small earthquake preceded the conflagration:"
and he insinuates that the building might have been set on fire by a flash of
lightning in the night, or by an eruption of fire in the earthquake.

In 193, Canterbury in England was severely shaken by an earthquake.

The plague prevailed in London in 211, and a comet appeared in the same year.
In 214, there was a most dreadful inundation of the river Trent in England,
which spread over 20 miles of country, and destroyed many lives. Here is
probably a mistake in chronology of at least two years -- or rather a
difference between different authorities. Eusebius, the learned Bishop of
Caesaria, places the birth of Christ two years earlier, than the common or
Dionysian Chronology. Many authors follow one mode of computing time and many
the other; and without the original authors, and a close attention to their
modes of reckoning time, it is not possible to reconcile these differences. The
uniform influence of comets in producing violent tempests and unusual swelling
of the ocean, within a year of their appearance and after their departure, may
assist in correcting ancient chronology.

In the year 218 two comets appeared, and a severe frost of five months is
related to have happened in England in 220.

There was a great inundation of the Tweed in 218, and a pestilence in Scotland
in 222 which destroyed 100,000 lives.

In 235 a comet is noted, but I find no other phenomena mentioned about this
time, except a great death of fish in 231, multitudes of which were washed
ashore on Britain; and an earthquake in Wales in 232.

In the reign of the Emperor Gordian, about the year 243, the earth was
agitated by most violent earthquakes; and in 245 there was a prodigious
inundation of the sea in Lincolnshire, England, which laid under water many
thousand acres of land, which are said not yet to be recovered. A severe winter
is mentioned in 242.

We have now arrived to one of the most calamitous periods recorded in history
-- a period of mortal plagues, which commenced about the year 250, or 252 in
the reign of the Emperor Decius and continued fifteen or twenty years, through
the administration of Gallus and Volusian, Valerian and Gallienus. This period
was ushered in by a comet in 250, the winter of which in England was so severe,
that the Thames was frozen for nine weeks. -- An eruption of Etna is noted
under the year 253, and an earthquake in Cornwall in 251.

The plague appears to have been most fatal in Rome at two different times,
during this period; viz. in the years 252 and 262 or 3, including the year
preceding and succeeding each of these periods. It reached the northern parts
of Europe, and in 266, Scotland had scarcely living people enough to bury the
dead.

It first appeared in Ethiopia, on the confines of Egypt, and spread over all
the provinces of the Roman Empire, which, says Zonaras, were excessively
exhausted by its destructive ravages. Zosimus, after describing the devastation
occasioned by the irruption of the Scythians, says "Lues etiam pestilens in
oppidis atque vicis subsecuta, quicquid erat humani generis reliquum,
absumpsit." The plague in towns and villages followed the Scythians and
devoured that part of the human race which the barbarians had spared.

Jornandes says, the pestilence "faciem totius orbis foedavit" -- desolated or
disfigured the face of the whole earth. -- In the reign of Gallienus, 5000
citizens of Rome perished daily, in 262, or the following year, a portion of
this period most distinguished for convulsions of the earth.

This latter period was marked by destructive earthquakes in Rome, Syria and
other countries. In some places the earth opened and salt water issued.
Trebellius Pollio says, "Frightful earthquakes shook Italy, Asia and Africa.
For many days, [some authors say, three days] there was an unusual or
preternatural darkness and a hollow rumbling noise in the earth, which opened
in many places. Many cities in Asia were overwhelmed, and others lost in the
ocean. Pestilence followed and desolated the Roman Empire."

In the Universal History, it is said that this plague ravaged Capadocia and
all Asia Minor, and was followed by famine, earthquakes and a great comet or
meteor.

Orosius remarks that "Nulla fere provincia Romana, nulla civitas, nulla domus
fuit, quae non illa generali pestilentia correpta atque vastata." Scarcely was
there a province of the Empire, a city or a house, which was not attacked and
desolated.

This passage is worthy of notice, for it will hereafter appear, that although the
plague is usually limited to cities, where powerful artificial or local causes
aid the general contagion, yet in some instances, the general state of the
atmosphere has been so pestilential, as to produce plague on the most elevated
hills and salubrious places, in detached villages and houses, without the least
communication with the sick and infected.

Gibbon chap. 10, has calculated that "a moiety of the human species" fell a
prey to this frightful epidemic.

Cedrenus page 211 says this disease began in autumn and ended at the rising of
the dog star; or beginning of August.

The state of the air, during this pestilence, was uncommonly impure. The
description of it by Eusebius, in a philosophical view, deserves notice.
"Quando, inquit, aer iste pravis undique evaporationibus turbatus, serenus
reddetur? Tales enim ex terra fumigationibus, e mari venti, e fluminibus aurae,
e portubus exhalationes spirant, ut veluti ros quidam tabidus e cadaveribus
putridis, cunetis subjacientibus elementis inferatur."

Magdeburgh. Cent. 3. p. 31. This is a remarkable instance of a state of air so
highly corrupt, as to form on objects a mould or coat, like a turbid dew, from
dead bodies ros tabidus -- a state of air which the author ascribes to vapor
from the rivers and the earth. -- The account is analogous to what is related
of other pestilential periods, and the fact denotes an utter derangement in the
healthful qualities of air and water. -- Cedrenus compares this dew to the gore
of dead persons. "Ros saniei mortuorum similis apparebat."

Page 211. In the Traite de la Peste, I find the following description of the
symptoms of this malady, from St. Cyprian -- dejection of mind, exhaustion of
strength, incessant involuntary evacuations, as in certain paralises, violent
fever of the bowels, mouth inflamed, stomach swelled, eyes sparkling. The
disease destroyed the feet, the hands, the sight, the hearing and organs of
generation.

Aurelius Victor says of this plague "Simulque Romam pestilentia grassabatur,
quae saepe curis gravioribus atque animi desperatione oritur." The plague
spread, which often arises from the more distressing cares and despair. This
describes the miserable state of mankind, at that period; but anxiety and
despair do not produce the plague, except during the prevalence of a
pestilential state of air. There must be a strong predisposition in the body,
or an imbecility in the powers of animal life previously induced; or the
utmost pressure of grief will never occasion a plague. But at the time when
general causes have impaired the vigor of the animal principles, slight causes
will often induce fever and destroy life. The practical inferences from this
fact are extremely important to mankind.

The articles in this account of pestilence which deserve particular notice,
are the introduction of the period by a comet and an eruption of Etna -- the
agitations of the earth by subterranean fire -- the preternatural darkness of
three days, a phenomenon not unusual at such times and easily accounted for, on
the supposition of the extrication of a great quantity of subterranean vapor --
the pestiferous state of air which covered objects with mould and corruption --
and which generated plague in every village and almost every house.

See Zosimus in Gall. lib. 1. sec 26. 37, 46. Zonoras lib. 12. Trebellius
Pollio in Gall. Jornandes. Hist. August. 1098. Eliop. lib. 9. Baron. vol. 2.
496. Aurel. Victor. Epit. Magdeburgh. Cent. 3. 31. Near the close of this
period, about the year 272, there was an eruption of Vesuvius. At the same
time, a severe famine raged in England. Five or six years later, a severe famine
prevailed over the world. "Fames ingens per totum orbem grassata est."

Zosimus. It is proper here to notice an inaccuracy of the celebrated Newton,
in his Dissertations on the prophecies, on the 6th chapter of Revelations, in
which he says, "In the reign of Probus also there was a great famine throughout
the world -- an usual consequence of famine is pestilence. -- This pestilence
according to Zonoras, arising from Ethiopia, while Gallus and Volusian were
Emperors, pervaded all the Roman provinces for fifteen years." But Probus began
to reign in the year 276, whereas the pestilence broke out in Ethiopia under
Decius or Gallus and Volusian, about A. D. 252 according to Zonoras, but
according to other authors, two or three years earlier. Therefore the
pestilence under Gallus, could not be a consequence of a famine under Probus,
which was 25 years later than the plague ascribed to it. These remarks are
necessary to correct that passage of Newton, and they are useful in correcting
the common notion, that the plague is usually occasioned by famine. The idea is
probably unphilosophical; but is certainly contrary to fact. Famine often goes
before the plague, and as often follows it. But some of the most disastrous
periods of the plague, have originated during the greatest abundance of
provisions. -- Such was the fact in England, in 448, and in 1347, as will be
hereafter related. The great error of historians and physicians has been, that
observing famine and pestilence often cotemporary, and the cause of the plague
not being obvious to the senses, they have taken famine to be the cause. Whereas
it will appear on careful investigation, that famine is an effect of the same
cause which produces the plague among men. The dearth of provisions, during
this formidable epidemic, is the effect of a pestilence in vegetation; that is,
a failure in the principles of vegetable life, which proceeds from the same
derangement of the seasons, or defect in the properties of air and water, which
causes the plague among men. -- Famine often augments pestilence, and modifies
the symptoms of the disease; but in a healthy state of the elements of life,
air and water, famine will not produce the plague. This may be demonstrated by
multiplied instances of seamen, starving on the ocean, who often perish by
hunger, without disease, or if they had diseases in consequence of mere hunger,
nothing like the plague has ever been of the number.

I cannot help noticing also the observations of Mr. Gibbon on the calamities
of this period. He says, "Our habits of thinking so fondly connect the order of
the universe with the fate of man, that this gloomy period of history has been
decorated with inundations, earthquakes, uncommon meteors, preternatural
darkness, and a crowd of prodigies fictitious or exaggerated."

See vol. 1. chapter 10. If the original writers who have related the facts above
mentioned, had been as fond of decorations, as this author, we might well have
distrusted their accounts of unusual occurrences. Had this elegant writer taken
due pains to inform himself of the truth, before he had indulged such
reflections on the most credible historians, he would have found similar
phenomena to have attended the same calamity, pestilence, in every age from
that period to the present, and many of them if not all, during his own life,
if not within his own observation.

He goes on to observe that "famine is almost always followed by epidemical
diseases." This point will be afterward considered.

He says also that the plague at this period "raged from 250 to 265, without
interruption, in every province, every city and almost every family of the
Roman Empire."

The words without interruption, were probably inserted for the sake of
decoration. They are not authorized by the original writers; and cannot
possibly be true, for an uninterrupted plague in a city or country, would soon
leave it without an inhabitant. The truth is, it seldom raged, more than six or
eight months, in the same place, at one time. It seized this town, one year,
and that, the next, as we observe in modern times, through the whole period.
The words of Zonoras per quindecem continuos annos, are to be understood as
above explained.


The more I examine the original writers, from whom Gibbon derived his
materials, the less confidence I place in his representations of events. He
appears to be a partial historian and a superficial philosopher.

In 280 a comet, and in 282 an earthquake in England.

In the year 289 was visible a large comet, and in 290 the winter in England
was very severe, all the rivers being closed for six weeks. Busiris and Coptis,
two cities of Egypt, were overthrown by an earthquake. In 292 famine, pestilence
and drouth prevailed -- the bodies of men were covered with carbuncles and
ulcers.

Cedrenus. Worcester in England was almost ruined by an earthquake in 287.

Short, vol. 2. In 298 also appeared a comet and earthquakes soon followed,
which in Syria, destroyed several thousand lives.

Magdeburgh, Cent. 4. p. 1434. Earthquakes were experienced in Constantinople
in 309 and 310.

In the year 311, the usual rains of winter failed in Italy, famine followed and
then pestilence. Baronius, vol. 3. p. 69, describes it as a new disease of
foreign origin, which, in consequence of excessive heat, produced the anthrax
or carbuncle over the whole body, which exposed the patient to mortification.
It fell upon the eyes with great severity, rendered many persons blind, and
destroyed the lives of great multitudes of all ages. The reader will remark
that this distemper was not of domestic origin! This is a stale custom of
ascribing all evils to foreign sources.

It is related that Cyprus, about this period, suffered a drouth of thirty-six
years in consequence of which it was nearly dispeopled.

Under the chronological tables, I find a famine mentioned to have destroyed in
England and Wales, forty thousand lives in the year 310; and in the following
year a violent earthquake injured London.

A comet is noted in 321, and a universal famine in Britain in 325.

In the year 335, appeared a comet of great magnitude, and as it was about two
years before the death of Constantine the Great, superstition held it to be the
omen of that event.

In 336 Syria and Celicia were laid waste by pestilential diseases. There was
an inundation of the Tweed, the same year.

Etrop. lib. 10. Orosius, lib. 7. Magdeb. Cent. 4. 1442. I have not found any
particular account of the duration or extent of this calamity. But it appears
that this period, like that in the time of Thucydides, was followed by most
destructive earthquakes in 340, which overwhelmed or injured many cities of the
east. A comet marked this period in 339.

Baron vol. 3, p. 536. A snow of 15 feet depth in England is recorded under the
year 341.

In 358 happened a most tremendous shock of an earthquake, which buried in
ruins the greatest part of Nicomedia. The shock happened soon after daybreak
in the morning, 11th Kal. Sept. and was preceded by a collection of vapor or
clouds, that covered the city with impenetrable darkness, so that the eye could
not discern the nearest objects. This was soon succeeded by flashes of
lightning and most violent winds and tornadoes, which carried buildings to the
adjacent hills. The scene was closed by a shock of the earth which demolished a
large portion of the city.

Authors relate that this earthquake levelled 150 cities.

Short indeed was the respite which Asia Minor enjoyed. In 362, the remains of
Nicomedia were destroyed, part of Nice was overturned, Jerusalem was shaken and
other parts of the world did not escape. This was the year also in which Julian
attempted to rebuild Jerusalem, when fire bursting from the earth, destroyed
the works and rendered the place inaccessible. This event has been ascribed to
a preternatural influence; but is a common phenomenon in Italy, Asia Minor, and
in all countries subject to earthquakes; and as it happened when the
neighboring countries were laid waste by the explosion of subterranean fire,
there is no necessity for resorting to supernatural causes, to account for the
phenomenon.

During these agitations of the earth, the sea receding left its bed, a highway
for passengers. Inundations succeeded, and drouth, famine and pestilence walked
in the train of public calamities.

In the following years, the earthquakes were repeated and Baronius asserts
that the whole world was shaken; the shores of the sea were in some places
changed; some places sunk, and in others the waters rose and carried vessels
over the tops of houses. Authors place the destruction of Nice in 367, and of
other cities in 368 or 372.

The destruction of Nicomedia was preceded by a severe drouth -- a common
event, that a violent explosion of fire from the bowels of the earth, is
preceded, some weeks or months, by a total exhaustion of water by evaporation.

In the midst of these convulsions, appeared a comet in 363 or 4, and a meteor
or globe of fire in 363.

A hard winter of 14 weeks duration in England is mentioned under the year 359,
the year following the destruction of Nicomedia, and the severe drouth. This is
a usual event. A singular light of great extent appeared in the heavens, in the
year preceding.

The whole reign of Constantius was distinguished for destructive earthquakes,
and the early writers of ecclesiastical history "make no doubt that God, by
these judgments, manifested his displeasure at the prevalence of the Arian
blasphemies." A dreadful famine closed this period.

It was during the early part of this period, in 359, that the plague broke out
in Amida, a city of Persia, when besieged by Sapor, and from which, when taken,
Am. Marcellinus very narrowly escaped.

See Baron. vol. 4. 121, 188, 209; vol. 3. 776. Am. Marcel. lib. 22 and 25. P.
Mexia Hist. Emp. p. 339. Eutrop. lib. 11. Niceph. lib. 9 and 10. Magdeb. Cent.
4. c. 13. Each. Romans Hist. vol. 3. 116. Aurelius Victor, Epit. Julian. Just
before the death of Valentinian I. appeared a comet, in the year 375. Zosimus
mentions a hard winter at that time, extending to an unusual length. Another
author mentions a severe drouth about the same time. Crete, Peloponnesus and
Greece in general were agitated by earthquakes and some towns were demolished.
Gibbon chap. 26 has well described the earthquakes of 365, but by mistake
quotes Zosimus lib. 4. p. 221; whereas the latter author, in this passage,
describes the earthquakes of 375.
In Wales 43,000 died of the plague.

Echa^d's Romans Hist. vol. 3. 156. Zosimus lib. 4. Magdeburgh Cent. 4. ca. 13.
Am. Marcel. The following year was marked with famine, and universal pestilence
among men and cattle. So severe was the famine in Phrygia that the inhabitants
abandoned the country.

Baron. vol. 4. 380. A comet appeared in 383, and the plague raged in Rome and
in Syria in 383 and 4. -- This star however is described by Nicephorus and
others, as of a singular figure, resembling a burning column; its motions
differed from those of other stars -- it was visible 30 days.

Niceph. lib. 12. Magdeb. Cent. 4. ca. 13. About the same time, the Nile rose
to such an alarming height as to threaten Alexandria and Lybia with an
inundation.

Sozomen, lib. 7. 20. Magd. Ibm. Just before the death of Theodosius, about the
year 394 or 5, happened dreadful earthquakes, storms, rain and unusual darkness.

The appearance of the fiery column and the inundation are placed by some
authors under the year 394. The Magdebu^g^ History from Prosper's Chronicon,
places it under the sixth ye^r of Gratian, which is alleged to be the year of
Christ ^^. But Gratian was killed about the year 383. There is therefore a
mistake as to the era of this phenomenon, which, as described by authors of
credit, was one of the most singular that was ever exhibited to the people of
this globe.

Niceph. lib. 12. 37. Magd. vol. 2. 1452 and ^. About this period, swarms of
locusts covered the land of Judea; and being driven by the winds into the sea
and washed on the shore of Palestine, by Gaza, Ascalon and Azotus, they filled
the atmosphere with a fetid effluvia, which occasioned pestilence among men and
cattle.

Magdeburgh from Hieronymus, vol. 2. p. 1455. In 396 Constantinople sustained a
violent shock of an earthquake, during which the heavens appeared to be in a
flame. Functius places these events under the year 400, and he is probably
correct.

Baron. vol 4. 20. P. Diac. lib. 13. We are now arrived at another singular and
distressing period of the history of man. In the year 400, under the
administration of Arcadius and Honorius, a comet appeared of a prodigious size
and horrible aspect. Its immense coma seemed to sweep the earth, and Baronius,
the pious author of Ecclesiastical Annals, remarks, that many of the Gentiles
were terrified into christian baptism and (...).

Durin^ (...) or ^ppearance, happened one of the most (...) on lord. The (...)
Sea was covered with (...) 10 days. A drouth is mentioned under the same
period, which was so se^ere that the heavens were like (...). Unfortunately
historians have often neglected to arrange these phenomena in due order,
throwing them into a general description.

The same period was marked by deluges of rain, and from the (...) of
narration, it appears that the rains preceded the hard winter of the year 400.
The rivers were so sorelled as to prevent the imperial generals from passing
into the east to attack Sardis. -- Severe earthquakes occurred in the same year.

About the year 407 or 8, near the close of the reign of Arcadius, a celestial
phenomenon of a singular species presented itself to the view of an astonished
world. It was called a comet, but did not resemble one of the ordinary figure.
It resembled a cone or pillar, but had not the appearance of a star, so much as
of the flame of a lamp. Its motion was not regular -- it began to move from the
point of the heavens where the sun rises at the equinoxes, and passing the tail
of Ursa, proceeded to the west.

It measured the heavens -- its vertex, at some times, extended to a great
length; at others, was contracted into the figure of a cone. After being
visible for four months, it disappeared. This is the description of it, nearly
in the words of Nicephorus. Meteors were observed at the same period.

Accompanying an^ following these phenomena, were some of the most distressing
calamities. Violent earthquakes levelled cities -- inundations of rivers and
the sea, followed by intolerable cold storms of hail, and a drouth that blasted
vegetation, by which means multitudes of people perished. Pestilence raged in
every quarter, and famine so severe, that the populace demanded that human flesh
should be sold in market. Palestine was devoured by locusts.

Nicephorus has employed a chapter to describe the physical evils, and the
miseries of man, in this singular period. He declares that almost all Europe
perished. -- "pasa de oleto e^ Europe^." and no small part of Asia and Africa.

Niceph. lib. 13. ca. 6 and 36. Baron. vol. 5. 20, 114, 176, 294. Zosimus lib.
5. Magd. Cent. 5. ca. 13. Each. vol 3. 254. In 418 appeared a comet; in 419
several cities of Asia were overturned by an earthquake, and in 420 there was
an eruption of Etna. There was also an inundation of the sea in Hampshire, in
England, in 419. Famine and pestilence prevailed also in this period. -- A great
storm of hail is mentioned under the year 418, and deep snow.

The next period of general pestilence commenced in the reign of Theodosius the
younger, about the year 445 -- or a year or two earlier. A comet in 442,
ushered in a severe winter, in 443, the snow fell to such a depth and continued
so long in Illyricum, that multitudes of men, women and children perished. The
year preceding, the Huns had ravaged the country and destroyed the provisions,
which added to the public calamities. An irruption of the Sea in North and
South Wales, 441, preceded the first comet, a second comet appeared in 444. In
445, severe famine and plague distressed Constantinople, and pestilence appeared
in all parts of the world. In 446, Sept. 17, occured a tremendous earthquake,
which demolished the greatest part of the walls of Constantinople, with fifty
seven towers. The shocks continued unremittingly for six months, and extended
to a great part of the globe. Many cities were overthrown, the earth, in some
places, was thrown into large hills; in others, it opened and swallowed up
whole towns. Islands disappeared and were lost in the ocean: the sea receding,
left ships on dry land, springs of water were dried up and new fountains
appeared, and in this violent concussion of the elements perished innumerable
multitudes of fish.

The pestilence attending, and which rarely fails to attend such agitations of
the earth, was universal and of several years duration. In this period, the
plague in England was correspondent to the terrible operations of subterranean
fire. In 448 or 9, it carried off incredible numbers of people, so that the
living could scarcely bury the dead. -- And it must not be omitted that the
plague was preceded by the greatest abundance of provisions. This was in the
reign of Vortigern, and in time of peace.

Niceph. lib. 14. ca. 46. Beda. Ec. Hist. 51, 52. Baronius, vol. 6. p. 30, 36,
37, 38. Echard. vol. 3. 331. Magdeb. Cent. 5. ca. 13. An important fact here
occurs. In 446, the Picts and Scots had overrun and desolated England, so as to
occasion a dearth of provisions. But this famine produced no pestilential
disease. It is particularly noticed by the historian, that the plague did not
occur, till a year of great plenty had intervened. This is one strong proof
among others, that famine is not the cause of plague; but often accompanies, and
sometimes increases the disease. It often happens that, during extraordinary
agitations of the earth, the elements of vegetable life appear to be defective.
The same cause which affects human health, seems to prevent the growth or
vitiate the pabulum of vegetables. General descriptions are seldom correct. I
have already taken notice of the mistakes committed by Newton and Gibbon, whose
general descriptions lead, in the instances mentioned, to false conclusions. A
similar mistake occurs in Henry's excellent History of Britain, vol. 1. chapter 1.
concerning the calamities of the Britons, in the period under consideration The
author says, "the neglect of agriculture naturally produced a famine, which was
followed by a pestilence." -- These facts are not correctly stated. The
incursions of the Picts and Scots had occasioned the neglect of culture and a
famine; but this famine was followed by plentiful crops, which were succeeded by
pestilence.


The close of this period was peculiarly distressing in Italy, Phrygia,
Cappadocia and Galatia, where the famine compelled parents to devour their own
children. The pestilence made great havoc, at the same time, and no remedy or
alleviation could be found. The body was universally inflamed and covered with
tumors. The disease destroyed the eyes. A cough succeeded the eruption, and
ended life on the third day.

Niceph. lib. 15 ca. 10. This was in the beginning of the administration of the
Emperor Marcian, which commenced in 450, in which year another comet was
displayed in the heavens and a singular light or flame, a severe drouth "ingens
siccitas," afflicted the earth, and the calamities of this period continued for
several years.

It must be remarked here that Functius has placed this comet and the beginning
of Marcian's reign, in 454. Such differences in chronology cannot fail to
embarrass an inquiry like the present, the results of which depend much on
correctness of dates.

Nicephorus and Evagrius give a particular account of an earthquake which laid
great part of Antioch in ruins in the second year of the Emperor Leo, which was
A. D. 458. A comet is noted under the preceding year. But they say further,
that this event took place 347 complete years after the destruction of the city
in the reign of Trajan, which was in 117. Now 347 years added to this number,
give 464, for the year of the last catastrophe.

Niceph. lib. 15. 20. Evag. lib. 2. 12 and 14. In the 311th Olympiad, which
comprehends the years from 465 to 468 inclusive, appeared a comet. Whether the
destruction of Antioch was in 458 or 464, the extent of the shock, through
Thrace, Hellespont and the Grecian isles, together with the deluges of rain
which are said to have swept away whole towns in Bithynia, leave no room to
question the approximation of a comet at or near the time.

Byzantine Hist. vol. 15. Evag. lib. 2. 14. This latter period was
distinguished for pestilence which raged in Rome, about the accession of
Anthemius to the empire, and according to Baronius in the year 467.

Vol. 6. 281. In the following year, a number of houses were overthrown by an
earthquake at Vienna. Of the extent and dura^ion of the pestilence, I have no
particular description. A great eruption of Vesuvius is mentioned in 472, and a
severe winter of four months duration, in 473 with deep snow. -- The plague
succeeded in Rome.

In the year 480 Constantinople again suffered great damage by an earthquake,
which demolished a great number of buildings.

In 480 or the following year another comet was visible; or probably two years
later. In 484 occurred a drouth most terrible and distressing -- not a vine nor
an olive branch retained its verdure -- the earth was pale and desolate, and
the sun assumed a melancholy face. Africa was almost abandoned, in consequence
of this event and an attending plague.

Baron. vol. 6. 343, 426 and 7. Baronius places the earthquake at
Constantinople in 477, but others place it in 480, which is most probably
correct. The difference in the chronology of different authors, who relate the
events of these early ages, is seldom less than two, three and four years. --
The plague infested Scotland in 480.

In 494 an earthquake overturned Laodicea, Hierapolis and Tripoli. According to
Functius, this event was in 496.

Magdeb. vol. 3. Cent. 6. ca. 13. In 499 appeared a comet, which was soon
followed by an earthquake which destroyed Neo Cesarea, in Pontus, and an
eruption of Vesuvius laid waste all the adjacent country.

Zonoras lib. 3. Baron. vol. 6. 541. Magd. Cent. 6. ca. 13. p. 789. A comet is
noted in 502, and a severe winter in 507, but I have no account of any public
calamity, attending either of these phenomena, except a pestilence among men
and cattle in Scotland, in 502.

In 517 is recorded a five year's drouth in Palestine.

Encyclop. Chronol. In 518 a comet; and in Dardania, now Maesia, a series of
earthquakes demolished twenty-four castles, divided mountains and in one place
opened a fissure of thirty paces in length and twelve in breadth.

Baronius vol. 6. 702. In 519 two cities in Cilicia were overthrown; Edissa was
inundated and part of its buildings and inhabitants overwhelmed.

Zonoras, Tom. 3. Magd. Cent. 6. p. 791. Evagrius places the inundation at
Edissa, in the following period, after the destruction of Antioch, and as the
historians do not always specify the year in which a particular event took
place, I am inclined to believe the account of Evagrius.

Lib. 4. ca. 3. In the 7th year of the Emperor Justin, A. D. 525, appeared a
comet, and the same year Antioch was again overwhelmed in ruin by an
earthquake. Some authors relate that 300,000 persons perished in this
catastrophe, and among them Euphrasius, the bishop. -- This event happened on
the 29th of May, about 12 o'clock. A conflagration followed and consumed what
was left of the city. In the same shocks, Dyrrachium, now Durazzo, the
Epidaurus of high antiquity, Corinth and other cities were greatly injured.

Baronius vol. 7. 109. 110. 111. Niceph. lib. 7. 3. Evag. lib. 4. Zonoras Tom.
3. A severe winter happened the same year.

In 528 Antioch was again shaken and suffered considerable injury. An
inundation of the Humber in England is noted about this time.

In 531 appeared the resplendent comet, whose revolution is fixed at 575 years,
supposed to be the same which was visible in the year before Christ 44, after
the death of Julius Caesar. This was the fifth year of the reign of Justinian.
Famine and a slight plague prevailed in Wales.

At this period Gibbon commences his lively, but unphilosophical description of
the formidable and destructive calamities, which afflicted the whole earth in
the 6th century. See his history, vol. 4. chapter 43.

Not long after the approach of the comet in 531, the sun assumed a pale color,
and shone with a feeble light. In a translation of Cedrenus, this phenomenon is
thus described. "Toto anno eo, sol lunae instar, sine radiis, lucem tristem
praebuit, plerumque defectum patienti similis." During the whole year, the sun
gave a gloomy light, like the moon, and appeared as if eclipsed.

Byzantine Hist. 3. 293. Procop. de bell. Vandal. lib. 4. It is remarkable that
tradition has preserved a faint account of a similar phenomenon, during the
approach of the same comet, at the time of the Ogygean inundation, before
Christ 1767. It is said, that the planet Venus changed her color, size and
figure. An account is preserved in tradition, of a phenomenon of the same
nature, during the approach of the same star, in a subsequent revolution.
Gibbon in the chapter above cited. -- Pliny, as I have already remarked,
mentions a similar phenomenon, about the time the same comet appeared, soon
after the death of Julius Caesar.

The appearance, in the period under consideration, is a well authenticated
fact, and witnesses a singular change in the properties, and reflecting powers
of the atmosphere, or denotes an essential alteration in the face of the sun,
which is improbable. In either case, it seemed a prelude to the most dreadful
calamities, famine, earthquakes, and pestilence. I am not without suspicions
that Europe might have been overspread with a vapor like that in 1783, during
the eruption of Heckla.

In 534 is recorded one of the most distressing famins, that ever afflicted the
earth; it continued many years, and destroyed multitudes of the human race.
Pompeiopolis was this year overwhelmed in ruin by an earthquake, and great
numbers of its inhabitants perished.

Paul. Diac. lib. 16. About this period, Vesuvius began to utter hollow
rumbling noises, the precursors of an eruption.

Baron. vol. 7. 218. Procop. de Bell. Goth. Magdeb. Cent. 6. p. 793. Excepting
a slight plague in Wales -- no pestilence is mentioned by the authors I have
consulted, until the year 542. But the famine, in great severity, had raged
eight or nine years before -- a proof that something more than famine is
necessary to generate the plague.

In 539 appeared another comet, and the famine now raged with double horror. The
country of Italy had been ravaged, the year before by the Goths and
Burgundians, and the lands left untilled. This might have contributed toward
the dearth which followed. It is recorded that many persons fed on human flesh,
some districts of Italy were deserted, 50,000 people perished in Picenum, and
greater numbers in other districts. The bodies of the famished people became
thin and pale; the skin was hardened and dry like leather, and clave to the
bones; the flesh assumed a dark appearance like charcoal, the countenance was
senseless and stern, the bile redundant.

Procop. de Bell. Goth. lib. 1. Among these frightful effects of hunger, no
plague yet appears -- a circumstance that the philosopher should not pass
unnoticed.

The account which Baronius gives of this famine, is, perhaps more philosophical
and deserves notice. He says, the crops failed, corn ripened prematurely, and
was thin; in some places, it was not harvested, and that which was gathered,
was deficient in nourishment. Those who subsisted upon it became pale, and were
afflicted with bile. The body lost its heat and vigor, the skin was dried, the
countenance stupid, distorted and ghastly, the liver turned black. Many
perished by hunger; many betook themselves to the fields to feed on vegetables,
and being too feeble to pull them, lay down and gnawed them off with their
teeth.

Baronius, lib. 7. 326. This is the most probable account of the famine.
Repeated instances are on record, which evidently mark a pestilential state of
the elements, as fatal to vegetable, as to animal life. In many periods of the
world, there has been a universal defect in the powers of vegetation. This
phenomenon in the vegetable kingdom is cotemporary, or nearly so, with
pestilence among men; and superficial observers have ascribed the plague to a
prior or cotemporary famine. But an accurate survey of facts, will probably
convince any candid enquirer after truth, of the fallacy of this opinion. It
will be made apparent that famine and pestilence are equally the effects of some
general cause; a temporary derangement of the regular operations of nature.

In the present instance, the famine could not be exclusively and immediately
the cause of the formidable plague that afterward assailed mankind, for it was
most severe in 539, and the next year the crops were good. But the plague did
not break out till 542, at least I can find no account of any pestilence,
during the famine.

An eruption of Vesuvius is noted under the year 532, the year after the
appearance of the great comet. -- It is probable that the paleness of the sun
was owing to a vapor from some volcanic eruption, as in 1783; and it is
remarkable that both of these periods alike produced famine from defective
vegetation.

During the remaining p^rt of this century, a series of most calamitous events
afflicted the earth. A mountain in Rhodes burst open, and a part of it rolled
down upon the inhabitants below. Many places suffered by inundations, one of
which overwhelmed the borders of Thrace for an extent of four miles.

In the year 543, the whole earth was shaken by earthquakes. This was the year
in which the plague broke out in Constantinople; but it commenced in Egypt, the
pre^eding year. -- In 543 there was a dearth of cor^ ^ne and oil. The plague
again ravaged Constantinople in 547.

In 545 there was an inundation of the Thracian sea, and a severe winter. A
terrible dysentery in France in 548.

See Cedrenus, and Paulus Diac. lib. 16. In 550 an earthquake convulsed Syria
and Palestine; and Greece in 551. In 553 appeared a singular meteor in the
north and west, which was preceded by a winter so severe that wild beasts and
fowls might be taken by the hand. Inundations marked this period.
Constantinople was shaken 40 days in 554.

Paul. Diac. Madeburgh Cent. 6. ca. 13. In 557 Constantinople was almost laid
in ruins by an earthquake. In 558 a comet appeared, a severe winter followed
and universal plague, especially in Constantinople, where the living could not
bury the dead. This year the Danube was covered with ice.

In 560 an earthquake destroyed Berytus and injured Cos, Tripoli, and Balbus.
An excessive drouth in 562, and a plague began which spread over the whole
world. There was a dark day in the same year.

The year 565 was distinguished for a calamitous plague, in France, Germany and
Italy, which Baronius calls "vehemens pestis inguinaria."

Vol. 7. 547. In 580 Antioch was again laid in ruins by an earthquake, and a
shock was felt in Scotland. The plague again prevailed, from that year to 583,
in Gaul and Germany and other countries. In 587 it ravaged Italy. Earthquakes
attended this period.

In 590 appeared a comet; an inundation, from deluges of rain, overspread Rome,
covering the walls of the city, and lodging innumerable serpents on the plains.
In the next summer, happened the severest drouth ever known; it lasted from
January to September; and the most deadly plague ravaged all Italy. In this
pestilence, died Pope Pelagius.

This is a general sketch of the phenomena recorded of the period under
consideration.

Of the universal and destructive plagues which dispeopled the world in the
reign of Justinian I. and the succeeding age we have accurate accounts by
cotemporary historians: From two of which, Procopius and Evagrius, I shall
transcribe the particulars.

Procopius relates, "That this pestilence, which almost destroyed the human
race, and for which no cause could be assigned but the will of God, did not
rage in one part of the world only, nor in one season of the year. It ravaged
the whole world, seizing all descriptions of people, without regard to
different constitutions, habits or ages; and without regard to their places of
residence, their modes of subsistence or their different pursuits. Some were
seized in winter, some in summer; others in other seasons of the year.

It first appeared in Pelusium in Egypt and thence spread westward to
Alexandria and all parts of Egypt; eastward toward Palestine, and extended to
all parts of the world, laying ^aste islands, caves, mountains, and all places
where men dwelt. If it passed by a particular country at first, or slightly
affected it, it soon returned upon it with the same desolating rage which other
places had experienced. -- It began in maritime towns and spread to the
interior country. It seized Constantinople in the spring of 543.

Most persons were seized suddenly without any premonition, nor was there any
change of color or sense of heat; for until evening the fever was so slight
that the patient was not ill, nor did the physician, from the pulse, apprehend
danger. But in some cases, the same day; in others, the next; in others, at a
later period, a bubo arose, either in the groin, the arm ^its, or near the ear,
or in some other part. All patients alike had these symptoms.

Some were seized with drowsiness and slumbering; others with furious
distraction. The slumberers forgot all things -- some would eat if desired;
others were neglected and starved.

Neither physician nor attendant caught the distemper by contact of the sick or
dead; and many, encouraged by their wonderful escape, applied themselves with
assiduity to the care of the sick and the burial of the deceased.

Many were seized, they knew not from what cause, and suddenly died. Some who
were given over by physicians unexpectedly recovered; others who appeared to be
in no danger speedily expired. Many died for want of relief; others recovered
without assistance. No cause of the disease could be devised by human reason --
no means of prevention or cure. To some, bathing was beneficial; to others,
injurious. Many leaped into water and the sea -- In many the bubo, without
sleep or delivium, turned into a gangrene, and these died with excruciating
torture.

The physicians opened the bodies of some, and found within the sores huge
carbuncles. Those whose bodies were spotted with black pimples, of the size of
a lentil, lived not a day. Those who had running sores escaped, and these were
the most certain signs of recovery. Some had their thighs withered; others lost
the use of their tongues.

To women with child, the disease was certain death.

This disease in Constantinople lasted four months, raging three months with
extreme mortality. In the beginning, few died more than usual; but the disease
gradually increased, till it swept off 10,000 persons in a day."

Procopius calls it arrogance to pretend to assign the natural causes of this
pestilence, declaring them to be undiscoverable.

Persic. lib. 2. ca. 22. Authors mention the early effects of this disease on
the brain; the patients, on the first attack, saw phantoms of evil spirits,
which made them imagine themselves smitten by some person.

Evagrius, who felt the effects of the same disease himself and lost many of
his family by it, has enumerated so many ^^ngular circumstances, that I (...)
offer the reader a translation ^f his account. When I say, the same disease, I
refer however to a subsequent epidemic. Procopius, as an eye witness, described
the pestilence of 543 in Constantinople. It did not continue incessantly to
rage in every place, for this would have soon left the earth without an
inhabitant; but after an interval of a few years, it returned and revisited the
same places. The plague described by Evagrius was many years subsequent to that
mentioned by Procopius. He wrote about the year 594. His descriptions however
are general.

See Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. ca. 29. "I will now describe the plague, which has
prevailed in these times, and already raged fifty-two years, a thing never
before known, and has already depopulated the world. Two years after the taking
of Antioch by the Persians, Under Cho^roes A. D. 540
a pestilential disease began to prevail, in some respects resembling that
which Thucydides has described, in other respects different. It had its origin
in Ethiopia, according to common report, and spread over the whole world,
falling on different places by turns, and sparing none of the human race.

Some cities were so severely assailed by this disease, that they were left
without an inhabitant. Some districts however were more slightly affected. The
pestilence did not always begin its attacks at the same season of the year, nor
cease to rage, in all places in the same manner. In some places it broke out in
the midst of winter; in others, in the spring; in some, it began in summer; in
others, in autumn; and in some cities, it attacked certain parts of the town,
and left others untouched.

Very often we might observe, particular families all perished, in a city where
the disease did not prevail, as an epidemic. In some places, one or two
families only perished, while the rest of the city escaped. But we observed
particularly that the families which escaped, the first year, experienced the
same calamity in the year succeeding.

But what above all appeared singular and surprising was, that the inhabitants
of infected places, removing their residence to places, where the disease had
not appeared, or did not prevail, were the only persons who fell victims to the
plague, in the cities which were not infected. And these effects were
particularly observable, both in cities and in other places, in the cycles of
the Indictions. The cycle of indiction was a period of 15 years, at the end of
which the Romans paid a certain tax to the Emperors.
Especially in the second year of each indiction, was the plague extremely
mortal. Of this I am myself a witness, for it may not be improper, when the
occasion seems to require it, to interweave into this history what concerns
myself. At the commencement of this calamity, I was seized with the inguinal
plague; and in the diseases, which have at different times prevailed, I have
lost many of my children, my wife and great numbers of my kindred, of my
servants and laborers: the cycles of indiction parcelling out my calamities
among themselves.

At the time of writing this account, the disease had already invaded Antioch
the fourth time; the fourth cycle of indiction had passed, after the first
invasion of this disease, when I lost a daughter, and her son.

This disease was a compound of various others. For in some persons, seizing
the head, it rendered the eyes sanguineous and the face tumid: Then falling
upon the throat, soon put an end to life in all that were thus seized. Some
were afflicted by discharges from the bowels. In others an abscess formed in
the groin, a raging fever followed, and the second or third day, the patient
died, with his body and his mind apparently sound, as tho they had not felt
disease. Some were seized with delirium and expired. Carbuncles also arising on
the body extinguished the lives of many. Others recovered once and again, and
afterward died of the same disease.

The modes of contracting the disease were various and all calculation was
baffled. Some perished by once entering infected houses, or remaining in them
-- some by only touching the sick. Some contracted the disease in open market.
Others, who fled from the infected places, remained safe, while they
communicated the disease to others who died. Many who remained with the sick,
and freely handled them as well as dead bodies, wholly escaped the disease.
Others who had lost their children and dependents, and in despair sought death,
by attempting to throw themselves in the way of infection and assiduously
attending the sick, found all their efforts in vain; they could not contract
the disease.

The distemper has already prevailed fifty-two years, to this time, exceeding
all preceding plagues: For Philostratus was surprised that, in his time, that
calamity had prevailed for fifteen years. What will happen hereafter is
uncertain, since all things are at the disposal of God who understands the
causes of things and the events."

Thus far Evagrius. See also Nicephorus lib. 17. ca. 18.

The reader is desired to attend particularly to the foregoing relation of
facts, as some important conclusions will, in the sequel, be drawn from them,
and other authorities hereafter to be cited.

It will be remarked that although authors speak of this pestilential period, as
of fifty-two years duration, as Evagrius and Gibbon have done, yet this is not
accurate. Evagrius, from whom this number is copied, says, the pestilence had
then prevailed fifty-two years; but it was still raging, and what was to happen
afterward, he could not determine.

The truth is, plagues were uncommonly frequent during this period; but the
disease did not prevail without intervals. On the contrary, the years
remarkable for mortality are specified by historians, viz. 542 and 3, 547, 558,
562 to 565, 582 and 3, 587, and finally one of the most destructive periods of
all was 590 and the few following years. Although this was a long and severe
period of calamity, yet from the best accounts I can obtain, I see no reason to
believe the mortality, in any given term of five or ten years, from 542 to 600,
to have been greater, than in some other periods of the same duration. More
people probably died in a short space of time, in the reign of the Antonines --
in that of Gallus and Volusian -- and far more, in the dreadful plague of 1346
to 50. -- It is even probable that in the last 50 years of the 16th century,
the earth sustained as great a loss of inhabitants as in the same space of time
in the 6th century. General descriptions are rarely correct, and Mr. Gibbon's
unphilosophical, tho eloquent flourishing description of the miseries of the
human race, in Justinian's reign is calculated to mislead a careless reader.

Evagrius indeed says, this plague exceeded all preceding ones. This is
natural; Thucydides said the same of the disease in his time. But we are more
able to form a correct comparison between the different epidemics that have
prevailed, than the cotemporaries with any particular one.

Agathius relates that in the pestilence at Constantinople in 558, many died
suddenly as with an apoplexy. The most robust constitutions survived only to
the 5th day. The critical period in the Athenian plague was the 7th or 9th.
Thucydides makes no mention of the stupor at the beginning of the distemper,
nor of the volutatio humi, whirling of the earth, or dizziness, nor of buboes,
nor of the effects of the disease on pregnant women.

Freind's Hist. of Medicine 416 et seq. Baron. vol. 7. 357, 358. Warnefred
relates of this pestilence, in Liguria, where it was particularly mortal, that
there appeared suddenly certain marks "quaedam signacula," upon the doors of
houses, on garments, and utensils, which could not be washed out but grew
brighter by washing. The next year, appeared in men's groins, or other delicate
parts of the body, tumors like nuts or dates, which were soon followed by
intolerable fever, which extinguished life in three days. If the patient
survived the third day, he had hopes of recovery.

I should have ranked this account among the fictions of a disturbed
imagination, had not more recent and well attested facts given me reason to
credit it.

The description of the terrible effects of this disease in Italy by the same
author, is melancholy and painful to the reader.

The dysentery which raged in France in 548 was accompanied with signs of the
plague, and was nearly equal to it in mortality. The plague raged this year at
Munster, in Ireland.

Short vol. 1. 67. Smith's Hist. Cork 10. The desolating plague of 590 was
mortal almost beyond example, and preceded or attended with extraordinary
phenomena. In 588 Antioch was overwhelmed by a violent earthquake, and 60,000
people buried in its ruins. The inundation of the Tyber exceeded all that had
been known, as did the drouth of the succeeding summer. The intervening winter
was equally remarkable for its severity -- "qualem vix aliquis prius recolebat
fuisse," says Warnefred; such as the oldest persons could scarcely recollect.
Violent tempests overturned buildings. About the same time, swarms of locusts
appeared in Trente and devoured every species of vegetable. In some parts of
Italy, they continued their ravages for five years. Cedrenus adds, that fish
died, and this mortality he ascribes to the freezing of the waters, page 332.
-- Modern observations prove the fallacy of the reason here assigned; fish do
not die beneath a cover of ice; but the death of fish by means of earthquakes,
and of sickness, is a common event.

Agust. Hist. 1156, 1157. Magd. Cent. 6. ca. 13. The order of the phenomena
here related was this -- the earthquake at Antioch -- deluges of rain and
inundations, tempests, a most rigorous winter, with a comet, excessive drouth,
pestilence.

See also Echard's Romans Hist. vol. 4. 246. Africa was almost depopulated by
this plague. So sudden and rapid was the disease in its action, that during a
procession in Rome, instituted by St. Gregory, on account of that calamity, no
less than eighty persons fell dead in the street.

Authors relate that the serpents, washed from the mountains by the flood, and
lodged on the earth, putrefied, and contributed to the subsequent plague.

Gregory of Tours relates, that the plague, at that time, was introduced into
Gaul by a vessel and her cargo, but it did not spread regularly from house to
house, but started up in distant and detached places, like fire in a field of
stubble. Marseilles and Lions were made waste by its mortality. It was most
fatal to the poor.

Lib. 9. The following facts are related of the pestilence in Rome in 581, in
the collection of German writers by Pistorius, page 683. Men died suddenly, at
play, at table, and in conversation. Sometimes they fell dead in the act of
sneezing, "dum sternutabant," so that when one heard another sneeze, he turned
to him and exclaimed, "God help you" -- which was the origin of a custom still
observed in some countries. This custom was of higher antiquity.
Sometimes persons expired in the act of nodding or gaping; which gave rise to
the practice of making the sign of the cross, on such occasions -- a custom not
yet obliterated.

In 599, the plague in the east, in Africa and Rome, was dreadful. The death of
the Emperor Mauritius, in 602, was preceded by the appearance of a comet. A
severe winter, about this time, killed the vines, and grain suffered by frost
and blight. The army of barbarians, marching to besiege Constantinople, was so
harrassed and weakened by the plague, as to be compelled to abandon the
enterprise. Cayanus their commander lost seven sons.

Niceph. lib. 18. 35. Magd. Cent. 6. 13 and 7. 13. Baron. vol. 8. 138. Paul.
Diac. lib. 4. The Magdeburgh History mentions a severe winter in 604, which was
followed by excessive heat and drouth in 605. It places the first comet of 606
in April and May; the second in November and December.

Cent. 7. 13. The year 615 was distinguished for an epidemic elephantiasis in
Italy, and the shock of an earthquake. A comet appeared in 617 and pestilence
in 618.

Baron. vol. 8. 243. Short vol. 2. 207. Here is a period in which mention is
made in history of comets, without all their attendant calamities -- one in
625, another in 632. It is the first period of the kind I have been able to
find; and whether this silence of history is to be ascribed to the carelessness
of writers in that distracted period, when the world was overrun by barbarians,
or whether men escaped extraordinary maladies, I am not able to decide.

An earthquake in Palestine however marked the approach of the comet in 632.

Funct. Chronol. Short mentions an earthquake at Antioch in 637; and shocks in
Palestine in 638 which continued for 30 days -- a comet in 639, and the plague
in Syria in 640. But I have not the original authorities. The Universal History
relates that in 639, the plague was so severe in Syria, Arabia and in Medina,
that the Arabs call that year the "Year of Destruction."

Vol. 1. 485. A general pestilence in Italy is mentioned in history under the
year 651, but no particulars. A surprising meteor had passed the hemisphere, in
the preceding year. A violent plague in Constantinople in 654.

Functius Chron. Magdeb. Cent. 7. ca. 13. In 664 pestilence raged in Normandy,
England and Ireland; and the historian remarks that the same disease which had
afflicted England, afterward invaded Italy in 665. Thus it would appear that
this epidemic broke out first in the north of Europe.

Beda. Eccle. Hist. p. 136. Baron. vol. 8. 496. But the disease appeared in
Egypt the same year it did in England and Ireland.

Paul. Diac. 980. In the same year, in March, appeared a bow, iris, stretching
across the heavens, and all flesh trembled, says the pious Diacon, expecting
the last day.

Ibm. Livy mentions a similar bow at Rome, during a great plague.
In 669 or 70 appeared a singular meteor or flame in the heavens -- the next
year an unusual storm that destroyed men and cattle; and in 672 the plague
raged in England, of which died Bishop Ceadda.

Beda, lib. 4. Short mentions a comet in 672, and a severe frost in 670, the
year of the celestial flame.

In 678 according to Beda, and in 677 according to Sigebert, in the 9th or 10th
year of Constantine Pogonatus, appeared a comet in August, which was visible
for three months. The year preceding was marked by most calamitous tempests
which cut short the fruits of the earth, except leguminous vegetables which
were replanted and come to maturity. About the same time appeared clouds of
locusts in Syria and Mesopotamia. Universal pestilence followed these
ph^nomena, in 679 and 680. England and Ireland were ravaged by it in 679; and
in 680, during July, August and September, Rome was laid waste: "parents and
children, brothers and sisters, were borne to their graves on the same bier."
Multitudes of people fled to the mountains, and the streets of the city were
overgrown with grass and weeds. A violent earthquake shook Mesopotamia and
other countries in 680. The locusts appeared two years before the earthquake,
and in the same year with the comet, according to Paulus Diaconus. A severe
drouth followed the comet, which in England lasted three years.

See Paul. Diac. lib. 6. Beda, Ec. Hist. p. 116. Baron. vol. 8. 526, 544. Magd.
Cent. 7. ca. 13. Muratori, vol. 6. In 681 famine, says Beda, raged in England,
and in 683, pestilence "quae ex more famien secuta est," says Paulus Diaconus.
In this latter year, if this was the sixteenth of Constantine, according to
Baronius, there was a violent eruption of fire from Vesuvius, which laid waste
all the neighborhood.

Baronius, vol. 8. 564. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 13. In the same year Syria and
Lybia were afflicted by famine and pestilence.

Other authors place this last pestilence two years later. The disease raged in
Ireland in 685, in which year, there was a great inundation of the sea and the
island of Inissidda was torn into three parts. In 687, or according to others
in 684, appeared a star, which was probably a comet, but without a coma.

Smith's Cork, p. 11. Magd. Cent. 7. Warnefied relates that a singular meteor
appeared in 685. We cannot but notice the coincidence in time between meteors
and volcanic eruptions.


Notwithstanding some differences among authors respecting the time of the
events here related, we observe all the violent agitations of the elements
which introduce and attend great plagues.

In 690 happened in Italy, one of the greatest inundations from rain that was
ever known -- a severe pestilence followed, "Pestis inquinoria."

In 696, the same disease raged in Constantinople; but no particulars are
mentioned.

Magd. Cent. 7. A severe winter preceded this pestilence, when the Thames was
covered with ice for six weeks.

In 707 a terribly severe winter is mentioned and a violent earthquake in
Scotland. Short mentions pestilence in Scotland in 703 and in 713, but I have
no particulars.

In 717 happened a very severe winter, so that animals died of cold; and the
same year, a great overflowing of the Tyber. The Saracens, in an immense army,
marching to besiege Constantinople, perished with cold, hunger and pestilence,
and in the city, the plague extinguished the lives of 300,000 of its
inhabitants. An earthquake in Syria in 718.

Paul. Diac. lib. 6. 47. Baron. vol. 9. 15. Magd. Cent. 8. ca. 13. Cedrenus.
Here is a chasm in the history of comets of 40 years -- at least I can find no
mention made of them from 685, to 729. The severe winter and the inundation of
717 however leave very little room to question the approximation of one at that
time, and others doubtless appeared, during this period. I have found no author
that mentions a comet about this time; but it is worthy of remark that the
splendid comet of 1401 was calculated to have a period of 343 years. This was
therefore the same which appeared in 1744. If this calcu^ation is just, ^he
same comet must have appeared in 1058 -- in 715 -- in 372 -- and in 29 or 30;
or near these years. Now it app^ars that there was one in 1058 and in 375
attended with all the usual calamities -- it is therefore presumeable that it
appeared in ^15 or 16.


There was a great plague in Constantinople in 724.

In the year 725, a vapor like smoke issued for several days, from the sea
between Thera and Therasia, the two islands which, many centuries before, had
arisen from the bottom of the sea. With this vapor issued dense substances,
which, when exposed to the air, grew hard and formed a species of pumice, with
which the neighboring sea and the coun^^ies of Asia Minor and Macedonia were
covered. A small island arose at the same time.

Magd. Cent. 8. ca. 13 Murato^i, vol. 1. 151 In 729 appeared two comets in
January; one preceding the sun, visible in the morning; the other following it,
was seen in the evening. The same year the plague prevailed in Norwich.

A plague in Syria raged in 732, but no particulars are mentioned. The
following year, the heavens appeared all in a flame.

Magd Cent. 8. ca. 13. The next pestilential period is remarkable for the
violence of the operations of nature.

In 740 a tremendous earthquake, or rather a continuation of successive shocks
for twelve months, announced the commencement of a series of calamities. It
began on the 7th Kal. November, and demolished buildings, statues and walls in
Constantinople, with a multitude of cities in Thrace, Nicomedia and Bythinia.
Sigibert places these events in 741.

In 742, or as others say in 743, a most severe drouth was followed by most
terrible earthquakes. The next year appeared a comet and the year following,
another; and the third year after the drouth, which was either in 745 or 6,
according to different authors, a remarkable thick darkness covered the earth
from August to October. At this time the plague was raging at Calabria in
Naples, and it continued to spread with dreadful havoc for several succeeding
years, in the countries of the east. So violent was it in Constantinople in
746, that the living could not bury the dead; but the bodies were carried in
cart-loads and thrown into empty cisterns, and any place that would conceal
them from the sight. Fatal indeed was the disease, when "eodem die aliquis
mortuum efferebat, et ipse mortuus afferebatur" -- the man who buried a corpse,
was sometimes carried, the same day, to his grave.

In the order of the events here related authors agree. Cedrenus mentions an
extraordinary light or flame in the sky in 742, and a similar flame in the
north, the year following. He mentions at the same time a famine in
Constantinople; and limits the darkness to five days, from the 10th to 15th of
August.

Paulus Diac. Hist. August. 10. 19. Magd. Cent. 8. 13. Baron. vol. 9. 144, 185.
At the close of this period and while the plague raged in Constantinople, in
749 or 50, Syria was laid waste by an earthquake -- whole cities were
exterminated -- others removed entire from mountains to plains, for a distance
of six miles. This catastrophe corresponded with the approach of a comet. Short
mentions two.

Magd. Cent. 8. 13. Baron. vol. 9. Short. 1. 81. Such was the waste of people
in Constantinople by the preceding plagues, that the emperor Constantine
repaired the loss by introducing the inhabitants of neighboring countries.

In 760 or 61, for this difference occurs among good authorities, appeared a
comet, or light, called dokites, by the Greeks, from its resemblance to a beam;
which was visible 10 days in the east and 21 in the west. -- In 762 appeared
two other comets and the following winter was the most severe probably on
record. It began about the first of October, and lasted till February. The
Euxine sea was frozen to the distance of one hundred miles from the shore, and
the snow and ice accumulated to the depth of thirty cubits. In this frost, the
animal and vegetable kingdoms suffered great injury. On the breaking up of
winter, the ice from the Danube and the Euxine was forced in huge masses, into
the Bosphorus, and against the walls of Constantinople, which were greatly
damaged.

In March, falling stars, or meteors were very frequent, and the succeeding
summers were remarkable for most terrible drouth, in which all springs were
exhausted. Myriads of venomous flies appeared, and a desolating mortality
concluded this series of disordered seasons.

Paul. Diac. lib. 22. Baron. vol. 9. 271. Magd. Cent. 8. ca. 13. Short on Air,
vol. 1. 82. Short mentions a fatal pestilence in Wales in 762.

On the authority of Short, I have mentioned a mortality after the severe and
unusual seasons of 763 and 4; but the original writers I have consulted do not
mention it; tho the fact may be found in others which I have not seen. It is
altogether probable that such extraordinary seasons should occasion great
sickness; but it is equally probable that if any destructive and general plague
had followed them, the writers I have consulted would have mentioned it.

I am led to notice this circumstance, by the consideration that no earthquake
is recorded during this period. This circumstance is of no small consequence in
this inquiry; and is a confirming proof of the justness of my suspicions, that
pestilence has an intimate connection with subterranean heat or the action of
fire. It appears that the plague, for the most part, is violent and extensive,
in proportion to the action of the fire that exists in and about the globe. The
preceding pestilential period, beginning in 740, is a striking instance of the
truth of this remark.

A great mortality happened in 766. In 767 a severe drouth exhausted all
springs and rivers and the year following was distinguished by a comet.
Pestilence prevailed in England in 771, and in Chichester died 34,000 people.

Short vol. 2. 208. Short mentions plague and famine in France in 779 -- a
comet, an earthquake at Constantinople, and pestilence in Scotland in 784; but
I have no particulars.

In the reign of Charlemagne, about the beginning of the ninth century,
commenced a period of great mortality. A comet in 799, was followed by an
excessively cold winter in 800. These events were preceded by violent
earthquakes in Sicily and Crete and in 798, an extraordinary darkness in
England of seventeen days. In 801 earthquakes shook Italy, France and Germany,
and these phenomena were repeated in 802 and 3. A prodigious tempest in the
year 800, levelled a multitude of buildings.

In 802 the plague prevailed in various places, "propter molitiem hyberni
temporis," says the annalist Bartianus, by reason of a mild winter. This
however could not be the true reason.

In 808 a very mild winter was followed by the plague. In 810 happened the
greatest mortality among horned cattle that is on record. In some places in
Germany, it destroyed almost all the species.

Lancisius 146. Annal. Fuldenses 810. In 811 swarms of locusts from Africa
invaded Italy and devoured every green thing.

In 812 appeared a comet, and after a chasm in the accounts of Etna of nearly
four hundred years, that volcano is recorded to have discharged fire in this
year. P. Diaconus places the comet in 813, and a violent earthquake.

Magd. Cent. 9. ca. 13. Muratori vol. 2. 505, 507. Pistorius' Germ. Script. vol
2. 38. In 817 was a comet, and a pestilence soon after commenced, which authors
relate to have arisen from excessive rains and a humid air. This plague raged
in almost every part of France in 820, and crops failing from excess of
moisture, a famine ensued. Baronius mentions earthquakes in 820 in those places
where the Christians were persecuted. The following winter was so severe that
the Rhine and the Danube were covered with solid ice for more than 30 days, and
sustained loaded carriages.

In 823 was another most severe winter, in which the snow lay on the earth
twenty nine weeks, and occasioned the death of many animals and men. An
earthquake and a universal plague in France. The next year fell a shower of
hail, which killed men and cattle. Severe drouth the same year.

Magd. Cent. 9. ca. 13. Muratori, vol. 2. 513, 516. Short, vol. 2. In 827 the
Thames was covered with ice for nine weeks.

In 828 appeared a comet in Libra; and in 829, another in Aries; with many
meteors. The earth in France was violently shaken in 329; a violent tempest
followed, but no pestilence is mentioned.

Baron. vol. 9. 809. Magdeb. Cent. 9. ca. 13. In 839 appeared a comet and
another in 842. In 840 Constantinople was shaken for five days, and some parts
of France felt the shock. The rains were excessive, the Rhine overflowed, and
the storms of hail and wind were unusually severe.

Magdeb. Cent. 9. ca. 13. In 850 another comet is mentioned, and in the
following year a most severe drouth, which occasioned a famine that compelled
men to feed on human flesh. -- There was a severe earthquake in Gaul the
preceding year. -- A pestilence in many parts of Scotland in 853.

Baron. vol. 10. 73. Magd. Cent. 9. Muratori, vol. 2. 531. It will be observed
that no pestilence is noted under some of these last instances of comets and
other phenomena. History, during the dark and barbarous ages under
consideration, is extremely barren; and the smaller calamities of all kinds
have been passed over in silence. Whether any considerable mortality prevailed,
at these periods or not, we cannot determine from the silence of the dull annals
of the dark ages.

In 855 an earthquake at Constantinople, and in other places, violent tempests.
In 856 another earthquake and a tremendous inundation of the Tyber, which was
followed by an epidemic disease, called a plague of the fauces, in which the
throat was obstructed by defluxions, and sudden death ensued. A species of
quinsy.
In 858 a comet, and the succeeding winter was so severe that the Adriatic sea
was covered with ice and people walked on it to Venice. This was followed by an
earthquake in Constantinople.

Muratori relates that in 855, two unusual stars appeared for ten days,
alternately, and that the next year the winter was very severe, dry and
pestilential, so that a great portion of men perished. But I suspect he refers
to the same years mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

Baron. vol. 10. 131. Muratori vol. 2. 534. Short vol. 1. 85. The plague was in
Scotland in 863.

The winter of 864 is recorded as very severe. In 867 there were violent
tempests, and in the following year a general famine in Europe, severe
earthquakes and a comet.

Magd. Cent. 9. ca. 13. In 872 a comet, and a most excessive heat and drouth,
which cut short the grain.

Ibm. In 874 appeared in France myriads of grass-hoppers or locusts of a
remarkable size, with six feet and two teeth harder than stone. They are
represented as having leaders, which went before them a days journey, measuring
a certain space; the swarm followed about 9 o'clock and there waited for the
rising of the sun, obscuring the heavens by their numbers, and with a broad
mouth and large intestines, devouring every green herb and tree. Their days
journey was four or five miles.

These animals were at last driven into the British channel by the winds, and
being washed ashore, their putrefying bodies caused a stench, and sickness,
which, with a pinching famine, destroyed a third of the people, on the
neighboring French coast.

The succeeding winter, 875, was terribly severe and continued from November to
the vernal Equinox.

In this or the following year, for authors differ, appeared a comet of
extraordinary brightness, and in June following, were deluges of rain, which,
in Saxony, swept away a whole village, with its inhabitants and cattle.

In the year 878 a mortal pestilence raged among the cattle, especially about
the Rhine. Dogs and birds which at first collected round the dead bodies,
suddenly disappeared.

Magd. Cen. 9. ca. 13. Pistor. Germ. Hist. vol. 2. 570. vol. 1. 63. In 879
there was an eruption of Vesuvius.

In Feb. 882 appeared a comet with a vast coma preceded in January by an
earthquake. In the next year Italy was severely afflicted by famine. In 884 the
plague was in Oxford.

Magd. Cent. 9. 13. Short. vol. 2. In 887 the winter was unusually long and
severe; and a pestilence among cattle was so mortal, that few survived it.

Muratori, vol. 2. p. 92. A comet is noted under 896, and a famine in France and
Germany, in the following year. -- Italy was shaken by earthquakes.

Dufresnoy. Baglivus. In May 904 appeared a comet, followed by a severe frosty
winter of four months, and violent earthquakes with mortal pestilence in 905.

Universal Hist. vol. 17. 87. Magd. Cent. 10. ca. 13. In 912 appeared a comet
of unusual splendour and the following winter was very cold "acutissimum fuit
frigus," and meteors in the air very frequent. A famine followed in Germany, and
Italy experienced earthquakes.

Magd. Cent. 10. Short. vol. 1. Baglivus. p. 542. The plague was in Scotland in
922.

Short. vol. 2. A severe winter in which the Thames was frozen for 13 weeks in
929, followed by a dreadful famine, is mentioned by the last cited authors. An
earthquake is mentioned in 935, and a pestilence in 937, but no details.

In 940 there was a severe winter and pestilence among cattle.

In 942 and again 944 appeared a co^^t, the latter very large with a brilliant
coma; followed by se^^re famine in France and Italy. Some authorities place the
latter comet in 945. The winter of 946 or 7 was long and severe, continuing to
the vernal equinox of the next year.

Magd. Cent. 10. -- Pistor. Germ. Script. vol. 1. The same period was marked by
earthquakes in France and Germany.

In 954 pestilence invaded the north of Europe, with great destruction --
Scotland lost forty thousand inhabitants. The following winter was severe.

Baron. vol. 10. 739. -- Magd. Cent. 10. In 961 a flame or fiery column
appeared in the heavens. In 962 a very severe winter and a famine. In 964 a
dreadful plague in the Emperor Otho's army. In 968 a comet, an earthquake and
violent winds which destroyed the grain and occasioned famine.

Baron. vol. 10. 771. Magd. Cent. 10. Pistorius, vol. 1. 134. English authors
mention a malignant fever in London in 961; at which time there was a large
marsh on the south side of the Thames.

Maitland's Hist. London. In 975 appeared a very large comet in harvest, and
the following winter was excessively severe. The next year England was
afflicted with grievous famine. An earthquake preceded, in 974.

Magd. Cent. 10. ca. 13. Simeon Dunelmensis. In 981 a comet and in 983 another.
In this latter year was an eruption of Vesuvius. Universal famine followed and a
plague among the Lacedaemonians.

Baron. vol. 10. 831. Magd. Cent. 10. 13. This period was followed by
desolating earthquakes in Lacedemon in 986: -- In 987 the season was
unfavorable and occasioned dearth -- malignant fevers prevailed in England and
the cattle died of fluxes.

Brompton, Angl^ Scrip. 878. Meteors and a flaming sky were observed in 993, in
which year was a great eruption of Vesuvius. Then followed an excessively
severe winter, which lasted from November to May. The rivers were frozen dry,
fish perished and a scarcity of water ensued. In July a severe frost gave to
the trees the gloomy aspect of winter.

With these singular seasons prevailed a famine and a deadly plague among men
and cattle.

In 995 a comet was seen. The Saxon Chronicle places the foregoing events three
years earlier.

In 996 an epidemic flux prevailed with great malignity in England.

The events here related are similar to what are common at the present day; a
volcanic discharge of fire being followed by unusual cold and snow. Meteors
also are common near the time of such discharges.

Magd. Cent. 10. 13. Baron. vol. 10. 877. Hitherto our accounts of the great
volcanoes have been very imperfect. The first instance of an eruption in
Iceland, which is recorded, was in the year 1000; and from that period we have
a regular history of volcanic discharges in that island, which is one of the
principal outlets of fire on the globe, and which, we shall find, has no small
connection with the extensive and powerful operations of fire, both in Europe
and America. There are many volcanoes in the island of which Heckla is the
principal.

In the year 1000, there was an eruption in Iceland, two globes of fire or
great meteors were seen, violent earthquakes in England, and a severe winter
followed. In the same year appeared a comet with a long coma.

In the year following a flux, and fevers with a burning ague, were epidemic
and mortal in England.

Magdeb. Cent. 10. 13. The next period of general pestilence was remarkable for
its extent, violence and attending phenomena.

In 1004, an eruption of Heckla in Iceland, with a violent earthquake announced
the approaching calamity. In 1005 appeared a comet of frightful aspect, and in
the winter Italy was, for three months, convulsed by earthquakes. In the same
year commenced a famine, and a plague of three years duration, which desolated
the whole earth. Cotemporary authors affirm that more than half the human race
perished. The living were fatigued with burying the dead -- "ut sepelientium
taedio, vivi ad huc spiritum trahentes, obruerenter cum mortuis." Such was the
weariness of those that buried the corpses, that the living before their breath
had left their bodies, were tumbled into the graves with the dead.

At the close of this horrible destruction, Vesuvius discharged prodigious
quantities of lava which laid waste the neighboring country.

In 1009 was seen a comet in May. The beginning of the year the earth was
deluged with rain, and a plague among the Saxons followed.

The plague is also mentioned under the year 1012, with violent rains and
inundations, followed by an earthquake in 1013. But the necessary materials for
a detail are wanting.

Magd. Cent. 11. 13. Baron. vol. 11. 27. Muratori, Tom. 5. 55. In 1015 appeared
a comet, attended with violent tempests, and followed by famine in 1016. In 1017
another comet was seen, and the following year is noted as pestilential. But I
have no particulars.

In 1020 was seen another comet, and the winter was excessively severe, so that
men perished with cold. This was followed by pestilence, in which the bodies of
the infected generated "serpents," says the historian; by which he probably
means some species of worms. A similar fact will be related from Thuanus in the
16th century.

In 1021 was an earthquake, and the next year, the drouth and heat were extreme.

In 1025 the summer was wet. The plague raged in England, and in other parts of
Europe, pestilence with violent earthquakes.

Magd. Cent. 11. 13. In 1029 was an eruption of Heckla, and pestilence in some
parts of Europe.

A comet in 1031 was accompanied, in its passage, through the system, with
great storms of wind and rain, producing vast inundations. In France, England
and the east raged famine and pestilence. Locusts were added to these
calamities, which were so severe in some parts of the world, that multitudes
were compelled to leave their country Violent earthquakes marked this year, and
what is usual in the tempestuous seasons occasioned by comets distinguished by
volcanic eruptions, a splendid meteor, or globe of fire.

During an eclipse of the sun in 1032 or 3, authors mention a singular
phenomenon -- a saffron color in the air, which gave to the human countenance a
cadaverous aspect. But it might be merely the effect of a partial darkness,
with a hazy atmosphers.

A severe winter in 1035, was followed by an eruption of Vesuvius in 1036. The
frequent coincidences of this kind deserve notice.

In 1037 is noted an igneous appearance in the heavens, like a beam. These
phenomena were followed by pestilence in England and in the Emperor's army, and
with earthquakes.

Magd. Cent. 11. 13. Univ. Hist. vol. 17. 166. Echard's Romans Hist. vol. 5. 146.
In 1042 commenced another distressing period. A comet in this year was followed
by an eruption of Vesuvius in 1043 and snow in harvest. The year 1042 was very
tempestuous and rainy; the dykes in Flanders yielded to the swelling ocean, and
the low grounds were overwhelmed, with infinite destruction. At this time began
a general famine in England, France and Germany. The year 1043 was also
distinguished for rains and storms; autumnal snows were early, and an
infectious disease carried off vast numbers of cattle. In 1044 there was great
mortality among men.

In 1047 fell a deep snow in the west of Europe, which overwhelmed small trees,
and lay till March. In March 1048 was a violent earthquake, followed by a
tempestuous season and great sickness. There was an eruption of Vesuvius the
same year, and an earthquake in October. The reader will remark a very regular
connection between eruptions of volcanoes and violent winds.

Magd. Cent. 11. 13. During this period the countries about the Hellespont
were, for three years, ravaged by locusts.

In 1052 a tempest is noted which demolished many buildings. In 1053 a comet
which was followed by a famine. But the seasons are not described.

In 1057 severe frost and great quantities of snow ruined the vines. During the
following year, a comet was seen, the year after which the winter was very long
and severe, and in 1060 prevailed famine, and plague among men and cattle.

In 1062 a trembling of the earth in Constantinople, attended with thunder and
lightning, was succeeded by the plague. The next year was distinguished by a
comet, visible 40 days, a tempest of four days, deep snow, and extreme cold,
which proved fatal to vines, trees, birds and cattle.

In 1065 several hundred thousand Scythians, marching to invade the Roman
empire, perished with pestilential diseases.

In 1066 a comet was seen in May, and a cold winter succeeded. Egypt and
Arabia, countries not subject to earthquakes, were violently convulsed in
November, and a plague speedily followed, which, authors affirm, swept away one
half the inhabitants. This was attended with famine.

The north of Europe speedily felt similar calamities. Violent earthquakes in
1068, and a comet in May, of apparent diameter equal to that of the moon,
visible 40 days, were succeeded by famine. The country in England from Durham to
York was depopulated. Men subsisted on dogs, cats and every unclean thing; or
perished and their bodies were left to putrefy on the earth. The winters were
unusually severe.

Magd. Cent. 11. 13. Murat. vol. 5. 44. Baron. vol. 11. 370. In 1074 another
comet appeared and a hard winter. The winter of 1076 was excessively cold from
Nov. to March, so that the roots of vines were killed. In April 1077 appeared a
comet, and famine and plague raged in Constantinople with such mortality, that
the living could not bury the dead. An earthquake was experienced in England.
Shocks were also felt in 1081 and 1082.

In 1084 raged famine and pestilence; the latter cut off the whole army of the
Emperor Henry, in Rome. In 1085, Russia was laid waste by locusts and the
plague. The seasons were unfavorable in England, the crops bad and a great
mortality among cattle. In 1086, were great inundations in Flanders, Italy and
other countries; and in 1087 the fish died in the rivers.

Magd. Cent. 11. Baron. vol. 11. 564. Stowe's Annals. Knighton. Hist. Ang.
Script. 2353. Authors relate that in 1086, domestic fowls left the houses and
fled to the woods. The two following years, the same calamities continued --
bad seasons, murrain among cattle, and a violent fever, which appeared in the
former year, raged in these and affected one half the people of England. In
1089 a burning plague destroyed mankind. Earthquakes distinguished these
periods.

Functius Chro. vol. 1. 102. In 1091 appeared a comet; another in 1094; a third
in 1096, and a fourth in 1098.

In 1091, many violent tempests happened which levelled buildings, 600 houses
were blown down in London; swarms of locusts darkened the sun, and the next
year a plague raged, which the historian relates to have arisen from the
putrefaction of their bodies. The place where the locusts appeared is not named.

A most severe winter in 1093, occured after a very rainy summer in England.
The summer of 1094 was also excessively rainy. -- The plague at the same time
raged in England, Gaul and Germany. A violent earthquake with a tempest in
1094. The comet in Oct. 1096 was attended with great rains, which prevented the
sowing of winter grain, and famine followed. Various fiery appearances and
meteors were observed, during this period, and the winter of 1095 was severe.

In 1098 a pestilence invaded cattle, from the bad quality of their food, which
had been injured by great rains. This was the year of the last comet above
named, and in the following year, was a hard winter and a dearth. Syracuse was
injured by an earthquake.

Magd. Cent. 11. 13. Matthew Paris, p. 17. Muratori, Tom. 5. 59. To the year
1099 or the following, is to be assigned the terrible inundation which spread
over the low lands in Kent, belonging to Earl Goodwin, and which, never having
been recovered, now form the shoals, called Goodwin Sands, of dangerous
navigation. -- A severe winter followed, and pestilence and famine in various
places.

Pistorius, vol. 1. Anderson, Hist. Com. vol. 1. 176. It is probable that the
events related in the two last paragraphs happened in the same year. The
inundation is said to have drowned in Holland one hundred thousand people.

A dark day is mentioned in the year 1099.

In the year 1100 raged a pestilence in Palestine, said to have originated from
the stench of dead bodies. In Syracuse, a violent earthquake demolished a
tower, with the loss of many lives. In 1101 a singular meteor, and such
multitudes of worms, called papiliones, from their resemblance to a pavilion,
that they covered two or three miles of country.

Magd. Cent. 12. ca. 13. In 1103 a new star shone for twenty-five days, and a
comet of a bright flaming color. -- A great mortality happened this year.

Magd. ibim. Matthew Paris. In 1105, there was a discharge of fire from Heckla,
and in the same year, a great quantity of snow, a violent earthquake in
Jerusalem, about Christmas, and about the same time, a light in the west almost
equal to the sun, and two mock suns.

In Feb. of the following year, a comet Supposed to be the same as that which
appeared in 531 and in 1680.
of unusual splendour for three weeks was visible from three to nine o'clock,
and two mock suns. A violent earthquake happened the same year. Many meteors
were seen and violent tempests and inundations, with myriads of insects in the
air, marked the disorder of the elements. -- The year was also noted for
sterility of grain, and a consequent dearth -- men were attacked with plague
and unusual diseases -- "ignotis morbis, igne, flamma, ardore invisibili
homines excruciati et absque ad ustionis nota extincti."

Magd. Cent. 12. ca. 13. Muratori, Tom. 5. 485. The reader cannot fail to
remark how regularly the mention of comets is accompanied with a failure of
crops, meteors, and tempests. We have proof in modern times that these were not
the fictions of imagination. See the years 1769-70 -- 1783-4 -- 1788-9.

In 1107 appeared a comet with a long coma -- another was seen in Normandy in
1108.

In the year 1109 erysipelous diseases were epidemic in England; which
afflicted and destroyed many people; their limbs covered with black spots, like
carbuncles.

Magd. Cent. 12. ca. 13. Sigebert. Polydore Virgil. In December 1109 appeared a
comet, and in June 1110 another, which spread its coma to the south. A severe
winter, with deep snow and long continued cold, followed and sterility of
grain. An unusual recess of water in the Trente, severe earthquake in Salop,
and a mortality among men and cattle distinguished the year 1111. -- An
earthquake and severe plague are mentioned under the year 1112; but the year
was remarkable for abundant crops of grain. -- This year there was an
extraordinary recess of the water in the British Channel for a whole day, fish
died in the water and domestic fowls took flight into the woods.

Magd. Cent. 12. ca. 13. Knighton, Hist. Ang. Script. 2379. Here we have an
account of a progression in the pestilence -- from the eruptive diseases of
1109 to the plague in 1112 -- This is the modern order.

In 1113 or, as some authorities have it, in May 1114, a comet appeared, and in
a period of distressing calamities. In this year there was an eruption from
Heckla in Iceland.

In May 1113 an extraordinary snow very much injured trees and vegetables. In
June a dreadful tempest laid waste whole countries, and the excessive heat of
the summer produced dysentery and other pestilential epidemics. In 1114 many
cities in Syria were prostrated by an earthquake; and its effects were felt in
all the oriental countries. In November 1115 many houses in Antioch were
swallowed up in a chasm rent in the earth. In January 1116 various places
suffered by shocks of the earth, and in 1117 all Italy was shaken for forty
days.

In 1113 Flanders was overwhelmed by an inundation, which compelled many
Flemmings to abandon their country, and they settled in England.

This event seems to fix the approach of the comet in the year 1113.

Severe drouth and a singular recess of the ocean left rivers dry in 1114.
October 15th people walked over the Thames between London bridge and the tower.
In December the sky appeared to be in a flame.

The winter of 1115 was most rigorous, and a terrible mortality swept away the
cattle. A comet appeared this year also.

The year 1116 was rainy and fruits were destroyed. In 1117 swarms of locusts
about Jerusalem devoured vegetation, and in England great damage was done by
floods.

In 1118 and 1119 earthquakes were violent. In 1120 the locusts and mice
overran Judea, and Trent suffered much from earthquakes. A severe winter
followed in 1121, and a drouth the next year, which occasioned a scarcity of
provision, and men and cattle perished.

In the foregoing period, no great pestilence is mentioned, but such diseases
as were occasioned by intemperate seasons, except among cattle.

Magd. Cent. 12. Baron. vol. 12. 117. Muratori, Tom. 5. p. 60. Maitland's Hist.
Land. In 1124 happened a very severe winter, which destroyed trees and vines --
succeeded by a cold spring which retarded vegetation. The following year was
noted for a destructive plague among men and cattle, in France and Brabant.
Terrible was the famine in Italy, and in England so many people perished with
hunger, that dead bodies lay in the highways unburied. In 1125 the famine,
accompanied with pestilence, continued in England, Germany and Italy. The
season was excessively wet and all fruits were injured or destroyed. In 1126
appeared a comet in October, followed by a winter excessively severe, and in
the following year, violent earthquakes occurred in Syria. Erysipelous
distempers were fatal in England.

In the pestilence of 1125, it was computed that one third of the people
perished.

Magd. Cent. 12. Baron. vol. 12. 160. Dufresnoy. In 1130, 31 and 32, happened
the most destructive murrain among cattle and fowls ever known in England. In
1131 an excessive drouth in France.

In October 1133 appeared a comet. The same year, England was shaken by
earthquakes, and inundations continued a whole month. Authors assert that the
sun exhibited singular appearances, changing its figure and dimensions, and
that there was a remarkable intemperature in the air. In modern times, the face
of the sun is often disfigured with spots, and it is not unphilosophical to
suppose that moving vapor in the air may suddenly change its apparent diameter.

In 1134 the sea broke into Flanders, as it did in the following year. This
year was rainy.

In 1135 the drouth destroyed vegetation and occasioned a dearth. The Rhine was
fordable in almost any place. Terrible tempests and earthquakes and an eruption
of Vesuvius marked this period, and a dreadful plague ensued.

Short, vol. 1. 118. The eruption of Vesuvius was in 1136 and a second in 1139.
The summer of 1137 was as remarkable for drouth, as was that of 1135. The
plague was universal. The disorders in the elements occasioned a long and
desolating famine.

Magd. Cent. 12. Pistorius, vol. 1. 156. Matthew Paris. Knighton mentions the
sun's changing its form in 1133, and adds that a darkness happened which
rendered a candle necessary in the day time.

Chronocon. From this it is probable the sun presented appearances, like those
which we observed on the 19th of May 1780, and which are usual in dark days.

The reader will remark the occurrence of such days, in years when electricity
shakes the earth, or fire and lava are discharged by volcanoes. He will note
also the drouth that preceded the eruption of Vesuvius in 1135 and 1138.

In 1140 was an earthquake in England. In 1141 a very severe winter. In 1143
the air, for a mile in extent, was filled with an unusual insect, with the body
of a worm and the size of a fly. A general plague among men and cattle began
the same year, and raged with great violence in various countries. In 1144 or
as some authors relate in May 1145 appeared a comet, illuminating the heavens,
and the same year were violent earthquakes. In 1146 another comet, and the
plague incredibly fatal. A famine prevailed with distressing severity, for 12
years, including the years just named.

Magd. Cent. 12. Muratori, Tom. 5. p. 65. Pistorius, Germ. Script. If men, at
this period, had any respite from natural evils, the intervals were very short.
In 1150 a very severe winter and severe pestilence are recorded in the Saxon
chronicle, together with famine and an eruption of fire in Iceland. Earthquakes,
inundations and pestilence marked the subsequent years. The years 1151 and 2
are mentioned to have been very rainy -- the winter of 1153 and 4 severe, and
the summer of 1156 excessively dry. These phenomena follow each other so
rapidly, and are related with such brevity and in general terms, that it leaves
the mind at a loss to what influence to ascribe the diseases which afflicted
nations for a series of years about this period. In this gloomy and barbarous
age of the world, history is concise and destitute of accurate observations.

In 1157 there was an eruption in Iceland, with a very cold winter. In 1158 an
eruption of Vesuvius, an earthquake in England, and an inudation of the Tyber.
Pestilence appeared in Scotland in 1154.

Not long after these events, Antioch, Tripoli, and Damascus were convulsed by
an earthquake, with the loss of 20,000 lives.

After an interval of more than 300 years, during which I find in history no
account of any eruptions from Etna, this volcano is introduced to our notice by
an almost continual eruption from 1160 to 1169. Earthquakes were violent in
1161 -- in Sicily an inundation drowned 5000 people -- in 1163 one of the
greatest inundations in Friesland ever known, preceded by a very severe winter.
At this time the plague was raging in Milan, Normandy and Aquitain. Unusual
darkness is mentioned in 1164. In England, the sea overflowed twelve miles of
country, destroying men, cattle and improvements. In 1165, a comet appeared
with a long coma; 12,000 people perished by an inundation in Sicily, and
Norfolk and Suffolk in England were shaken by an earthquake. Most of Frederick
Barbarossa's army perished by the plague in 1167. This period was remarkable
for great wind and hail.

In 1169 the eruption of Etna was very violent; Catana was demolished by an
earthquake, and 15,000 people perished -- Asia Minor felt the shock. In the
next year, so general and tremendous were the earthquakes, that many of the
best cities in Syria, Palestine and other countries, were laid in ruins.
Germany suffered by earthquakes and inundations. Pestilence marked this period,
and in 1172 a malignant dysentery raged in England.

In 1174 mention is made, for the first time, of an epidemic cough or catarrh.
There is however no question that influenza and measles always preceded or
accompanied pestilence in the ancient and middle ages, as they do in modern
times. Authors have neglected to record the prevalence of all the minor
epidemics, or nearly all, until after the invention of printing.

In 1175 history mentions an eruption of Etna, pestilential diseases in England
and a famine. In 1176 a long and severe winter, and an irruption of the sea into
Holland with immense destruction -- a severe drouth followed with a loss of
seed time. The year 1177 was distinguished for violent winds.

In 1178 a comet was succeeded by a most rigorous winter, and destructive
inundations. On the 11th of September, was a dark day, with singular
appearances of the sun and moon. Another comet is mentioned in 1179 and a great
hail storm.

In 1181 appeared a comet, and earthquakes, with an eruption of Etna, marked
this period. -- At this time Denmark was almost laid desolate by excessive
rains, famine and pestilence, while Germany lost half of its inhabitants by the
plague. Some allowance must be made for exaggeration in the accounts of the
more destructive plagues. This was an age of superstition, and the imaginations
of men were susceptible of strong impressions.

In 1185 is recorded a most violent earthquake, over Europe. Calabria was
overturned, and thousands perished. On the Adriatic, a whole city was swallowed
up, and the shock was felt to the Baltic.

In 1186 Russia and Poland were desolated by locusts and pestilence. The winter
was so mild, that the following harvest was in May, and vintage in August. In
Carinthia, the locusts devoured every green thing.

An unusual conjunction of planets happened, this year, in Libra; and so great
was the alarm, in that ignorant and credulous age, on account of the calamities
predicted by astrologers, that a solemn fast of three days was appointed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Luckily no uncommon event happened in England, until
the next year, when pestilential diseases prevailed among men and cattle. In
1188 the plague was in Rome.

Magd. Cent. 12. Murat. vol. 5. p. 70 -- 6 -- 182. Univ. Hist. vol. 32. 110.
Henry Hist. Brit. vol. 3. 380. I have no accounts of comets in this period from
1181 to 1211; although it is probable that several were visible.

How far may we suppose the conjunction of all the planets had any influence in
producing the remarkably mild winter of 1186?

In January 1193 was a remarkable aurora borealis.

In 1193 and 4 excessive rains injured the grain and produced a dearth. In
England an acute pestilential fever was epidemic and left in health scarcely a
number of persons sufficient to tend the sick. The usual forms of burial were
neglected, and dead bodies were thrown into graves in piles. A severe winter
put a stop to this epidemic. Brompton, with a natural partiality for religious
houses, informs us that the only places exempted from the destruction of this
pestilence, were the monasteries -- Cotemporary with this disease was an
earthquake and a singular fiery appearance in the sky. Short places this fever
under the year 1196 and calls it a "burning ague." See the years 1001 and 1723.

Brompton's Hist. Ang. Script. 1271. Magd. Cent. 12. Short, vol. 1. 130. The
winter of 1200 was cold; the summer of 1201 was very rainy; and the winter
succeeding was severe almost beyond example. In 1203 was a sore famine from bad
seasons. In 1205 a rigorous winter and a great hail storm; in 1206 an eruption
of Heckla; but I have no account of any epidemics that prevailed.

In 1210 was an eruption of Heckla, and a cold winter. In 1211 appeared a
comet, in May, visible for 18 days. Great tempests marked this period with
inundations. In 1212 Venice and Damascus were violently agitated by
earthquakes, and in Sicily thousands perished by an inundation. These phenomena
were the heralds of a severe pestilence, which, in 1213, was so fatal in Italy,
that authors affirm scarcely one tenth of the inhabitants survived. In the year
following appeared two comets.

The year 1219 was distinguished for the approach of a large comet, distressing
inundations, in one of which perished 36,000 inhabitants, an earthquake and a
volcanic eruption in Iceland. In 1220 the plague was so fatal in Damietta, that
authors relate three persons only survived out of 70,000. By this we are to
understand the disease to have been extremely mortal; but we must reject the
literal meaning of such relations. It is doubtless true that the pestilence of
this period has rarely been exceeded in mortality.

This period was very calamitous in the north of Europe. In 1221 Poland was
afflicted by excessive rains, and the floods which followed swept away whole
villages. The winter succeeding was severe, so that frozen wine was sold by
weight, while famine and pestilence almost desolated Europe. In most countries,
the living could hardly bury the dead; and in some cities, scarcely a person
survived.

In the year 1222 appeared a comet of unusual magnitude and the summer was
excessively dry. A frost, with deep snow in April, destroyed the fruits. In
autumn the earth was deluged with rains and swept with violent winds. An
earthquake shook Germany and Lombardy; in Cyprus two cities were demolished;
the shocks were frequent and continued for two months, in Brixia, Venice,
England and other countries. The plague raged, for three years, with
uncontrolable fury, in Germany, Hungary, France and other countries; falling on
cattle as well as man.

During this dreadful period, the discharges of fire and lava, from the
volcanoes in Iceland, exceeded what had been before known in the same space of
time. There were two eruptions in 1222, one from Heckla; the other from
Reikenese; and the eruptions of the latter were repeated in 1223, 1225 and
1226. In 1224 was a severe drouth; in 1225 a rigorous winter, followed by a
dearth, and mortal diseases among sheep.

Let any candid man observe the natural phenomena accompanying this desolating
period, from 1219 to 1226; and decide for himself how far the fire or
electricity of the system is an agent in producing them, and the attending
diseases.

We observe here the progress of pestilence to be the same as in modern times.
The plague appeared in Egypt almost at the same time with the comet, and first
derangement of the elements in 1219 and 1220; but was two, three, four and five
years later in the high northern latitudes.

No comet is mentioned in the histories of this dark period, as far as I can
find, from 1222 to 1240; but that there was one, in the vicinity of the ^^rth,
between 1228 and 1233, is very probable.

In 1228 an inundation in Friesland demolished whole towns, and it was
estimated that 100,000 people perished. Great rains in summer and excessive
heat were followed (...) severe winter, with deep snow.

In 1230 the waters of the Tyber rose to the stairs of St. Peter's Church, and
drowned the lower city. July and August were excessively hot. An inundation of
the Danube in 1232, and in 1233 so severe a frost, that rivers were converted
into highways in Italy; and earthquakes marked the year, with a dark day.

During this period from 1230 to 1233, France, Denmark and Italy were wasted by
dreadful famine and plague. These calamities continued in 1234 and 5, in England
and France. In London alone 20,000 people were starved. Worms and locusts
devoured the fruits of the earth.

The winter of 1236 was rainy -- the following summer extremely dry, and in
England most distressing agues were epidemic. In 1237 was an eruption of a
volcano in Iceland.

In 1239 pestilence again raged -- a new star, like Lucifer appeared. Famine was
so severe that persons fed on human flesh.

In 1240 a comet appeared in Feb. and was visible a month. Mortal diseases
prevailed, and authors relate that the fish, on the English coast had a battle,
in which eleven whales and a multitude of other fish were slain and cast
ashore. The cause to which this phenomenon is assigned is laughable enough; but
the fact is important; for it strengthens modern observations, that when
pestilential diseases prevail on the surface of the earth, fish often perish
beneath the water. Of this no doubt can remain; and this alone demonstrates
that the pestilential cause is as powerful or nearly so, at the bottom of
rivers and the ocean, as on the earth -- a fact that reduces the theory of
propagating the fomes of epidemic diseases in vessels, clothes and similar
articles, from one country to another, to a thing of very trifling
consideration.

The winter of 1240 was very severe -- the snow was deep and cattle perished.
An eruption of fire in Iceland is noted the same year.

In 1242 the Thames rose by means of excessive rains and overwhelmed the
country for six miles about Lambeth. The years 1243 and 4 were remarkable for
continued drouth, meteors and a most fatal plague. -- An eruption of fire in
Iceland in 1245.

In 1247 a violent earthquake was experienced in England, and in September a
fatal plague. The earthquake was in February and followed by a very rainy
summer. The winter following was so mild, that people wore their summer
clothes; but from March to May was cold.

The summer of 1250 was rainy and tempestuous, followed by a hard winter. The
summer of 1251 was intolerably hot, and epidemic diseases prevailed, with great
mortality.

In 1252 late frosts in spring, and succeeding drouth destroyed the fruits of
the earth. At the close of July came great rains, vegetation started, but great
mortality prevailed among cattle. At Michaelmas began the plague in London,
which spread o^^r England, and raged till August following. This is one
instance of the plague's appearing in autumn, running through the winter, and
ceasing about the time, in the hot season, when that disease usually begins.

The winter of 1254 was rigorously cold, a murrain among sheep was very fatal,
and in England and France a mortal distemper among horses called the evil of
the tongue, but it is not described.

In 1255 appeared a comet; tides rose to an uncommon height; rivers swelled
with excessive rains and tempests levelled buildings. In 1256 the rains and
tempests were equally violent, and another comet appeared. In 1257 the summer
was also excessively rainy. From these rains came a dearth of corn in England
and France in 1258, which was also rainy; and famine and diseases made havoc
with human life. Fifteen thousand persons perished by hunger in London; but I
have no account that the plague prevailed at that time.

To this series of wet seasons succeeded severe drouth in 1259 and 1260; and
the mortality continued till the summer of 1259 -- after which plenty succeeded
to want.

The year 1261 was rainy in England and Scotland, and a dearth was the
consequence in the following year.

In 1262 an eruption of a volcano in Iceland.

In 1263 a severe frost in winter converted the Thames into a highway for men
and horses. In 1264 a comet was visible from June 20th to September 28th and
pestilential diseases swept away horses and cattle.

In 1266 swarms of Palmer worms devoured all vegetables in Scotland, and
several villages on the Tay and Froth were swept away by floods. These were
preceded by a remarkable halo.

In 1268 appeared a comet, and violent tempests and rain are noted, together
with sterility of grain and dearth in Austria and Sicily.

In 1269 the winter was extremely severe; horses and carriages passing on the
ice over the Thames. A plague raged among the Crusaders, on their march to the
holy land, of which died the French king and his son. Some authors mention a
comet of stupendous magnitude under this date; which is probably the same as
that noted under the foregoing year.

In 1274 was a great earthquake and a comet of frightful aspect -- an
earthquake also in 1275.

In this year, it is related, the rot among sheep was first known in England.
As this was said to be an imported disease, it is proper to state how it was
introduced. Short on Air, vol. 1. 155, says, "This year, a rich Frenchman
brought into Northumberland a Spanish ewe, as big as a two year old calf, which
sheep being rotten, soon infected the country, so that the disease overspread
the whole kingdom, and lasted 25 or 28 years, till it left very few sheep
alive. This was the first rot ever known in England."

The reader will judge which is the greater calf, the man who gravely tells or
the man who believes such a tale as this.

Historians fix upon the year 1277 for the formation of the Dollert Sea,
between Groningen and East-Friesland, by a great inundation, which overwhelmed
33 villages irrecoverably; with many farm-houses in the open country.

In 1280 a great inundation was followed by a very cold winter. In 1281 Poland
was afflicted with famine. The winter of 1282 was the severest then remembered;
an earthquake shook Italy and a plague raged in Denmark. In 1283 the same
malady prevailed in Scotland. In 1284 the winter was one of the mildest ever
known; the year was also remakable for great tempests, an unusual darkness and
an eruption of Etna. The year 1285 was noted for a similar darkness, most
parching drouth and the commencement of a famine in England.

This drouth was followed in 1286, by the approach of a comet. In this year,
Prussia was infested with a new species of worms, whose sting was poisonous.
Swarms of flies and pestilential fevers in Spain nearly destroyed the army of
the French king, then making war on Arragon.

In 1287 fifteen islands in Zealand were overwhelmed by an inundation, with the
loss of 15,000 inhabitants.

In 1288 the summer was excessively hot and dry Grain was however abundant in
this and the preceding year The drouth was followed by great mortality and a
severe winter.

In 1293 a comet was visible, and a great snow storm happened in May. Italy was
shaken by earthquakes. In the following year, England was distressed by severe
famine, thousands of the poor perishing with hunger. A severe drouth exhausted
all the springs and rivers, grass withered and cattle were fed on straw. The
winter of 1293-4 was extremely cold, and an eruption of Heckla happened in 1294.

In 1295 and 6 many countries were afflicted with famine, and in 1297 the plague
prevailed in Scotland.

A comet of great magnitude appeared in 1298, or as other authors say, in 1299,
and others in 1300; whose approximation was attended with violent earthquakes
in Germany, and other places in 1299, and with an eruption of Heckla in 1300.
The year 1298 was noted for a great mortality among the Jews, and multitudes
perished in the east with various diseases in 1299.

In 1305 appeared a comet, attended with fatal pestilence. A hard winter
followed, and the Rhine was covered with ice.

In 1311 mount Heckla discharged its fiery contents; in 1312 appeared a comet,
and a three years famine commenced in Bohemia and Poland, which was exceedingly
distressing. Men became like wolves and preyed on human flesh.

In 1314 incessant rains destroyed the grain; a comet appeared in December
following, and in 1316 raged a desolating dysentery in England, accompanied
with an acute fever, which, like the true plague, left scarcely survivors to
bury the dead. The famine continued to rage with all its horrors. Horse flesh
was a delicious dish. Wheat sold at forty shillings the quarter; equivalent to
L30 sterling in these days.

In 1318 the winter was severe, and in 1319 the plague prevailed in England. A
murrain spread among cattle, at the same time, with fatal destruction. I have
no account of any comets from 1315, to 1337 -- which may be owing to the defect
of my historical materials.


In 1321 the drouth was extreme, and there was an eruption of Etna. Eruptions
of Etna are also mentioned in 1323, 1329 and ^333, and a severe winter, in the
first of these years 1323, which covered the Baltic with ice. The plague raged
in 1325.

The year 1330 was rainy and the crops indifferent. The year following, Ireland
was distressed by famine, but Dublin was relieved by plenty of fish, called
Thurlhods, which had not been seen there for ages. In 1332 was an eruption in
Iceland.

In 1336 grain was abundant. A violent earthquake shook Venice, and a
succeeding plague laid waste the city. This was preceded by numerous abortions.
To repair the waste of population, the Senate passed a decree inviting persons
to come and reside in the city, and promising them the rights of citizenship,
after two years residence. Howel's Survey.


In 1337 happened a severely cold winter, without snow. Two comets were
visible, one four months, the other two. The plague prevailed in Nuremberg and
other parts of Europe. The winter following was also severe. Pistorius places
these comets in 1336, and mentions an inundation at Florence. At this time,
Europe was, for three years, ravaged with locusts.

In 1339 or 40, appeared another comet. Great floods, an eruption of Heckla,
and a severe winter followed, which covered the north sea with ice.

See Short on Air, vol. 1. Pistorius, vol. 1, and 2. Dufresnoy's Chron. Henry's
Hist. Eng. vol. 4. 500. Camden's Britannia. Functius' Chron. Knighton's Chron.
In traveling through the dark ages, we find but few interesting descriptions;
and nothing could have induced me to undertake the tedious detail of detached
facts respecting pestilence, but a strong desire to ascertain all that can be
discovered of the operations of nature, in producing epidemic diseases. It is
of infinite importance, in discussing this subject, to know whether certain
phenomena of seasons, of subterranean fire, and unusual animals, uniformly
attend pestilence; and to ascertain, if possible, the order in which they
proceed, for the purpose of discovering whether they are connected with each
other as cause and effect. Barren as the history of the barbarous ages really
is, we yet find it to contain a great number of facts, that will assist us in
developing the causes of epidemics. The subsequent periods of the world furnish
more ample materials -- we now approach the morning of science, when the
clearer lights of more accurate history will illuminate our path.

SECTION IV. Historical View of pestilential epidemics, from the year 1340, to
1500.
THE pestilence next to be described was the most general and awfully
distressing that the world ever experienced. The precise year when it appeared
in Asia, where it began, is not ascertained; but probably about 1345, perhaps a
year or two earlier.

The histories of that age ^elate, that it commenced in Cathay, China, and was
preceded by the bursting of a huge meteor or globe of fire; or as others
relate, the fire burst from the earth. These accounts were taken from Genoese
seamen, and are recorded by Villani; bu^ Dr. Mead, with that obstinacy that
rejects truth when opposed to preconceived theory, thinks the report
incredible, and questions not the disease originated in Egypt. Had he ever
examined the subject, like an impartial man, he would have believed the account
of the seamen, for there is not a more certain phenomenon in nature, than the
appearance of meteors and the explosion of fire in pestilential periods.

Villani, book 1. chapter 2. Mezeray, Tom. 1. 798. This plague appeared in 1346 in
Egypt, Syria, Greece, Turkey; in 1347 in Sicily, Pisa, Genoa and other parts of
Italy; in 1348 it appeared in the south of France, first in Avignon, which is
not a maritime city, but at a distance from the sea, and afterward in other
parts of the kingdom and in all the southern provinces of Spain. At the close
of the same year, it made its appearance in England, first in Dorsetshire, and
soon traveled over the whole country. In 1349 it overrun Ireland, Holland,
Scotland, and in 1350 all Germany, Hungary and the north of Europe.

This pestilence was remarkable for raging in winter as well as summer, even in
the north of Europe. In France it first appeared at Avignon in February and
prevailed there nearly a year.

Muratori, vol. 3. part 2. 588. Short has placed its first appearance in the
south of England in September. But Archbishop Parker has placed its origin just
after Christmas. His words are, "Ea statim post nativitatis dominicae
celebratum festum, ipsa nimirum hyeme et rerum omnium ad victum necessarium
copia, cum vix ulla contagionis suspicio oriri mortalibus potuit, incepit."
"Immediately after the feast of our Lord's nativity, in winter and amidst the
greatest abundance of provisions, when there could be no suspicion that a
contagious disease would arise among men, the plague commenced." It raged about
five months and according to this author ceased in May following; although other
authors relate, that it had not gone through the kingdom till late in the
summer.

Parker's Antiq. Brit. p. 360. In the English Annals by William Wyrcester, in
the black book of the Exchequer, it is said that this plague prevailed in the
parts of London and its vicinity in autumn 1349.

These different accounts of the time of the first appearance of this disease,
are reconcilable on the principles which modern observations have unfolded. It
is found that the plague is always preceded, for some months, and in some
instances, for two or three years, by other malignant fevers, which increase
gradually to the violence of the true plague; and often the degrees of violence
are so gradual, tha^ physicians themselves can hardly determine a line of
distinction between the malignant disease, which is the precursor of the
plague, and the plague itself. That is, they are at a loss to know where the
malignant disease ends and the plague begins. Hence all the disputes, at the
commencement of a pestilence, whether the disease i^ the plague or not -- a
circumstance which appears to have marked the origin of all great plagues, and
yet physicians and philosophers in Europe seem never to have suspected the
cause. -- These facts will be hereafter demonstrated, and they annihilate at
(...) blow the whole doctrine of the propagation of that disease from country
to country by infection.

From the uniform operations of nature in the case of epidemic pestilential
diseases of the kind under consideration, there must have been in England,
during the summer, previous to the appearance of the plague, malignant fevers,
which might approach to the violence and fatality of the plague. This
circumstance might create a small difference in the accounts of the origin of
the plague -- inaccurate observers mistaking the one disease for the other --
or rather naming the previous putrid fever, the plague, before it put on the
characteristic symptoms.

It is possible however that these authors may refer to the commencement of the
disease in different parts of England.

This formidable calamity deserves a particular description, with all the
phenomena attending it.

In 1347 appeared a frightful comet, in August. Preceding and during the
prevalence of the disease, the whole earth was shaken by most tremendous
earthquakes. All Germany was shaken in 1346. In 1349 on the 9th of Sept. Sicily
was shaken to its foundation, together with all Italy. In Greece many cities
were overthrown, and in many places towns and castles were demolished.
Thousands of people were swallowed up and the courses of rivers were obstructed.

Over Avignon was suspended a meteor or pillar of fire for an hour. The heavens
were at times illuminated as with flame, and meteors were frequent.

I have no particular description of all the seasons, during the five years, in
which this mortal pestilence desolated Europe. But the year 134^, the year of
the comet, was, in England, excessively rainy, and the air humid. Mutius, in
the collection of German history, says that the whole year 1348 was southerly,
moist weather, but there were no heavy rains to cool the air. Fruit was
abundant, but corn was not nutric^ous. See vol. 3. 241. -- In England the rains
continued from May to Christmas.
Short, from Johan Cole de Billona, mentions that a hot air, cloudy and moist
atmosph^re had continued for some years, and that a malignant, contagious
peripneumony followed in all Europe. But unfortunately the compiler leaves us
in the dark as to the precise time of its appearance, and whether before or
after the other forms of this pestilence.

Mezeray relates that in China, the disease originated from a vapor, which
burst from the earth, was horribly offensive and consumed the face of the
country through an extent of 200 leagues. This account may be inaccurate, but
is not to be wholly rejected. That some action of subterranean heat was
instrumental in generating the disease, is very probable; or at least that some
phenomena of fire accompanied it, because this supposition is consonant to the
whole series of modern observations.

The pestilential state of air, in that period, is strongly marked by the
appearance of myriads of unusual and loathsome insects, not only in China, but
in Europe. They are des^^ as young serpents, or as venomous insects, or as
large vermin with tails and eight short legs -- in which description, probably,
a frightened imagination had some share of infl^^nce. But of the fact of their
existence, there can be no doubt.

In the Ouse there was a great inundation just before Ascension day, and in
York began this plague speedily after the flood.

The symptoms of this fatal malady were -- violent af^^ction in the head and
stomach, buboes and other glandular swellings; small swellings like pimples or
blisters; usually a feve^ (...) a vomiting or spitting of blood. -- The
swellings in the glands* ^^e infallible signs of the disease; but the most
fatal symptom was, the pimples or blisters spread over the whole body.
Hemorrhages from the mouth, nose and other parts, indicated a universal and
sudden disorganization of the blood. The patient usually died in three days or
less -- which denotes the virulence of the poison, or rather the activity of
the disease, which destroyed the powers of life in half the time, which the
bilious plague usually employs.

The peripneumony which was epidemic about the same time, appeared in a burning
fever, insatiable thirst, a black tongue, anxiety and pains about the heart,
short breath, a cough with expectoration of a mixed matter, open mouth, raging
delirium, fury, red, turbid or black urine, restlessness, and watchings, black
eruptions, anthraces, buboes, and in some, corroding ulcers over the whole
body. The disease usually terminated the 4th day, sometimes not till the 7th.
The blood was black and thick; but sometimes greenish and watery or yellowish.
-- Venesection was certain death. The disease baffled medical skill -- the only
remedies that appeared to relieve, were laxatives early administered, cupping
and scarification, leeches applied to the hemorrhoids, and inwardly, infusions
of mild, diaphoretic, attenuating, pectoral vegetables.

It will be hereafter proved that malignant pleurisy and peripneumony usually
form a part of that series of diseases which always occur during a period of
general contagion. When plague and yellow fever occur in summer, in northern
climates, pleurisy and peripneumony often assume, in winter, great and even
pestilential violence.

This plague was so deadly that at least half or two thirds of the human race
perished in about 8 years. It was most fatal in cities, but in no place died
less than a third of the inhabitants. In many cities perished nine out of ten
of the people, and many places were wholly depopulated. In London 50,000 dead
bodies were buried in one grave yard. In Norwich died about the same number. In
Venice died 100,000 -- in Lubec, 90,000 -- in Florence the same number. In the
east perished twenty millions in one year. -- In Spain the disease raged three
years and carried off two thirds of the people. Alfonso 2d. died with it while
besieging Gibraltar.

In this fatal period, the apprehension of death destroyed the value of
property. In England, and probably in other countries, cattle were neglected
and they ran at large over the country. The corn perished in the fields for
want of reapers; whole vill^ges were depopulated; and after the malady ceased,
multitudes of houses and buildings of all kinds were seen mouldering to ruin. A
horse which before had been worth forty shillings, after the sickness, sold for
half a mark.

Although in the year preceding there had been a plenty of provisions, yet the
neglect of agriculture during the general distress produced a famine. Such was
the loss of laborers, that the few survivors afterward demanded exorbitant
wages, and the Parliament of England was obliged to interfere, and limit their
wages, and even compel men to labor. -- See 23d Edward 3. A. D. 1350. The
preamble states, that a great part of the people, especially workmen and
servants had died of the late pestilence, and those who survived, seeing the
necessity of men, demanded excessive wages.

This disease was particularly fatal in Denmark -- all business was at a stand,
towns were deserted, and all was terror and despair. It reached the highest
northern latitudes; it broke out in Iceland, and was so fatal, that the
settlements there are supposed not to have since recovered their population. It
was called the sort diod, black death.

In some places people attempted to escape infection by taking their families
on board of vessels, and putting to sea; but it was in vain; they were seized
in every place, without regard to age or sex.

In 1348 the malady swept away the Greenland merchants and seamen. This disease
also, or some other cause destroyed the colony of Danes in that country, for it
was extinguished and has never been found or heard of to this day.

This pestilence was remarkably fatal to the monks and regular clergy of all
descriptions. In one society at Montpeliers, of 140 members died all but 7:
About the same proportion perished in Magdalen Society. In Marseilles, of 140
not one survived. But a circumstance related in Knighton's Chronicon deserves
particular notice. At Avignon where the disease first appeared in France, 66 of
the Carmelites had died, before the citizens were apprized of the fact; and
when it was discovered, the report circulated that the brethren had killed each
other.

An important consequence results from the fact -- that this plague first
appeared in a monastery, which might be crowded with lazy, idle, filthy monks;
in a city not commercial, nor a sea port. There was no idea of any imported
infection; but there must have been strong local causes, which first excited
into action the general contagion which, at that time, pervaded the atmosphere
over the whole globe.

Such was the havoc made by this pestilence among the clergy in England, says
Knighton, that a vicarage which before the plague, might have been supplied for
four or five marks a year, or two marks and the man's board, was raised to the
price of twenty marks or twenty pounds.

Col. 2600. This pestilential period was preceded and attended with all the
usual phenomena of fatal Epidemics. Except eruptions of volcanoes, of which I
have no account, at this period except in Iceland in 1340. But my accounts of
volcanoes are very imperfect.
The earthquakes and the insects have been noticed. Abortions were among the
remarkable precursors of this malady. The same fact is noticed by Diemerbroeck,
before the great plague at Nimeguen, in 1635. The same has been mentioned by
the authors he quoted, Forestus, Sennertes, and others; and is ascribed to the
tenderness and debility of the heart and Viscera. Hence pregnant women first
feel the effects of a state of air unfriendly to the support of life, and if
they are seized with plague, are always its victims.

Another phenomenon attending this plague was the death of fish. This
circumstance, with the bad state of the water, which is often affected by the
pestilential state of the elements, and was greatly affected in this period,
gave rise to a report that the Jews had poisoned the wells and springs. The
prejudices against the Jews, which have marked and scandalized all christian
countries, except America, were at their height in the reign of Edward the 3d
of England, the period under consideration. These prejudices drove legislators
and princes to exercise every species of cruelty upon the Israelites, on
account of their usury; and when the report of their poisoning the water
circulated, the populace in some places and especially in Germany, rose and
assassinated multitudes of these unfortunate men.

The death of animals, particularly of sheep, marked the same period. In
England, 5000 died in one pasture. The state of the air and water was so
pestilential that it is averred by historians, the fowls and fishes had
blotches on them.

Authorities. Short, on air. vol. 1. 165. Knighton, Chron. Pennant's Arctic
Zoology p. 67. Townsend's Travels in Spain, vol. 2. 219. Maitland's Hist. of
London. Muratori, Tom 3. 588 and 594. Univ. Hist. vol. 32. 251. Stow's Survey,
478. Mazeray's Hist. France. Villani, and many others. It may be remarked that
this mortal pestilence raged in England and France, during peace, or rather
during a truce, which had been concluded between Edward III and the King of
France in 1347, and which lasted seven years.

Guido, an inhabitant of Avignon, when this malady appeared, and who escaped
death by the favorable process of a bubo, relates a fact that throws light on
this subject. He says that the malady was of two kinds -- "the first, and which
preceded the other about two mouths, was a fever, with spitring of blood," not
unlike that which prevailed in the time of Fracastorius. All who were seized
with these symptoms, died in three days.

The other kind, which succeeded the first, came on with continued fever,
carbuncles and abscesses, in the glands. -- This was as fatal as the other,
except near its decline, and the patient died in five days.

Friend's Hist. Med. p. 5^4. It is remarkable, that the disease which is
technically called plague, pestis, is always preceded by a similar fever. It is
in fact the plague in its first stages, tho it does not exhibit the glandular
swellings, which modern physicians contend are characteristic of true plague,
and mark a generic or at least a specific difference between that and any other
kind of typhus fever. This fact of a progressiveness in the disease,
annihilates the favorite notion of deducing all plagues from infection; a
notion which is bandied about between physicians and legislators like a tennis
ball, tho unhappily for mankind, infinitely less harmless.

At the close of this dreadful period, in 1350, were severe earthquakes in
Italy. In 1356 a violent shock in Switzerland, and in Germany, especially on
the Rhine, which did great injury. To this succeeded most violent rains, and
famine and pestilence in Germany, with prodigious mortality.

Muratori, Tom. 3. part. 2. 594. Brabant escaped this terrible pestilence and
so did Milan.

In 1352 authors relate that 900,000 people in China perished by famine.

The rainy and humid seasons which introduced the great pestilence of 1347-50,
were succeeded by drouth in 1350, a comet in 1351, with tremendous storms, and
a meteor which burst with a heavy report. The winter following was severe, and
in 1354 Africa and Cyprus were devoured by locusts.

In England prevailed epidemic madness in 1355.

In 1358 was a severe winter, followed by an eruption in Iceland, and a wasting
plague in Italy in 1359. According to Baccace, Florence lost 100,000 citizens,
and Petrarch says, scarcely ten of a thousand survived. There was a great
mortality particularly among childbed women, and cattle did not escape.

This pestilence also became nearly general. In 1361 Milan, which had escaped
in 1348, was severely afflicted, as was all France, England and Ireland, and it
was computed that Scotland lost one third of its inhabitants. This plague was
called the second in the reign of Edward III, and it was in time of peace.

In this pestilential time, occurred a remarkable storm of hail and snow, in
April 1360. The tendency of the elements in such periods to generate hail and
snow, is a fact that well deserves consideration.

In January 1361, a violent tempest spread desolation over Europe. The winter
was severe, and the summer dry. In March 1362 appeared a comet in the North
East, with a vast coma, and an eruption in Iceland. A dearth and diseases among
cattle followed.

This last pestilence differed from that in 1348, in two or three particulars.
It raged with most violence, on mountainous districts, where the air was pure,
and where the plague of 1348 did not prevail. It attacked the nobility and
gentry with more violence than the poor; contrary to the usual fact; whereas
the disease of 1348 was most fatal to persons in the humbler walks of life.

Muratori Tom. 3. part 2. 600. Liber Niger Saccarii vol. 2. 433. Henry's Hist.
Britain vol. 4. 194. The comet and volcano of 1362 were followed in 1363 by a
winter of extraordinary severity, which lasted from September to April. The
Rhine was covered with ice for ten weeks.

The year 1365 was rainy, and the plague carried off 20,000 people in Cologne,
and the vicinity. In 1366 an eruption in Iceland destroyed 70 farms. The same
year was very sickly in England and deaths sudden.

In 1368 was visible in March a comet with a coma, and the crops failed. In
this year commenced in England the third great plague in the reign of Edward
III.; the reader will note that this was preceded by a sickly year in 1366. The
mortality was great, and especially about Oxford. The most fatal year was 1369,
and in Ireland the disease raged in 1370. I have no particulars of the progress
of the disease on the continent; but it was very fatal.

Murat. vol. 3. 632. Pistorius vol. 1. lib. Niger 435. Maitland's Hist. Land.
Van Trail's Letters on Iceland. In 1373 raged an epidemic madness among the
lower people in England; and in 1374 a similar disorder prevailed in France and
Italy. During pestilential periods, some general cause seems to affect the
brain in a powerful manner, even in persons who escape the plague.

In 1374 also was an eruption of a volcano in Iceland. There was also famine, a
violent plague in Italy and some parts of France. In 1371 there had been a
severe earthquake in the south of France.

Murat. Tom. 3. 646. 649. In 1379 commenced a great sickness in the north of
England, which almost laid waste the country; and in 1380 was seen a comet. The
disease is not described, but it was the forerunner of a most dreadful plague.
Provisions were good and cheap.

In 1381 and 2 considerable earthquakes were felt in England, and a severe
pestilence appeared at Avignon in France, which raged for four or five years,
depopulating many cities. It prevailed in Italy, France, Germany, England,
Ireland, Greece, and the East.

There was an eruption of Etna in 1381, and the year closed with great rains.
The year 1382 was without winds. The plague was most fatal to children, and
great ravages were made also among the friars. In this pestilence Lubec lost
90,000 people.

Liber Niger Sac. 441. Short on Air. In 1388 the drouth was so severe, that the
Rhine was fordable at Cologne. In 1389 violent tempests raged in England, with
great destruction; and in the year following, was an eruption of a volcano in
Iceland. In modern days, we observe the same train of phenomena, evidently
depending on one general cause. In 1389 appeared a singular meteor or light in
the heavens.

The year 1389 was remarkable for the death of children in all parts of
England. From the phenomena that attended and the diseases which followed,
compared with the order of diseases in modern days, it appears very probable
that this disease was a species of Angina, which almost invariably precedes the
plague. In the next year, a deadly plague raged in the north of England. Swarms
of gnats and flies marked this period, and some parts of the continent were
overrun with locusts.

Pistor. vol. 1. Short on Air. The reader will remark the excessive drouth
preceding the eruption in Iceland and the fiery appearance in the heavens in
the year of the tempest. In these phenomena, nature is nearly uniform.

It is a very common event that dysentery of a malignant type succeeds the
plague. Such was the case in England, in 1391, when this disease was epidemic
and very mortal. A dearth of corn might have contributed to the same event; but
it is often the fact, without any scarcity of food.

An uncommon redness of the sun is mentioned in July of 1391, and for six weeks
after, thick vapor or clouds. Perhaps these might have been occasioned by the
eruption in Iceland, in the preceding year: as it appears to have been a
phenomenon somewhat similar to that which Europe beheld with amazement and
terror in 1783. -- I have however my suspicions that while the central fires
expel immense quantities of burning lava, from volcanoes, they may force
through the earth in the adjoining continents, a subtle vapor, that is
invisible, until it is collected and condensed in the higher regions of the
atmosphere.

The beginning of the 15th century was marked by a severe and desolating
pestilence. The disease first appeared in the last year or two of the former
century. In 1399 the mortality was such in Spain, especially in Andalusia, that
the king was obliged to suspend the law which restrained widows from marrying
within a year after the death of their husbands. It was preceded by a severe
winter.

Mod. Univ. Hist. vol. 20. 353. In 1402-3 and 4 the plague in Iceland carried
off multitudes of the inhabitants.

Van Troil. In 1400 epidemic and mortal sickness prevailed in England. A
violent earthquake the same year in Persia. In 1401 Florence was nearly
dispeopled by the plague. In 1402 in March appeared a comet of a fiery aspect,
and coma, which was visible for three months. According to Liber Niger
Saccarii, this was in 1401, and this is most probably correct. The period of
this comet i^ 34^ years and we shall find it under the year 1744.
In 1402 a frost so severe that the Baltic was passable for horses for six
weeks. In 1406 the sea broke into Holland, Zealand and Flanders, with
prodigious injury. A plague carried off 30,000 people in London; and a comet
the same year. The winters following were so severe that most birds died. In
Sept. there were great floods from rain. In 1408 there was an eruption of Etna
and deep snow.

Pistorius, Germ. Script. vol. 1. Short on Air. Maitland's Hist. Land. The
summer of 1406, when the plague raged in London, was close, moist and southerly
weather.

In 1411 the dysentery carried off 14000 people in Bourdeaux, but I have no
account of the seasons. The plague raged in Aquitain and Gascoigne with great
mortality. In 1412, there were uncommon tides in the Thames. In 1414 a comet,
and in 1416 an eruption of fire from a volcano in Iceland, preceded by great
snow.

In 1421, according to some authors, happened the dreadful inundation in
Holland, which formed the Zuyder Sea. In 1422 there was an eruption of fire in
Iceland, and a severe winter followed. The same year, the plague raged in
Poland. From these phenomena, I suspect the approach of a comet, but have no
account of one.

In 1426 a comet, an excessively hot summer, and a violent earthquake which
overturned twenty cities in Catalonia, in Spain, and was felt in most parts of
Europe. In 1427 the seasons were rainy, the winter mild, a dearth and famine
followed, and the plague in Dantzick. Epidemics prevailed in England, and the
year following, the plague.

In 1430 happened a general earthquake -- in 1432 a great inundation in Germany
-- in 1433 a comet was visible for three months, in the south, and the winter
following was terribly severe. The frost began in the last week in November and
lasted till the middle of February.

Pistorius Germ. Script vol. 1. Short, vol. 1. Liber Niger Sac. vol. 2. In 1436
there was an eruption of a volcano in Iceland and a severe winter. An epidemic
fever prevailed in Venice, which was attributed to the use of stagnant water.

In 1438 and 9 violent storms and great rains injured the corn and a dearth
ensued. A comet in 1439 and a hard winter followed. To these phenomena
succeeded in 1440 a series of distressing epidemics, severe coughs, smallpox,
fevers and dysentery, which proved exceedingly fatal.

Short vol. 1. Pistorius vol. 1. In 1443 Bohemia, Hungary, and Poland were
terribly injured by an earthquake. In 1444 there was eruption of Etna and
Lipari, and the explosion was repeated in 1446 and 7. An epidemic prevailed in
1445, which suddenly ended life, but it is not described. In January 1449 was
seen a comet. This year the plague raged in Italy and in 1450 famine and plague.
In Milan perished 60,000 people.

Muratori vol. 13. Short vol. 1. This plague of 1450 is said to have arisen in
Asia, and afterward spread over Italy, Germany, France and Spain, leaving
alive scarcely a third of the human race.

In 1455 appeared a comet and another in 1456. In this latter year, Italy was
violently shaken by an earthquake, and 40,000 people perished. -- Pistorius
places the earthquake in 1457, and says it demolished 40 towns, and destroyed
60,000 lives. In 1459 a plague began in July and raged six months in Italy.

Pistorius vol. 1. 375. Muratori Tom. 5. p. 50. Short vol. 1. It will be
observed, in this period and in many others, that the plague is not mentioned
under the year of the earthquake. Modern observations explain the progress of
pestilence, which is most usual, viz. measles, catarrh, angina, and other
malignant complaints preceding the crisis of the pestilential state of air, or
plague. And we find almost invariably some of these diseases to be epidemic,
even before the comet, earthquakes and eruptions of volcanoes, although the most
violent form of the pestilence does not always appear till a year or two after
those phenomena. There is also a difference, in the times of the appearance of
the plague in various countries. In Egypt, the pestilence usually appears
first, and is cotemporary with the comet, or nearly so; and the same year, when
the plague rages in Egypt, we find anginas and other malignant diseases
prevailing in Europe and America, in northern latitudes. This difference in
time evinces the power of local causes, in aiding the progress of the epidemic
constitution of air, and which produce the most violent diseases in Egypt, one,
two or three years, previous to their appearance in cooler latitudes. But it
will almost always be found true, that the commencement of a series of
epidemics is nearly at the same time in all parts of the world; the precursors
of the plague being nearly cotemporary in different countries; although the
pestilential constitution or general contagion arrives to its crisis much
sooner in Egypt, Smyrna and Constantinople, than in places less exposed to the
influence of local causes of disease.

In 1465 pestilence again appeared in Italy, but I have no particulars. In 1467
a comet, and a mild winter is recorded; a remarkable fact, and the second
instance I have found in history. Indeed so uniform are hard winters during the
approach of comets, that the accounts of exceptions are to be suspected of
inaccuracy in point of time.

In 1468 a most deadly plague raged in Parma of which Short gives a particular
description from Rolandus Capellatus.

Short, vol. 1. 194. Muratori, vol. 13. Edit. Milan. Pistorius, Germ. Script.
vol. 2. In 1471 the winter was rigorous and stormy. In 1472 appeared three
comets; two of them of distinguished magnitude. In 1473 most excessive heat and
drouth, and authors relate that the woods took fire by the heat of the sun.
This drouth continued three years -- all small rivers were dried up -- the
Danube was fordable in Hungary. In 1475 and 1476 appeared those enormous swarms
of locusts, which always denote a state of air highly pestilential, and ravaged
Hungary and Poland. In 1474 earthquakes were felt in Germany. In 1475 an
eruption of a volcano in Iceland.

These phenomena, in this period, as usual, introduced most terrible
pestilence, which began in 1472 and arrived to its height in 1477. It raged in
Italy, Germany, France and England, and how much more extensively, my
authorities do not inform me. It prevailed several years, with incredible
mortality. In Paris perished 40,000; a large number for the population at that
time. In England the number of deaths was not estimated; but authors relate
that fifteen years of civil war did not carry off one third of the number. This
year 1477 was excessively hot. In 1478 innumerable locusts overran Italy.

In 1478 and 9 the plague in England repeated its ravages; beginning like that
of 1348, in autumn, raging through the winter until the next autumn.

Pistorius, vol. 2. 754. Muratori, vol. 13. Short, vol. 1. Maitland's Hist.
London. Fracastorius de Contagione, 136. Fernelius de morbis Pestilentibus. In
1480 the winter was severe.

In 1481 and 3, a most deadly plague infested Italy and Germany.

Muratori, vol. 13. Pistorius, vol. 2. 875. In 1482 a species of pleurisy was
epidemic in Italy.

Fracastor. p. 182. In 1484 the winter was severe.

In 1483 or 5 appeared in England a new species of the plague called Sudor
Anglicus, or sweating sickness of the English, because it was supposed to
attack none but Englishmen. This however was a mistake; for the same disease,
at different times, appeared in Ireland, Germany, Sweden and Holland.

In the life of Erasmus, it is said to have appeared first in 1483, and to have
returned in 1485. John Kay^, or Caius, a cotemporary physician, says, it first
appeared in 1485 in the Duke of Richmond's army, on his landing at Milford
Haven, in Wales. But on all hands it is agreed to have had its origin in
England, and to have been a species of plague. It is called "novum pestilentiae
genus," a new kind of pestilence; and instead of being peculiar to England or
Englishmen, "a B^^^annis exortum, incredibili celeritate per orbem long
lateque divagatum est;" it originated in Britain, and with incredible rapidity
spread far and wide over the earth.

Life of Erasmus, 347. Friend's Hist. ^ed. 566. Sir Thomas More, in a letter to
Erasmus, declares this disease in London, Oxford and Cambridge to have been
more dangerous than a battle. "Minus periculi in acie, quam in urbe esse."

The summer of 1485 was excessively rainy, and an inundation of the Severn made
great havoc with men and cattle.

This disease attacked persons suddenly, with a sensation like that of hot
vapor running through the part affected. To this succeeded internal heat,
unquenchable thirst, and profuse sweating, which often carried off the patient
in two or three hours. The violence of the attack was past in 15 hours, and in
24 hours the patient was considered to be out of danger. It was most fatal to
persons in high health and easy condition of life. It was attended with most of
the symptoms which characterize the plague -- anxiety, restlessness, violent
pain in the head, delirium and excessive drowsiness.

See the life of John Caius, in Aikins' Biographical Memoirs of Medicine, p.
120, also Friend's Hist. Phys. This was a pestilential period, for the plague
infested Italy and Germany in 1483, and Denmark in 1484. And it will be found
on examination, that when the sweating sickness raged in any part of Europe,
that or some other pestilential disease, was in other countries. During the
prevalence of this form of the plague in England, at this period, Denmark lost
nearly one half of its inhabitants by the common plague; which raged terribly
for two years

The author of the Traite de la Peste, page 23, remarks, "That until the 15th
century the plague exhibited the same character; but then "its accidents
degenerated," or rather it reigned a new malady, which, under different
external appearances, committed similar destruction on the human body. It did
not any longer show itself by buboes, carbuncles and pimples; nor by any of the
eruptions which the heat of the viscera pushes out; nor was the skin withered
by the parching dryness which accompanies the carbuncular spots; on the other
hand, the skin was inundated by torrents of sweat, which seemed to be po^^d
from the whole body, the viscera were dried, and the heat which dissipated the
fluids, seemed to disorder all the laws of the animal economy.

About the middle of the 16th century, the plague resumed its former character,
but the symptoms somewhat varied and lighter."

The sweating plague at first attacked none but Englishmen. Even Scotchmen
escaped, in foreign countries, where Englishmen were seized. Foreigners in
England escaped. This however was on its first invasion in 1485 -- for, in
subsequent years, it spread over other countries. But the fact of its seizing
only Englishmen at first, is precisely analagous to what has happened on many
other occasions, in other countries. It recurred in England in 1506, 1518, 1528
and 1551.

In 1491 appeared a comet, the season was very wet, an epidemic swept away
cattle, and a famine afflicted Ireland. A severe winter is noted in 1493.

Short, vol. 1. Smith's Cork. page 30. In 1495 and 6 the plague raged in
Portugal.

Hist. of Portugal by Osorio. In 1496 an epidemic leprosy prevailed in Germany,
which covered the body with ulcers from head to foot.

Pistorius, vol. 2. In 1498 the summer was very dry. In 1500 a tempest in Rome
did great injury, a comet was visible in Capricorn, an eruption of Vesuvius,
and a mortal plague raged which carried off in London 30,000 people. The king
for safety retired to Calais. Maitland arranges this plague under the year
1499. This pestilence was preceded by an abundance of provisions.

Short, vol. 1. Maitland's Hist. London. It is a current opinion that the
venereal disease was imported into Europe by the first adventurers to America,
with Columbus; and that it gradually spread in Spain; from whence it was
carried into Italy by some of the soldiers, who were in the siege of Naples in
1494; thence it was propagated rapidly throughout Europe. This subject will be
hereafter considered. It is however remarkable, that an epidemic leprosy spread
over Germany, about the same time, which seems to indicate an unusual tendency
in the human body to ulcerous and scorbutic complaints.

SECTION V. Historical view of pestilential epidemics, from the year 1500 to
the year 1600.
THE comet of 1500 was followed by an excessively severe winter in 1501, to
which succeeded a summer of great heat and drouth in 1502. In this latter year
the plague carried off 500 persons daily in Brussels; the city was soon
abandoned, the streets were overgrown with grass, and the roofs of houses with
moss.

Skenkius' Obs. p. 748. De Pauw vol. 1. 85, mentions a desolating plague in
China in 1504. In the same year, the malady prevailed in Ireland.

In 1505 appeared a comet; and another in the following year, in which also was
an eruption of Vesuvius, which was succeeded by a severe winter. Pestilential
diseases were universal. A fatal spotted fever overspread Europe in this hot,
moist summer. The plague raged in Lisbon and London was severely visited by the
sweating disease.

Short vol. 1. Smith's Cork p. 34. Osorio's Hist. of Portugal. Fracastor, de
Contagione. In 1508 a great earthquake convulsed Italy and Germany. In 1509 a
shock demolished a part of the walls of Constantinople, with many buildings,
and the loss of 13,000 lives: After which the plague almost dispeopled the city.

These events commenced a distressing period. In 1510 there was an erupti^n of
Heckla, and universal catarrh or severe influenza in Europe. This was called in
France cocoluche, from the practice of covering the head of the patient with a
cap. It was preceded by a series of moist weather.

In 1511 appeared a comet; another in 1512 and a third in 1513. In 1511 the
plague prevailed in Verona, and in 1513 a malignant fever or dysentery, which
covered the body with black spots. Bleeding was pernicious; cupping and actual
cautery were successful.

In 1514 cats perished by an epidemic pestilential disease, says Fernelius; and
the plague was in Tournay; while a mortal distemper raged among the cattle in
England.

In 1515 a malignant catarrh or throat distemper in Holland seized persons
suddenly, and if not cured, in a few hours, fell on the lungs and terminated in
death in one day. In this year and the next appeared comets, and Germany
suffered universally by inundations.

To these disasters succeeded a severe winter in 1517, followed by a very hot
summer. Corn was in great abundance, but the sweating plague made great havoc
in London, and so malignant a murrain raged among cattle, that ravens and dogs
which fed on their carcases, swelled and died.

This deadly sweating plague was preceded, in the spring of the year, by an
epidemic inflammation of the throat, so virulent as to destroy life in a few
hours. The malignity of this disease has rarely, if ever been equalled in
modern times. It seems to have been merged in the sweating plague, about
midsummer. Authors relate that half the people of England perished with these
diseases. -- The disease in the throat seems to have been of an inflammatory
diathesis, as early bleeding and purging were the only successful remedies.

In 1518 the plag^e visited Lisbon, and the sweating disease prevailed in
Brabant.

Short vol. 1. 206 -- 7. Smith's Cork, 34. In 1521 appeared a comet, followed
by a cold winter. Inundations are said to have overwhelmed, in this year, 72
villages and 100,000 people. England suffered by dearth and sickness, and in
1522 the plague visited Munster in Ireland, and the continent. -- The winter
following was distressingly severe.

Pestilential fevers prevailed in 1524 and 5. The mortality in London alarmed
the people, and the terms were on that account, adjourned. In 1527 appeared a
comet, and one in each year, for six years in succession. In 1527, the wetness
of summer injured the grain, a severe famine ensued, and many of the poor were
starved to death. This year is noted for a great hail storm in Italy.

In 1528 the spotted fever, that almost infallible precursor or companion of
the plague, broke out in all parts of Europe; the plague in Italy, and the
sweating disease in London with dreadful mortality, terminating in death in six
or seven hours. The same disease prevailed in Cork.

In 1529 the sweating disease seized Amsterdam, raging a few days with great
mortality, and passing rapidly to other places.

In 1530 was an eruption of Etna, and an earthquake in Lisbon demolished 1400
houses. In 1531 was another eruption of Etna, the sweating plague raged in
Germany, and pestilence, in some form, was almost universal. -- A great hail
storm, the same year.

See Skenkius' Obs. Smith's Cork 35. Short vol. 1. Maitland's Hist. London.
Fracastor informs us that the petechial fever of 1528 was preceded by a mild
winter and southerly rainy weather, together with inundations in spring, and
unusual darkness. He observes, that appearing in many places, it must have had
a common cause.

De Contagione, p. 160. The last remark is verified by modern observations. The
petechial fever is an almost infallible forerunner of the plague in the Levant,
in Italy and other countries. It may be laid down as an axiom, on this subject,
that although the appearance of this fever is not always and certainly followed by
the plague, yet that the plague, in most parts of the east, is always preceded
by a petechial fever.

In 1533 there was a volcanic eruption in South America, but I have no account
of the diseases of that year.

In 1534 the plague was in Narbonne.

In 1535 there was a terrible plague in Cork.

In 1538 appeared a comet, which was preceded by eruptions of Etna in 1536 and
7 and a hard winter. In 1539 another comet and in 1541 a third.

In 1538 a mortal dysentery raged all over Europe, as also in the following
year. The preceding summer^ had been moist, and an acute fever, with violent
pain about the heart, delirium, moist and black tongue, anthraces and buboes,
had been epidemic. But Fernilius remarks that the unusual dysentery of 1538 and
9 could not be ascribed to any visible cause in the seasons.

In 1538 also was a violent earthquake at Puteoli, near Naples and Vesuvius,
where there was an immense eruption of fire. This year the plague raged in
Constantinople, and in 1539 was still more destructive.

In 1539 the drouth in Ireland was excessive -- and nearly dried up the river
Lee at Cork.

In 1540 there was a terrible drouth. In England a pestilential ague and a
dysentery were epidemic and mortal. Another eruption of Etna happened this
year, and the next year a comet.

Short, vol. 1. Mignot's Hist. Turkish Empire, vol. 2. p. 4. In 1541 the plague
raged in Constantinople.

The year 1543 was very wet and cold, and a great mortality among cattle. In
1542 the plague was in Geneva. In 1543 it raged in London in winter. In 1545
there was an eruption of Etna. The plague again raged in Geneva, and all over
Europe a pestilential epidemic, called the Troup Gallant, which seized chiefly
the young and robust, with a mortality nearly equal to that of the true plague,
of which it seems to have been the precursor. Patients had a violent pain in
the head, heat in the kidneys, universal lassitude, continual watchings ending
in frenzy, or drowziness ending in lethargy; and worms rising into the throat,
with danger of suffocation. Bleeding was the only remedy; then detergents and
cordials. The disease terminated on the 4th or 11th day. Charles, duke of
Orleans, died of this disease at a monastery in Abbeville.

In 1547 the plague prevailed in most parts of Europe, as in Ireland and in
Germany; and in 1548 in London. Here my labors begin to receive aid from that
accurate and elegant historian Thuanus, who, in lib. 4, describes the disease
as it prevailed in Saxony. "Such was its violence that all other distempers
gave way to it or ran into it. Most of the soldiers in the Emperor's army were
seized. They experienced a most intolerable pain from the heat of the head; the
eyes were swelled and fiery; the tongue bloody; respiration difficult and
breath fetid; vomitings of bilious matters frequent; finally the body became
livid, with pimples here and there scattered over it, which bred worms. Death
took place the second or third day."

During this year great rains inundated Tuscany. Locusts in 1547 were unusually
num^rous.

Short, vol. 1. Thuanus, lib. 1. and 4. Univ. Hist. vol. 37. Smith's Cork. p.
40. This pestilential period was long and severe. In 1548 the plague was in
London. A contagious peripneumony prevailed over Europe, with spitting of blood
and difficulty of breathing. In 1549 the plague prevailed in Prussia and
Portugal.

In 1550 a comet in March, and the same year an eruption of Etna and Lipari.
The summer was very rainy and the winter dry. In 1551 the earth was deluged
with rain, and infinite damage was done by floods. The catarrh was epidemic in
France. An epidemic pestilential fever raged all over Europe, and the sweating
sickness in London. The plague followed in various parts of Europe. In 1552 it
raged in Misena, and the patient discharged blood by the pores for three days
before death. In 1553 the same distemper raged in Paris, with extreme
mortality, and to appease the wrath of heaven, many heretics were burnt.

At the same time, pestilence spread over Hungary and Transylvania for two
years and suspended the operations of war. This year also there was an
earthquake from the Elbe to Saxony.

Thuanus, lib. 12. Skenkius' Obs. p 766. In 1554 there was an eruption of fire
in Iceland and in the same year appeared a comet. In 1555 the summer was
excessively rainy, and fevers were very mortal in England and France.

In 1556 a comet and a drouth; the fevers of the last season raged with
augmented violence; as also the spotted fever and confluent malignant small pox.

This year there was an eruption of Etna, and in China a large district of
country was sunk by an earthquake, with all its inhabitants, and became a Lake.
These phenomena indicated a great disorder in the elements and introduced most
deadly epidemics.

In 1557 a comet; an inundation of the Tyber; and a violent catarrh was almost
universal. The cough was severe, and pain in the side, difficulty of breathing
and fever attended. In general bleeding the first or second day was successful;
but in a small town near Madrid, bleeding was fatal, and 2000 patients died
after venesection.

In Alemar this epidemic assumed the form of a sore throat; 2000 persons were
seized almost instantly in October, of whom 200 died. Forestus ascribes it to a
vapor, for it was preceded by thick clouds of an ill smell.

In 1556 the plague raged in Vienna.

In 1557 a violent plague broke out in a small inland village between Delph and
the Hague in Holland -- an instance of its origination at a distance from a
seaport; and it spread over the country, in June. This disease was preceded by
meteors in the air, and attended with abortions. Such was the mortality, that
the poor fought for coffins for their dead relations. In Delph only, died 5000
of the poor. It continued through the winter to May 1558.

In the same summer pestilential fevers raged with great mortality in France,
Holland and other countries.

In de Thou's history of his own times, vol. 2. 227, we have an account of the
spotted, or petechial fever, which appeared in Spain in 1557, which was nearly
as mortal as the inguinal plague. He calls it a "new disease" and unknown to
the ancients. The spots differed from the florid pimples of the purple fever.
It was putrid, malignant and much resembling the plague, but "did not carry so
pestilent a contagiousness." It ^as called in Spain the "puncticular disease."
Innumerable people perished by it that year. The same fever in Florence "was
succeeded by a violent plague," which had raged on the Tuscan coast.

In 1558 appeared a comet. The summer was excessively hot and the winter very
cold. Dysenteries raged in France, and in Holland semitertians, which affe^^ed
principally the rich, as the plague, the last year, did the poor. In some
places quartan agues were fatal, and malignant fevers, in others.

Violent tempests and inundations are mentioned, this year and the last. In
1558 died Charles V. emperor of Germany.

Short vol. 1. Van Swieten vol. 16. p. 23. Maitland's Hist. Land. Univ. Hist.
vol. 27. 373. In 1560 a comet, and a dearth of corn in England.

In 1562 and 3 the plague spread over Europe. It broke out in 1562 among the
English soldiers, who were sent to garrison New Haven in France. The next year
it raged in London and carried off 20,000 of its inhabitants. Authors say, the
soldiers from New Haven introduced it into London; but who introduced it into
New Haven, we are not informed.

The truth is, this terrible disease appeared in most parts of Europe about the
same time. In Frankfort, Nuremberg, Magdeburgh, Hamburgh, Dantzick, and in the
vandalic maritime towns, Wismar, Lubick, Rostock and others, perished by
computation 300,000 persons in the year 1563. -- This disease also raged in
winter, for Thuanus mentions the death of Castalion, a literary character of
that age, by the plague at Basle in January.

This year was remarkable also for earthquakes. In Sept. was a violent one in
England, especially in Lincoln and other northern parts. In January the river
Thames was agitated by preternatural fluxes of the tides, which forced back the
natural tides, three times. In winter, severe cold rendered that river passable
as a highway.

The same year earthquakes were felt in Illyrica, and Dalmatia, and Catana
suffered a great loss of lives.

In 1564 a comet appeared, and remarkable northern lights, or meteors, and a
destructive inundation of the Thames.

Short vol. 1. Maitland's Hist. Land. Thuanus. Strype's Life of Archbishop
Parker, 131. In 1564 epidemic quinsies were very mortal, and in some places,
the spotted fever or the plague. -- In winter came on as severe a frost for two
months as was ever known.

This epidemic quinsy was a species of angina maligna, and fatal as the plague.
It spread over Europe.

In 1565 ^a^ce was afflicted by pestilential epidemics, in which bleeding and
purging were fatal. The next year appeared the plague in Lions. -- Charles IX.
demanded of the physicians the best mode of treatment, and they all decided
against venesection. -- One fourth of the inhabitants of France perished.

In 1566 the spring was rainy and the harvest dry. The Hungarian fever broke
out in the Emperor Maximilian's army, and as authors affirm, the soldiers, when
disbanded, spread it all over Europe, with great mortality. This disease
invaded the patient at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, with slight cold and
shiverering for about fifteen minutes. This was followed by intense heat, and
intolerable pain in the head, mouth and stomach, so that the slightest touch of
the bed clothes, made the sick utter shrieks: The pain in the mouth and stomach
being the pathognomonic symptoms of the disease. -- The thirst was
unquenchable, and a longing for wine, which was fatal, if taken. The tongue was
dry and lips chopped. Delirium came on the third day. A critical looseness and
deafness were favorable -- Swellings behind the ears were frequent. The most
miserable crisis was, tubercles on the top of the foot, which, if neglected,
ended in mortification. Many suffered amputation. Spots, like flea bites,
appeared on the body, and if livid or black, they were fatal symptoms. Copious
bleeding, on the first seizure, was, of all remedies, the most successful.

Skenkius' p. 770. Short vol. 1. In the year 1567 was an eruption of Etna, and
in Tercera, one of the Azores, fire burst from a lake on the top of a hill, and
the water released from its bed, rushed down and swept away part of a
settlement below. In 1568 a spotted fever raged in Paris, in which prostration
of strength rendered bleeding fatal. The winter of 1567 was very severe, and
the summer excessively dry.

In 1569 appeared a comet. -- The spotted fever in this year became epidemic in
Europe, raging for three years with great destruction. The plague was in
London. Short remarks that this spotted fever "in several places turned to the
plague, and where the plague raged, it turned to this fever." -- Indeed this
spotted fever was a milder form of the pestilence, raging as it usually does,
for some time, before the glandular plague appears. In this period, it was the
herald to announce one of the most general plagues that Europe ever knew. The
petechial fever prevailed principally from 1569 to 1574, interspersed with the
real plague, in a few places; and the real pestis followed it, with mortal
rage, and prevailed for three or four years.

In 1570 a most dreadful earthquake in Chili, S. America, destroyed many
villages and buried the inhabitants in their ruins. This is the first occasion
I have of introducing America in this history.

Ulloa b. 8. chapter 7. Thuanus, whose authority is very respectable, and who was
cotemporary with this period, relates that in 1570 the dikes in Holland were
broken by a swell of the ocean, and that 400,000 people were overwhelmed in the
floods. He says further that similar phenomena were observed, that year, in
different places over the whole world. Reggio, Florence, Venice and Modena felt
severe shocks of earthquake in 1571, and Ferara was laid in ruins.

The summers of 1570 and 71 were moist and warm; and in gene^al the seasons
were similar for the two succeeding years. The winters were rigorous. Fluxes,
measles, worms and semitertians were epidemic in many places. In 1572 appeared
a comet or new star, very bright and clear, larger than Jupiter, in the
constellation of Cassiopeia, behind her chair. It was stationary for 16 months
and by degrees evanished. The winter succeding was remarkable for hard frost
and deep snow. The author of Observations de Physique et de Medicine, says,
that all maladies in France in 1572 turned to epilepsy and palsy.

This year the plague raged in Poland; and at Basle a malignant fever, chiefly
fatal to men of robust constitution.

In 1574 the petechial fever, which had spread mortality over Europe,
especially in Italy and Spain, began to change into the usual form of the
plague. This disease made its appearance in London, in a small degree, in
October and November of this year.

In 1575 the plague appeared in many parts of Europe, and ^^ged with incredible
mortality for three years. It was reported in Italy to have been imported into
Verona and Venice, from Trent. Such was the current vulgar opinion. But men of
science hold the disease to be generated in cities from the filthiness of
private dwellings, and not to be produced by the position of the stars or
malignant constitution of the air.

The truth was, the disease in Italy first appeared in Trent, an inland town,
far from the sea -- another instance in which the advocates of importation from
Africa or the Levant are silenced. Philosophy disdains to look abroad for the
cause of an epidemic, when the strongest of all causes exist in the place.
Trent is situated in a valley, on the bank of the Adige, a river which often
overflows the adjacent low lands; and after the flood recedes, the place is
sometimes so sickly that the people are compelled to retire to the neighboring
hills. Strong local causes therefore account for the first appearance of the
plague in that city. The general contagion of the atmosphere, which had
produced spotted fevers and other deadly diseases all over Europe for four
years preceding, was aided by the local unhealthiness of Trent, and here
appeared first, the crisis of the pestilence, or plague. See the description of
that country in Zimmerman on Air.

The disease almost depopulated Trent in 1575, and became mortal in the
neighboring Venetian territories. This mortality however was only the
forerunner of greater evils. The disease indeed subsided in winter, and the
people supposed its violence to be past. They might have known otherwise, had
they attended to the progressiveness of the malady, and the certain indications
of its increase.

In 1576 the disease appeared in Venice; and as it carried off a few people at
first, in scattered situations, opinions were, as usual in all such cases,
divided as to the nature of the distemper. In this state of the public mind,
two eminent physicians, Mercuriale of Fo^li, and Capavacca of Padua, undertook
to assert the disease not to be pestilential. The senate, observing the
controversy among the Venetian physicians, as to the nature of the distemper,
listened to the two foreigners, who declared they could cure it, and put a stop
to the removal of the diseased from the city. By this means, says the
historian, the distemper was obviously increased; and it raged with terrible
fury, till it carried off 70,000 of the citizens, with fifty-seven valuable
physicians and surgeons. The two foreign physicians were dismissed, with
applauses for having preferred the good of Venice to their personal safety.

This account from Thuanus deserves particular notice. We here see the same
doubts about the nature of the disease on its first appearance, which prevail
in all similar cases -- as in Marseilles in 1720 -- in London in 1665 -- and in
America, with respect to the yellow fever, which is only another form of
plague. The source of all these doubts and controversies, which have so often
embarrassed the citizens and disgraced the faculty, is, the progressiveness of
the pestilence. The malignant diseases preceding, slide into the glandular
plague so gradually, that physicians themselves do not know precisely when the
distemper should lose the name of malignant fever and take that of plague.
Sydenham honestly confesses that, in 1665, he did not know whether the
malignant disease which appeared in May and became epidemic, just before the
plague, was the real plague or not. And the truth is, that the disease often
assails people, in a few scattering cases, at the beginning of a plague, with a
mortality equal to the true pestis, and without the distinctive marks of
plague, the glandular tumors.

These facts will hereafter, with careful observation, obviate all
controversies at the beginning of pestilential diseases; and they will decide
infallibly all questions relative to the domestic or foreign origin of such
maladies.

This pestilence was severely felt in Padua, Milan, Cremona and Pavia. Vicenza,
which escaped this year, was visited the next, with equal severity.

Dr. Mead is puzzled to know why Vicenza, which lies between Verona and Padua,
should escape the plague, in the year when both those cities were infested; and
yet the next year, should suffer equally with her neighbors, when they were
exempt from the calamity. He finds some difficulty in accounting for the
conveyance of the infection from one to another, without communicating it to
the intervening city. This subject will be considered in a subsequent section;
I will only here remark, that nothing is so fatal to truth and science, as for
a man of popular talents to espouse an erroneous theory, and then strive to
bend facts to its support.

See Thuanus, lib. 62. Shenkius, 756. Short, vol. 1. In 1575 multitudes of
flies and beetles were found in England, and in 1576 an earthquake was
experienced.

In November 1577 appeared a comet of surprising magnitude, with a long coma --
and most terrible tempests accompanied its approach. In 1578 another comet, and
in 1579 an eruption of Etna. In 1578 were earthquakes in England.

Short, vol. 1. In the great pestilence of the preceding ten years, not only
Europe, but Asia was laid waste. So general and severe was the disease that the
operations of war, in the Turkish empire, were suspended. Messina in Sicily
lost 40,000 inhabitants -- and Europe must have lost in ten years, by the
pestilence under the various forms it assumed, one third, or more probably one
half her people.

In this period we see all the extraordinary operations of nature united.
Comets, earthquakes, in Europe and S. America tempests, volcanoes, unusual
animals, excessive floods from rain or an extraordinary intumescence of the
ocean all mark an extreme agitation or disorder of the elements. -- The vast
comet of 1577, the year when the plague was at its height, was calculated to
approach within 840,000 miles of the earth. Upon the Newtonian principles of
the power of attraction, the influence of that body on the earth must have been
prodigious.

Encyclop. art. Astronomy. In this year appeared in Moravia a new disease,
evidently distinct in its symptoms from any known malady, and which Thuanus has
described.

This also was the year in which a sudden disease seized the court and
attendants at the Oxford assizes in England. Early in July, while the court was
sitting, "there arose, says Stowe, amidst the people such a damp that almost
all were smothered -- very few escaped, that were not taken at that instant.
The jurors died presently -- after which Robert Bell, Lord Chief Baron. There
died in Oxford 300 persons -- and sickened there, but died elsewhere, more than
200 from the 6th to the 12th of July. After which died not one of that
sickness, for one of them infected not another, nor died thereof any one woman
or child."

Chronicle, p. 681. This sudden catastrophe is ascribed ^o a damp or vapor. But
there is no need of resorting to such a cause. The atmosphere, during the
period under consideration, was not furnished with the power of supporting
animal life, in as ample a manner as it usually is. -- This is evident, from
the universality of mortal epidemics. In this state of the atmosphere, a
multitude, crowded into a court room, in the hot month of July, must speedily
destroy all the respirable air, and death must ensue. That the principal cause
was not only local, but sudden, is demonstrated by the circumstance, that no
infection accompanied the diseased. Had the cause of their illness been long in
operation, it would have produced in the body that species of poison, which is
noxious to persons in health. Persons, suddenly deprived of life, as by damps
in wells or the fumes of charcoal, communicate no infection.

It is suggested by some writers, that this disease was occasioned by an
infected prisoner, who was brought from jail into court; but Stowe does not
mention this circumstance. And it is possible the catastrophe might have been
owing to a sudden discharge of mephitic vapor.

Scarcely had the last period of pestilence come to a close, when another
series of maladies succeeded, and nearly in the order of those last described.

In 1580 appeared a comet on the 10th of October which was visible for two
months. The preceding summer was very moist and rainy, and about the rising of
the dog star, came on a cold dry north wind. In June began an epidemic catarrh
in Sicily, which spread over Europe. In July, it was in Italy; in August, in
Venice and Constantinople; in September, it extended over Hungary, Bohemia and
Saxony; in October, on the Baltic; in November, in Norway and in December, in
Sweden, Poland and Russia. -- Its symptoms were nearly the same, as in this
country, but the disease was more violent and fatal. -- In Rome, died of it
4000 people -- in Lubec, 8000; at Hamburgh, 3000; and multitudes in other
places. It appears to have been attended with more fever than in ordinary cases
-- The fever was continual for four or five days, with a pain in the head,
straitness of the breast and cough -- it terminated in profuse sweating. -- In
general bleeding and purging were found to be prejudicial.

Riverius, lib. 17. In this year and about the time, when the catarrh had
overspread Europe, broke out in Grand Cairo, one of the most desolating plagues
ever known. Prosper Alpinus, who lived in that age, reports the number of
deaths, from November 1580, to July 1581 to have been 500,000. It will be found
on examination that the plague, in a series of pestilential and epidemic
diseases, appears in Egypt, before it does in Europe and America, and is nearly
cotemporary with the catarrh, angina or other precursor of the pestilence in
more northern latitudes. This fact deserves notice. The plague which followed
the catarrh in Europe, did not appear in many places, perhaps in none except in
France, in the year 1580. -- In northern latitudes, the malignity of the
epidemic constitution does not appear, till the second or third year, after its
commencement in catarrh or measles.

In Paris however the plague raged in 1580, the same year it appeared in Egypt,
and carried off 40,000 people, mostly of the poorer sort; and at the same time,
it prevailed in many of the neighboring towns, especially, says Thuanus, "at
Laon in Vermandois, which city is in a position exposed to a hot sun, in which
died 6000."

The historian further remarks, that the "crops that year were plentiful, and
the sky serene; so that it was thought the disease was produced rather by the
influence of the stars, ab astrorum impressione, than by the malignity of a
corrupt air." This is another proof that a state of air, as described by
Hippocrates, is not always the cause of pestilence.

Although this malady broke out in France in 1580, yet it had been preceeded by
the catarrh. The historian remarks, that the catarrh was not so much dreaded
for its mortality, tho many died of it, as for the astonishing rapidity with
which the contagion spread from place to place. It seized the lower spine of
the back with a chill, horrore; to this succeeded gravedo, a dull pain in the
head; and universal languor or debility, resolvens membra, loosening or
unhinging the joints. If the crisis was not favorable in five days, the disease
terminated in a fatal fever.

See Thuanus and Riverius, also lib. 17. In 1580 considerable earthquakes were
felt in Belgium, at Cologne and about the Mediterranean. The same shocks were
felt in various parts of England, but Short places them under the following
year. The German sea was agitated, and a great swelling of its waters was
observed.

See Thuanus, lib. 71, 72. Short, vol. 1. p. 260. In 1580 also, the marshes in
Essex, and some parts of Kent in England, were laid waste by mice, which were
so numerous as to destroy the herbage, and a murrain among cattle succeeded.

In this year was issued a proclamation of Queen Elizabeth, upon the
representation of the Mayor and Aldermen of London, prohibiting any new house
to be built within three miles of the gates of the city, and more than one
family to reside in a house. The reasons assigned for the prohibition are
connected with this subject. The increase of London had long been considered as
an evil, by swelling the head too large for the body, and several attempts had
been made to restrain the increase. The resort of people to the city from the
country was held to be prejudical to agriculture.

But the proclamation states further, that "such great multitudes of people,
brought to inhabit in small rooms, whereof a great part are very poor, yea such
as must live by begging, or by worse means, and they heaped together, and in a
sort, smothered with many families of children and servants, in one house or
small tenement, it must needs follow, if any plague or popular sickness should,
by God's permission, enter amongst those multitudes, that the same would not
only spread itself, and invade the whole city and confines, but a great
mortality would ensue the same, and the infection be dispersed through all
other parts of the realm."

In this paper, we observe some powerful causes of pestilence in London to be
explained -- and events showed how little good was done by the interference of
authority with private rights, and an attempt to check, by positive
prohibitions, the natural growth of towns. This proclamation, like all which
had preceded it, was useless. The city increased, and the plague continued to
ravage it, until the good providence of God arrested the evil, by a general
conflagration, and men had become wise enough, to build large, airy houses, and
keep them clean.

Maitland's History of London. In 1582 a remarkable tempest is mentioned, and a
comet in May. A severe earthquake was felt in South-America, and a small city
near Lima was destroyed.

Ulloa's Voyage, vol. 2. b. 7. In 1583 several concussions of the earth were
experienced in England, and the plague appeared in London. At the same time it
appeared in Germany or Holland; as Diemerbroeck mentions this as a pestilential
year. The following winter was severe. In Rome there was a famine.

Maitland's Hist. Land. Short, vol. 1. In 1585 in spring appeared very
malignant pleurisies. In 1586 Thrace was overrun with locusts, and the plague
raged in Hungary, Austria and Turkey. A comet appeared in each of these years,
and in 1586 Lima in South-America was nearly ruined by an earthquake. See
Ulloa, from whom my accounts of earthquakes in Spanish America, are all taken.

In 1587 a very cold spring, but a plentiful year in most countries. The plague
raged in Flanders, which was almost depopulated by disease, war and famine. In
some parts, the wild beasts took possession of the houses. Dogs ran mad, and
did no small mischief, and fields were covered with weeds and bushes. The
catarrh appeared in England, this year, but how extensively, I am not informed.
An eruption of fire in Iceland is recorded under the same year.

In 1589 the English fleet, returned from Portugal, with the Hungarian fever,
says Short, and introduced it into England. What an influence have names, and
what mischief is done by ignorance and false philosophy! The Hungarian fever!
As tho this fever had been a native of a particular soil, and transplanted from
country to country, like a fruit-tree. Names are not always harmless. The name,
Sudor Anglicus, given to the sweating plague, because it appeared first in
England and was at first peculiar to Englishmen, has led the moderns to
suppose, the disease to have been limited to England or to Englishmen, although it
repeatedly spread over all Europe. In the same way, the insect which injures
wheat in America, was ignorantly called the Hessian fly, and although the animal
was never known in Germany, yet people believe, that, like yellow fever, it was
imported. It is thus that ignorance gives currency to an improper name, and the
name in turn assists to propagate and perpetuate an error.

The truth, in regard to diseases, is, that they often assume peculiar
symptoms; such as are not usual. These are not properly new diseases, but
modifications of common fever, proceeding from the infinite variety of that
cause of sickness, which I denominate general contagion, and which Sydenham
called the Epidemic Constitution of the air. This or other causes are
perpetually diversifying the symptoms of diseases; so that physicians are often
at a loss whether to call a disease by an old or new name. Wherever the
peculiar causes first exist, there will the peculiar symptoms of disease first
appear -- and when similar causes exist in other places, the same symptoms will
attend the disease.

In 1590 multitudes of people perished by famine. A comet approached the system,
the winter was cold, a violent earthquake convulsed Hungary, Bohemia and
Vienna; near the latter place, the earth emitted an offensive smell. The drouth
was extreme. The Azores were shaken by an earthquake, and a tempest in
September threatened to overwhelm them in mass.

In 1591 universal catarrh in Europe was a prelude to most destructive
pestilence. It is singular also that the plague broke out in Narva and Revel,
in Livonia, on the gulf of Finland, in the 59th degree of latitude, and raged
through the succeeding cold winter. Six thousand persons perished in Revel. As
to its origin, the great Thuanus could not decide whether it was "a belli
incommoditatibus, sive caeli inclementia," from the distresses of war, or
intemperature of the air. There could have been no suspicion of a foreign
origin.

Thuanus, lib. 100. Cotemporary with the catarrh was a malignant spotted fever
in Trent. A distressing famine caused a great mortality in Italy.

In 1591 the plague began to show itself in Italy, but attended with peculiar
symptoms. A fever, little infectious, seized the head, inducing delirium, and
in many patients, was attended with fluxes and flatulent bowels. It terminated
fatally on the tenth day. The remedy was bleeding "Secta vena capitis, quae in
brachio est, aliisque a capite manantibus," says Thuanus. It attacked chiefly
men between the ages of 30 and 50; but was fatal to few women. It raged in
Umbria, Tuscany, Romagne and Lombardy, sweeping away, in some towns, almost
every man. From August to August, it was computed that 60,000 persons perished.

Thuanus, lib. 102. In 1592 the petechial fever spread over Florence, with a
malignity that entitled it to the name of plague. It was most fatal to the
nobles.

In England the drouth in this and the former summer was extreme. The Thames
was fordable at London. The plague appeared in Shropshire in the west, and
carried off 18,000 citizens in London. Persia suffered much by an earthquake in
the same year.

Short, vol. 1. Sims on Epid. Mem. Med. Soc. vol. 1. M^itland's Land. In the
same year a furious pestilence prevailed in Candia. It appeared in spring,
increased till July and then abated. On its first appearance, all infected and
suspected persons were removed to a distant hospital, but without effect. The
disease continued to spread -- a proof that it was an epidemic. In September,
it was supposed to be extinguished; but in October, it broke out with fresh
violence, and the diseased were confined to their houses -- a useless and
pernicious regulation. The city lost 20,000 inhabitants.

In 1594 was a severe winter. The years 1594, 5 and 6 were very rainy in
England and Germany. Crops failed, and in Hungary, the famine was extreme.

In 1596 appeared a comet. Violent earthquakes shook different countries, and
several cities in Japan were swallowed up.

In 1596 and 7 prevailed in Cologne, Westphalia and other parts of Germany, a
singular disease, which authors ascribe to the famine which had preceded. It was
a malignant fever, which was attended with convulsions and raving madness, or
delirium. Sometimes the convulsions were attended with little or no fever. The
patient was contracted into a knot or ball by the violence of the convulsions,
or extended to full length, like a dead body -- sometimes the extension of the
body was succeeded by a contraction in the same paroxism. The particulars
respecting this disease do not fall within the plan of this history, but may be
found in Short, vol. 1.

In 1597 appeared a comet, and the same year the catarrh was again epidemic.
Malignant fevers, accompanied with worms in youth, were predominant also, and
the plague was in Juliers and Geneva. A dearth in England. The winter of 1597
was severe, as was that of 1599.

The summers of 1598 and 99 were remarkably dry, and swarms of fleas, gnats and
flies abounded. Tertians, with petechiae, were frequent, and continual fevers
which yielded to bleeding and purging, or went off with a bilious diarrhea. --
Smallpox and measles were also epidemic.

These diseases, as usual, were the precursors of a very distressing plague,
which, in the autumn of 1598, raged in London, Litchfield, Leicester and other
places in England. It even broke out in the small towns in Wales and the
northern counties, as in Kendal in Cumberland, where died 2500 -- in Richmond,
where died 2200 -- at Carlisle which lost 1196 inhabitants; and at Percrith
which lost 2266.

See Camden's Britannia. In 1598 Pegu, in Asia, was depopulated by famine, and
Constantinople was almost stripped of its inhabitants by the plague. Seventeen
princesses, sisters of the Sultan, Mahomet III. died in one day. To arrest the
progress of this mortality, cannon were fired and aromatics burnt in all parts
of the city; but with what success the historian does not inform us.

History of the Turkish Empire. In Italy an inundation of the Tyber injured
Rome.

In 1599 the spring was cold and dry; the summer hot and rainy, with great
floods. A very mortal distemper raged among cattle in Italy. In Spain and
Lisbon died 70,000 people of the plague. In some places, a fatal dysentery
prevailed.

Short, vol. 1. Sims on Epid. SECTION VI. Historical view of Pestilential
Epidemics from the year 1600 to the close of the year 1700.
THE year 1600 was remarkable for pestilence in almost every part of Europe.
Spain, where the disease was fatal the year before, was this year almost
depopulated. There raged throughout Europe, a pestilential, mortal cholic which
destroyed the lives of all whom it seized, within four days. The patient, as
soon as he was seized, became senseless -- the hair fell from his head -- a
livid pustule arose on the nose, which consumed it -- the extremities became
cold and mortified.

In Florence a terrible earthquake destroyed many buildings.

The winter of 1600 was very cold. In the summer of 160^ there was a severe
drouth of four or five months; and a violent dysentery followed, with double
tertians and continual fevers. The plague raged in Portugal, attended with
black round worms. At Christmas, there was an earthquake in England. The same
year there was an earthquake at Arequipa, in Peru, accompanied by an eruption
of a volcano.

In 1602 a cold and dry summer and winter, the catarrh was epidemic, and acute
fevers prevalent. These diseases and phenomena accompanied a series of
calamities in all parts of Europe.

The famine that marked this period, for a series of years, exceeded in extent
and severity, what had been before recorded. Famins are usually local; but in
the present instance, there was a failure of crops for several years, in almost
every part of Europe; while the plague committed most desolating ravages.

In Muscovy the famine raged for three years at the beginning of the century
under consideration, attended with the plague. Parents devoured their dying
children; cats, rats and every unclean thing was used to sustain life. All the
ties of nature and morality were disregarded; human flesh was exposed to sale
in the open market. The more powerful seized their neighbors; fathers and
mothers, their children; husbands, their wives, and offered them for sale.
Multitudes of dead were found, with their mouths filled with straw, and the
most filthy substances. Five hundred thousand persons were supposed to perish
in Muscovy, by famine and pestilence.

At the same time, the famine in Livonia, and the cold winter of 1602, destroyed
30,000 lives. The dead bodies lay in the streets, for want of hands to bury
them.

Thuanus, lib. 135. Encyclopedia, art. Russia. At the same time, raged a most
dreadful pestilence in Constantinople, which also followed a famine.

In England, there was also a dearth, and in 1603 perished 36,000 in London, of
the plague, which was said to be imported from Ostend.

Maitland's Hist. Land. Mignot's Hist Turkish Empire, p. 256. Even in this
case, the report of imported infection into London was believed, although the
nation had before their eyes, a demonstration to the contrary; for the same
malady broke out in every part of the kingdom, and had actually prevailed in
Chester, in the north-west corner of England, the year preceding.

It is idle to ascribe the plague to infection, communicated from person to
person, or from clothes to persons. The disease, in 1602 was in every part of
Europe, and appeared nearly at the same time, in the most distant parts. In
this case, as in those before related, of 1580 and 1591, it had been preceded
by catarrh, and a course of malignant fevers. The malignity of the disease in
1602 resembled that of 1348 -- persons were seized with spitting of blood, and
died in three days.

In August 1603 in Paris died 2000 persons weekly of the plague. This disease
was attributed to the diet and filth accumulated, under a defective police.

Wraxall, vol. 3. 438. Why the filth of Paris did not produce the plague in
other seasons, writers have not informed us.

The period under consideration was remarkable for the universality of the
action of subterranean fire. The earthquakes of 1600 and 1601 and the bursting
of a volcano in South-America have been mentioned. In 1603 there was an
explosion of Etna. In 1604 a second eruption in Peru, and a comet.

The plague abated, in some places, the year following; but London was not free
from it for a number of years, and from 1606 to 1609 inclusive the distemper
carried off from two to four thousand citizens in each season.

In 1607 commenced an unusual concurrence of great agitations in the elements,
and severe pestilence attended.

In this year appeared a comet, and another in 1609. The winter of 1607-8 was
the severest that had been known for an age; boats were built on the Thames.
And here for the first time, I am able to introduce North America, into this
history; from which will be derived some of the most important evidence in
regard to the universality of the causes of pestilential epidemics.

The severity of the winter mentioned was equally great in America, as in
Europe. George Popham, and a company of settlers under the patent of king
James, to the London merchants, attempted a settlement at Sagadahoc in 1607;
but Popham, the President, died during the winter, and the extreme cold was one
of the discouragements that contributed to break up the settlement.

Gorges Hist. New England. Purchase, vol. 4. 1637. Hutchinson's Hist. Mass. vol.
1. 2. In this same year was an eruption of Etna.

The comet of this year produced a most remarkable tempest, with a swell of the
ocean, that did incredible damage in England. In the latter part of winter, the
tempest brought in a flood into the Severn, which overflowed the country, near
Bristol, to the extent of ten miles, with a rapidity, that left no time for the
people to save their effects, and many lives were lost. The flood rose above
the houses, where people had resorted for safety, and overwhelmed them. The
loss of cattle and goods was immense.

In Somersetshire, the inundation laid waste an extent of 20 miles by 10;
overwhelming five towns. So sudden was the irruption, that laborers were caught
in the fields, and were seen floating on the timbers of their houses. In
Norfolk, the inundation was not less destructive.

Thuanus, lib. 138. In 1608 a very malignant dysentery prevailed.

In 1609 the approach of the second comet produced effects equally remarkable
with the last. The action of subterranean fire was extensive. There was an
eruption of Etna, and a violent earthquake at Lima in Peru. The winter was so
severe, as to convert the Thames into a common highway.

In this year the plague was augmented in London; and it raged in Alemar and
Denmark. In the years 1607 and 8, it had been very mortal in Cork.

The pestilential state of air, at this time, was experienced at sea. The
people on board the fleet under Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Summers, bound
to Virginia, were seized with the calenture, a spotted pestilent fever, which,
on board of one of the ships, was so malignant as to be called the plague.
Thirty-two dead bodies were thrown out of two ships. Was this disease imported?
In the same passage, the fleet met with a tremendous storm of four days
continuance, and Sir T. Gates was shipwrecked on Bermuda.

Purchase, vol. 4. p. 1733. In 1610 the catarrh was again epidemic. In some
parts of the continent prevailed the Hungarian fever like the plague, and
severe bilious complaints. A remarkable fiery bow in the heavens was observed
in Hungary; and Constantinople was infested with clouds of grass-hoppers, of
great size, that devoured every green thing. The malignant sore throat was
fatal in Spain, and authors relate that this was its first appearance in that
country.

In 1611 the plague carried off 200,000 of the inhabitants of Constantinople.
It appeared also in some other places. The summers of the three last years were
very hot and dry.

In 1612 appeared a comet. A terrible tempest made great havoc with shipping --
2000 dead bodies of sailors were found on the coast of England, and 1200 on
that of Holland. Some towns were injured. In the following year, Provence in
France was greatly injured by an inundation; and swarms of locusts succeeded,
which laid waste the vegetable kingdom.

The summer of 1612 in England was excessively dry, and a malignant fever
severely afflicted the nation.

In 1613 the plague appeared in detached parts of France, and in Montpelier, a
malignant disease so fatal, as to want only the buboes, to prove it the true
plague. It was marked with red and livid spots, swellings behind the ears and
carbuncles. One third who were seized died.

Riverius, lib. 17. The preceding summers, the earth was covered with
grasshoppers, and the air filled with clouds of flies.

In this year also Constantinople was ravaged with the plague; and as cats were
supposed to spread the infection, the physicians, who were mostly Jews, advised
the emperor Achmet I. and he accordingly ordered all the cats to be transported
to a desert island near Scutari.

Short, vol. 1. Mign^t's Hist. Turkish Empire. In 1614 the winter was severe;
there was an eruption of Etna, and an earthquake in the Azores. The heavens
appeared, at one time in a flame, and afterward very dark.

This year was remarkable for the most universal smallpox, and most fatal ever
known. It laid waste Alexandria, Crete, Turkey, Calabria, Italy, Venice,
Dalmatia, France, Germany, Poland, Flanders and England. The mortality equalled
that of the plague. In Persia also it raged, with measles.

In 1615 the seasons were cold. In 1616 a very hot and dry summer -- quartan
agues epidemic -- not a family in Germany escaped; but not fatal.

In 1617 the summer was hot and dry.

In 1618 appeared a remarkable comet in November, (Short mentions four) and a
town in Rhetia was overwhelmed by an earthquake. Violent tempests, inundations
and hurricanes are recorded of the same year, and in Bermuda, the year
following, a storm tore up the strongest trees by the roots. In 1619 Heckla
discharged her fiery contents.

In 1618 broke out in Naples a malignant Angina which ravaged the place for
many years. The plague appeared at Bergen, in Norway, in Denmark and in Grand
Cairo. This was the beginning of a very pestilential period, and here must be
introduced the terrible pestilence which wasted the American Indians, just
before our ancestors landed in Massachusetts. As this is one of the most
remarkable facts in history, and one that demonstrates the general causes of
plague to belong to other climates, besides those of Egypt and the Levant, I
have taken great pains to ascertain the species of disease, and the time of its
appearance.

Capt. Dermer, an English adventurer, who had arrived in America, in a fishing
vessel, a year or two before, passed the winter of 1618-19 in Monhiggan, an
Indian town on the northern coast On the 19th of May 1619 he sailed along the
coast, on his way to Virginia, and landed at several places, where he had been
the year before; and he found many Indian towns totally depopulated -- in
others a few natives remained alive, but "not free of sickness;" "their
disease, the plague, for we might perceive the sores of some that had escaped,
who described the spots of such as usually die." These are his words. He found
some villages, which, in his former visit, were populous, all deserted -- the
Indians "all dead."

Purchase, vol. 4. 1778. Richard Vines, and his companions, who had been sent by
Ferdinando Gorges, to explore the country, wintered among the Indians, during
the pestilence, and remained untouched, the disease attacking none of the
English. Belknap's Life of Gorges, American Biography, vol. 1. p. 355, but the
year is not specified.

Gookin, in his account of the Indians, Historical Collections, p. 8, places
this pestilence in 1612 and 13, about seven or eight years before the English
arrived at Plymouth. But this cannot be accurate, unless the disease began to
rage for a number of years previous to 1618. Capt. Dermer's letter in Purchase
is decisive of the time of the principal sickness, and fortunately we have
another authority which is indisputable.

A sermon was preached by Elder Cushman at Plymouth, in 1620, just after the
colony arrived, and sent to London to be published. In the Epistle Dedicatory
which is dated December, 21, 1621, the author has these words. "They [the
Indians] were very much wasted of late, by a great mortality, that fell amongst
them, three years since, which, with their own civil dissentions and bloody
wars, has so wasted them, as I think the twentieth person is scarce left
alive."

Hazard's Collection, vol. 1. p. 148. This corresponds also with the accounts
in Prince's Chronology from original manuscripts. This fixes the time in 1618,
precisely agreeable to Capt. Dermer's account. This was the year of the
principal mortality; but like other pestilential periods, this continued for a
number of years; for some of the Plymouth settlers went to Massachusetts, (now
Boston) in 1622, to purchase corn of the natives; and "found among the Indians,
a great sickness, not unlike the plague, if not the same." It raged in winter,
and affected the Indians only.

See Purchase 4. 1858. Prince's Chron. 124. The time then is fixed. The disease
commenced, or raged with its principal violence in 1618 and through the winter.
This was the year of the remarkable comet, when the plague was raging in many
parts of the world. So fatal was the pestilence in America, that the warriors
from Narragansett to Penobscot, the distance to which the disease seems to have
been limited, were reduced from 9000 to a few hundreds. Hutchinson says, 30,000
of the Massachusetts tribe alone were supposed to be reduced to 300.
When our ancestors arrived in 1620, they found the bones of those who
perished, in many places, unburied.

Magnalia, book 1. p. 7. The kind of disease is another important question.
Dermer seems to think it a species of plague, and he saw some of the sores of
those who had survived. Hutchinson, vol. 1. p. 34, 35, says some have supposed
it to have been the smallpox, but the Indians, who were perfectly acquainted
with this disease, after the English arrived, always gave a very different
account of it, and described it as a pestilential putrid fever.

Fortunately General Gookin, in the passage above cited, has left us a fact,
which leaves no doubt as to the nature of the malady. His words are -- "What
the disease was, which so generally and mortally swept them away, I cannot
learn. Doubtless it was some pestilential disease. I have discoursed with some
old Indians, that were then youths, who say, that the bodies all over were
exceeding yellow (describing it by a yellow garment they showed me) both before
they died and afterward."

This account may be relied on for its authenticity and it decides the
question, that the pestilence was the true American plague, called yellow
fever. If any confirmation of this evidence were necessary, we have it in
Prince's Chronology, where it is recorded that this fever produced hemorrhagy
from the nose.

At the time Gookin wrote, about forty or fifty years after the settlement of
New England, the infectious fevers of autumn were called "pestilent," and they
were frequent in the country, but had not then acquired the appellation of
yellow.

Winthrop's Journal, p. 51. This fever has been frequent among the Indians
since the English settled the country. Some instances will be hereafter related.

The evidence then of the origin of the yellow fever in this country, between
the 41st and 44th degrees of latitude, is complete, leaving no room for doubt
or controversy. No intercourse existed, in 1618, between this continent and the
West Indies; nor did a single vessel pass between New England and the islands,
till twenty years after that pestilence. Not one of the islands was then
settled, except by the Spaniards, with whom our ancestors had no commerce. Not
an European was among the Indians, except a French seaman, who had escaped from
a wreck a year or two before, and Mr. Vine's men, who arrived directly from
England. These men escaped the disease; none being attacked but the Indians;
another evidence of the origin of the malady in the country.

In Gorges' description of New England, there is the following account of this
pestilence. " The summer after the blazing star, which moved from the east to
the west, even a little before the English removed from Holland to Plymouth, in
New England, there befell a great mortality among the Indians, the greatest that
had ever happened in the memory of man, or been taken notice of by tradition,
laying waste the cast."

The author further remarks that this star was much noted in Europe. In America
it was seen in the south-west, for "thirty sleeps," as the Indians express
themselves. The description of the comet here given answers to that of
Riverius, who represents it as very splendid, larger than Venus, moving from
the east to the west, and visible from Nov. 27, 1618, till the close of
December. This was the time the pestilence was raging among the Indians. Gorges
indeed says, it was the summer after the blazing star. It is true, that the
disease continued not only into 1619, but occurred in autumn for some years
subsequent. We hear of it among the Massachusetts Indians in 1622. From this it
appears that this was a long and severe period of pestilence, between 1617 and
1623, or a later year; like the present period in the United States.

It must be remarked that in 1618, the same year when the Indians in America
were falling a prey to this malady, the angina maligna broke out in the kingdom
of Naples, and spread mortality over the country, as authors affirm, for
eighteen years. This however is not understood, as affirming the disease to
have been constantly epidemic; but as prevailing at certain times and seasons.

The same destructive principle operated in Virginia. Capt. Dermer relates that
when he arrived in the Chesapeek on the 8th of September, "The first news
struck cold to our hearts, the sickness over the land." Capt. Dermer was
probably the first Englishman that ever passed through the rapids between
Long Island and the main land, now called Hell-Gate. He describes this passage
as a cataract, and mentions the difference in times of high water, from the
^ast and west.
Three hundred of the settlers died in 1619.

It appears from Purchase that the emigrants to Virginia in 1619, 20 and 21,
amounted to 3570, in 42 sail of ships. Mr. Jefferson allows only 2516 persons
to have arrived in that period.
There were 600 souls in that colony before these arrived, making the whole
number 4170. Of these, 349 perished in the Indian massacre of 1622, which would
leave 3821 survivors. But in 1624 no more than 1800 were living. Scanty means
of subsistence might have contributed to this mortality; but most of it was in
consequence of fevers, that were probably the effects of the climate, and a
very unfavorable state of the atmosphere.

In 1620 a comet was followed by a cold winter. In England the year was
distinguished by a violent tempest, a preternatural tide, and a very wet
summer. The Hungarian fever, so called, spread along the Rhine, and in the next
year became infectious. London became sickly. The year 1621 was remarkable for
an epidemic malignant smallpox.

In 1622 a ^omet is noted, and an earthquake in Italy. In New England the
spring was excessively dry, from the third week in May to the middle of July.

In 1623 the epidemic fevers in Europe became more fatal, as the period of
pestilence approached. This is obvious from the London burials, which show a
considerable increment. Riverius, who has written on the epidemic fevers of
this period in the south of France, observes that the mortality was great,
until he began to bleed and purge, when it abated. He refers to the city of
Montpelier, where almost half died who were seized. The disease was a species
of pestilence.

This author concurs with the ancients in ascribing pestilence to comets.
Speaking of the singular star of 1618, he says, "Hunc vero Cometam, morborum
malignorum et pestilentium, necnon etiam bellorum, quibus universa pene
hactenus Europa devastata est, praesagium ac prenuntium fuisse, credere non
alienum est."

De febre pest. 533. fol. The author falls into the error, which has brought
into contempt the opinions of the ancient sages, in regard to the influence of
the stars on man, and the state of the elements. He ascribes moral as well as
physical effects to that influence. Admitting the distant orbs to have some
effect on the air or fire of our system, and through that medium to augment or
diminish the stimulus which acts on the human body and of course on the
passions, by the exciting powers; yet any moral effects derived from this
source, must be so inconsiderable, or so blended with the effects of other
causes, as interest, ambition, love, revenge and the like, that the degree of
influence could not be ascertained, nor the effects of one cause distinguished
from those of the other. I reject therefore all moral effects ascribed to
comets; but the physical effects are, beyond question, great and extensive.

The diseases of this period continued to multiply and grow more malignant in
1624, when the epidemic assumed the form of the spotted fever. In 1625 this
fever turned to the plague, and in 1626 changed back to the spotted fever, says
Lotichius, cited by Short. This is not an unusual fact.

The plague in 1625 swept away 35,000 of the citizens of London. It raged at
the same time in Italy, Denmark and Leyden, and how much more extensively, I am
not informed.

In this year another comet was seen; several cities in Spain were overwhelmed
by inundations; the winter was severe; the summer, hot and moist weather; and
there was an eruption of a volcano in Iceland. It is remarkable also that, in
this year, a volcano burst forth in Palma, one of the Canaries, with a violent
earthquake.

The summer of 1626 was very hot, and the plague continued its ravages in many
parts of Europe, as in Wittemburg and the vicinity; and in Lions, which lost
60,000 of its inhabitants. This was the prelude to more general calamity in
France; for in the following years the whole country felt the distressing
effects of the malady.

In 1627 and 8 the same disease prevailed in various other countries,
especially in Augsburg after a famine. In 1629 the pestilence raged in
Amsterdam. In 1630 Cambridge in England was visited. It was a very sickly
summer in London, so that the citizens were alarmed and many retired to the
country; but finding the country very sickly, they returned.

In 1629 Pola, a town in the Venetian territories, lost 7000 inhabitants by an
earthquake.

Of the pestilence in this period, there was hardly a suspension. Particular
countries enjoyed short intervals of health; but Europe and America were
severely annoyed by pestilential diseases between 1632 and 1637.

In 1630 happened great explosions of subterranean fire. Apulia lost 17,000
people by an earthquake; and Lima, in South-America, was laid in ruins by the
like catastrophe. At this time the plague prevailed in Vienna.

In 1631 happened a memorable earthquake in Naples, with a tremendous eruption
of Vesuvius, which continued or was repeated in 1632. In this eruption,
Baglivus assures us, Vesuvius lost 240 feet of its altitude.

Cotemporary with these discharges of fire and lava, was an erysipelous fever
in Europe with inflammation in the jaws, and an increase of mortality,
antecedent to a general plague. See the bills of mortality for London, Augsburg
and Dresden, where the progress of the malignity in the epidemics, is
distinctly marked, by an augmentation of the bills, till the plague in 1636.

In 1633 appeared a comet, which was followed by a severe winter. The same
winter in America was mild, says Winthrop, p. 61. Southerly winds prevailed
till the close of winter, when there were great snows. It is very common that
severe cold is progressive, happening in Europe one year before it does in
America, as will hereafter appear.

In 1633 the year of the comet, commenced an eruption of Etna, which continued
for four or five years, through this whole pestilential period. London was
shaken by an earthquake, and at Halifax in Yorkshire raged a very malignant
fever.

In this year also a "pestilent fever," invaded the little colony at Plymouth
in Massachusetts, and carried off twenty of their number. This was a great
mortality for that small settlement. It must have been occasioned by a fever of
domestic origin, as the colony had, at that time, no intercourse with foreign
countries, except with England. No suspicion has ever been entertained that the
disease was of foreign origin.

At the same time, the Indians were invaded by the smallpox which swept them
away in multitudes. It spread from Narragansett to Piscataqua, and westward to
Connecticut river.

The summer of this year was remarkable for innumerable large flies, of the
size of bees, which made the woods resound with a humming noise.

Hubbard's M. S. p. 131. Winthrop's Journal, 51 -- 56 -- 59 -- 61. We have then
a remarkable evidence of the extent of a pestilential principle in the
elements. The same species of diseases appeared, at the same time, in Augsburg,
Dresden, London, and in America. Probably the same species prevailed over most
of Europe; for we hear of them in every part of Holland in the following year.
The diseases predominant, previous to the plague, are of the eruptive kind:
Such was the case in the present instance. In America, the epidemic among the
Indians took the form of the smallpox; and although it is the current opinion
that the smallpox is communicated only by contagion, yet my investigations
have satisfied me that this is a great error. The smallpox is one of the
family of eruptive diseases, which belong to almost every pestilential period.
Before its origin and progress had been affected by the art of innoculation, it
used to be epidemic, in large cities, under that inflammatory condition of the
atmosphere, which originated measles, influenza, anginas and plague, and rarely
or never at any other time. This disease therefore, tho communicable at any
time by infection, is generated in particular habits without any infecting
cause ab extra; and is the offspring of that state of the atmosphere which
generates other eruptive epidemics.

In 1634 the plague showed itself at Ratisbon. The summer in America was hotter
than usual, and the following winter was very cold.

In 1635 the plague appeared in Leyden and 20,000 inhabitants perished. This
year was distinguished for an eruption of Vesuvius, violent earthquakes, an
inundation in Holstein which des^royed 600 people and 50,000 head of cattle,
and a terrible tempest in America on the 15th of August O. S. which brot in a
remarkable swell of the ocean. It will appear hereafter that most of the
violent storms and hurricanes, which sweep the earth, happen during or near the
time of the discharges of great quantities of fire from volcanoes. In this
year, Etna and Vesuvius were both in a state of eruption. The plague appeared
also in Mentz and other parts of Germany.

In 1636 there was an eruption of Heckla. The pestilence was general in
proportion to this universal agitation of the central fires. In London it
prevailed in 1636 after a regular increase of previous malignity in diseases.

Of the progress of the pestilence in Holland, and especially in Nimeguen, we
have an accurate account in the treatise of the able Diemerbroeck, which is by
far the most learned and philosophic work on the plague, that I have seen. Not
that I believe his opinion of the cause of the plague; but his view of the
subject is otherwise correct and worthy of universal attention.

In 1635 when the plague appeared in Leyden, the malignant diseases, its
precursors, appeared in various parts of Holland. In Nimeguen, these precursors
were measles, smallpox, dysenteries of the worst type, but especially the
spotted fever. The malignity of this fever increased, until it changed into the
real plague -- "donec in apertissimam pestem transiret," says Diemerbroeck.

The plague appeared, in a few cases, in November 1635, but made little
progress, during the winter. In January appearances were more alarming; in
March the malady spread rapidly and continued to increase till autumn. Scarcely
a house escaped; more than half who were seized, ^ied; and medical aid was
baffled. The disease declined in the following winter, and was extinguished by
a severe frost in February 1637.

The summers of 1636 and 7 were warm, the winds constantly from the south and
west, "cum magnis aeris squaloribus," says Diemerbroeck.

In 1635 a dysentery prevailed in most parts of Germany. In 1636 the eruption
from Etna was augmented, and Rome was severely afflicted with the plague. In
1637 the same distemper raged in some parts of Holland, in Denmark,
Constantinople and Natolia; after which year the disease declined or
disappeared.

This period of disease was also experienced in Virginia, where, says Winthrop,
died 1800 people in the year 1635.

The summer of 1638 was very hot and dry in England, as it was in America,
after a very severe winter, and cold spring.

In this year was a most tremendous earthquake in Calabria, memorable for the
destruction of whole towns and the loss of 30,000 lives.

On the first of June, between 3 and 4 o'clock in the afternoon, in a clear
warm day, with a westerly wind, happened a great earthquake in America, which
extended from the Piscataqua to the Connecticut, and perhaps over the whole
northern region. The year was also distinguished for tempestuous weather; not
for ordinary storms which occur many times every year, but violent hurricanes
of vast extent. On the third of August a tempest raised the tide, on the
Narragansett shore, fourteen feet above common spring tides. Autumn was very
rainy and considerable snow fell in October, which our ancestors ascribed to
the earthquake. On the 25th of September, another mighty tempest occurred and
the highest swell of the sea that had then been observed in America. If I
mistake not, the state of the atmosphere, during earthquakes and eruptions of
volcanoes, is peculiarly disposed, not only to produce high winds, but to
generate snow and hail.

This year was very sickly in America. In December a general fast was observed,
one reason for which was the prevalence of the "smallpox and fevers."

Winthrop, p. 165. The spring of 1639 in America was very dry, there was no
rain from April 26th, to June 4th, O. S. and from the southward came swarms of
small flies, which covered the sea, but they did not invade the land.

Winthrop, p. 181 -- 184. The plague continued to infest London, without
interruption, from 1636 to 1648; see the bills of mortality; but it was not
epidemic, nor very fatal.

In 1640 a hard winter, and epidemic pleurisies were fatal in Europe. The
following year, a malignant fever was epidemic, in England, and other countries.

In September 11th appeared, in the evening, a remarkable light in the heavens,
about 30 or 40 feet in length; it moved rapidly and was visible about a minute.
It was seen in Boston, in Plymouth and in New Haven, and to the spectators
every where, appeared to be in the same part of the heavens -- of course must
have been of a great altitude.

Winthrop, p. 232. I notice this fact as it confirms the testimony of ancient
writers, who, in describing the seasons and phenomena of pestilential periods,
frequently mention similar appearances. This seems to have been of the figure
of a beam, called by the Latin writers, trabs, but it differed from those
meteors discribed by ancient writers, in the rapidity of its motion.

In November following a series of tempests took place, and the highest tide
ever known at Boston.

This summer of 1641 was remarkably wet and cold, so that a great part of the
corn did not come to maturity. Those who fed on it, the year following, were
exceedingly troubled with worms, and some persons found a remedy in leaving
bread and living on fish.

Winthrop, p. 234. The following winter was the most severe that had been known
for 40 years. The bay at Boston was frozen so that teams and loads passed to
the town from the neighboring islands. The snow was deep, and Chesapeek bay was
nearly frozen. At Boston, the ice extended to sea, as far as the eye could
reach. The following spring 1642 was early, but wet.

Winthrop, p. 240, 243. The oldest Indians declared they could scarcely
recollect such a winter.

This severe winter was followed by a very sickly summer on the Delaware river.
Such was the mortality among the settlers from New Haven, who had not long been
in that country, that it broke up their settlement. The Swedes settled there
suffered much by the same disease.

Ibm. 254. The very wet weather of the last year produced a dearth of corn in
Boston, in the spring of 1643, and myriads of pigeons appeared also and did no
small injury, the same season. It is an old observation, in America, that
pigeons are uncommonly numerous in the spring of sickly years. The
Massachusetts colony suffered also from the number of mice which devoured their
grain, and the bark of the fruit trees.

Several singular meteors were seen this year in the neighborhood of Boston.
Here ends Winthrop's Journal -- a circumstance to be regretted. Hubbard's
Manuscript will in part supply materials for this work, for some years
subsequent. But for the last 30 years of the last century, I can obtain very
little information of the state of the seasons and health in America.


One fact in the foregoing account deserves notice; the extreme winter in
America was in 1641-2, one year later than in Europe. Several instances have
occurred in other periods, which seem to indicate a kind of progressiveness in
great cold from east to west. It often happens however that the winter is
severe at the same time, in both hemispheres, as in 1607-8 -- 1683-4 -- 1762-3
-- 1779-80.

In England, in 1643 a malignant fever was epidemic and few escaped. In autumn,
it put on pestilential symptoms and petechiae. The same year, an eruption of
Vesuvius and of Etna.

In 1644 a malignant fever was epidemic in Denmark.

The summer of 1645 being excessively hot, there prevailed a contagious
dysentery, which was fatal in England. For the great mortality in England,
through a series of years at this time, see the London bills.

In this year a great sickness prevailed among the Indians on Martha's Vineyard
-- few escaped.

Neal's Hist. New England, vol. 1. 264. In 1646 inundations laid a part of
Holland, Friefland and Zealand under water so suddenly, as to destroy more than
one hundred thousand lives and three hundred villages. Gorges relates that two
mock suns, with other singular celestial phenomena, were seen this year in
America.

P 41. In 1647 May 13th, a most tremendous earthquake in Chili, South-America,
sunk whole mountains into the earth and nearly ruined the large city of
Santiago.

Ulloa, book 8. chapter 7. This year appeared a comet. The plague in London also
was more severe, and appeared after this year to subside.

In 1646 and 7 the Ukrain was ravaged by locusts.

A. D. 1647. This year appeared an epidemic catarrh in America, and the first
of which we have any account. It is not named either influenza or catarrh, but
is clearly the same disease. It is thus described in Hubbard's Manuscript, p.
276. "In 1647 an epidemic sickness passed through the whole country, affecting
the colonists and the natives, English, French and Dutch. It began with a cold
and in many accompanied with a light fever. Such as bled or used cooling drinks
died -- such as made use of cordials and more strengthening things, recovered
for the most part. It extended through the plantations in America, and in the
West Indies. There died in Barbados and St. Kitts, 5 or 6000 each. Whether it
was a plague, or pestilential fever, in the islands, accompanied by great
drouth, which cut short potatoes and fruits."

This epidemic was in the same year with the earthquake in Chili, but the date
of the disease is not recorded.

In Connecticut prevailed a malignant fever, occasioned b^ the excessive heat
of the summer. Of this fever died the Rev. Thomas Hooker, and many others in
H^^rd. See Neal's Hist. N. E. vol. 1. 289. Magnalia, b. 3. 67.


The year 1648 appears to have been less sickly, in London; but in the south of
Europe, malignant diseases were the harbingers of the plague, which in 1649
carried off 200,000 people in the southern provinces of Spain. In Ireland and
Shropshire the plague prevailed in the same year, and a fatal fever in France.
The smallpox was epidemic in Boston.

Townsend's Travels, vol. 2. 219. Short, vol. 1. Douglas' Summary, vol. 2. 395.
In 1650 was an eruption of Etna, and an earthquake in the north and west of
England. In this and the following year the plague continued in Ireland.

In 1650 the influenza spread over Europe. In 1651 many desolating floods
happened in Holland and France -- in Italy, a quinsy or sore throat proved very
fatal to children. These diseases were succeeded by malignant fevers, and
plague in most parts of Europe, except in England. The summer of 1651 was hot.

In 1652 appeared a comet. A dangerous synochus prevailed in France and a
tertian fever in Denmark.

In 1653 a slight earthquake occurred in New England, in Oct.

The years 1652 and 3 were remarkably dry in England, and in 1654 public thanks
were ordered for a supply of rain.

Mercurius Politicus. In 1654 the plague made its appearance in Denmark. Some
severe epidemic had prevailed in New England; for in the spring of 1654 a
general fast was appointed by the government of Connecticut, one reason
assigned for which was, "the mortality which had been among the people of
Massachusetts." What the disease was, I am not informed.

Trum. Hist. Con. 225. In 1655 occurred the second epidemic catarrh, recorded
in the Annals of America. The following is the account of it in Hubbard's
Manuscript, p. 285.

"In 1655 there was another faint cough that passed through the whole country
of New England, occasioned by some strange distemper or infection of the air.
It was so epidemical, that few persons escaped. It began about the end of June.
Few were able to visit their friends or perform the last testimony of respect
to any of their relations at a distance. Of this died Mr. Nathaniel Rogers,
minister of Ipswich."

See also Magnalia, b. 3. 108. It will be observed that this epidemic commenced
in the heat of summer, and that its invasion was sudden and universal. In
November 1655 occurred an earthquake in South-America.

Of the seasons in America I have no account; but in Europe the winter of
1654-5 was extremely severe. The rivers and harbors in Holland were all made
fast with ice; a series of snow storms took place in April, and as late as the
19th there was a severe frost at Brussels.

See Mercurius Politicus, a London paper for 1655. In March 1655 was an
eruption of Vesuvius; it was very sickly in the north of England; and there
were great tempests of wind and hail in 1654 and 5.

In 1654 the plague appeared at Chester in England; but did not become
epidemic; owing, it was supposed, to the precaution of confining the diseased
to their houses. This may possibly have been the case; but it is probable the
opinion is not well founded. See this point considered in the 16th section.
At the same time the disease was raging in Turkey, in Presburg, Hungary and in
the city of Moscow, it is alleged, perished 200,000 inhabitants. We have here
precise and authentic evidence, that the plague appeared in Chester, in the
north-west of England, in Denmark, in Russia, Hungary and Turkey, in the same
season. To prove this to be the effect of a general principle, we have
numberless authorities, in the Gazettes of that and the next year, that
malignant diseases prevailed over Europe. See the paper above cited. Thus when
a few cases of plague occurred in Chester, fatal diseases prevailed over the
north of England. And it is remarkable in this instance, that the epidemic
plague appeared in the north of Europe before it did in Italy -- an exception
to the general course of that disease.

In 1655 the plague was more general in Europe. It prevailed in Sardinia,
Malta, Leyden, Amsterdam, and in Riga, a Russian port at the mouth of the
Divina. There died in Riga 9000 -- Amsterdam 13,^00 -- Leyden 13,000.

In 1656 the same disease invaded Naples, Rome, Genoa, Candia, Benevento, and
most parts of the Neapolitan territories. In the city of Naples, perished three
fourths of the inhabitants, and in Benevento, a greater proportion. The numbers
of deaths were estimated as follows --

In the city of Naples died 240,000 -- survived 50,000.

In the Neapolitan territories 400,000.

In Benevento died 9000 -- survived 500.

In Rome about 10,000.

In Genoa in 1656, 10,000, and in 1657, 70,000, and 14,000 only survived.

In Riga 9000.

In Thorn 8200.

I have not materials for a complete view of the diseases of this pestilential
period. But it is to be observed, that influenza prevailed over Europe in 1650,
and diseases of the throat in Italy in 1651 -- diseases which seem to precede
pestilential fevers on most occasions.

The summer of 1656 was hot, and an earthquake in the south of Italy
accompanied the dreadful mortality.

See Univ. Hist. vol. 28. 318. Mercurius Politicus, 1656. Encyclopedia, art.
Plague. The influenza in America was also succeeded by fatal epidemic diseases,
although I have no means of determining what they were. The account recorded is
that there "was a great sickness and mortality, throughout New England in 1658.
The season was intemperate and the crops light." Trumbull, p. 244. This year
was also distinguished for what is called in our annals, the "Great
Earthquake." This is an instance of a violent concussion of the earth, in the
same year with violent rains; but unfortunately I can find no account which
phenomenon preceded the other. The summer was so rainy, that the christianized
Indians observed days of fasting, on that account, apprehending that their
crops would fail and the world be drowned.

Neal, vol. 1. 259. The introduction of the plague into Naples was ascribed to
a transport of soldiers from Sardinia. How the disease came to be in Sardinia,
we are not informed. But this report, like nine tenths of all the stories about
infection, is demonstrably a mistake. The account given in the history of the
disease, is, that it was at first called by physicians a "malignant fever." One
of the faculty, a man probably of more observation and firmness than the
others, affirmed the distemper to be pestilential, and for his audacity, was
imprisoned by the Viceroy, who apprehended the report might injure the business
and reputation of the city.

We have then another instance of the uncertainty in the minds of medical
gentlemen, about the nature of the disease, when it first appeared, because it
was not characterized by the distinctive marks of the plague, the glandular
tumors. This circumstance demonstrates that the disease was not imported, but
an epidemic; appearing first, as al^ great plagues first appear, in the form of
catarrh, inflammatory fevers, affections of the throat, and typhus fevers.

There cannot be a more clear and demonstrable truth, than that a disease of
specific contagion, must communicate a disease of the same specific character.
If the plague has this species of contagion, it cannot communicate another
disease, a malignant fever, for instance, which has a different character or
type, and is destitute of the distinctive marks of the plague. A single
instance might occur, in which the disease might not bear the character of its
original; but it is absurd to suppose, that a plague with glandular tumors, can
communicate and render epidemic a fever without glandular tumors.

Yet all severe plagues first appear in the form of such fever, or other
diseases without tumors. I challenge the followers of Mead to produce an
exception. Hence the uncertainty that perplexes the physician and the
magistrate at the commencement of the plague -- an uncertainty that has
originated in the errors respecting the specific nature of the disease and its
propagation by infection -- errors as fatal to great cities, as to truth and
philosophy.

Had the real origin of this disease been known, the certainty of the existence
of it in Naples, Venice, Rome, Vienna, Amsterdam and London, would have induced
the citizens to abandon the places, before the distemper had made much
progress, and multitudes of lives would have been saved -- an expedient
practiced in America, with the most salutary effects.

In Genoa, the disease manifested a more distinct progression; 10,000 died the
first year, and about 70,000 the second.

When this distemper appeared in Malta, Candia and Sardinia, every possible
precaution was taken to prevent its introduction into Genoa, by stopping
intercourse with those places; but in vain.

When the report of a malignant infectious fever in Naples prevailed in May
1656, an alarm was excited in Rome; a committee of health watched over the
safety of that city; four of the gates were shut and barred; the others were
guarded with vigilance to prevent any person from entering who could be
suspected of infection; but all efforts were useless. The real truth was the
disease was an epidemic, no more under the control of health laws, than the
influenza and sore throat which had preceded it.

The summer of 1657 in England was very hot, and succeeded by a long severe
winter and deep snow.

In April 1658 commenced in Europe an epidemic catarrh, which was so sudden in
its attack as to seize a whole village in a night. It was severe and fatal to
old people -- its course was finished in about six weeks. The summer was hot
and fevers with vertigo and delirium, were epidemic.

See Short, vol. 1. and Morton's Treatise. It will be remarked that the year
1647 when the influenza invaded America, was a sickly year in Europe. In 1655
when the plague was epidemic in Europe, the influenza again prevailed in
America. In 1658 when the influenza invaded Europe, great sickness and
mortality occurred in America. These alternations of epidemic diseases will be
observed in the subsequent stages of this history.

In 1659 prevailed the Cynanche Trachealis in America -- the first instance
mentioned in our annals. Magnalia, b. 4. 156. -- This disease was also
succeeded by malignant diseases, for the Legislature of Connecticut in October
1662 appointed a day of thanksgiving, two reasons assigned for which were, the
"abatement of the sickness in the country, and a supply of rain in time of
drouth."

This was the commencement of a very sickly period in Europe. In 1660 occurred
an eruption of Vesuvius, and of a volcano in Iceland. The year was very
tempestuous, and earthquakes shook England, France and America. In 1661
appeared a comet.

In 1662 another considerable earthquake happened in New England; and in this
year was the drouth above mentioned. -- In 1663 Canada was convulsed for five
months by a series of successive shocks -- small rivers and springs were dried
up -- the waters of others were tinctured with the taste of sulphur -- an
immense ridge of mountains subsided to a plain. Such were the phenomena in
America which marked this pestilential period.

Mem. Royal Society, vol. 6. 86. Neal's Hist. N. England. Mem. Amer. Acad. vol.
1. 263. In 1663 a malignant disease seized the inhabitants of the Venetian
territories and 60,000 perished. The country, at the same time, was overrun by
innumerable small worms.

In the same year, a memorable mortality occurred in England, among the cattle
and sheep, by means of a disease in which the liver was eaten by small worms,
and in some cases, the lungs. These phenomena were the precursors of the plague
in many parts of Europe. In England, all diseases assumed new violence, as
early as in 1661, preparatory to the great plague. See Sydenham. In Holland,
the plague appeared at Heusden, in 1663.

The winter of 1663-4 was mild. In the following summer, Prussia was afflicted
by a malignant purple fever, attended with tumors or inflammation in the
throat, very fatal to the young. Bonnetus. Med. Septen. p. 206. A species of
scarlatina.

In 1664 appeared a comet; another in 1665, and a third in 1666. In 1664 began
an eruption of Etna, which lasted, with various degrees of violence, till the
year 1669, when it ended with a most dreadful explosion. This period
corresponds with the epidemics described by Sydenham.

In 1664 the summer in England was wet, and cattle died of diseases. In
New England commenced the mildew of wheat, which has rendered it impossible to
cultivate that grain, on the Atlantic coast of the three Eastern States. The
winter of 1664-5, was terribly severe in England; the Thames was a bridge of
ice, and in January happened earthquakes, in Coventry and Buckinghamshire.
During this winter inflammatory fevers and quinsies, says Sydenham, were more
frequent in London, than were before known. These gave way in May to a
malignant fever, which could hardly be distinguished from the plague, which, in
June, became the controling epidemic.

Such were the phenomena of the pestilential period under consideration; and at
this time, the plague appeared in Holland, and in England. English authors all
agree that the disease was imported into England from Holland in some bales of
cotton! O fatal bales of cotton! says Short. This tale has been recorded and
repeated by every writer on the subject, without a single document in evidence
to prove that any cotton was imported, or that the first persons seized had
ever seen such cotton. The whole tale rests on assertion. That the seeds of the
distemper were not imported is evident from the acknowledged facts relative to
its origin; and is demonstrated by the history of the preceding diseases found
in the works of Sydenham.

The origin of the pestilence, which arrived to its crisis in 1665, is to be
traced back to the year 1661, when malignant diseases began to appear in
different and ^istant parts of the world. In London, the intermitting tertian
^er, says Sydenham, became epidemic, and differed from the same disease in
other years, by new and unusual symptoms, which in short, amounted to this,
that they were " all more violent." In winter, the disease yielded, as usual,
to cold, but continued fevers prevailed every winter. These fevers, with some
variations, continued until the spring of 1665, and the bills show how much
they augmented the mortality in London. This increased malignity in usual
diseases, with an increase of the number and mortality of epidemics, is the
constant precursor of the plague or other pestilential fevers.

Notwithstanding the clear evidence of these facts, authors have conjured up a
tale of importation which would disgrace a schoolboy by its inconsistency. If
this language should be thought too severe, I can sincerely say, that in my
opinion, no language can be too severe for the carelessness which has
originated a system of error on this important subject.
The account states, "That a violent plague had raged in Holland in 1663, on
which account, the importation of merchandise from that country was prohibited
by the British Legislature in 1664. Notwithstanding this prohibition, it seems
the plague had actually been imported; for in the close of 1664, two or three
persons died suddenly in Westminster, with marks of the plague on their bodies.
-- Some of their neighbors, terrified at the thoughts of their danger, removed
into the city; but too late; for they soon died of the plague, and communicated
the infection to others. It was confined however through a hard, frosty winter,
till the middle of February, when it again appeared in the Parish of St. Giles,
to which it had been originally brought; and after another long rest, till
April, showed its malignant force afresh, as soon as the warmth of spring gave
it opportunity. At first, it took off one here and there, without any certain
proof of their having infected each other.

Encyclopedia, art. London. 21. In the substance of the foregoing statement,
all authors are agreed, and I want no other proof that the report of the
importation of the disease is all a vulgar, childish tale, the propagation of
which is a disgrace to philosophy and to the faculty of that age.

In the first place we have no authentic evidence in any author, that any bales
of cotton were brought from Holland to London, at that time. The whole
assertion rests on vulgar report, and is wholly unsupported by proof -- had the
report been well founded, the fact might have been ascertained, and in an
affair of such magnitude, probably would have been. The importation of goods
from Holland was prohibited by act of parliament.

In the second place, the disease first appeared in Westminster, not in the
commercial city of London, but in a place where bales of cotton would be the
least likely to be deposited and opened; Westminster being the residence of the
nobility and gentry, rather than a place of commerce.

In the third place, no proof is stated that the persons first seized had any
connection with bales of cotton.

In the fourth place, the death of two or three persons, with the plague-marks
on their bodies, in December 1664, is no evidence of any imported infection at
that time; for the bills of mortality show, and the reader is desired to turn
to them, to be satisfied, that a smaller number died that year of the plague,
than had died of it in any of the six preceding years. In the year 1659 died of
that disease 36 -- in 1661 died 20, and every year more or less. In 1664 died
but 6 of the plague, and yet this number, small as it was, must be proof of the
importation of infection, that year, when greater numbers, in preceding years,
are passed over in silence! In such accounts, there must be want of knowledge,
or want of honesty. The plague imported from Holland! when the city of London
had not been free from it, for 28 years preceding! See the bills of mortality!
--

Besides, why in the name of common sense, should "two or three," infected
persons in 1664, spread the plague over London, and desolate the city, when
twelve, fourteen, twenty and thirty-six infected persons, who died in preceding
years, produced no ill effects? To account for such effects on the principle of
infection, is not possible; and men of science ought to be ashamed of such
absurdities.

In the fifth place, the suspension of the disease, during six weeks, is
evidence, that infection had no agency in spreading the disease. It is a fact
known and acknowledged, that infection cannot be preserved, for a tenth part of
that time in the open air. Air dissolves the poison of any disease, in a very
short time. Infection can only be preserved in confinement, as in close vessels
or packages of goods. The walls of an infected house will be cleansed by the
action of air, in a very few days, so as to be perfectly harmless. During the
six weeks suspension of the plague in London, where was the infection concealed
to preserve it from air and frost?

Was the fomes shut up by design for a few weeks and then set at liberty? Had
the persons who were first seized in February, any access to the infected
houses or clothes of those who died in December? Is this probable? There is no
suggestion of this sort.

Then again another interval of several weeks elapsed from the death of those
in February, before others were feized. It is not solely improbable; but I
aver, that the fomes or infecting principle of no disease whatever, can be
suspended in a state of inaction, in the open air, and afterward give rise to
disease. Unless therefore it can be proved that the persons who died in April
had access to infection, which had been closely confined from the air, they
could never have received the disease from the virus generated in February or
December. Now it appears from the statement, that the persons, seized in
February, lived in a different part of the city, from those who died in
December, and no suggestion that they had an intercourse with any infected
object.

But the last sentence of the statement disproves fully all assertions and
suspicions respecting infection. It seems that when the disease showed itself
in spring, it seized one here, and another there, in scattered situations,
"without any certain proof of their having infected each other." This is
usually the case in the plague, and in the yellow fever, in the ulcerous sore
throat, the dysentery and other contagious, epidemic diseases. The whole
mystery is, that any disease will first seize the constitutions least capable
of resisting that state of air, from which the disease proceeds. One person
will sust^^n a vitiated air, for one day only; another for two days, and a
t^^rd for a week, before his constitution yields to the destructive principle.
It is precisely with the access of the plague, in a city, as with a company of
men going from a healthy situation, into a marshy place -- one man will be
seized very speedily with the ague and fever; another will sustain his health
for a week or two, and some perhaps escape unaffected. This example explains
the phenomena which attend the invasion of pestilence, as related by Evagrius,
Diemerbroeck and others, and which will be more fully discussed in a subsequent
section.

The account therefore of the origin of the plague in London in 1665, not only
does not prove the disease to have proceeded from imported fomes, but actually
demonstrates the impossibility of the fact.

But we have better evidence than the popular accounts afford us, that the
disease was generated in the city of London. Sydenham has left facts on record,
which place this point beyond controversy.

After describing the multiplied diseases of increased malignity, which
prevailed in London, from 1661 to 1665, and which swelled greatly the bills of
mortality in that city, he informs us that in May 1665 he was called to assist
a woman of a sanguine habit, who was seized with violent fever and frequent
vomitings. He was surprised at the singularity of the symptoms, and puzzled to
know how to treat the disease. The woman died the 14th day. He observed her
face, during the fever, to be red, and that a little before her death, a few
drops of blood issued from her nose. These and other circumstances suggested to
him the use of bleeding, and his next patient recovered.

This species of malignant fever soon spread and toward the close of May and
beginning of June, became epidemic. Soon after appeared the true plague with
its characteristic symptoms. After stating these facts, Sydenham says, "Whether
the fever under consideration deserves to be entitled a plague, I dare not
positively affirm; but this I know by experience, that all who were then seized
with the true plague, attended with all its peculiar concomitants, and for some
time afterward, in my neighborhood, had the same train of symptoms, both in
the beginning and through the course of the disease."

He then observes that he attended some persons with the true plague, and
afterward, he saw several cases of a similar fever.

See chap. 2. sect. 2. Had not the faculty been blinded to truth by their
theory of specific contagion, it would not have been possible so long to
overlook the progressiveness of the plague, which not only Sydenham, but many
physicians of the 16th and 17th centuries observed and recorded.

The malignant diseases which prevailed from 1661 to 1664 marked a pestilential
state of air in London. We now know what Sydenham could not know, that this
unhealthy state of air extended not only over Europe, but over Persia and
America. But the malignant fever which appeared in May, as described by
Sydenham, was the first stage of the plague, or mild form of the disease, which
always precedes that state of it which is characterized by buboes. This form of
the disease appears before the season or state of the atmosphere is advanced
sufficiently to give the destructive principle its full force.

The same species of fever preceded the terrible plague in Venice and in
Naples, as before related; and this is always the cause of uncertainty and
controversy respecting the nature of the disease, at its commencement. And it
is remarkable that this milder form of the plague, often rages for many months,
before the disease arrives to its crisis. Thus in London, the pestilential
principle produced a few cases of real plague, in the winter of 1664-5. The
cases must have occurred in constitutions more irritable, or susceptible of the
cause, than bodies in general; or the persons must have been exposed to the
action of powerful local causes, or to extreme debility. The severe frost
doubtless suspended the operation of the pestilential principle -- but on the
opening of spring, the operation began, and proceeded from the malignant
epidemic of May to produce the most deadly effects.

I have one observation further to make on this subejct. It has been alleged
and generally admitted that the plague was introduced into Amsterdam, in 1663
by a vessel from the Mediterranean. It is probable that if this question could
be fully canvassed, the popular belief would appear to have had no better
foundation, than many opinions in America, in regard to the importation of the
yellow fever, which are proved to rest merely on conjectures, suppositions, and
vague reports. But in regard to the origin of the pestilence in Holland, in
this instance, it is wholly immaterial, whether popular opinion was well
founded or not; for we have the express authority of Diemerbroeck, that
anterior to the arrival of the ship, with the supposed infection, the plague
broke out in Heusden, a town on a branch of the Meuse, surrounded by a morass,
not a maritime place. Besides the spotted fever, which precedes the plague and
turns into it, had been prevailing in all parts of Holland in the preceding
year. The pestilence therefore originated in Holland, before the infection
arrived; and the tales of importation vanish in smoke.

According to the bills of mortality, London lost upwards of 68,000 inhabitants
by the plague in 1665, and more than 28,000 by other diseases. As the 28,000
deaths by common diseases must have occurred mostly in the six first months of
the year, before the plague raged, this circumstance shows what a great
increase of mortality preceded the plague. With such evidence before their
eyes, how can discerning men look abroad for the sources of the malady!

It should also be remarked that this calamity among the human race was
preceded by a great mortality among cattle in 1664.

It must not pass unobserved that the summer of 1665 in England was very
temperate, the weather fine and the fruits good. All the writers of that day
agree, that no cause of pestilence could be observed in the visible qualities
of the season.

This was the last plague that has appeared in London, or in Great Britain. The
disappearance of the plague in that and other countries, is a most consoling
fact, and one that has not a little engaged the minds of philosophic men, to
discover the cause. The causes usually assigned are, the destruction of the
city by fire in 1666, the more airy, convenient construction of the modern
city, the introduction of fresh water, with more cleanliness, and improved
habits of living.

These reasons would have more weight in my mind, if the other large cities in
England, in France, Spain, Holland and Germany, which have neither been burnt
nor improved in their general structure, had not also escaped the ravages of
pestilence. But as the plague has not visited Paris and Amsterdam, which retain
their ancient construction, no more than London, which has been improved, we
must resort to other circumstances for the causes of this exemption. The
consideration of this subject will fall under another part of this work.

In 1666, appeared a comet, the summer was very hot, and a tremendous
hurricane, tore up a thousand trees in Nottingham forest, and of 50 houses in
one village, seven only were left standing. In this tempest fell hailstones,
as large as hens eggs. An earthquake occurred in Oxfordshire. Persia did not
escape the effects of this pestilential constitution. In 1667 prevailed famine
and epidemic diseases, and an earthquake demolished great part of Teflis, the
capital of Georgia, and four villages, with the loss of 30,000 lives; and
another city with the loss of 2,000 lives.

Chardin's travels, 86. ^26. In 1666 dysentery prevailed over England and many
parts of Europe and in St. Domingo. This disease seems to be the successor of
the plague, and other epidemics. During the inflammatory stage of an epidemic
constitution, evidenced by measles, influenza, a mild smallpox, we rarely hear
of destructive dysentery. But after those diseases have run their course,
dysentery appears in many parts of a country, and sometimes becomes almost
universal. It would be a curious question, by what means the inflammatory
diathesis, so to speak, of the epidemic period, acts upon the nerves, muscles
and intestines, to give to the subsequent autumnal fevers this particular
direction.

During the foregoing series of epidemics in Europe, America did not escape.
Slight shocks of earthquake were felt in 1660, and in 1665. Great sickness
prevailed at this period also, but I am not informed of the species of
disorder, except the smallpox in Boston in 1666.

In 1668, appeared a comet with a stupendous coma. This was attended by an
excessively hot summer, and malignant diseases in America. In New York the
epidemic was so fatal, that a fast was ^ppointed in September, on that account.
This was undoubtedly the autumnal bilious fever in its infectious form. In this
same year was an earthquake in America, and a meteor in the west, in form of a
spear, pointing toward the sitting sun, which greadually sunk and disappeared.

Neal's Hist. vol. 1. 367. Magnal. b. 4. 184. This year was marked also by
violent earthquakes in Europe and Asia. The winter of 1668-9 was very severe,
and ice was seen in the Bosphorus; that of 1670 covered the Danube with a
bridge of ice.

In winter appeared in Hungary two mock-suns of resplendent brightness -- the
infallible forerunner of great discharges of electrical fire, or of violent
tempests. -- On the 11th of March 1669, the eruption of Etna which had
commenced in 1664 redoubled its fury, and by immense discharges of lava laid
waste the country below. Its violence subsided in July; but tremendous
hurricanes marked the year. The summer of this year also was excessively hot.

In this year, the cats in Westphalia died with an eruption on the head,
accompanied with drowsiness. In England prevailed a dangerous fever, with slimy
tongue and sore mouth.

In Norway prevailed measles of a malignant kind, attacking old and young.
Bonetus, Med. Sept. 223. -- In the two following years measles was epidemic in
London alternating with the smallpox. -- See Sydenham. -- In 1673 winter was
cold; and catarrhs were frequent with spotted fevers -- A comet appeared in the
preceding year.

In 1675 a wet and cool summer, the influenza prevailed in Europe with the
usual symptoms. In Italy was seen a meteor or fire ball, from the north-east;
and the following winter in America was colder than usual.

The summer of 1676 in England was cold. Measles and smallpox prevailed in
some places.

In 1677 was seen a comet in April and May; an earthquake was experienced in
England; and in Charlestown, Massachusetts, raged the smallpox with the
mortality of a plague.

Mag. b. 4. 189. The summer of 1678 was very hot and dry. There was a comet and
an earthquake in Lima. Fevers and affections of the throat were epidemic in the
north of Europe. The plague raged with most desolating fury in Algiers and
Morocco. Authors relate that four millions of people perished, and that the
waste of population has not since been repaired.

Cheniers Morocco, vol. 2. 180. On the 12th of January occurred in England a
most extraordinary darkness, at noon.

Notwithstanding the barrenness of my materials, this pestilential period may
be very clearly distinguished, by the measles from 1669 to 1672 with the
smallpox, the catarrh of 1675, the subsequent malignant fevers and affections
of the throat, and finally the pestilence of 1678.

The same deleterious principle extended to America. Our annals relate that the
seasons were unfavorable and the fruits blasted, while malignant diseases
prevailed among the people. The sickness and bad seasons were attributed, by
our pious ancestors, to the irreligion of the times, and to their disuse of
fasting. On this occasion, a synod was convened to investigate the causes of
God's judgments, and to propose a plan of reformation. The smallpox prevailed
at Boston in 1678, and a singular epidemic in England, France and Holland.

See Neal's Hist. N. Eng. vol. 2. 32. Mag. b. 5. 85. Hutch. vol. 1. 324. Doug.
vol. 1. 440. Short, vol. 1. The comet of 1678 was followed by a very cold
winter, after a rainy autumn, with an epidemic cough. A comet is mentioned in
1679, and the plague was in Vienna.

The year 1680 was distinguished also for a severe winter, and the noted comet
that had appeared in Justinian's reign. In Dresden raged the plague. The summer
was hot and sickly. A large meteor was seen in Germany, descending to the north
and leaving behind it a long luminous stream.

The summer of 1681 was excessively dry. This was the forerunner of violent
earthquakes, which, in 1682 shook all Germany, Italy and Switzerland. In some
places, the shocks were preceeded, for four nights, by lights or flame, like
ignes fatui, on the mountains. The convulsions were attended with a
disagreeable sulphurous smell. In this year also was visible a comet, and an
eruption took place, both of Etna and Vesuvius.

In this year 1682 a mortal disease spread among the cattle in Italy,
Switzerland and Germany, that was called the angina maligna, and of which
cattle died in 24 hours. Authors relate that a blue mist appeared on the
herbage of pastures. The disease moved about two German miles in 24 hours, and
spread over Germany and Poland. Cattle at rack and manger were affected equally
with those that grazed.

At Halle in Saxony prevailed the plague; and at Dublin, a petechial in which
the brain was severely affected, and bleeding pernicious.

The discharges of fire already mentioned were productive, as usual, of violent
winds. In Sicily, a tempest, preceded by great darkness, almost laid waste the
island.

In 1683 was an earthquake in England, in September, preceded by meteors or
lights and fetid exhalations. A comet appeared in this year, and another in the
following.

The winter of 1683-4 was the coldest that could be recollected by the oldest
men living. Trees of large size split with the frost. The same winter was
excessively severe in America, and from a passage in a letter of the Rev. John
Eliot, the season appears to have been sickly.

Hist. Col. vol. 3. The year 1683 was also remarkable for general sickness in
Connecticut, and in some places, unusual mortality. Some towns suffered by
excessive rains.

Trumbull's Hist. p. 383. These unusual seasons were accompanied with singular
diseases. In Leyden in 1683 prevailed what was called the hungry fever, which
came on with a chill, succeeded by ravenous hunger. To gratify this appetite
was fatal. When the hot fit came on, the ^unger subsided. In 1684 was a
terrible earthquake in St. Domingo.

Description of St. Domingo, vol. 1. 142. After the severe frost in 1684, a
malignant dysentery raged over Europe. This and the two succeeding summers were
hot and dry. In 1685 Languedoc in France was overrun by grasshoppers, and the
petechial fever was prevalent.

In September 1686 was seen a comet. At Lille in France, fell a storm of hail,
the stones of which were of a pound weight. There was an eruption of Etna, in
this year also, and a meteor was seen at Leipsick on the 9th of July, which was
stationary for 7 minutes, at the height of 30 miles. It is curious to remark
the coincidence in time between the phenomena of the electrical fluid,
tempests, snow and hail.

The summer of 1687 in Europe was very rainy. In October the city of Lima in
Peru, was demolished by an earthquake.

The winter of 1688 was cold, and in the summer following epidemic catarrh
spread over Europe. This was preceded by a disease of the same species among
horses, attended with a defluxion of rheum from their noses. Swarms of ^nsects
in some countries announced a pestilential period. In the interior of Germany
were some dysenteries. An earthquake was experienced at Naples, and Smyrna was
laid in ruins.

In 1689 appeared a comet, and both Etna and Vesuvius discharged fire. The
autumn was very rainy, and the spotted fever prevailed in some parts of
Germany. In Boston the smallpox was epidemic.

In 1690 the summer was rainy, frogs were in unusual numbers in Italy, and corn
was cut short by mildew. Rainy seasons generally succeed great eruptions of
volcanoes and earthquakes.

The year 1691 commenced with severe frost, followed by a hot dry summer. The
spotted fever prevailed in Italy, in which bleeding was fatal. There was also
great mortality among cattle and sheep.

The seasons in this year were peculiarly unfavorable in America, although I am
not able to describe them. It appears from the journals of the assembly of
New York, that upon an address of the house to the governor and council, a
monthly fast was appointed to be observed from September 1691 to June 1692; the
special reasons assigned for which were, "a burdensome war, and a blast upon
the corn." This is a remarkable fact, and not unfrequent, that at one and the
same time, the powers of vegetation fail in the most distant parts of the
earth. Perhaps we shall be able to account for this instance of a deranged
state of the elements by the universal explosions of fire in the two following
years. St. Domingo experienced a severe earthquake in 1691, in the year of this
blast on the corn.

Description of St. Domingo, by Moreau St. Merry, vol. 1. 142. On the 7th of
June 1692 after a series of dry, hot, calm weather, a most dreadful earthquake
suddenly sunk the town of Port Royal in Jamaica, and demolished most of the
buildings on the island, with the loss of 2000 lives. After the earthquake, the
heat was still more intense, musquetoes were innumerable, and a malignant fever
fell upon the inhabitants in all parts of the island, with which 3000 perished.

In the same year, a similar disease invaded Barbados, and afflicted the
island for many years. Indeed the whole world was sickly.

On the 8th of September England, Holland, France and Germany were convulsed by
an earthquake, and Switzerland felt a shock in October. In the same year was an
eruption of Etna, and great snows followed.

The spotted fever continued its ravages; and it was remarked to be much more
malignant and fatal in the wane of the moon. During an eclipse in 1693 the sick
almost all died. The disease was more fatal in town than country.

I have no account of the diseases in Egypt or the Levant, during this period;
but it will be found on examination that great pe^^ilence raged in those
places, about this time, or between 1639 and 169^.

On the 10th of January 1693 happened a most terrible earthquake in Sicily and
Naples. On the preceding evening, was observed a great flame or light,
apparently at the distance of an Italian mile, and so bright as to be m^st^^en
for a fire. The spectators attempted to approach it; but (...) appeared still
at the same distance. As soon (...) the earth began to shake, the flame
disappeares.

It is not within my limits to enumerate the miseries occasioned by this
concussion of the earth. Suffice it say that many towns were laid in ruins and
60,000 people perished. During the convulsion a fountain discharged its waters
as red as blood. This calamity was preceded by a serene sky, and followed by
darkness or vapor of a reddish or yellow hue.

The effects of this earthquake were remarkable on the human body. Among these
were malignant fevers, smallpox fatal among children; madness, dullness,
sottishness and melancholy, with deliria and lethargy. Are not these effects
produced by an excess of stimulus, occasioned by the superabundance of
electricity?

The summer following this convulsion of the earth, was intemperately wet and
cool, and corn was mildewed. Another account says the summer in Italy was very
hot and dry. The spotted fever, and in some places dysentery were very morta^
Wounds degenerated into ulcers, and blisters were followed by mortification
which proved fatal to many.

In this year also Etna in Sicily, and Heckla in Iceland discharged fire and
lava; a new volcano was opened in Asia, and an island, called Sorea, near the
Moluccas, was ruined by its volcano.

Most dreadful storms marked the same year; one in America, on the 19th of
October, was memorable for its violence.

An epidemic catarrh began in Europe in October, being preceded by a similar
disease among horses.

The preceding winter was probably very mild in America; for on the 13th of
February, Gov. Fletcher, with a body of troops, sailed from New York for Albany.

Smith's Hist. New York, 82. In 1693 the seamen and soldiers, under Sir Francis
Wheeler, who was sent to conquer Martinico, were seized with the plague of
America, and three fourths of them perished. Hutchinson, vol. 2. 72, relates
that this fleet came to Boston and introduced the disease into that town, where
it occasioned a deplorable mortality. Douglas relates the same fact.

This account seems to be contradicted by Mather, in his Magnalia, b. 1. 22. In
a sermon delivered on lecture day, April 7, School, it is asserted in so many
words, that "An English squadron has not brought among us the tremendous
pestilence, under which a neighboring plantation has undergone prodigious
desolations. Boston, it is a mavelous thing a plague has not laid thee
desolate."

By comparing the date of this sermon, with other events related in it, I find
there is no mistake in the date; and as the author lived in Boston, and was
cotemporary with these events, and personally acquainted with Sir Francis
Wheeler, I conclude it was not Boston, but some other sea port town, which
suffered by the arrival of a fleet.

In the 2d book of Magnalia, p. 71, the same author mentions this expedition
and the terrible mortality. He says the distemper was "the most like the
plague, of any thing that had ever been seen in America, whereof there died
before the fleet could reach to Boston, as I was told by Sir Francis himself,
1300 sailors out of 2100, and 1800 soldiers out of 2400."

In book 7. 116, the same author says, "there was an English fleet of our good
friends with a direful plague aboard intending hither. Had they come, as they
intended, what an horrible desolation had cut us off, let the desolate places,
that some of you have seen ^n the colonies of the south, declare unto us. And
that they did not come was the signal hand of heaven." This passage is in a
lecture preached on the 27th of September, School.

From this authentic history, written by a cotemporary clergyman, we infer that
Hutchinson must have made a mistake. Sir Francis Wheeler's fleet arrived at
Boston, most dreadfully infected, but no disease was propagated in Boston. Some
other fleet, it seems, had introduced the disease into a "colony of the south,"
perhaps Newport or New York, but I have no information on the subject.

The great discharges of fire and earthquakes of 1693, were followed, as usual,
by an intensely cold winter. The succeeding summer of 1694 was not and
excessively dry in Italy, till October, when the earth was deluged with rain.

In May was a violent earthquake and volcano in Banda, an island in the Indian
seas. Fire issued from the neighboring seas, the air was impregnated with the
smell of sulphur, and sickness prevailed. An eruption of Vesuvius happened the
same year, and violent earthquakes in Sicily and Calabria. In this year the
agitations of fire seem to have subsided; and as usual, a series of rainy cool
summers succeeded, in which corn perished or was blasted, crops failed, and
universal dearth ensued.

One of the most remarkable effects of the late agitations of the elements, was
the frequency of apoplexies in Italy. So common were they in 1695, as to be
called epidemic, and occasion general consternation. This is not an infrequent
consequence of the high excitement that takes place in pestilential times,
ending in extreme debility in the brain. Something of this kind has been
observed in America, within the last few years.

I have very few facts in regard to the seasons and diseases in America, during
this period, from 1689 to 1695. It appears however that the disorders of the
elements were experienced in America.

In 1695 prevailed a mortal sickness among the Indians in the eastern parts of
this continent.

Hutch. vol. 2. 87. A contagious fever prevailed in Bermuda, the same year.

In Europe many malignant fevers prevailed, but no epidemics, except measles
and chin cough of a bad type. In Ireland appeared offensive fogs, a thick
clammy dew on the herbage, of a yellow color, and consistence of butter. A
similar substance was observed at Middletown, Connecticut, on the morning after
the earthquake, May 17, 1791.

The year 1696 was cool and wet -- summer in Britain, resembled winter, and
winter was like summer. Corn was mildewed. Dysentery fatal among children.

In America the winter of 1696-7, according to Hutchinson, was very severe.
Loaded sleds passed from Boston to Nantasket. Food was scarce and losses at sea
very great. I am not without suspicions however, that the author has here
described the following winter, which was as severe as he has represented it.

In 1697 the weather in Europe was mostly cool. An earthquake at Lima in Peru
shook the country with terrible violence.

In a diary kept by Daniel Fairfield, of Braintree, in Massachusetts, an
unlettered man of good understanding, I have a particular description of an
influenza that prevailed in America in the severe winter of 1697-8. For this
and many other articles of intelligence, I am indebted to the late Dr. Jeremy
Belknap, whose value as a man and as a historian many years friendship and
correspondence had taught me to appreciate, and whose loss to society and the
republic of letters, I most deeply lament.
This catarrh began in November and prevailed till February. Its violence was
in January, when whole families were sick at once, and whole towns were seized
nearly at the same time. It appears to have been an epidemic of the severe
kind; and the epidemics which followed it in America were of correspondent
severity.

In the same winter a mortal disease raged in the town of Fairfield in
Connecticut, which was so general, that well persons could scarcely be found to
tend the sick and bury the dead. Seventy persons were buried in three months,
although it may be doubted whether the town then contained 1000 inhabitants.

M. S. letter from Dr. Trumbull. In the same winter raged a deadly fever in the
town of Dover, in New Hampshire.

M. S. of the Rev. John Pike. This disease was doubtless that species of
inflammatory fever, attacking the brain and ending in typhus, which has often
proved a terrible scourge to particular parts of America, during the rage of
pestilence in the east, and of other epidemics in this country. We shall hear
of it in the following century, and especially in 1761.

On the 20th of June School the town of Latacunga, in the province of Quito,
nearly under the equator, was laid in ruins by an earthquake, as were Riobamba,
Hambato and other towns in the same district. In one place a chasm of five feet
broad and a league in length, was opened, and on a mountain happened a volcanic
eruption, from which issued ashes, cinders and flames.

Ulloa, vol. 2. The malignant fever already mentioned, whatever might have been
its precise symptoms, was soon followed by more general sickness. In 1699 raged
in Charleston South Carolina and in Philadelphia, the most deadly bilious
plague that probably ever affected the people of this country.

Mr. Norris of Philadelphia has kindly favored me with a sight of a number of
M. S. letters of his grandfather Isaac Norris, written during the sickness, to
his correspondents. This worthy gentleman was then in trade, and well
acquainted with the facts respecting the disease, as his own family suffered a
loss of several of its members.

In a letter dated August 15, 1699, he mentions, that a malignant fever broke
out about the beginning of August, which he describes as the "Barbados
distemper," tho he gives no intimations of its being communicated from
countries abroad by infection. He says the patients "vomited and voided blood."

On the 24th of August, arrived the Britannia from Liverpool, which had been 13
weeks on her passage; she had 200 passengers on board -- had lost fifty by
death, and others were sickly.

September 1st, he writes that the distemper appeared to abate at one time, but
afterward revived. He mentions the summer to be the hottest he ever knew; men
died at harvest in the field. All business in the city was suspended.

During the yearly meeting the disease abated, but the meeting was thinly
attended. Afterward the disease returned in all its violence.

October 9th, he writes that he had hoped the cool weather would have relieved
the city, but it did not.

October 22d, the disease had abated. Of this epidemic, died two hundred and
twenty, of whom eighty or ninety belonged to the society of friends.

The population of Philadelphia at this time, is not exactly ascertained; but
as the city had been settled but seventeen years, the number of people could
not have been great. If we consider that the city was thinly inhabited, and
that no considerable artificial causes of disease had been accumulated;
together with the fact of the patient's vomiting and voiding blood, we must
admit the disease to have been extremely virulent, beyond any thing that has
marked its returns in subsequent periods.

In the same letters, Mr. Norris, October 18th, mentions that he had
information from Charleston of the great mortality by the same fever -- 150 had
died in a few days, and the survivors mostly fled into the country.

In a history of South Carolina, lately published, there is a more particular
account of the calamities that befell Charleston in this year 1699. A most
dreadful tempest, a common event after excessive heat, threatened a total
destruction of the town. The sea swelled and rushed violently into the town,
compelling the people to fly to the tops of their houses for safety. A fire
broke out and laid most of the town in ashes. The smallpox proved fatal to
many of the youth, and to fill the cup of calamity, the bilious plague broke
out with such irresistible mortality, that the principal officers of
government, one half of the members of assembly and multitudes of the citizens
fell victims. These calamities came near to dissolve the settlement.

Hist. of S. Carolina, vol. 1. 142. I find no suggestion that any vessels had
arrived from the West Indies at these places, or that any suspicion existed of
the importation of this terrible disease. At that time, there was very little
intercourse directly between Philadelphia or Charleston and the West Indies.

But it will be remarked, that the disease first appeared about the "beginning
of August," as in modern times -- that it once abated, as it did in New York,
both in 1795 and 6, so as to be extinguished in the latter year, and that for
two or three weeks. -- That in 1699 as in later returns of it, it yielded not
to cool weather, until late in October. It will be further remarked, that a
severe epidemic catarrh preceded this plague, about eighteen months, as it did
in 1789-90.

During this period, other parts of the earth did not escape affliction. A
comet appeared in School and another small one in 1699; and in this latter year,
Lima suffered considerable damage by an earthquake, as did some parts of
Batavia in the East Indies.

In October School began a fatal spotted fever to prevail over all England. In
the spring of 1699 a severe and fatal catarrh was epide^ic, which carried off
the young and robust, together with hard drinkers. A cough was epidemic among
horses in England and France. In this period the catarrh in America preceded
that in Europe, one whole year.

The seven last years of this century, the period under consideration, were
distinguished for a severe and continued famine in Scotland. The general cause
was, the wet and cold summers which prevented crops from arriving to maturity.
Vast multitudes perished with hunger -- the dead bodies lay scattered along the
highways. See Sinclair's Statistical account of Scotland in a great number of
passages, and especially vol. 6. 132, 189. It does not appear that, during this
long period of distress and want, any pestilence prevailed in Scotland.

At the same time, famine afflicted Finland and carried off one tenth of the
inhabitants, and a greater proportion in the less fertile provinces of Sweden.

Williams's Obs. on North Governments, vol. 1. 638. The same period was
remarkable for failure of crops in America. In a sermon preached in Boston on
Lecture Day, Sept. 27, School, we have the following account of this subject.
"The harvest has once and again grievously failed, in these years, and we have
been struck through with terrible famine. -- The very course of nature has been
altered among us; a lamentable cry for bread, bread, has been heard in our
streets."

Magnalia b. 7. 113. In the preceding page, of this sermon, it is also
remarked, that "Epidemical sicknesses have, in these years, been once and again
upon us," and it is mentioned that Boston lost, in one year, six or seven
hundred of its people, by one contagious disease. The year is not specified.

It will be observed that in the history of the last two centuries few
instances of the plague in Egypt and the Levant are mentioned. The reason is,
that I have no regular series of accounts of plague in Egypt or Constantinople,
for the last two or three hundred years. One remark however I will hazard, on
the strength of facts within the present century, that whenever malignant
epidemics prevail generally in Europe or America, the plague ra^es in Egypt and
Constantinople, or rather a little before; the commencement of the pestilential
state of air in those unhealthy cities being a little anterior to its principal
effects in the north of Europe.

At the time of the dreadful bilious plague in Philadelphia and Charleston just
before described, the plague was raging in the Levant, and for a year or two
after.

During this period, in 1700, the same pestilential constitution displayed
itself in a most destructive sore throat in the island of Milo, in the Levant.
It is thus described by Tournefort, vol. 1. let. 4. He says it appeared in a
"Carbuncle or plaguesore in the bottom of the throat, attended with a violent
fever." It carried off children in two days, but spared adults. He calls it the
"child's plague." There appears to be some propriety in giving the disease this
appellation. It has some resemblance to the true pestis, the ulcer being formed
in the throat instead of the glands. The insidiousness of the distemper is
another circumstance of resemblance -- persons in both diseases often walking
about, a few hours before they expire. But this is a most prominent fact, that
the ulcerous sore throat, or malignant anginas are rarely or never epidemic,
except in periods when the plague and yellow fever prevail in places where they
usually appear. In no instance has the sore throat been epidemic in America,
except when the plague has been raging in Egypt and Constantinople. At least I
can find no exception to this remark; and what is more, the virulence of the
one disease in one country, corresponds with the malignity of the other disease
in the other countries. Thus, as the plague in Egypt in 1736, was far more
destructive than the same disease, at other times, so was the angina maligna of
that period in America.

When observation and philosophy shall prevail over the prejudices of men in
regard to the origin of these diseases from infection, it will be found that
the angina, in its various forms, is only a particular stage or modification of
the pestilence, which spreads over the world at certain unequal periods. The
milder forms of the pestilence appear in catarrh, measles and chin cough; which
usually appear together, or nearly so, at the beginning of the more virulent
general contagion; the later and more fatal stages are marked by anginas,
cynanche maligna, petechial fever, bilious and glandular plague in summer; and
pestilential pleurisies in winter.

There are certain times, when the constitutions of men in all parts of the
world, contract a poison, which nature makes an effort to expel; and the
different epidemics that accompany or follow each other, in rapid succession,
appear to be the different modes by which nature strives to rid the human body
of the virus. These modes depend on the season of the year, the constitution or
age of the patient and a multitude of subordinate circumstances. -- Whether
this poison is a positive substance inhaled by the lungs and pores, or is the
effect of mere debility, which unfits the several parts of the body to perform
their functions, is a question of a curious nature.

It is remarkable that in this year 1700, when this ulcerous sore throat was
raging in the Levant Isles, small children in the north of Europe were seized
with a suffocating catarrh or catarrhous fevers. These were followed by mild
epidemic measles.

Short vol. 1. 418. In the same year the smallpox was confluent and malignant.
The winter of 1700 was very mild.

In this year fell a meteor in Jamaica, which entered the earth, making
considerable holes, scorching the grass, and leaving a smell of sulphur.

Bad. Mem. 6. 389. SECTION VII. Historical view of pestilential epidemics from
the year 1701 to 1788.
THE year 1701 appears to have been excessively dry in America. Dr. Rush
relates that during the dry summer of 1782, a rock in the Skuylkill appeared
above the surface of the water, on which were engraven the figures 1701. How
little do men suspect the value of this inscription! To this alone I am
indebted for the fact of extreme drouth in that year -- and the fact is among
the proofs of an extraordinary evaporation, before discharges of fire and lava
from volcanoes. In 1701 was an eruption of Vesuvius; in 1702 of Etna. It will
hereafter appear that a similar dry season in 1782 preceded the great eruption
of Heckla in 1783. Indeed it is a general fact, and as far as I can learn, such
seasons seldom occur, except during the approach of comets, or antecedent to
volcanic eruptions.

This was a pestilential period. In 1701 Toulon lost two thirds of its
inhabitants by the plague, and the Levant was severely affected about the same
time. See the bills of mortality for Augsburg, Dresden and Boston.

In 1702 appeared a comet; Etna discharged its fires, and in Boston raged a
malignant smallpox, attended, in many cases, with a scarlet eruption, which
was mistaken for the scarlet fever. It appears from Fairfield's diary that this
disease appeared in June and was at first mild, not fatal to any of the
patients. In August died one patient -- in September it became very mortal, and
in this month was attended with a "sort of fever called scarlet fever." In
October, many died of the "fever and the smallpox, and it was a time of sore
distress," on which account the general court sat at Cambridge. In December
"the fever abated;" but the smallpox continued to be mortal, till the month of
February 1703, when it began to subside.

I have already remarked that eruptive diseases seem to belong to one family.
Physicians will observe ^he alliance in their symptoms; but I would observe
that the progressiveness in this disease of 1702 and the variations in its
symptoms, prove it to have been an epidemic, and not the effect of mere
infection, or specific contagion.

In this year also the drouth was extreme. In New York raged the American
plague, which was said to have been imported from St. Thomas's. By the
accounts, this was more fatal than any disease since that period. It was called
the "Great Sickness" and hardly a patient survived. On account of it, the
assembly was held at Jamaica on Long Island.

Smith's Hist. N. York, p. 104. Journals of Assembly, vol. 1. 151. Such were
the epidemics in America which followed the influenza of School -- malignant
pleurisies in School -- plague in 1699 and in 1702, with virulent smallpox --
all of unusual severity. Let the reader compare these facts with the accounts
from Europe and the bills of mortality.

The winter of 1702-3 was variable -- severe frost and great snows, with
intervals of warm weather. In spring catarrh prevailed in England, followed by
a sickly summer, with earthquakes.

In January and February 1703 were severe shocks of earthquake in Rome, Naples
and other parts of Italy. In October a memorable tempest or hurricane, which
did great damage at sea, and injured buildings on land.

In 1704 the summer was very dry, and a most malignant spotted fever raged in
Augsburg and in Prussia. Flies were in great abundance, and there was an
eruption of Vesuvius. The last eruption of the volcano in Teneriffe was in this
year, since which it has discharged smoke, but no fire.

Note. A late arrival from Teneriffe brings an account of the bursting forth of
a volcano, in June last, which continued, till the vessel left the island in
August.

In December 1705 were many most violent tempests and inundations. The tide
rose in the Loir in France 25 feet beyond its usual height. Half of Limerick in
Ireland was laid under water. These storms indicated the approach of a comet,
which appeared in the following year.

In 1706 coughs and coryzas prevailed, and dysentery fatal among children.

A small shock of earthquake was felt in America in 1705.

In 1707 appeared another comet and subterranean fire was uncommonly agitated.
Vesuvius discharged fire, and a new island was thrown up in the Archipelago,
with an earthquake and volcano. The seasons in this and the following year were
variable.

Buffon's Not. Hist. In November 1708 began a most severe and universal catarrh
in Europe, which was speedily followed by a series of pestilential diseases. Of
this catarrh, of the seasons, and the plagues that followed we have from Europe
very correct accounts; but, with the utmost industry, I cannot learn whether
the catarrh extended to America.

The explosion of subterranean fire in various places in 1707 seems to have
been the commencement of this period; although there was a plague in the eastern
parts of Europe, most of the preceding years from 1700. A meteor passed over
England, near the mouth of the Thames, July 31, 1708, a few months before the
catarrh.

The winter of 1708-9 was the severest that had happened, after 1683-4. But it
appears that the catarrh commenced two months before the severe cold began. At
least this epidemic appeared in the north of Europe, as early as November;
whereas the autumn was one of the mildest, till January, that was ever known.
Then the weather changed sudde^ly to most severe cold and continued for a
number of weeks.

Short, vol. 1. Lancisius, p. 194 and seq. This catarrh is carefully described
by Lanci^ius as it appeared in Italy. In Rome it commenced in January, but
increased afterward, as the cold abated. It began with coryza, rheumata and
slight cough, and was attended with pains in the breast, angina, pleurisies and
peripneumonies, which prevailed greatly in the spring, among those who
neglected the cough, or used a full diet.

Symptoms of this catarrh were, lassitude, fever with chills, wandering pains
in the breast, continued cough, hard pulse, flame-colored or turbid urine,
spitting of blood and difficult respiration. The cheeks were red and the body
suffured with a yellow color, like that of the jaundice.

Persons shut up in prison, escaped the disease. This has been observed in one
or two instances in America, and has been alleged as an evidence that the
influenza is an infectious disease, and that persons sequestered from
contagion, may escape it. To my mind the fact is rather an evidence that the
escape of prisoners is owing to a different, perhaps a less stimulant condition
of the air they breathe. It is hardly possible they should escape exposure to
infection, when every one around them is affected. The contagion of the disease
however is not denied.
Fewer women than men were afflicted, and persons in easy circumstances, who
could take care of themselves, suffered less than the poor. Many recovered by
means of sweats or hemorrhagy at the nose, or discharges from the bowels, or
copious discharges of urine, or by all these evacuations, accompanied by
spitting a thick phlegm. Venesection was beneficial, especially in robust
constitutions. On dissection, the precordia appeared of a reddish color,
extending to the diaphragm -- and discolored by spots of blackish thick blood
-- polypusses were discovered in the great vessels of the heart.

This disease did not entirely disappear till June.

In the summer of 1708 preceding the severe winter and catarrh, gnats appeared
in prodigious swarms.

The winter of 1708-9 killed fruit trees, vines and corn. After this excessive
cold, multitudes of people died of apoplexies, and others were seized with
vertigoes, arthritics, pleurisies, inflammatory fevers of all kinds, and
consumptions. This severity of cold extended over America as well as Europe, in
the same winter.

A pestilence raged in the north of Europe from the years 1702 to 1711, of
which we have an account in Philosophical Transactions, No. 337.

Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 6. p. 5. It has been observed already that the plague
raged in the Levant, in the first years of the present century. In 1702, the
same year, it will be noted, in which the terrible smallpox raged in Boston
and bilious plague in New York, the plague broke out in Poland, near Pickzow,
soon after an unfortunate battle between the Swedes and Saxons. No suggestion
appears that the disease was caught by infection from a distant country, nor
that the fetor of dead carcases was supposed to generate the distemper. On
these important points we are left in the dark. All that is recorded is, that
it first began near Pickzow in Poland, soon after a battle. It spread in 1703,
4 and 5 over Poland, and into parts of Hungary and Russia, sweeping away vast
numbers of inhabitants. In 1706 we hear nothing of it. In 1707 it broke out in
Warsaw, with great mortality. In 1708 it appeared in Thorn, and parts of Polish
Prussia.

This approach of the disease alarmed the people of Dantzick -- public prayers
were ordered in the churches -- all commerce and communication with infected
places were forbid -- no merchandise from infected or suspected places was
permitted to enter the city, and the magistrates neglected no measure that
could guard the public safety. All travelers and strangers were strictly
examined, and none permitted to enter without sufficient proofs that they came
from healthy and uninfected places. These and other strict regulations were
enjoined in July 1708; but notwithstanding these precautions, "the distemper
gradually insinuated itself, for in March 1709, there died out of one district
in the old town seven persons, and another person, being ill, was sent to the
hospital, where the disease soon spread." Dr. Gottwald, the author of this
account, visited the hospital on the 16th of the same month, and found many
persons ill -- "some had buboes, others carbuncles, others gangrenous ulcers,
which he could not determine to be pestilential, but which he judged to be
symptoms, if not of the plague already commenced, at least of something, but
little inferior to it, and certain forerunners of that destructive distemper."

In the preceding account, we observe the utter insufficiency of laws and
regulations to prevent the introduction of the plague into cities; and the
uncertainty of physicians at first as to the nature of the disease. The facts
stated prove the disease to have been generated on the spot, and to have been
progressive from malignant fevers to the real plague. I have no bills of the
mortality in Dantzick for the preceding years, but if any such are on record,
it will appear, that the approach of the plague was indicated in that city by
malignant diseases and increased mortality, for some months or perhaps a year
or two preceding.

The disease spread slowly at first, but in July and August became general --
it was at its height in September, and gradually declined till the close of the
year. The number of victims was nearly 25,000.

From the very accurate history of this pestilence by Dr. Gottwald, the
following circumstances are to be collected.

1st. That the distemper first made its appearance in a part of the old town,
called Raumbaum. What its situation is, may be seen in Busching; a part of the
city built on a stream which falls into the Vistula -- low of course -- a place
of business, and its streets dirty.

2d. The disease, after its first appearance, lay lurking for a long time, in
the suburbs of the city, and its progress was not perceivable, for two or three
months. This corresponds with its phenomena in London and other places; and
proves that cold or favorable weather suspends or checks the action of the
pestilential principle.

3d. It was most fatal to the poor -- people in good condition mostly escaped.
The same was observed at Copenhagen in 1711.

4th. Its decrease was gradual, as well as its increase.

5th. Many of the inhabitants, tho they took never so much care to avoid the
distemper, kept at home, suffered no infected person to approach them, and used
all manner of preservatives, "yet caught the infection."

6th. The disease was preceded, in 1708, by extraordinary numbers of spiders.
The same presage has been observed on other occasions.

7th. While this distemper was raging, on the 11th of August, an offensive mist
was observed, like a thick cloud, but of short duration. It returned in the
afternoon, from the northwest, so thick as to darken the air. Its color was
that of the effluvia from the ^ffervescence of the oil of vitriol with oil of
tartar, a blackish yellow.

8th. In the beginning of October appeared over the city a blue fiery globe or
meteor, which came from the north west, in the night, shot toward the town
rapidly, illuminating the city, and fell to the south.

9th. Crows, sparrows and other birds did not make their appearance during the
pestilence.

In 1708 and 9 the plague desolated Livonia. In 1710 the disease appeared in
Sweden; 30,000 persona perished by it in Stockholm, and other parts of the
kingdom did not escape. Historians relate, that in the latter part of the last
century and beginning of the present, the sweating sickness and great plague in
Sweden destroyed several hundred thousand lives, in consequence of which Sweden
is less populous than formerly.

Williams's Obs. vol. 1. p. 638. Universal Hist. vol. 35. 458. In 1710 also the
territory of Lithuania was ravaged by pestilence.

In 1711 Copenhagen lost 25,000 citizens by the same malady.

It is proper to remark how extensively pestilence prevailed after the great
catarrh and terribly severe winter of 1709.

Nor did America escape the operation of the general principle. A body of
troops under Genesis Nicholson, destined to cooperate with a fleet from England,
in the reduction of Canada, e^camped near Wood Creek in the province of
New York, and in July and August were attacked with a distemper which made
dreadful havoc and obliged them to decamp. Some of the men died as if they had
been poisoned. This circumstance gave rise to a report which Charlevoix gravely
relates, that the Indians had poisoned the water of the creek, by throwing into
it all the skins of beasts they had taken in hunting. The disease was probably
the lake fever or a malignant dysentery. This happened in 1709.

Hutch. Hist. Mass. vol. 2. 179. England also felt the influence of the same
general principle, as appears from the bill of mortality for 1710. In France,
England and the Low Countries raged a catarrhous fever to which was given the
name of Dunkirk rant. In some places prevailed a spotted fever, as at Norwich.

Short on Air. Baddam's Mem. vol. 6. 70, 72. In 1712 prevailed catarrh in
Europe, with sore throats. Whether catarrh prevailed in America also, I can
obtain no information. The seasons in England were excessively wet, and corn
was rotten or mildewed. The winter was severe, there was an eruption of
Vesuvius and an earthquake. From these circumstances, I suspect the approach of
a comet, but have found no account of any. Since the text was prepared for the
press, I have found an account of a comet in 1712. My suspicions therefore were
well founded.


Short, vol. 2. 8. In October 1712 commenced a mortal sickness in the town of
Waterbury, in Connecticut, which raged for eleven months. It was so general
that nurses could scarcely be found to tend the sick. What the disease was, I
am not informed; but not improbably it was that species of putrid pleurisy,
which has so often made dreadful havoc in America.

Trumbull's Hist. of Connecticut, 386. In the same year, prevailed a sore
throat in London, accompanied with dizziness and pain in the limbs.

In 1713 prevailed the measles in America, cotemporary with epidemic pestilence
in Europe.

In 1712 and 13, the plague was epidemic in Vienna, Hungary, Stiria and other
eastern countries. This disease was preceded by the spotted fever, which
gradually changed to plague. At the same time, whole countries were overrun
with insects.

Short, vol. 2. 10. In England prevailed a fever which Mead has pronounced to
have been of the same kind, as the sweating sickness in the sixteenth century.
-- He says it was imported from Dunkirk, but how it came to be in Dunkirk, he
does not inform us.

During these calamities among men, the beasts of the field did not escape. A
fatal distemper among cattle broke out in 1711 and raged with such violence, in
Italy, as almost to destroy the species. It spread for three or four years, and
horses perished by a similar pestilence. The writers who describe the disease,
represent it as a kind of plague; and all agree that it sprung from a single
infected cow from Dalmatia. How this cow became infected, they do not inform
us. The truth is the disease was an epidemic, tho very infectious; and that it
did not necessarily originate in infection, is proved by its appearing in many
other parts of Europe.

The disease began with rigors, which were followed by violent fever, with
eruptions like those of the smallpox, and terminated in five, six or seven
days.

Baddam's Mem. vol. 6. 72. Lancisius p. 154. In 1714 began in Europe a series
of dry summers. This year was rather sickly in England, and cattle also
perished by an infectious distemper.

In 1715 the smallpox and measles were epidemic in England. In the same year,
Plymouth in Massachusetts lost 40 of its inhabitants by a malignant disease,
but no particulars are known.

Hist. Col. vol. 4. 129. In 1716 the winter was excessively severe, and a fair
was held on the Thames. The rivers in Europe, even in Italy, were covered with
ice.

Short, vol. 2. 17. In America, the 21st of October O. S. was so dark that
people used lighted candles. Lima, the same year, was shaken by an earthquake.

Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 1. 244. Ulloa. Lima. In 1717 appeared a comet, and there
was an explosion of Vesuvius. Holland and Germany suffered severely the same
year by inundations. In America the winter was terribly severe, and remarkable
for "prodigious storms of snow," says Mr. Winthrop of New London in a letter to
Dr. Mather, Hist. Col. vol. 2. 12. One hundred ^heep belonging to that
gentleman were buried in the snow on Fisher's Island, and 28 days after, were
dug out, when two of them were found alive; and they both lived and thrived.
The snow was accumulated over them to the height of sixteen feet. -- This snow
storm is distinguished in the Annals of America, as by far the greatest ever
known.

This year was remarkable also in America for the death of many old people, says

Hutchinson's Hist. vol. 2. 223. In Europe catarrh was prevalent, and malignant
smallpox among children. At Underwald in Switzerland prevailed a tertain, so
violent as to destroy life at the second attack. The plague made its appearance
in some part of the Turkish dominions.

See Short, vol. 2. 20, and Lady Montague's Letters. In 1718 the winter was
cold in Europe, the season in England hot, and a comet was seen. The plague
advanced.

See Short, vol. 2. and Russel's Hist. Aleppo. In 1719 malignant fevers were
prevalent in many parts of Europe, marking a pestilential principle of great
extent. The winter of 1719-20 in America was very cold.

Douglas. In these last years raged malignant pleurisy in Hartford, in
Connecticut, with great mortality.

In March 1719 an immense meteor passed the heavens, illuminating the earth and
bursting with a tremendous report. Its diameter was calculated by Dr. Halley at
a mile and a half.

At this time the plague appeared in Aleppo, and carried off by report 80,000
people. Russel agrees that this disease came from the north, although he has given
us few particulars. It raged, as usual, for two or three years.

Hist. of Aleppo -- passim. In 1718, 19, 20 and 21, says Dr. Rogers, the
greater number of those who lived near the slaughter-houses at Cork, died.

In 1720 happened the last great plague in Marseilles, on which occasion has
been published "Traite de la peste," a treatise in quarto, by Chicoyneau, under
the sanction of the French king, in which great efforts are made to prove the
disease to have been imported from the Levant.

The proofs of importation stand thus. "Capt. Chataud left Said in Syria in
January 1720, with a clean patent. The plague was not then in Said, tho it
broke out soon after. On the passage, several persons died, and the physicians
at Leghorn, where the ship stopped, pronounced their disease to be "a malignant
pestilential fever."

The ship arrived at Marseilles, and some persons who had concern with the
goods, died in May. The suspected goods were subjected to fifteen days retreat
and purification -- they were forbid to be introduced into the city -- the
porters were shut up; but all regulations were fruitless. In June, deaths
appeared in the city with distinctive marks of the plague."

On such flimsey evidence do the sticklers for the sole propagation of the
plague by infection, ground all their assertions respecting the disease at
Marseilles!

But it happens in this case, as in most similar instances, that the pretended
proofs of infection carry refutation in the very face of them.

In the first place, it is an acknowledged fact, that at the time the ship left
Said, the plague had not appeared in that port, or town. It was at Aleppo and
in other places far distant in 1719, but had not broke out in Said. How, in the
name of reason, could men or goods be infected, when the disease did not exist
in the place?

To overcome or rather to evade the force of this objection, the writers on the
subject are compelled to resort to supposition. They say it is possible, the
plague might have been in the place, tho not known or generally admitted. And
here rests their whole argument!

It is true, that some of the seamen or passengers died on the passage, with a
malignant pestilential fever. But in this case, the malady originated on board
the ship -- and the infection is not traced to the Levant ports. There is an
end of the chain -- the disease began without infection, on board the ship, as
malignant fevers have done in thousands of other ships.

Again, it is admitted by Dr. Mead himself, p. 255, that from the time of the
sailors' death, after the ship arrived, it was full six weeks before the
disease was known in the city of Marseilles; a circumstance that renders it
nearly impossible that there could have been any propagation of the distemper
by infection. To remove this objection, the advocates of infection again resort
to supposition. They suppose it possible some latent seeds of the disease had
been concealed in goods, or clothes -- and such ridiculous suggestions are made
the grounds of assertion.

But what completely refutes all these idle suppositions, is, that we have full
evidence, that the plague in Marseilles was generated in the city, and
gradually arose from milder diseases. In the beginning of the "Traite de la
peste," it is stated from Mon. Didier and not denied, that "the preceding year
1719 was a barren year -- the corn, the wine and the oil, were defective. The
heat of spring was excessive and followed by great rains, with westerly winds
-- the fruits were bad. In this year a pestilential fever appeared in
Marseilles, of which many died, and in some, appeared buboes, carbuncles and
paroitides."

Here we observe facts that always exist, before the plague, and which
demonstrate the uniform operations of the laws of nature. The year 1718 began
to exhibit malignant diseases in greater numbers than usual. In 1719 the plague
broke out at Aleppo, and in the north and west of Europe, malignant fevers
became in many places, epidemic and pestilential. In 1720, the pestilential
state of the air, arrived at its crisis in Marseilles. The pestilence in Europe
exhibited a regular progress, from ordinary typhus fever to the plague. A fatal
smallpox and spotted fever prevailed in Piemont.

To demonstrate this fact, the reader will only turn to the bills of mortality
in London, Amsterdam, Vienna, Dresden, etc. for the years under consideration,
and observe every where the effects of a general unhealthy state of air, in the
increase of the number of deaths. -- The bills of mortality in Boston and
Philadelphia also prove this state of air to have extended to this country; and
the malignancy of it seems to have abated in America after 1721, in which year
the smallpox was very mortal in Boston.

The accounts of diseases in America, at this period, are few and imperfect.
Tradition has preserved the memory of desolating sickness, at various times and
in various places, some of which, I suspect, refer to this period, but I am not
able to ascertain the dates, with any certainty. My father mentions an
instance, which he believes to have been not long before his birth, which was
in 1722. An aged lady of 96, who was born in 1702, informs me that a malignant
pleurisy raged when she was 17 years old; this fixes the period in 1719.
By accident however, I am able to determine positively the pestilential state
of air in America in 1720. A genuine letter is extant, from Thomas Hacket of
Duck Creek, now in the state of Delaware, dated April 10th 1720, in which he
states that a mortality prevailed in that place, which exceeded that in London
in 1665, and almost depopulated the village. I have seen the letter in
possession of Dr. Rush.

In 1721 there was an eruption of a volcano in Iceland. A dreadful dysentery
raged in Upper Saxony.

In 1720 there was a great earthquake in China, and in 1721 shocks were felt in
the Mediterranean, by Dr. Shaw who was then on his travels to the east. -- In
October 1720, fire arose out of the sea near Tercera, one of the Azores, and a
small island arose.

Buffon's Not. Hist. In 1722, the seasons were cold, wet and rainy. In August
happened a most violent storm in Jamaica and S. Carolina. In May an earthquake
in Chili.

The winter of 1722-3 was cold and dry in England. In 1723 appeared a comet,
and on the 24th of February, O. S. a mighty tempest which is recorded among the
memorabilia of America. The wind blew violently from the southward, then veered
suddenly to the eastward and northward, bringing in a tide which rose two or
three feet above the Long Wharf in Boston, and flowed over all the lower part
of the town, filling cellars and destroying property to a great amount. Immense
damage was sustained in all the maritime towns.

See Mather's letter. Hist. Col. vol. 2. 11. The confluent smallpox raged in
England See the London bill of mortality for 1723. Dysenteries, pleurisies and
other inflammatory complaints prevailed in the different seasons.

The bilious plague prevailed in Barbados, said to be imported from Martinico.
We are not informed from whence it came into Martinico. In these accounts of
infections, we are not led to the end of the chain.

In the same year 1723 prevailed in many parts of the colony of Rhode Island, a
fatal disease called the "burning ague." It was particularly fatal, near
Providence, between Pautucket and Pautuxet. In proportion to its patients, no
disease in Ametica, was ever more mortal. It did not prevail in a large town,
but in villages, and perhaps the clearing of some neighboring swamps might have
been one cause of the disease. The year however was less healthy than usual. A
disease of the same name is noted once or twice in ancient history. See the
year 1001.

The year 1724 in England was mostly wet and cold; the whooping cough
prevailed; but the year was generally healthy.

The summer of 1725 was also wet and cold in England. In January a severe frost
produced many inflammatory complaints. In this year happened violent
earthquakes in South-America, and eruptions from two volcanic mountains in
Iceland. I have no account of the weather and diseases in America. I only learn
from an old gentleman, that one of the winters between 1722 and 1725 was
called, "the hard winter."

The winter of 1726-7 was changeable in England, but mostly cold with great
snows. Remitting fevers prevailed in summer and inflammatory, in winter, which
swelled the bills of mortality to an unusual degree. At the same time the
plague raged in Egypt.

The same winter in America was milder than usual -- the summer of 1727 was
very hot and dry. See Dudley's account of the great earthquake.

Philos. Trans. and Museum, vol. 5. 363. In 1727 appeared a comet -- an
explosion of fire took place from Vesuvius and a volcano in Iceland. The
interior counties of England were shaken by an earthquake; and on the 29th of
October of the same year happened one of the most extensive and violent
earthquakes ever known in America. A malignant dysentery was epidemic in Bern.
In America, the summer was very hot.

Short, vol. 2. Van Troil on Iceland. Williams on Earthquakes. Memoirs of
American Academy. P^nnant's Arctic Zoology. Zimmerman on dysentery. Phil.
Trans. 437. Baddam's Mem. vol. 10. 110. This was a sickly year; see the bills
of mortality for London and Amsterdam, Boston, Philadelphia Christ's Church and
Dublin. The prevalent diseases in London were fevers of a malignant type. What
the disease was in Philadelphia, I know not; but the greatest mortality was in
February, March and April.

In 1728 putrid fevers were frequent -- the summer was cold in England and the
following winter severe. The year 1727 was unproductive; corn in England was
scarce and the scarcity continued into this year. An eruption of a volcano in
Iceland and the plague in Egypt marked this year, 1728. The eruption in Iceland
continued till 1730.

This year, 1728, the summer weather in South Carolina was unusually hot and
dry. The earth was parched and the springs exhausted. In August a violent
hurricane occasioned an inundation, which spread over the low grounds and did
incredible damage to the wharves, houses and corn fields. The streets of
Charlestown were covered with boats; the inhabitants were driven to the upper
stories of their houses; twenty-three ships were driven ashore and thousands of
trees were levelled. The same season, the bilious plague raged in Charleston
with great mortality.

Hist. of S. Carolina, vol. 1. 316. In 1729 appeared a comet, and in autumn a
universal catarrh in Europe, and perhaps over the globe. This was preceded by
measles. It seized with a slight chill, a slow fever, weariness, continual
hoarseness, pain of the head, and difficulty of breathing. The suddenness of
the attack was astonishing, and it proved fatal to many aged and phlegmatic
people. Many pleurisies and peripneumonies followed. Its first appearance was
in Poland, Austria and Silesia, and it marched over Europe in five months. At
the close of this epidemic in 1730, Vesuvius discharged its contents of fire.

In this year 1729 the plague was in Aleppo, and it will be seen that the bills
of mortality in the north of Europe exhibit a sickly state, through a period of
many years at this time. The measles prevailed in America, and in Farmington,
Connecticut, a malignant pleurisy.

The summer of 1729 was in most parts of England, very wet, in other parts,
dry; but this made no difference in the prevalence of the catarrh. The
smallpox was very frequent in England.

This year also is remarkable for the first appearance of the yellow fever or
black vomit at Carthagena, in South-America, where it made dreadful havoc among
the crews of the fleet under Don Domingo Justiniani. The same fate attended the
crews of the galleons under Lopez Pintado in 1730.

Ulloa, vol. 1. p. 44. -- Land. 1772. The winter of 1729-30 was very mild in
Europe. There was a small eruption of Vesuvius in 1730 and in Iceland, and an
earthquake in South-America, on the 8th of July totally demolished the towns of
Conception and Santiago, in Chili. This dreadful calamity was soon followed by
an epidemic disease which swept away greater numbers than the earthquake.

Ulloa, vol. 2. 235, 257. The plague was in Cyprus about this time, and was
preceded by an earthquake.

In January 1729, the rivers and canals in Holland were covered with ice, from
12 to 20 inches thick. Measles and anginas prevailed, and in autumn the
smallpox made great havoc.

Bad. Mem. vol. 9. 314 and sequel. It will be observed that these eruptive
diseases in Holland were cotemporary with the measles in America, and the
malignant pleurisy in winter, which was the predominant symptom of a
pestilential constitution of air, in America, until the year 1761.

The winter of 1730-31 was very severe in Europe.

It appears from the bills of mortality in Boston and Philadelphia, that the
years 1730 and 31 were sickly. What the malady was which swelled the mortality
in Christ Church to double the usual number in 1731, I am not informed; but the
greatest mortality happened in March and April. The smallpox was the disease
which augmented the bill in Boston in 1730.

In 1731 the smallpox spread in New York, and occasioned an adjournment of the
legislature in September.

Journals, vol. 1. p. 633. In 1732 appeared a comet, and in America the
following winter was very severe, continuing from the middle of November to the
end of March. In Europe, the winter was mild.

Douglas Sum. Short on Air. Lima in South-America was shaken, this year, by an
earthquake; a shock was experienced also in England; and in November the same
was experienced in Canada and New England. On the 9th of August happened a
remarkably dark day.

See Douglas, and Professor Williams Mem. Am. Acad. In this year, the plague
prevailed at Tripoli, Sidon and Damascus; and the American plague at
Charleston, S. Carolina.

Lining's letter. Edin. Essays, vol. 2. Toward the close of the year, in
October, commenced in America a severe universal catarrh, which appeared in
Europe also in December. It spread over all Europe, in the beginning of 1733,
and probably over the earth, as it was experienced at the isle of Bourbon, in
the Indian Ocean.

Mem. of Dr. Hunt of Northampton, and the Medical publications in Edinburgh.
This epidemic seems to have been the precursor of the most pestilential period
of this century. The summer of 1733, in England, was dry and pleasant. The
winter following was very mild. The plague raged at Aleppo.

The scarlatina appeared in Edinburgh; and the chin cough also began in England
in 1734, continuing to prevail in 1735.

This period also was noted for meteors. In June 1734, a ball of fire passed
through two opposite windows of a steeple at Air, in Scotland, broke one end of
the bell-joist, and descended to the earth, without doing further harm. A boy
in the neighborhood was killed by another ball of fire.

Sinclair's Stat. Ac. of Scotland, vol. 1. 96. On the 2d of February 1735,
Popayan in S. America, was nearly ruined by an earthquake.

The summer of 1735, was very wet and cold. In Europe in 1734 commenced a slow
putrid fever. An anginous fever became epidemic among children, and quinsies or
swellings of the throat, with contagion, and great mortality. Smallpox of a
malignant kind prevailed at the close of the year. The pestilential state of
the air is said to have affected birds, which died in the cages. Canine madness
prevailed.

Short, vol. 2. Van Swieten, vol. 16. p. 56. In 1735, prevailed a spotted fever
of a fatal kind, and other malignant disorders, with hydrophobia. In Scotland,
the measles became epidemic, and fevers of a bad kind.

Essays and Obs. Edin. Phil. Transac. vol. 4. H^ham, vol. 1. Earthquakes were
felt in England in 1734 and 1736.

In 1736 and 7 a fatal ulcerous sore throat and malignant peripneumonies,
prevailed in France.

In 1735 or 6, three or four thousand people, in the Orkney Islands, perished
with famine. The scarcity there in 1782 and 3 was also deplorable, but none
perished.

Sinclair's Scotland, vol. 7 497. While these epidemics were prevailing in
Europe, America felt the pestilential state of air. In May 1735, in a wet cold
season, appeared at Kingston, an inland town in New Hampshire, situated in a
low plain, a disease among children, commonly called the "throat distemper," of
a most malignant kind, and by far the most fatal ever known in this country.
Its symptoms generally were, a swelled throat, with white or ash-colored
specks, an efflorescence on the skin, great debility of the whole system, and a
tendency to putridity.

It first seized a child, who died in three days. In about a week afterward,
three children, in another family, at a distance of four miles, were
successively seized and all died on the third day. It continued to spread, and
of the first forty patients, not one recovered.

In August, it appeared at Exeter, a town six miles distant. In September, it
broke out in Boston, fifty miles distant; although it did not appear in Chester
six miles west of Kingston, till October. -- It continued its ravages, through
that year into the next, and gradually traveled southward, almost stripping
the country of children. Very few children escaped, for although the disease was
very infectious, yet its propagation depended very little on that circumstance.
It attacked the young in the most sequestered situations, and without a
possible communication with the sick. It was literally the plague among
children. Many families lost three and four children -- many lost all.

In some places, this distemper was more fatal than in others -- country towns
suffered more than populous cities. And it should be here remarked, that the
virulence of this species of disease seems at times to be greatly augmented by
cold and wet weather -- it is most mild in cities where the air is, in a
degree, corrected of its rigor and moisture. -- To this observation however
there are exceptions.

Scorbutic people and those who lived on pork, and of course the poor, suffered
most. In some families, it was comparatively mild -- in others it was malignant
like a plague. This disease gradually traveled westward and was two years in
reaching the river Hudson, distant from Kingston, where it first appeared,
about 200 miles in a strait line. It continued its progress westward, with some
interruptions, until it spread over the colonies. Few adults were affected; its
principal ravages were among persons under age, or rather under puberty. For
many years after it was epidemic, it frequently broke out in different places
without any apparent cause, but did not spread -- a striking proof that such
diseases will not become epidemic by the sole power of infection, but that some
general cause must aid its propagation, or it will perish in its cradle. This
is probably true of every species of pestilential disease.

From an elderly lady of great observation in New Haven, I have learnt that
persons who, recovered of this distemper, were subject, all their lives, to
sore throat and quinsies, and what is perhaps more remarkable, that few or none
of them have lived to be old. It is at least apparent, in the sphere of her
observation, that those persons have died at an earlier age than others. These
facts are striking proofs how much the whole system, and especially the seat of
the disease, was impaired in strength and firmness, by that distressing malady.
A gentleman still living, who was affected with the same disease in 1742,
informs me that his constitution has never recovered from the shock it received
from that malady.

The invasion of this distemper was gradual, and for some time before its
attack, children appeared to languish. It was not always attended with great
prostration of strength, for persons were often walking, an hour or two before
their death. The same happened in the angina of 1794.

See further particulars in Colden's account. Medical Obser. and Enq. London,
vol. 1. 211. and in Belknap's History New Hampshire, vol. 2. 118. Diseases
among cattle in New Hampshire marked this period.

In 1736, and during the rage of the ulcerous sore throat in America and in
England, the plague made terrible havoc in Egypt -- authors relate that Cairo
lost 10,000 persons in a day. -- In Nimeguen raged a malignant dysentery.

In 1737 while the angina maligna was spreading over the northern parts of
America, the bilious plague prevailed in Virginia. In England and Scotland, the
measles broke out and prevailed in 1735 and 6, cotemporary with the angina in
America. Dr. Short relates that the first person seized was a woman in her
childbed illness.

At the same time prevailed miliary fevers in Cornwall, accompanied with
glandular swellings. Coughs, defluxions and catarrhs were frequent. A
pestilential disease in Devonshire swept away cattle and swine.

In 1737 a very severe influenza invaded both hemispheres. It commenced in
November.

In 1737 also appeared a comet; Constantinople was shaken and Smyrna half
destroyed by an earthquake. A small shock was felt in Boston. In October of
this year, a storm or hurricane in the East Indies, destroyed 20,000 vessels of
different sizes, and 300,000 people. There was a great eruption of Vesuvius in
the same year. In Iceland also was an eruption between 1730 and 1740, but the
year is not specified.

See Gent. Mag. and Tablet of Memory, art. Storms. A most singular meteor in
the same year, followed by a very severe winter.

This pestilential constitution did not produce the same diseases in England,
as in France and America. The fatal ulcerous sore throat was cotemporary in
America and in France in 1737; but that disease did not appear, in its
formidable array, in England until 1742. In 1734-5 appeared its sister-malady,
the scarlet fever in Edinburg; but it subsided; and the epidemic took the form
of measles of a bad type, with hoarseness, defluxions and catarrh. The catarrh
prevailed also in Barbados in the close of this year and beginning of the
next, and in New England was a great death of fish and water fowl.

In 1738 sudden deaths, vertigoes and apoplexies followed the preceding
epidemics in England. The plague raged at Ockzakow, at Barbados, and in
New-Spain the pestilence was so general and mortal, as to threaten the country
with depopulation.

In 1739 the smallpox prevailed in New York, and some dysenteries, but I hear
of no remarkable occurrences in this year; except that angina maligna appeared
in England in a few sporadic cases, but did not spread at that time; and an
infectious fever prevailed at Charleston.

Journals N York Assembly, vol. 1. 756. Fothergill's ac. Sore Throat. A comet
was seen in 1739, and the winter following in Europe was the severest known
since 1716 or perhaps since 1709. The cold continued till June and was
succeeded by a dry season; then a wet, cold autumn. A dearth succeeded in
Scotland, and measles spread over America.

In England spread the whooping cough in December 1740. The smallpox prevailed
and in 1741 that disease, with the spotted fever were very mortal.

See the London bills of mortality. In Bristol and Galway, in Ireland, the
fevers fell little short of the plague.

Huxham, vol. 2. Short, vol. 2. It was computed that in 1740 and 41, Ireland
lost 80,000 people by famine, dysentery and spotted fever.

Rogers on Epid. Amsterdam experienced the same pestilential constitution.

See the bills. Not less remarkable were the seasons in America. In 1740-41, a
year later than in Europe, the winter was of the severest kind. Many cattle
perished for want of food.

Journals of N. York Assembly, vol. 1. 799, 804. During this winter measles
prevailed in Connecticut. The American plague appeared in Philadelphia and
Virginia. In Scotland many perished by famine.

Sinclair's Scot. vol. 6. 433. Don Ulloa relates an opinion among the Spaniards
in South-America, that in 1740, the black vomit was first introduced into
Guayaquil by the galleons from the south seas. They aver the disease not to
have been known there, anterior to that year. It was most fatal to seamen and
foreigners, but the natives did not escape. Here we have a new source of yellow
fever!

In 1742 the ulcerous sore throat of a malignant kind appeared in England, and
continued to prevail more or less for many years, and in 1745 became very
infectious.

See Short, vol. 2. and Fothergill's Works. The summer of 1742 in England was
dry.

In America, the same angina prevailed in 1742. From 1740 to 1744 pestilential
diseases prevailed in all parts of the known world.

In Syria, the winter of 1741-2 was very severe. In March began an acute fever
in Aleppo, attended with a severe pain in the right hypochondrium. The plague
had previously shown itself on the sea coast. In April, says Alex. Russel, some
reapers brought the infection into the neighborhood of Aleppo. In the city, no
notice was given of the plague, till the 18th of May; but on strict enquiry, it
was found that cases had occurred before that time. Whether the "reapers"
introduced the fomites into the city, the author does not inform us.

The distemper made no great havoc in this season. It abated in July, and
nothing is said about infection, till November, when a few more cases occurred.
In February 1743 a few cases appeared and in March an alarm was given. It was
more general in this year, but disappeared in 1744.

When the disease subsided in Aleppo, it was followed by diarrhaeas and
dysenteries with petechiae; and some obstinate intermittents.

In December 1742 and January 1743 were earthquakes with great snows, violent
rains and frost.

In 1742 a mortal fever prevailed at Holliston in Massachusetts, in which died
Mr. Stone, the minister and fourteen of his congregation. In this year was seen
a comet.

In the spring of 1743; a smart shock of earthquake convulsed Sicily, Naples
and Malta. A catarrh prevailed at the same time. These were the precursors of
the dreadful plague which raged, in the following summer, at Calabria, Reggio,
and especially at Messina in Sicily, where perished 46,000 inhabitants out of
72,000. The summer was violently hot, and dysentery prevailed in other parts of
Italy.

At the same time, New York was severely afflicted by the bilious plague, where
died, in one season, 217 of the inhabitants -- a considerable number for the
population of that day. "New York, Oct. 24, 1743. By tke Mayor of the City. An
account of persons buried in the city of New York, From July 25th to Sept. 25,
1743. From Sept. 25 to Oct. 22d. Children, 51 Children, 16 Grown persons, 114
Grown persons, 36 165 52 165 217

And I do find by the best information I have of the doctors, etc. of this city
that the late distemper is now over.

JOHN CRUGER, Mayor." New York at that time contained about 7 or 8000
inhabitants.




I know not what diseases prevailed in Boston, but the bill for that year shows
it to have been sickly.

The year 1743 was distinguished for a tremendous eruption of fire at Cotopaxi,
a mountain in the province of Quito, five leagues north of Latacunga; all the
neighboring villages were ruined by floods from the melted snows of the
mountain. The eruption was repeated in 1744.

Ulloa, vol. 1. Venice suffered by an inundation in 1743, and the year was
remarkable for violent storms, at Boston, Jamaica, and in many countries.

In December 1743 appeared a comet of distinguished magnitude, which was
visible till February of the following year. This was probably the same which
appeared in 1401, and in both instances attended with pestilence.

In 1744 severe catarrh spread over Europe. It was at Rome in February; at
London in March; and in a few weeks pervaded England.

In June of this year, was an earthquake of considerable violence in
New England.

In 1745 Lima was shaken by an earthquake. An infectious fever broke out among
the troops employed in the expedition to Louisbourg. A similar fever prevailed
at Boston; and how far the health of the town was affected by the returning
troops, I am not informed. This was a time of general sickness.

In Charleston prevailed the infectious yellow fever, while Egypt and Smyrna
were suffering the ravages of the plague. The bilious plague prevailed, at the
same time, in New York.

In this year, the town of Stamford in Connecticut was severely distressed by a
malignant dysentery, which swept away seventy inhabitants out of a few
hundreds. The disease was confined to one street.

The year 1746 was probably still more unhealthy. An earthquake laid Lima and
Calao in ruins. The concussion began on the 28th of October, about six hours
before the full of the moon; and at intervals, the shocks were repeated for
four months, in which time they amounted to four hundred and fifty. During
these convulsions, fire burst forth in several places of the distant mountains.
Many days before the shocks began, hollow rumbling noises were heard in the
earth, at times resembling the discharge of artillery. Similar sounds continued
for some time after the earthquake.

See the melancholy tale in Ulloa, vol. 2. 83. Albany was, in this year,
visited by a malignant disease called by Colden, a nervous fever; and by
Douglas, the yellow fever. From an old citizen, who was living in 1797, my
friend Dr. Mitchell obtained the following particulars relative to that
disease. The bodies of some of the patients were yellow -- the crisis of the
disease was the ninth day; if the patient survived that day, he had a good
chance for recovery. The disease left many in a state of imbecility of mind,
approaching to childishness or idiocy; others were afterward troubled with
swelled legs.

The disease began in August, ended with frost, and carried off forty-five
inhabitants mostly men of robust bodies. It was said to be imported.

As this was unusual disease in Albany, ingenuity was occupied to find out its
origin. It was reported that a like disease prevailed in New York, and that it
had been imported in a vessel from Ireland. Nervous, yellow fever imported from
Ireland! Such are the vulgar tales that disgrace this age of science and
philosophy. From what fairy land were imported the malignant diseases, which
every where swelled the bills of mortality in the same year? -- Not that I
would insinuate that diseases of a certain kind are not infectious. A
pestilential fever originated in the Chebucto fleet, under the Duke D'Anville,
which landed an army on our shores in this same year, and one third of the
Indians who visited the cantonments, died. There the disease subsided, without
becoming epidemic.

But what I severely reprobate is, the disposition of men to trace all the
evils of life to a foreign source; when the sources are in their own country,
their own houses, and their own bosoms.

A similar disease raged, the same year, among the Mohegan Indians.

See the postscript at the end of the volume. At Zurich in Switzerland and in
Saxony prevailed a very malignant dysentery. Indeed for a number of years, at
this period, dysentery was epidemic in many parts of Europe and America.

In 1747 prevailed epidemic catarrh in America and Europe. In the same year the
bilious plague prevailed in Philadelphia. -- In 1748, in Charleston. The same
years were sickly in Boston.

In 1747 appeared a comet, and Etna, which had been quiet more than forty
years, commenced her discharges of fire and lava. In the West Indies, a
tremendous hurricane laid waste the Islands.

Two comets appeared in 1748; the winter was severe, and two or three
excessively hot and dry summers succeeded. In England the summer of 1747 was
very dry. In 1748 a fast was appointed in Massachusetts on account of the
drouth.

In England the angina maligna continued its ravages with increased mortality.
The same malady prevailed in France in 1749, and there was an earthquake at
London. The 18th of June was a noted hot day, and Mars was as near to the earth
as her orbit will permit.

Almanac for 1749. In 1749 the dysentery and nervous long fever visited many
towns in Connecticut with distressing mortality. Waterbury sustained a loss of
about 130 of her inhabitants principally by dysentery. Cornwall, then a new
settled village, on high mountains, lost twenty of her citizens. Hartford was
severely visited with intermittents, for the last time. The summer was very
dry, and locusts or grass-hoppers overrun the fields and devoured the herbage.

Douglas, vol. 2. 208. I am authorized to say that the terrible dysentery in
Woodbury did not appear to be very contagious -- it excited great alarm; every
one avoided the sick, if possible; but many who lived remote and never came
near the sick, were seized, and suddenly died. M. S. letter from Z. Beers.


In 1749 and 50 the dysentery, according to Zimmerman, made great havoc in the
Canton of Berne. It is remarkable that this formidable disease should be thus
prevalent in both hemispheres at the same time, and for a series of years.
About this time measles prevailed in America.

In 1750 appeared a comet, and the summer was excessively hot. In Philadelphia,
the heat raised the mercury to 100 degrees. by Farenheit. The plague carried off
30,000 people in Fez, and one third of the inhabitants of Tangiers.

Violent tempests marked this year, in America, and an unusual swell of the
Severn in England. Earthquakes happened in England, Jamaica, Peru, Leghorn,
Rome, Sicily and Lapland.

At Beauvais, 50 miles from Paris, broke out a pestilential disease, called la
Suete, resembling the sweating sickness, terminating fatally in three days.

See Gent. Magazine. At Bethlem in Connecticut raged a mortal fever, which
swept away between thirty and forty of the inhabitants. The exciting cause was
supposed to be the exhalations from a swamp which had been drained. It is not
improbable that this might have aided the general principles of disease.

Med. Repos. vol. 1. p. 523. The winter of 1750-51 is mentioned as extremely
severe in America. Vesuvius discharged fire and lava, in 1751, and on the 7th
of March, a most dreadful tempest at Nantz in France, destroyed 66 ships, with
800 lives. On the same day, a tempest at Jamaica did damage to the amount of a
million of dollars. A storm at Cadiz on the 8th of December destroyed 100 sail
of shipping. On the Adriatic coast was an earthquake.

In this year Constantinople lost 200,000 inhabitants by the plague. -- The
preceding winter was cold in Turkey, and the old people predicted a severe
plague from the quantity of snow that fell in Constantinople. This prediction
was founded on long observation; and I am able to confirm the justness of it,
by discovering that those years which produce the most violent action or
discharges of electrical fire, generate most snow, hail and cold.

Chenier's Morocco vol. 2. 275. In America the spring flights of pigeons were
unusually large. The dysentery was epidemic and mortal, in the same year, at
Hartford and New Haven; probably in many other places. -- With this fatal
dysente^y prevailed a mortal angina for several years. The same concurrence of
these diseases will be mentioned under the year 1775.

In England, the summer of 1751 was cold and wet; and a mortal distemper
prevailed among horses and cattle, in most parts of the country. In Cheshire
died 30,000 cows. In Glasgow the seasons were very sickly.

Gent. Magazine. Great and uncommon inundations occurred in the same year, in
France, England and Scotland. In Cork the water was three feet deep in the
midst of the city.

The dysentery and ulcerous sore throat were very fatal, this year in Guilford.

In 1752 the summer in South Carolina, and probably in all parts of America,
was distinguished for intense heat. The thermometer, for nearly twenty days
successively, varied between 90 and 101. -- The effects of this heat were
visible in a number of sudden deaths by apoplexies. There were some cases of
bad fever, but no epidemic. In September a violent tempest laid the city under
water. The dysentery was still prevalent in the northern parts of America.

Museum, vol. 3. 316 and sequel, Dr. Chalmera. In Ireland prevailed angina of
such a malignant type, as to kill the patient sometimes in eight or ten hours.
See Rutty on weather. The plague raged in the East.

An. Reg. 1766. 100. In this year Adrianople was nearly destroyed by an
earthquake. In Hinsdale, on Connecticut river, in the state of New Hampshire,
was an eruption of fire from a volcanic mountain, called west river mountain.

Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 1. 316. In America the winter of 1752-3 was long and
severe.

I have no account of any general epidemic in 1753; but particular places were
visited with distressing sickness. A singular instance of a local pestilence
occasioned by vapor deserves to be related.

In autumn 1753 after a dry season, arose in Rouen, the chief city of Normandy,
a thick fog, with the smell of sulphur, which increased to that degree, that in
the evening, lights could not be distinguished at any considerable distance. It
did not wholly disappear, till the next day. It was more dense in some streets
than in others.

In three or four days after, began an epidemic sickness which seized both
sexes, with chills, lassitude, loss of appetite, slight pains in the arms and
legs. These symptoms were followed by bilious looseness, nausea and vomitings.
Most patients bled at the nose, frequently in small quantity. The headache
then became violent, with a small, hard pulse -- a high fever followed. The
region of the stomach and hypochondria was tumefied; this symptom was succeeded
by a tension of the belly -- and a slight delirium followed. The tongue was
brown or black, but moist; sometimes with green ulcers or apthae. The patient
died the 5th, 7th, or 11th day; but not in every case. Some were thirty, or
forty days in recovery; many were left with a puffiness of the face, hands and
legs.

In some other parts of France appeared peripneumony and inflammation of the
pericordium, which was called a new disease.

Phil. Trans. vol. 49. In December 1753 and January succeeding, the small town
of Holliston, in Massachusetts, lost forty-three of its citizens, by a fever.
The disease began with a violent pain in the breast, or side, not often in the
head; then succeeded a high fever, but without delirium. The critical days were
the 3d, 4th, 5th, or 6th. Some of the patients appeared to be strangled to
death. The town contained no more than 80 families.

Hist Collections, vol. 3. 19. The winter of 1753-4 in Europe was very cold. In
1754 was a great eruption of Vesuvius which lasted several weeks, and violent
earthquakes in England, Constantinople, and Amboyna, in the Eastern Ocean. The
heavens appeared to be in a flame, and Egypt, which rarely feels earthquakes,
was severely shaken, and 40,000 of the inhabitants of Cairo, perished in the
ruins of two thirds of the city.

The gangrenous sore throat was very mortal in Ireland, and prev^lent in
England. See Rutty on weather. The same species of angina was, at the same
time, very fatal in America.

See Belknap's Hist. N. Hampshire, vol. 2. 121. In Maryland, the earth was
deluged with excessive rains, and intermittents were unusually obstinate.

Gent. Mag. 1755. At this time there were two or three very mild winters in
America. In 1754-5 and 1755-6 sloops sailed from New York for Albany in January
and February. Smith's Hist. N. York, 82. In this instance, America is an
exception to the general rule, that severe winters extend over both
hemispheres, about the time of great volcanic eruptions. The severity was
limited to the other continent.

The year 1755 was remarkable for violent earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions
from Etna and the mountains in Iceland. In April, Quito in South-America was
demolished.

Portugal had suffered for three or four years, most excessive drouth, by which
all springs were exhausted. But the year 1755 was rainy. On the first of
November, a tremendous convulsion laid Lisbon in ruins, with the destruction of
50,000 lives. This shock was felt on the whole Spanish coast, and 10,000 people
perished on one of the Azor^s. In Mitelene, an island in the Archipelago, 2000
houses were destroyed. The day preceding this concussion was remarkable for a
haze or vapor that obscured the sun.

On the 18th of November, America sustained a violent and extensive shock; but
its effects were not very calamitous. The fish in the ocean did not escape
without injury. Two or three whales, and multitudes of cod were seen, a few
days after, floating on the surface of the water.

In the remarkable year 1755, the most prevalent epidemics seem to have been
angina maligna, and catarrh, which spread over France and England. The angina
maligna was very mortal in some parts of America. In one town on Long Island,
two children only, under twelve years of age, survived.

M. S. of Mr. Reeve. In this year also prevailed a petechial fever in Ireland,
and according to Baron de Tott, Constantinople lost 150,000 inhabitants by the
plague.

See his Memoirs, Fothergill on sore throat and Rutty on weather. The winter of
1756-7 in Syria was excessively severe; the fruits were destroyed, olive trees,
which had withstood the weather for fifty years, were killed, and thousands of
poor people perished with cold.

Lon. Mag. 1764. In the following summer, crops failed, a dearth ensued, and so
severe a famine that parents devoured their own children; the poor from the
mountains offered their wives for sale in market, to procure food.

Ibim. This winter was also very severe in Europe. In 1756 appeared a comet and
there was an eruption in Iceland. A meteor was seen in France, and earthquakes
were experienced in various places.

In 1756-57 the catarrh was very prevalent in America, followed by an
earthquake in July. This catarrh preceded the same eipidemic in Europe by one
year.

In 1758 catarrh spread over Europe, and the plague began to show itself in
Egypt and Smyrna. In November, a large meteor was seen in Great Britain, and is
described by Sir John Pringle in the Philosophical Transactions. Seen from
Dublin, it moved from south to north. Annual register, 1759. 58.
In this year also, the petechial fever, the precursor of the plague, began to
show itself in Aleppo. -- The summer in America was extremely hot.

Letter of Gov. Ellis, Museum, vol. 5. 151. In 1759 appeared two or three
comets; and in November a most tremendous eruption of Vesuvius. In August was
an earthquake at Bourdeaux -- and one at Brussels. The winter following 1759
was excessively cold in both hemispheres. In Leipsic, sentinels froze to death;
and in South Carolina, the snow covered the earth to the depth of nearly two
feet. In England, the cold was less severe.

The year 1759 was memorable for violent earthquakes, in Syria. Buildings were
demolished and Damascus was buried in ruins. The shocks were repeated for many
weeks. In November, Truxillo in Peru was swallowed up by means of an
earthquake. It will be observed that this happened in the month, when Vesuvius
was in eruption. These great phenomena announced a general and severe
pestilence, and the effects of the general principles of disease were soon felt
over Europe, Asia and America. Annual Register, 1761. 96 and passim. The
earthquakes in Syria were preceded by drouth and followed by excessive rains.

See Russel on the plague at Aleppo and Volney's Travels. In 1759 the plague
began to appear in Cyprus, and at Acre and Latakia on the Syrian coast. In
Copenhagen raged smallpox with great mortality.

In New England were shocks of earthquake in February, at Boston and
Portsmouth. An, Regis. 1759. 88. In Autumn an unusual tempest and tide at Nova
Scotia.

In America, cotemporary with the commencement of the plague in Egypt, appeared
the measles, in 1758, and the year 1759 appears, by the American bills of
mortality, to have been very unhealthy. The predominant diseases were the
measles and dysentery. M. S. le^^er from Dr. Betts of Norwalk. The measles
appeared in 1758, but was most extensive in 1759. This is an instance of the
prevalence of dysentery and measles in the same year.

In this year also the scurvy, an endemical disease in Canada, was unusually
mortal.

Lind, p. 26. At Bombay, a meteor of extraordinary brightness was seen on the
4th of April, 1759.

After the severe winter of 1759-60, happened in America, a snow storm on the
3d of May, when the apple trees were in blossom. The disposition of the
elements to generate snow and hail, during pestilential periods, has already
been remarked. M. S. of Mr. Whitman. The spring of 1760 in America was very dry.

In 1760 earthquakes were repeated in Syria, and the plague appeared at Aleppo,
Jerusalem and Damascus. It continued to extend and increase, until the summer
of 1762; after which it declined. In Holland and Belgium were small shocks of
earthquake -- preceded by flashes of light. Annual Register 1760. 70. Russel on
the plague at Aleppo. Indeed earthquakes were felt in most parts of Europe.

Cyprus, which had been free from pestilence for 30 years preceding, lost
20,000 inhabitants by the malady. On the first appearance of the plague in
Egypt, the magistracy published as ordinance to prevent the introduction of the
disease by infection; but it was of no use. The disease was preceded, as usual,
by a petechial fever.

Mariti's Travels. In England, the summer of 1760 was dry and autumn wet. In
this year occurred another discharge from Vesuvius. -- A comet was seen in
January, and a distemper made great havoc among horses in and about London.
Annual Register 1760. 67. Immense damage was sustained by tempests. Ibm. 73.

The principles of disease in 1760 began to exhibit themselves in the
West Indies, and the ordinary fever of the climate assumed new and malignant
symptoms, with contagion.

Lind, p. 126. In this year also the northern parts of the American continent,
which had been (...) by measles, began to feel more severely the violence of
the epidemic constitution.

In November, the town of Bethlem was assailed by an inflammatory fever, with
symptoms of typhus, which in the c^urse of the following w^ter, carried off
about 40 of the inhabitants. The disease as extremely violent, terminating on
the 3d or 4th day; in some cases, the patient died within 24 hours of the
attack. It seems to have been that species of winter fever, which occurs in
pestilential periods, mentioned under the year School. During this epidemic, a
flock of quails flew over the chimney of a house, in which were several
diseased persons, and five of them fell dead on the spot. This was thought
ominous; but was a natural event, which may rationally be ascribed to
deleterious gas emitted from the chambers of the sick.

Med. Repos. vol. 1. 524. This disease was ascribed to the draining of the pond
or swamp, mentioned under the year 1750. But to this explanation, there are
strong, if not insuperable objections.

First. The fever began in November; but this is the month when the marsh
fevers of our climate disappear. I doubt whether the effluvia from marshes ever
act upon the human body, so as to produce disease, without a greater degree of
heat than Connecticut ever experiences in the month of November. Cold puts an
end to all marsh fevers, but this disease continued to increase in December,
and did not cease till late in the winter.

Secondly. This disease was called a malignant pleurisy; but marsh effluvia are
not known to produce fevers of that description. They are common on high, as
well as on low grounds, as I can prove by facts in America.

Thirdly. There is no necessity of resorting to marsh exhalations for the
source of this malady. The same species of fever prevailed in that winter and
the spring following, in many other parts of Connecticut, where no marsh
existed. In Hartford it carried off a number of robust men, in two or three
days from the attack. One of them was my paternal uncle.
In North-Haven it attacked few persons, but every one of them died. In
East-Haven died about forty-five men in the prime of life, mostly heads of
families. The same disease prevailed in New Haven among the inhabitants, and
students in college.

It is obvious then that this was an epidemic, very well known in sickly
periods, and not dependent on local causes. From Dr. Trumbull of North-Haven I
have the following remarks on the disease.

The blood was very thick and sizy; often issuing from the nose and sometimes
from the eyes. The inflammation was violent, and soon produced delirium. The
most robust bodies were most liable to the disease. A free use of the lancet,
in the early stages of the disorder, was the only effectual remedy; where the
physicians were afraid to bleed, the patients all died. Dr. Hugh Williamson, in
the second volume of the Medical Repository, has described this species of
disease, which, he says, prevails often in Carolina in winter, especially among
those who have been affected by bilious fevers in the preceding autumn. He
observes that bleeding is usually pernicious in that disease. Perhaps a
difference of climates may make different remedies necessary. But in different
periods, the same disease may require different treatment. In New England, that
fever has usually demanded an early use of the lancet.
This malady prevailed from November 1760 to March 1761.

I cannot learn that this species of inflammatory fever, has ever been epidemic
in the northern parts of America, since this period. But it is a common winter
fever, in the Carolinas, after sickly summers; and in the northern states,
sporadic cases of it occur with all its formidable symptoms. Instances will be
hereafter mentioned. It is the pestilence of winter, and rarely, if ever
appears, except when pestilential epidemics are current in summer. And I am not
without suspicions that the debility occasioned by marsh effluvia in summer may
predispose the system to that fever in winter, tho not necessary to produce it.

In March 1761 was a small shock of earthquake in New England, and the same
occurred in Iceland, Hamburg, Syria, England and South-America.

In the winter and spring of 1761 a severe influenza attacked the northern
parts of America. In Bethlem it was cotemporary with the fever just mentioned.
In Philadelphia it prevailed in the winter, and in Massachusetts, in April.
From Dr. Tufts, a respectable practitioner of medicin in Weymouth, I have the
following description of the disease.

"The distemper began in April, and in May ran into a malignant fever, which
proved fatal to aged people. It spread over the whole country and the
West India islands. It began with a severe pain in the head and limbs, a
sensation of coldness, shiverings succeeded by great heat, running at the nose,
and a troublesome cough. It continued for eight or ten days, and generally
terminated by sweating.

In May, the aged who had before escaped, were seized with an affection like a
slight cold; this, in a day or two was followed by great prostration of
strength, a cough, labo^ of breathing, pains about the breast, praecordia, and
in the limbs, but not acute. The countenance betrayed no great marks of febrile
heat. The matter expectorated was thin, but slimy. As the disease advanced, the
difficulty of breathing increased; the expectoration was more difficult; the
matter thrown off more viscid; at length the lungs appeared to be so loaded
with tenacious matter, that no efforts could dislodge it, and the patient sunk
under it.

This disorder carried with it bilious appearances -- the countenances of some
patients were of a yellowish hue. In some, there was an appearance of
indifference or insensibility; and at night, a slight delirium."

M. S. letter from Dr. Tufts. In the spring of 1761 earthquakes were felt in
many parts of Europe. See an account of them in An Register, 1761. 92. Shocks
also were felt in the Azores and West Indies. These agitations were precisely
cotemporary with the epidemic catarrh in America. Scarcely any country escaped
the convulsions of nature. During the pestilence in Thessalonica, shocks were
felt almost every day. Ibm.

In the summer of 1761, I am informed, the infectious bilious fever prevailed
in Charleston, but I am not possessed of the details. In May happened a most
extraordinary typhon or whirlwind, which swept Ashly river to its bottom. Five
vessels were sunk and eleven dismasted. Annual Register, 1761. 93. In Italy a
woman was killed by a sudden eruption of vapor under her feet. Ibm. 95. The
summer in America was very dry.

In the spring of 1762 the influenza was epidemic in Europe. It appeared at
Edinburgh in April in a few cases; at Dublin in May; and in June was general
and severe. It was therefore a year later than in America.

Essays and Obs. Edinburgh. Rutty on weather. An. Reg. 1762. In March was an
earthquake in Ireland, and in autumn a considerable shock in Spain. On the 11th
of June was seen a meteor, pas^^g from north to south, which met a dark cloud
and exploded. Another as large as the moon, and bright as the sun descended
slowly on the 4th of December, and dissipated.

Annual Register, 1762. In 1762 appeared a comet, and in America the heat and
drouth exceeded what was ever before known. From June to September 22d, there
was scarcely a drop of rain, almost all springs were exhausted, and the
distress occasioned by the want of water was extreme. The forest trees appeared
as if scorched.

The winter following was equally remarkable for severity, both in Europe and
America. The Thames was a common highway for carriages, and the poor perished
in the streets of London.

Land. Mag. 1763. Annual Register, 1762. In America the snow fell on the 8th of
November and continued till about the 20th of March. These extraordinary
phenomena were followed by an eruption of Etna in 1763, of three months
continuance.

In the extremely hot summer of 1762, the bilious plague prevailed in
Philadelphia. The same disease swept away most of the troops in the expedition
to Havanna. The plague raged in Constantinople and in Syria; while the yellow
fever spread mortality in Bengal.

In this year the plague in Aleppo came to its crisis. In 1760, died about 500
persons; in 1761, 7000, and in 1762, 11000; after which year it subsided.

See Patrick Russel, Hist. of that plague. The bills of mortality will best
show how severely the principles of disease were felt in London, Amsterdam and
Dublin in 1762 and 3.

No part of the earth seems to have escaped a share of unusual mortality in the
period between 1759 and 1763. In the latter year, the bilious plague in Bengal
carried off 800 Europeans and 30,000 natives. Lind, p. 82. In the year
preceding, a violent earthquake occurred at Chitacong in the territories of
Bengal.

An. Reg. 1763. 60. On the 19th of October 1762, happened a remarkably dark day
at Detroit, and the vicinity. While at dinner, the inhabitants found it
necessary to use candles. The darkness continued, with little interruption,
during the whole day.

Phil. Trans. vol. 53. p. 63. Mem. Amer. Acad. vol. 1. 244. During this
pestilential period, fatal diseases carried off the cattle on the continent of
Europe, and Toulon lost one third of its inhabitants by an epidemic.

An. Regist. 1761. 161. The summer of 1763 was a moist and unkindly season. In
August the Indians on Nantucket were attacked by the bilious plague, and
between that time and February following, their number was reduced from 358 to
136. Of 258 who were affected, 36 only recovered. The disease began with high
fever and ended in typhus, in about five days. It appeared to be infectious
among the Indians only; for no whites were attacked, although they associated
freely with the diseased. Persons of a mixed blood were attacked, but
recovered. Not one died, except of full Indian blood. Some Indians who lived in
the families of the whites, escaped the ^isease; as did a few that lived by
themselves on a distant part of the island. I am informed, by respectable
authority, that a similar fever attacked Indians on board of ships, at a
distance of hundreds of leagues, without any connection with Nantucket.

In December of the same year, the Indians on Martha's Vineyard, distant eight
leagues from Nantucket, were invaded by a like fever; not a family escaped, and
of 52 patients, 39 died.

In this instance, disease discriminated as nicely between the Whites and
Indians, as in 1797, it did between men and cats, and as exactly as the plague
in Egypt, between the Israelites and Egyptians.

Some suspicions were suggested that the disease at Nantucket might have been
received from a ship which put in there, with sick passengers, from Ireland
bound to New York; but there is no foundation for this opinion, as the disorder
broke out before the arrival of the ship.

See Phil. Trans. and Land. Mag. 1764. Hist. Collections, vol. 3. 158. M. S. of
Moses Brown. In 1764, just after this fatal pestilence among the Indians, a
large species of fish, called blue fish, thirty of which would fill a barrel,
and which were before caught in great numbers, on every side of Nantucket,
suddenly disappeared, to the great loss of the Inhabitants. -- Whether they
perished or migrated, is not known.

Hist. Col. 3. 158. In Europe, the year 1763 was remarkable for diseases among
various species of animals. In Denmark, an epidemic catarrhal disorder affected
horses. In Madrid, a pestilence among dogs swept away multitudes -- 900 died in
one day. In Genoa, the poultry perished in a similar manner. In Italy, horses
and swine fell victims to the pestilential principle. In France, horses and
mules; in Sweden, sheep, horses and horned cattle perished under the influence
of the general cause.

Rutty on Weather. The summer was remarkable for hail storms, one of which
totally ruined 36 villages in Maconnois in France. See the account of these and
of the earthquakes in that year in An. Regis. Chronicle. Hail stones fell of
sizes from three to ten inches in circumference. These storms were numerous and
many fire balls fell in various parts of England and a globe of fire was seen
in Sweden.

These hail storms occurred during or near the time of the eruption of Etna. In
1764 was another eruption of Etna. In most parts of Europe and America, this
period of pestilence appears to have closed with the years 1762 and 3. But in
Naples spread a malignant fever in 1764, preceded by famine, by which disease it
was supposed 200,000 people perished. The disease was marked by petechiae and
glandular tumors and was a mild species of plague. The season was excessively
hot, and the bilious plague prevailed in Cadiz. Lind, 189. 122. An earthquake
occured in Portugal and Siberia. In the February following occured a degree of
cold, rarely known in England. The mercury in Farenheit fell to 7 degrees. and in
one place, within the ball. An. Reg. 1765-66. A remarkable high tide in China
in May swept away a whole city. The cause is not mentioned.

Ibim. 92. To the epidemics above mentioned, succeeded a series of dysenteries,
in the hot summers of 1765 and 6. In 1765, the malignant dysentery raged in
Berne and other parts of Switzerland, in Suabia and Austria. The invasion was,
in many cases sudden, says Zimmerman, without any preceding symptom; but more
generally its approach was indicated by chills, lassitude and other premonitory
signs. In its progress, it exhibited most of the symptoms of the yellow fever
of America. It was preceded by a putrid fever, which yielded to the dysentery
in June.

See Zimmerman on Dysentery. This epidemic was followed by violent and
malignant pleurisies; a circumstance that marks its alliance with the
pestilential fever of America, and probably of all temperate climates, which is
also succeeded by pleurisy or peripneumony in winter.

In 1765 were many earthquakes in Italy, and Sweden, and a volcanic eruption at
Truxillo in Spanish America. Dysentery prevailed in Scotland, and intermittents
in Pennsylvania and Georgia, were universal.

In 1766 the summer was every where hot and in Europe excessively dry. In
Germany, the Rhine was lower than in the terrible drouth of 1476, and in many
places, was forded. In Scotland, the people were compelled to kill their cattle
for want of fodder. The heat and drouth produced great hail storms, and in
autumn, were followed by inundations, one of which at Montauban, in France,
swept away 1200 houses. Terrible tempests marked the year, and in the
West Indies, those hurricanes which lay the islands waste, and are recorded
among the memorabilia of the climate. In August, the planet Mars was nearer to
the earth, by two millions of miles, than it had been for many ages, and in the
spring appeared a comet.

The winter preceding this remarkable summer, was extremely cold in Europe. At
Ratisbon, Reaumur's thermometer was two degrees lower, than in the noted year
1709, and birds perished with cold. At Naples, the snow lay in the streets, to
the depth of 18 inches, and Vesuvius began to discharge smoke, the harbinger of
an explosion. At Lisbon, Reaumur's ther^ometer was 3 degrees below the freezing
point, and at Madrid, people skated on the ice.

These remarkable phenomena preceded and attended a general discharge of fire
and lava, from the three well known volcanoes, Etna, Vesuvius and Heckla, which
took place in 1766. This is one of the few instances on record, in which these
volcanoes have been in eruption, nearly at the same time. The eruption of
Heckla continued from April to September. These phenomena account for the
excessive drouth in Europe.

See Sinclair's Scotland. Annual Register, 1766. In this year 1766 was an
earthquake in New England, and a violent shock at Constantinople. Vegetation
failed in some parts of Europe and America, and grain was very scarce in Italy,
Great Britain and the Carolinas. In 1767 a million sterling was paid in England
for imported grain.

An. Reg. 1768. p. 101. I am struck with surprise to observe how universally
crops fail, about the time of great volcanic eruptions.
The winter of 1765-6 was not severe in America and there was little snow; but
in this remarkable period, as in many others, the severity of the seasons
commenced in Europe one year before it did in America. The winter of 1766-7 was
terribly severe in both hemispheres. The cold was as intense as in 1740; the
Rhine at Cologne became a bridge of ice, and supported laboring artificers, as
in 1670. In Italy, ^he poor crowded to the cities for aid, and perished with
cold. In Russia, both rich and poor perished. The wolves became ravenous,
entered towns and destroyed people. In England, the larks took refuge in
hay-carts and the market; the snow fell to the depth of many feet and buried
thousands of sheep. In America, the cold was very severe, and at Brandywine,
the mercury fell in Farenheit to 20 degrees. below cipher -- an unexampled degree
of cold in that latitude. In January happened a thaw, which broke up the rivers
in Connecticut, and left scarcely a bridge over the rivers. The cold in France
in 1767-8 was more severe than in 1740 and within a degree of that in 1709. In
Constantinople snow and hail fell as late as March 16.

See An. Regis. 1767. p. 52, 53, 54, 76. 1768. p. 58, 101. Every thing
indicated uncommon agitations in the elements. Pages would be necessary to
enumerate the tempests and hail storms of these years. In January 1769 fell two
fire balls in England; one of them on Tower hill. At Amiens, a man his wife and
his horses were killed by a discharge of subterraneous vapor. A violent storm
in Virginia on the 11th of September tore up trees, stranded ships and
demolished houses; Bagdadt was almost ruined by an earthquake, and Cuba was
desolated by a hurricane in 1768. An. Register, 1769. 67. 146. These last years
in England were rainy.

In 1767 epidemic catarrh prevailed in Europe, and diseases among horses in
New England and Ne^-Jersey. The summer was remarkable for hail storms;
Cephalonia was ruined by an earthquake, and Vesuvius, from this year to 1777
never ceased to discharge smoke, and frequently scoriae, stones and cinders.

An. Reg. 1767. 142, 151. Encyclop. art. Vesuvius. In 1768 vast multitudes of
caterpillars devoured the grass in the fields at Northampton, in Massachusetts.

The summer of 1768 was hot, but I have no account of the diseases in America
in this and the preceding year, ex^ept of a disorder in the head and throat
among horses.

Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 1. 529. In 1769 the summer was very hot, and in autumn
appeared a comet with a vast coma. Venus passed over the Sun's disk on the 3d
of June; there was a small earthquake in New England and a great tempest. Among
the diseases in America is mentioned a fatal angina in Boston, and other towns,
but I am not furnished with its history. The same distemper prevailed in 1770,
and in Jamaica occasioned considerable mortality.

Muscum, vol. 1. 35, 430. In Holland 32,000 cattle perished by a pestilential
distemper. An. Reg. 1769. 166. Great sickness prevailed at Rome. Ibm. In
America some cases of canine madness were observed. The meastes prevailed in
America, but I have no details of its origin and progress. The dysentery was
epidemic and fatal in 1769.

In July 1770 appeared also a comet. There was an eruption of Vesuvius in 1770,
and another in 1771. Flames issued from Heckla in 1771 and 72, but no lava. An
earthquake was felt in New England in 1771, and Italy was repeatedly shaken. On
the 17th of July was seen a meteor or fire ball.

These two years were distinguished by the most terrible earthquakes, storms,
rains and inundations, accounts of which fill the gazettes of those years. In
1770 the floods in England, Holland and France exceeded any that could be
recollected. In France the vintage was greatly injured. In 1771 the territory
of Honduras was wasted by locusts and famine.

An. Reg. p. 163. In 1771 great rains continued to occasion floods. In
Virginia, a flood in the Rappahannock filled the warehouses and ruined the
tobacco, which occasioned public prayers to be ordered. Similar inundations
happened in Germany.

There were earthquakes in Hispaniola, St. Maure, England, and in Ternate, a
Molucca island, where was an eruption of fire.

Gent. Magazine. An. Regis. 1770, passim 1771. 120. In 1771 a mortal distemper
swept away great numbers of foxes in America.

Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 1. 529. In Italy the harvest failed, and in Sardinia,
Holland, Flanders, and some parts of England, the cattle were swept away by an
infectious disease. The number of cattle that perished in Holland, was stated,
in Sept. 1771, to amount to 171,780.

An. Regis. 1771. 147. In Constantinople raged the plague in 1770; and one
thousand bodies were, for some time, buried daily. In 1771 this malady
prevailed in Poland and Russia, and 200,000 people perished, The number that
died in the Russian dominions was 62,000.

An. Regis. 1772. 155. In the East Indies the disorders in the elements at this
period produced still more deplorable effects. The excessive heat and want of
rain, which usually precede or attend the approximation of comets and volcanic
eruptions, occasion a failure of crops in countries, where the grain which is
the principal food of the inhabitants, depends on water from inundation. Such
is the fact in India and in Egypt, where rice is the great article of food.

The heat and drouth of 1769 cut short the rice crops in the territories of the
Ganges. The consequence was a famine, which, in 1770, destroyed incredible
numbers of the natives. The streets were filled with dead carcases, and such
numbers were thrown into the river, as to render the water and the fish unfit
for use.

In 1771 disease was added to the calamities of the miserable inhabitants, a
million of whom were supposed to perish by the bilious plague.

See Encyclopedia, Art. Bengal. In 1770 the atmosphere at Calcutta was filled
and clouded with flies of a large kind, which never descended to the earth, but
came so near that they could be distinguished with glasses. It is remarkable
that the appearance of these animals was cotemporary with the millions of worms
which overra^ the northern districts of America. Encyclop. Article Bengal. The
Bramins mentioned that a similar phenomenon occurred about 150 years before,
which must have been during the pestilence among the Indians in America from
1618 to 1622. At this time also began a disease among the potatoes in Scotland,
which has been gradually extending itself to this time. The leaves contract and
shrivel; and just below the surface of the earth, there appears on the ^alk a
scar of some length, or groove corroded through the rind, of the color of
ocher. The fruit on the roots is small and of an unpleasant taste.

Sinclair's, Scot. 2. 187. In 1771 anginas, in some parts of America,
occasioned a considerable mortality.

Register of deaths in New Haven. Catarrh prevailed in 1771, but was epidemic
in America in 1772. The winter of 1771-2 was very severe in Europe. In America
the month of March 1772 was distinguished for great falls of snow, beyond what
was ever before known. In Bohemia, it was computed that 168,000 persons
perished in that year by epidemic diseases. An. Reg. 152. A tempest in China
destroyed 150,000 lives in Canton River.

An. Reg. 1773. p. 10^. In 1770, cotemporary with the clouds of flies in India
and a most fatal pestilence among men and cattle in Europe, appeared in America
a black worm about one inch and a half in length, which devoured the grass and
corn. Never was a more singular phenomenon. These animals were generated
suddenly in the northern states of America, and almost covered two or three
hundred miles of country. They all moved nearly in one direction, and when they
were intercepted by furrows, in plowed land, they fell into them in such
numbers as to form heaps. They sought shelter in the grass, a hot sun being
fatal to them. They disappeared suddenly about the close of June and beginning
of July.

New England Farmer, Art. Infect. This species of worm has been seen at other
times, and in 1791, in great multitudes. No account can be given of their
origin and they seem not to have regular periods of return. In July 1791, the
late governor Huntington, a gentleman of careful observation, informed me, he
had exposed some of these animals to a hot sun on a dry board, and in a few
hours, found them dissolved into mere water. They seem to be generated by some
elementary process, and to be the harbingers of pestilence; at least they have
preceded diseases in America.

In February 1772 prevailed in America epidemic catarrh.

M. S. letter from Dr. Tufts. In this year, the measles appeared in all parts
of America, with unusual mortality. In Charleston, S. Carolina, died 8 or 900
children.

Public prints, Oct. 1772. A mortal fever prevailed also in Wellfleet on
Cape-Cod, which proved fatal to forty of its inhabitants. Hist. Col. vol. 3.
118. The mortality in Bohemia has been mentioned, and the sickness in London
appears by the bill of mortality.

This year, 1772, was distinguished for a great hurricane in the West Indies,
like those of 1766 and 1780.

An. Reg. 1772. 140. The anginas of the preceding year continued to prevail in
1772.

The winter of 1772-3 was moderate in England, but on the continent more
severe. In February, occurred in America, a remarkable day, still known by the
name of the cold Sunday.

This year, 1773, was in general sickly. In America, the measles finished its
course and was followed by disorders in the throat. After the measles left the
patient, came on a secondary fever, which, in some cases, proved fatal. Those
who survived, lay ill a long time, troubled with an excessive expectoration. It
seemed as if the patient discharged the amount of his weight.

But the most mortal disease, was, the cynanche trachealis or bladder in the
throat. In general, there was little canker, but an extreme difficulty of
breathing; the patient being nearly suffocated with a tough mucus or slime,
which no medicin could attenuate of discharge, and which finally proved fatal.
All medical aid was fruitless, and scarcely a child that was attacked in some
towns, survived.

This disease was speedily followed, in some places by the dysentery of a
peculiarly malignant type, occasioning mortification on the third day. This
disease was prevalent and very fatal in New Haven and East-Haven, in
Connecticut, and in Salem, Massachusetts.

M. S. letters from Dr. Trumbull and Dr. Holyoke. In Philadelphia, the measles
appeared in March, attended with efflorescence about the neck; at the same
time, catarrh which could hardly be distingushed from the measles.

Rush's Works, vol. 2. 238. Cotemporary with these diseases in America, were
the smallpox and a fatal fever in some parts of Scotland, and a plague which
carried off 80,000 people in Bassora, a town in Persia, near the Euphrates.

In this year, an earthquake sunk the town of Guatimala in New-Spain.

The year 1774 was more healthy than the preceding; but the scarlatina anginosa
began to show itself in Edinburgh, and in some parts of America, especially at
Philadelphia. On the 4th of May was a fall of snow.

Rush, vol. 1. 94, and the British Med. Publications in that year. The winter
of 1774-5 began on the continent of Europe with unusual severity. The rivers in
Germany were frozen, early in December, and there was deep snow at Bologna in
Italy in October. But in England, the winter was not severe -- an instance
which is sometimes observed in both hemispheres, that cold and falls of snow
run in veins. A remarkable instance has happened, the last winter, 1798-9 --
the weather being very cold, with immense quantities of snow from the Atlantic
to the mountains, but very mild in Canada and the western country, until the
close of winter.


An. Register, 1775. 87. and 1774. 173. In 1775 happened a great eruption of
fire from a volcano in Guatimala. An. Reg. 136. The summer was remarkable for
thunder and lightning.

A halo and mock suns were observed in England, and a meteor in America. In
Sweden and England, the summer was dry. In Holland happened a great tempest and
high tide, Nov. 14th.

An. Register, 172. In 1775 prevailed in England epidemic catarrh, preceded by
mild serene weather.

In America prevailed cynanche maligna, with considerable mortality. It seems
to have invaded all the northern parts of America, and in many places it
continued to be current with dysentery for three years. This was the case in
Middletown on Connecticut river. In other places, it disappeared in the winter
following.

M. S. letter from Dr. Betts. Registers of the first society in Middletown.
This pestilential period seems to have commenced with the great agitations of
the elements in 1769 and 70, and to have been first displayed in the drouth and
f^min in India, the plague in Turkey, and the insects and distempers among
cattle in Europe and America; to which may be added anginas. The process was
marked by a comet, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and tempests, with measles,
influenza and angina, and a series of most fatal dysentery closed the period.

In 1775 an eruption of water took place from mount Etna, and Lipari, a
neighboring island, discharged fire.

Encyclopedia, art. Volcano and Lipari. In this year began or very much
increased the mildew of oats in Montquitter in Scotland. About the beginning or
middle of August, the plant assumes a fiery red color; then black spots burst
forth near the roots, and ascend to the fibers that support the ear;
circulation then ceases, and the grain advances no further in maturity.
Sometimes it yields a little fruit; at other times none. This disease of the
oats still continues to be very injurious to the parish; but in 1789, a year of
unusual commotion in the elements in the north of Europe, as will hereafter be
related, it spread to a greater extent than was ever before known. This
phenomenon has been a subject of great research among farmers and philosophic
men; but no satisfactory cause has yet been discovered.

Sinclair's Stat. Acc. of Scotland, vol. 6. 131. It is remarkable that the prim
in America began to decay and perish about this period; and near the same time,
the wheat insect first appeared on Long Island.

I would just observe that the disease among the oats, and the death of the
prim, with the wheat insect, may be new phenomena in the natural world; or
certain revolutions which unusual causes may have induced in animal and
vegetable life.

About this time, for the year is not recollected, there was an eruption of
fire at Derby, in Connecticut, a few rods from Naugatuck river; the only
instance ever known in that place. It happened on a steep bank where it made a
large excavation in the earth, throwing trees and stones to some distance. A
light was seen on the spot in the evening before the explosion. It was
accompanied with a loud report, and some fossil substances were ejected, which
were analized by Dr. Monson of New Haven, and found to contain arsenic and
sulphur.

In 1775 also perished a bed of excellent oysters in the harbor of Wellfleet,
on Cape-Cod, twenty leagues south of Boston. These oysters had been in great
plenty, and furnished the inhabitants with no small portion of food; but in
this year from some unknown cause, they sickened and perished, and have never
since grown in that harbor.

Historical Collections, vol. 3. 119. During this sickly period also, the
oysters on the shores of Connecticut were in an unhealthy state, and sometimes
excited vomiting in those who ate of them.

It is remarkable also that in 1776 the lobsters in the vicinity of
York-Island, all disappeared. This event has generally been ascribed to the
firing of cannon in the summer of that year. But the place where they lived
being many miles from the British shipping, this explanation is not
satisfactory. It is more probable that they perished, or abandoned the ground,
on account of the bad state of their element.

The winter in 1776 was severe in Europe. The cold exceeded that of 1740. In
Denmark the sound was frozen and crossed on sledges. The Thames was also frozen.

An. Register, 1776. 114. The summer of 1776 in America was hot and in the
northern states rainy. The dysentery was prevalent in all parts of the country,
and was terribly fatal to the American troops in New York and at Ticonderoga. I
was at Mount Independence in October, and witness to the ravages of the
disease. Of thirteen thousand troops, it was said that one half were unfit for
duty.

It has been customary to ascribe the prevalence of this mortal disease to
infection spread by the soldiers who returned home from the armies. It is
certain that the disease was thus introduced into particular families; but
infection was the smallest among the causes of the epidemic. In most places, it
originated without any communication from the army; and I was a witness of such
instances. The disease was the effect of a particular state of the atmosphere,
aided by the seasons.

To prove how unfounded is the opinion that the disease originated in the army
alone, and spread from that as from a focus, it will be sufficient to mention
two facts. The first is, that this epidemic commenced in 1773, two years before
the war, in which year it was more malignant and fatal, in some places, than in
any subsequent year. Witness New Haven, East-Haven and Salem in Massachusetts.

In 1775 a remarkable fact occurred. About one hundred men belonging to
Danbury, in Connecticut, went to join the army on Lake Champlain; they
performed their duty and all returned in good health. While they were absent,
the dysentery invaded the town and carried off more than one hundred of the
inhabitants. In this instance, not a soldier returned from the army, until the
disease had subsided.

The second fact is, that the same disease has before raged generally in this
country, with all its horrors, in time of peace. Witn^ss the epidemic at
Georgetown in Maryland in 1793, at Derby in 1794 and at New Haven in 1795. In
an especial manner, I ought to mention the distressing dysentery, between 1749
and 1753, a time of profound peace, when not a soldier was seen in the country;
a period when the disease was as mortal and as general, as between 1773 and
1777. A like epidemic prevailed in many countries in Europe at the same time.

I have also taken pains to enquire of physicians in the country, as to the
propagation of this disease from the army, and am informed that the disease was
as fatal in villages where no intercourse was had with the troops, as where
there was intercourse.

The acquiescence of all descriptions of men, learned and unlearned, in the
opinion that epidemic diseases are to be ascribed solely to infection or
specific contagion, has proved extremely injurious to philosophy and to
medicin. A man in my father's neighborhood, was drafted to perform a tour of
military duty at New York, during the revolution-war. He was so much terrified
by the apprehension of catching the dysentery in the army, that he hired
another man as a substitute. The latter went to New York, performed the duty
and returned in health. The drafted man remained at home, was seized with the
distemper in a few weeks after, and died.
The disease is infectious, but it originates in any place, in particular
seasons, whether in peace or war; and ends at the command of the elements and
seasons. It ceased at the close of 1777 in the army as well as country, and
without any effort which had not been made in preceding years. It may be
observed further that the dysentery was and always is, most prevalent among old
people and children who have least intercourse with the sick, especially in the
country, where no artificial causes of disease exist.

In 1777 there was a small earthquake in the interior of England, and the
London bill of mortality was higher than usual. A volcano in Ferro discharged
discolered water, but no lava. The measles appeared in some parts of America,
the same year.

The summer of 1778 was excessively hot in America, and fevers of a typhus kind
were frequent. In Philadelphia an infectious bilious fever marked the summer
and autumn after the British army left the city. Rush, vol. 3. 162. In general
however the year was more healthy than the preceding summers.

In 1778 the plague was severe in Constantinople. It was preceded by a great
earthquake at Smyrna. An. Reg. 1778. In the same year an epidemic angina was
mortal at Manchester in England.

In the beginning of the winter succeeding 1778, there occurred some cold
weather; but the latter part was the mildest ever known. In February 1779, many
people along the river Connecticut plowed their fields; and in Pennsylvania the
peach blossomed. The summer succeeding was one of the healthiest ever known in
America.

In August 1779 happened a most tremendous eruption of Vesuvius; and about the
same time, the ships of Capt. Cook, then in a high northern latitude between
Kamschatka and America, were covered with ashes which were supposed to be
discharged from a volcano on the neighboring continent. In the succeeding
winter, Tauris, the capital of Persia, was laid in ruins by an earthquake.

See Encyclopedia, art. Vesuvius, Cook's voyage, 1779. The winter following
these eruptions and commotions was, in America, the severest that had been
known since 1741. From Nov. 25th to the middle of March, the cold was severe
and almost uninterrupted. The following was the state of the mercury in January
by Farenheit's scale -- at Hartford in Connecticut, lat. 41. 44.

AT SUNRISE. January, 1 -- 2 degrees. 19 -- 13 below 0 2 -- 7 below 0 20 -- 5 3 --
14 21 -- 6 below 0 4 -- 16 22 -- 5 5 -- 6 23 -- 9 below 0 6 -- 10 24 -- 6 7 --
9 25 -- 16 below 0 8 -- 1 below 0 26 -- 6 below 0 9 -- 5 27 -- 2 below 0 10 --
19 28 -- 8 below 0 11 -- 26 29 -- 20 below 0 12 -- 11 30 -- 15 13 -- 8 31 -- 4
below 0 14 -- 9 February, 1 -- 2 15 -- 15 2 -- 3 16 -- 10 3 -- 0 17 -- 17 4 --
15 18 -- 12 5 -- 8 below 0

Mean temperature in January at sunrise 4 degrees. -- almost 20 degrees below the
temperature of the same month in ordinary winters.

See Connecticut Courant, January 1780. Not only all the rivers, but the
harbors and bays in the United States, as far southward as Virginia, were fast
bound with ice. Loaded sleds passed from Staten-Island to New York; the sound
between Long Island and the main land was frozen into a solid highway, where it
is several miles in breadth. Chesapeek bay at Annapolis, where the breadth is 5
and an half miles, sustained also loaded carriages. -- The birds that winter in
this climate, as robbins and quails almost all perished; and in the succeeding
spring, a few solitary warblers only were heard in our groves.

The snow was nearly four feet deep, in Atlantic America, for at least three
months. The winter was severe in Europe also; and on the 14th of January, the
mercury at Glasgow fell to 46 degrees. below 0.

On the 19th of May 1780 occurred a day of singular darkness, in New England,
and it was perceived, in a smaller degree, as far south as New Jersey. The
heavens were obscured with a vapor or cloud of a yellow color or faint red. The
cloud which occasioned the principal darkness, passed over Connecticut about
the hours of 9 and 10, and continued till after twelve. In the greatest
obscuration, a candle was necessary to enable persons to read. For some days
before, the atmosphere was filled with vapor.

Mem. Amer. Acad. vol. 1. 234. On the same day that this lurid vapor overspread
several hundred miles of country in America, Etna began to discharge lava from
a new mouth, between two and three miles from its crater. The lava divided into
three streams of a quarter of a mile in breadth, and in a few days ran fourteen
miles. Violent earthquakes accompanied and followed the eruption. The
coincidence of these events, in point of time, well deserves notice. The great
discharges from Vesuvius and a volcano in the Arctic regions in 1779, the
terrible earthquakes, severe cold and eruptions of fire that followed, may
perhaps lead us to a rational solution of the phenomenon of the dark day --
which has not hitherto been explained.

Courant, Oct. 24, 1780. The plague broke out in Smyrna in the spring of 1780
but I have no account of its progress.

The spring was cool and dry, and catarrhous complaints were prevalent among
children, says Dr. Rush, vol. 1. 123. The summer following was hot, At
Hartford, July 8th, the Thermometer at half after 11 A M. was at 102, at 2 P.
M. 99 and an half, two degrees higher than it had been since 1772.
and a bilious remittent was epidemic in Philadelphia, accompanied with such
acute pains in the back, hips and neck, as to obtain the name of the
break-bone-fever.

In the midst of summer, but I do not recollect the precise time, appeared the
most singular halo about the sun which I ever beheld. I wrote a particular
description of it, at the time, which is mislaid, and therefore I shall not
attempt to describe it from recollection. -- Haloes are among the most certain
forerunners of tempestuous weather.

On the 2d of October the leeward West India islands experienced a most
dreadful hurricane; and on the 11th the windward islands were almost laid waste
by a similar calamity. Barbados which is least subject to these tempests, was
laid desolate; and it was estimated that 6000 souls perished. Houses,
plantation-buildings, wharves, piers, shipping were all overwhelmed in one
general ruin. It is said that, during the tempest, some of the islands
experienced an earthquake. Courant, Dec. 12, 1780. Jan. 9, 1781 and Jan. 23,
1781. As hurricanes are occasioned by discharges of electricity, some trembling
of the earth almost always attends those which are violent, and flashes of fire
are visible. Indeed the atmosphere appears to be a sheet of fire. Similar
discharges of electricity attended the tempestuous earthquake that destroyed
Nicomedia in 358 -- that which defeated Julian's attempt to rebuild Jerusalem
in 362 -- the hail-storm in Egypt, in the time of Moses -- and that which
happened at Mantua in 1785, to be hereafter related.

The canker-worm made extensive ravages in this period; but I cannot state
their rise and decline in different parts of the country. The winter of 1780-81
exhibited nothing worthy of particular notice.

In the spring of 1781 prevailed the influenza, or epidemic catarrh. It began
with a severe pain in the head, prostration of strength, coldness and chills,
the pulse not quick nor tense. The pain in the head lasted about twenty-four
hours, and was succeeded by a pain in the side, not pointed nor acute,
extending to the hips, accompanied with a soreness, and resembling a rheumatic
pain. The cough was troublesome, full, and the matter discharged of the
glandular kind, not well concocted. Respiration was difficult, and a
considerable defluxion on the lungs. In a few cases, the disorder terminated in
7 or 8 days; but usually not till the 13th or 14th; although the patient was
seldom confined to his bed. The disease left a sore^ess and weakness in the
side, which continued after the strength was recovered. Venesection had little
effect on the pain in the side. Epispastrics applied to the part gave relief.
The disorder was seldom fatal, but its effect were very visible in the
multiplied cases of pulmonary consumption, in the following year.

M. S. letter from Dr. Tufts. In the summer following no particular phenomena
occurred; the elements were in their usual state, so far as my information
extends; and in general the country enjoyed good health. A malignant fever
prevailed, in some degree, in New York, but excited no great alarm.

One year after this influenza in America, the same disease pervaded the
eastern hemisphere. Its progress was from Siberia and Tartary westward; and it
reached Europe in April and May 1782: I have no account of its course in
America, but it seems to be probable, that it took its direction from America
westward, and passing the Pacific in high northern latitudes, invaded Asia and
Europe from the east. This must have been the case, if the epidemic in Europe
was a continuation of that in America. For an account of this epidemic, see the
publications of that year.

In 1782 happened considerable earthquakes in Calabria, during which the
mercury in the barometer in Scotland sunk within the tenth of an inch of the
bottom of the scale, and the waters in many locks in the highlands were greatly
agitated.

Sinclair's Statistical account of Scotland, vol. 6. 622. In Britain the summer
was universally wet and cold, and crops failed, in consequence of which a
distressing dearth afflicted Scotland in the following year.

In America also the summer was cool. Two or three tornadoes happened in
Vermont and New Hampshire, with deluging rains, and in one place hail of
enormous size -- the gazette accounts say, pieces of ice were found of 6 inches
in length.

The latter part of summer was excessively dry. In New Jersey, a cedar swamp of
20 miles in length and 8 in breadth, taking fire by accident, was totally
consumed. The fire penetrated among the roots to the depth of 6 feet. -- Corn,
grass, and the very forests withered. The air was loaded with a thick vapor,
for some days in September. The reader will judge how far this extreme
evaporation and dryness, indicate the action of the internal fires or
electricity which produced the tremendous discharges from Heckla in the
following year.


Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 1. 356. Courant, Oct. 8, 1782. In autumn happened the
violent tempest which dispersed the English fleet from the West Indies, and in
which two or three of the French ships, taken by Admiral Rodney, foundered.

The winter of 1782-3 was more variable than usual; and extreme drouth cut
short the crops in the West Indies.

Courant, May 20, 1783. Mem. Amer. Acad. vol. 1. 360. On the morning of the 5th
of February 1783, a thick vapor or fog was observed over the island of Sicily,
indicating the agitation of the element of fire or electricity; and about 12
o'clock, a violent shock of earthquake laid many houses in ruins. This was but
a prelude to more terrible calamities; for about seven o'clock P. M. a
tremendous shock laid in ruins the greatest part of Messina, Calabria and many
towns and villages. From 30 to 40,000 persons perished in the ruins. On
subsequent days, many shocks were felt, but of less violence. During the
convulsions on the 5th, flames were seen to issue from the neighboring sea.

Courant, June 3, 1783, etc. On the evening of the 10th, a dense fog or vapor
spread over some parts of New England, having the smell of burnt leaves. The
ground, at the same time, was covered with snow.

Mem. Amer. Acad. vol. 1. 361. About this time, for the gazette accounts are
not particular as to the month, commenced a most distressing famine in the
Carnatic, which afterward extended to most of the European settlements in the
East Indies. At Madras hundreds of the natives perished daily, and the streets
were filled with dead bodies. The cause was a four years drouth; for during the
approach of comets, and the action of subterranean fire in other parts of the
world, that country is subject to excessive drouth, as happened in 1769 and 70.

Courant, June 24, 1783, and July 1, Dec. 5, 1785. In the evening of the 29th
of March the heavens were illuminated with a most splendid lumen boreale.

The summer of 1783 was variable in the northern parts of America; in England,
it was hot.

In June commenced a most formidable discharge of lava from Mount Heckla in
Iceland, which continued till the middle of August. The country around the
mountain was covered with burning fluid, to the extent of 40 miles, and in some
places, to the depth of 40 feet. The lava spread over 3600 square miles.

Previous to this eruption, all the springs and streams of water in the
neighborhood had been dried up; a sure forerunner of the discharge of fire; and
for some months before the eruption, the atmosphere over the island was filled
with a dark, bluish, sulphurous vapor or cloud, which was stationary in calm
weather, but which was sometimes dispersed by winds, and spread over Europe.
See Encyclopedia, article Iceland. During this eruption, a new island was
thrown up, at some distance from Iceland. On the 18th of August, soon after the
eruption of Heckla ceased, an immense meteor or globe of fire shot through the
heavens, from north to south, passing the Orkneys and the island of
Great Britain, and bursting with a loud report.

Encyclop. art. Iceland. Sinclair's Scot. vol. 6. 623. A part of the summer was
excessively hot in America. No less than thirty persons in Philadelphia, killed
themselves by drinking cold water. Many putrid fevers were the consequence of
the heat in various parts of the country; as also tornadoes and thunder gusts
of unusual violence, with hail of uncommon size, in all parts of America.
Rarely indeed has so much injury been done by hail in the same space of time.

On the 31st of May a large meteo^ or fiery globe was seen at Richmond in
Virginia, shooting from north to south. It burst with a heavy report. It will
be remarked that this meteor occurred about two weeks before the eruption of
fire from Heckla, but while the fires or electrical causes were in agitation,
as appears from the cloud of vapor, that was suspended over the island.

Courant, Sept. 2, and June 24, 1783, and Aug. 5, and 12. During the immense
discharges of fire and lava from Heckla, all parts of Europe, Great Britain,
Italy, Sicily, France and even the Alps were overspread with a haziness in the
atmosphere. This caused universal consternation, as a similar appearance had
preceded the earthquake in Sicily on the 5th of February. The churches were
crowded with supplicants. The French astronomer La Land attempted to quiet the
popular fears, by ascribing the phenomenon to a superabundance of watery
particles in the earth, from the moisture of the preceding year, which were
then exhaled by the summer heats. But this solution is not satisfactory. It was
more probably the smoke from Heckla, wafted by northerly winds and dispersed
over Europe, in an attenuated form.

Courant, Oct. 28, 1783, and Nov. 11th, and 25th. Franklin's Meteorol. Observe.
Museum, vol. 1. 473. It is still more probable that this vapor was the effect
of insensible discharges of electricity, combined with aerial substances; as in
Sicily on the 5th and in America on the 10th of February.

In October occurred tremendous gales of wind and high tides which did no small
damage in the seaports of the United States. The first, on the 15th and 16th,
occasioned the highest water at New Haven, which had been known in 40 years.
Many other tempests occurred in September and October; and from Vermont to
Georgia, the gazettes were filled with accounts of disasters from the violence
of the winds and rains.

Courant, October 21, 1783. On the 29th of November, a considerable shock of
earthquake was felt in all the northern states; and New York experienced two or
three shocks in the morning of the next day.

Some of the West India islands were severely shaken, about the same time, and
especially on the 4th of December.

Courant, Dec. 16, 1783. March 9, 1784. In autumn 1783 some parts of Europe
were deluged with continual rains, and at Rome 5 or 6000 children died of the
smallpox. About Grenoble raged an epidemic fever.

A distemper among the cattle in Derby in England, occasioned no small alarm,
and a royal proclamation was issued enjoining certain precautions to prevent
the propagation of the disease.

Cotemporary with these convulsions of nature, was a most desolating plague in
Egypt, the Grecian Isles, Dalmatia, Constantinople, Smyrna and in the Crimea.
It is not possible, with the general accounts given of such an epidemic, in the
public prints, to state, with any precision, its origin and progress in the
east. It is mentioned to have appeared in Smyrna, in the spring of 1783, and it
certainly raged in Constantinople, and many other parts of Turkey in the
following summer, as well as on the north of the Euxine.

Courant, Jan. 17, 1784. July 6. Sept. 21, and 28, 1784. In Egypt the same
disease committed most terrible ravages in 1783-4 and 5. It began in November
1783. To this calamity was added a severe famine; the inundation of the Nile, in
the summer of that year, having proved insufficient. So severe was the plague,
that in the winter after 1783, fifteen hundred dead bodies were carried out of
Cairo in a day; and the plague and famine of that and the succeeding year, was
supposed to carry off one sixth of the inhabitants of Egypt. See Volney's
Travels, vol. 1. 192 and 3, and Courant, Oct. 28, 1783, and Oct. 17, 1785, in
which it is said that in Cairo 3000 perished in a day in April, 1785.

We have then an exact general view of the phenomena which introduce and
accompany pestilence in Europe, Africa and Asia -- terrible earthquakes and
eruptions of volcanoes; excessive drouth in America, India and Egypt, failure
of crops and famine -- meteors, great heat and deluges of rain, in other
countries. Let us now see what followed these abovementioned agitations of the
elements, in our country.

See Courant, April 27, 1784, and Jan. 27, 1784, and June 8. In August 1783,
the scarlatina appeared in Philadelphia and in September it became epidemic. It
appeared about the same time in Salem, in Massachusetts. It was in Charleston,
South Carolina in 1784, in which year, it appeared in the interior of the
northern states, as in Vermont and New Hampshire, and in Middletown, on
Connecticut river. It continued to prevail about five years; but was not severe
in general and many towns wholly escaped its attacks.

Rush, vol. 1. 141. Museum, vol. 2. 562. Mem. Amer. Acad. vol. 1. 369.
Belknap's Hist. New Hampshire, vol. 2. 121. Register of deaths at Middletown.
In 1787 the cynanche maligna was epidemic at Northampton, in Massachusetts.

M. S. letter from the Rev. Mr. Williams. The measles appeared in America in
1783; at Salem as early as May. I find it in all parts of America, in that
year, but cannot trace the progress of the epidemic.

During this period neither dysentery nor pestilential autumnal fevers made any
considerable ravages in America, as far as I can learn; except at Fell's-Point
in Baltimore, where the bilious pestilential fever occasioned a mortality in
1783. Many sporadic cases of a similar fever appeared in various parts of the
country, and almost a whole family in New Jersey perished by it in the autumn
of that year. Fortunately however the constitution of the elements was
corrected, without producing its most fatal effects. Even the scarlet fever,
with the exception of a few places, was less malignant than it has been in the
last period.

This pestilential constitution was felt also in the north of Europe. The
scarlatina broke out in Edinburgh in the winter of 1782-3, a few months before
it did in America; but of its progress I have no account. It appears to have
been epidemic in London in 1786; so that its period was of about the same
duration as in America. The cotemporaneousness of this species of disease in
Great Britain and America, deserves particular notice.

In December happened a fog in Amsterdam of such density as to occasion
complete obscurity for three hours in the middle of the day. It was not
possible for persons to find their way in the streets, and many passengers and
some carriages fell into the canals.

Courant, March 9, 1784. The severity of the winter succeeding these phenomena,
both in Europe and America, corresponded with their extraordinary number and
violence. The weather was less uniformly cold than in 1780, but the frost, in
some parts of the winter was most intense. The following was the state of
Farenheit's thermometer, at Hartford.

February 10th, 1784, 19 degrees. below 0. 11 12 do. 12 13 do. 13 19 do. 14 20 do.
February 15 12 degrees. below 0. 16 16 do. 17 16 do.

On the 20th of January was discovered a comet in Pisces, which was involved in
a luminous atmosphere. It was visible about four weeks.

The severe cold commenced early; the Delaware at Philadelphia was closed at
the beginning of December, and continued bound with ice till the middle of
March; notwithstanding a relaxation of cold and a heavy rain in January. The
gazettes state that such intense cold had not been known in that city, since
1750-51. -- The Missisippi was reported to be covered with ice, as far south as
New-Orleans. At the breaking up of winter, the thaw was sudden, and immense
bodies of ice, floating down the rivers, which were greatly swelled, spread
ruin along the low lands on their banks. Great damage was sustained on the
banks of the Schuylkill, Susquehanna, Potomack and James rivers.

Courant, May 11, 1784. Feb. 24. March 30. April 11. In Europe, the winter was
no less severe -- an instance in which a severely cold winter in Europe
coincided in time, with the same in America. It may be remarked also that this
winter was just one century after the coincidence of like events; the winter of
1683-4 being equally severe in both hemispheres.

In 1783-4 the river Liffey in Ireland, the Thames in England, and all the
rivers in the interior of Holland, were covered with solid ice. In Holland, the
ice gave way about the first of March, and the rivers being greatly swelled,
the adjacent country was inundated, with immense loss of lives and property.
The river Waal, near Nimeguen, broke through its dikes and overwhelmed 34
villages. The Rhine from Cologne and Manheim, exhibited similar scenes of
devastation.

Courant, April 27, 1784, and May 18. In January a terrible tempest spread
desolation along the coast of France from Rochelle to Bourdeaux; vessels at sea
shipwrecked, and houses on land blown down. This happened on the night of the
17th. Its violence extended along the coast of Spain and Portugal. An
earthquake accompanied this hurricane. The coast of Italy did not escape, and
so high was the swell of the ocean, that fish were lodged on the houses in
Syracuse.

Courant, May 18, 1784, and June 1. This remarkable tempest happened just
before the appearance of the comet.

The spring was wet and cold; and repeated snows fell in April.

The heat of some part of the succeeding summer in America was extreme. The
following observations were made at Hartford.

See Courant, June 29. June 44th at 2 P. M. 97 degrees. by Farenheit. 25 2 P. M. 96
26 at sunrise, 80 at 10 A. M. 96 at 2 P. M. 100 at 3 P. M. 101 at 4 P. M. 100
at sunset, 91 at 10 P. M. 80 27 at sunrise, 82 at 7 A. M. 91

This extreme heat, as usual, produced most violent hurricanes or thunder
gusts, with hail of unusual size. In May, pieces of ice fell in South Carolina
of nine inches in circumference. On the 17th of August the southern part of
Connecticut was swept by a tornado, which levelled trees and buildings and did
great injury. The beginning of summer was very dry; but frequent powers
afterward refreshed the earth, and good crops succeeded.

Courant, August 10, 1784. August 24 and 31. See also Appendix to a Sermon
preached at Hartford on the death of Israel Seymour, who was killed by
lightning. A great eruption of Vesuvius happened on the 10th of May. Sickness
prevailed in Leghorn and other parts of Europe. The plague raged this year also
at Smyrna, Constantinople and in Dalmatia. Spolatro was nearly dispeopled. The
heat in Europe was great and Hungary was overrun by locusts, which devoured the
fields of grass and corn. A severe earthquake at the same time, shook the
country of Armenia, and its vicinity, and a town was demolished with the loss
of 6000 inhabitants, on the 21st of July. The plague raged also in the regency
of Tunis on the African coast.

Courant, Aug. 31. Supplement to do. Nov. 9. On the 30th of July a tremendous
hurricane laid waste a considerable part of Jamaica, sweeping away buildings,
canes, fruittrees and overwhelming all the shipping in the harbors.

Courant, Sept. 28, 1784, and Oct. 26. In October, according to the public
prints, Barbados was severely shaken by an earthquake.

On the 25th of November was a very violent tempest from the N. E. and S. E. by
which means, a most extraordinary tide was brot into our harbors from the St.
Lawrence to New York, and probably further to the south. Great injury was
sustained by loss of shipping, and of property stored near the wharves.

Courant, Dec. 7, 1784. The great rains swelled Connecticut river to the height
of usual spring floods.

A meteor was seen in New England on the evening of December 13, 1784, passing
rapidly from south-east to north-west, and bursting with a loud report.

The winter following exhibited nothing very worthy of remark. In Europe it was
colder than usual, and in America, it produced great snows, the melting of
which in the spring swelled Connecticut river to an unusual height.

On the 13th of March 1785, there was an eruption of fire in the river Majaro,
in the province of Palermo, in Sicily, which occasioned a large chasm in the
earth.

Courant, July 4, 1785. In America canine madness began to rage and spread in
all parts of the northern states. The gazettes of 1785 abound with accounts of
the dreadful effects of this singular disease. It will be remarked that
epidemic madness of dogs is one of that series of diseases which belong to
every pestilential period. Whenever the human race are generally afflicted with
epidemics, the canine species rarely escape the effects of the general
principle; and not unfrequently foxes, wolves and other wild animals,
experience its malignant effects, and run mad. In 1785, the scarlatina anginosa
was prevalent in the northern states. This was in the midst of the period, and
almost every gazette announced some new case of hydrophobia.

See Courant, Aug. 1, 1785. Aug. 8 and 29. The wheat-insect, which has been
ignorantly and improperly named the Hessian Fly, committed uncommon ravages in
this year. The precise time when this insect originated, is not ascertained,
probably about the year 1776, or a year or two earlier. Little notice was taken
of it, for two or three years. In 1780, Mr. Underhill of Long Island lost his
wheat crops by the insect; and in subsequent years, it penetrated into
New Jersey, traveling, according to common opinion, about 15 or 20 miles in a
year. In 1785, it occasioned unusual destruction of wheat -- and such was the
alarm in England, for fear it should prove infectious, and be introduced into
that country, that the King issued a proclamation dated June 25, 1788,
prohibiting the importation of American wheat. -- This event excited no small
uneasiness in America, especially in the states, whose staple is wheat.
Whereupon the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania requested the opinion
of the Agricultural Society, as to the manner by which that insect is
propagated. To this request, the Society returned for answer, their decided
opinion that it is the plant alone which is injured by the insect; that the
grain is sound and good, and that the insect is not propagated by sowing wheat
which grew on fields infected with it.

See Museum, vol. 4. 244. Am. Magazine. The prohibition by the King and Council
of Great Britain was deemed a judicious precaution; but was the fruit of an
error that pervades the world, respecting the powers of infection and
contagion. The opinion of the Agricultural Society is well founded, but it
remains for time and the force of truth to convince the people of Philadelphia,
that the yellow fever can no more be transplanted and rendered epidemic by
infection, than the wheat-insect. Both are diseases, originating where they
have a suitable aliment, and ceasing to exist, when that aliment fails.

The prohibition of the British government was repealed the next year; under
the apprehension of a dearth.

The summer of 1785 was excessively dry in France and England and fevers very
prevalent in France. In Holland such a drouth could not be recollected by the
oldest man living. The canals, rivers and wells were almost totally exhausted.
In the first part of summer, there was not a drop of rain for three or four
months, and cattle were fed upon the leaves of the trees. The drouth was nearly
as severe in the West Indies.

Courant, August 8, 1785, and 29th -- also Sept. 12 and 19. In North Carolina,
the fields were overrun with bugs, which threatened a destruction of the grain.

Courant, August 29, 1785. The summer contained some excessively hot days in
America, as well as in Europe.

Courant, Sept. 5. On the 25th of August happened in the West Indies one of the
most dreadful hurricanes ever known, and equal to that of 1772 or that of 1780.
This tempest was preceded by very sultry heat, and the phenomenon called
looming, by which distant objects at sea appear to be raised higher or brot
nearer than at other times, I have often noticed this singular effect of the
powers of refraction in the air, previous to storms, of which it is the usual
forerunner. Guadaloupe, St. Croix and the other windward islands were laid
desolate by this tempest. On the 27th of August, the leeward islands suffered a
similar calamity. On the 24th of September, an easterly storm brought into the
rivers in the southern states, as high a tide as ever was known. -- Norfolk was
inundated, with great loss.

Sickness was very general in many parts of the United States. The scarlatina
was prevalent, and the gazettes mention a precinct in Ulster in which died
almost every child under six years of age. Many adults also fell victims to
this or other maladies.

See Courant, Oct. 3, 1785, and Oct. 10. On the 9th of August happened a
memorable tempest at Mantua, in Italy, and the neighboring country. The wind
was a hurricane, and accompanied with rain and hailstones of the weight of 18
ounces. The accounts state that visible flames issued from the earth, and
scorched people's legs and clothes; other accounts mention that the fire ran
along on the surface of the earth. The reader will call to mind the relation of
the like fact, in the terrible hail-storm which constituted one of the ten
plagues of Egypt in the reign of Pharaoh.

Courant, Nov. 28, 1785. The autumn was uncommonly sickly in Jamaica. Kingston
was a general hospital.

Courant, Jan. 30, 1786. On the 9th of October there was an uncommon darkness
in Canada; while the atmosphere was of a siery luminous appearance. This was
followed by squalls of wind and rain, with severe thunder.

On the 15th occurred a still greater obscurity, succeeded also by lightning,
thunder and rain.

On the 16th the morning was calm and foggy. At 10 o'clock arose a wind from
the east, which partly expelled the fog; and soon after, commenced the darkness
of midnight. The people dined by candlelight. Soon after the darkness fell a
meteor or fire-ball.

See Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 2, and the Gazettes of that month Courant, Dec. 12,
1785. A slighter degree of obscurity on the 15th extended over New England: but
the 16th was a fair day.

The year 1786 exhibits fewer of the great phenomena of nature, than the
preceding year; but it commenced with a degree of cold rarely known in this
country. State of the thermometer at Hartford, Jan. 17 at sunrise, 14 degrees.
below 0. 18 do. 20 do. 19 do. 24 do. at noon, 0 at 2 P. M. 3 above 0. 20
sunrise, 17 below 0.

The frost of the whole winter was however far less severe than in 1784. The
summer following was cool.

One or two violent tempests occurred during the summer, particularly one on
the 23d of August, which passed over Woodstock, in Connecticut, with fatal
violence.

The scarlet fever and hydrophobia continued to prevail in this year.

The plague prevailed on the Barbary coast; and several thousand people in
Carthagena and Malaga, in Spain, perished with yellow fever.

Town's Travels, vol. 3. In June 1786 was a smart shock of earthquake in the
north of England. In August a second shock of considerable extent. In January
1787 a shock was felt in Scotland, on the night preceding which, a piece of
ground, near Alloa, on which was a mill, suddenly sunk a foot and a half. The
waters of rivers receded and left their channels dry, before the concussion.

Sinclair, vol. 6. The winter of 1786-7 began early and with great severity. --
On the 28th of November, the temperature at Hartford was at 10 degrees. by
Farenheit, through the day. At sunrise on the 29th, it was at cipher; and the
cold continued to be extreme for two weeks. It did not rise above the freezing
point till the 13th of December. The cold then abated, but the winter, on the
whole, was more severe than usual. Courant, Dec. 4, 11 and 18. The winter was
also severe in Europe.

The sore throat was fatal in some parts of the eastern states. One man in
Newton, Mass. lost three children after 30 hours illness.

Courant. Feb. 20, 1786. The plague continued to prevail on the Barbary coast,
and in this winter and the spring following seventeen thousand inhabitants of
Algiers perished. It made great havoc also in the dominions of Morocco, as it
did in Aleppo.

M. S. of Mr. O'Brien. Courant, April 16, 1787 and July 33. The wheat-insect
continued its ravages in the United States.

Two or three violent tornadoes are recorded to have occurred in the summer of
1786 -- one at Wethersfield, which overset a house and killed several persons;
and another at Northborough in Massachusetts.

About the close of August a celestial phenomenon of a singular kind appeared
at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. A small light cloud was seen, from which issued
repeated reports, like the bursting of crackers, or an irregular discharge of
musquetry -- supposed to be the explosion of a meteor or succession of meteors.
The wind was high at north-west, with flying clouds.

Courant, Sept. 10, 1787. A dreadful hurricane almost destroyed the settlements
at the bay of Honduras on the 2d of September. The hurricane was followed by
fatal diseases.

About the close of 1787 Vesuvius discharged a large quantity of lava. In the
same year was an eruption of Etna, in the month of July.

A most extraordinary tempest and inundation desolated the Coromandal coast on
the 20th of May. Whole towns were overwhelmed, and more than 10,000 people
perished.

Courant, May 26, 1788, and Aug. 4. This year was in general healthy in America
and in the north of Europe. In some towns in New England prevailed angina, but
it was not general.

SECTION VIII. Historical view of pestilential epedemics, from the year 1788 to
1798 inclusive, comprehending the last epidemic period in America.
THE winter of 1787-8 was colder than usual in America, but not of great
severity.

In Europe prevailed epidemic catarrh in 1788. It appeared at Vienna in April
-- was in Poland and Russia in May -- at London in June -- and at Paris in
August. In St. Luke's Hospital, it began on the 16th of July, and a few cases
occurred till Nov. 10th; but only twenty-five persons out of 190 were affected;
a proof that it has little contagion. Gent. Mag. 1789. 346. The invasion of
this epidemic was less sudden than usual.

On the 22d of July was a violent tempest from the N. E. which occasioned a
very high tide in the Chesapeek, and no small damage. This is a singular
occurrence. A north-east gale in June or July on the American coast, must be
attributed to some extraordinary cause; and perhaps this may be ascribed to the
approach of a comet, which appeared in October and November following. This
comet was predicted by Mr. Herschel, who made previous preparations for
examining it.

Courant, August 11, and 25, and April 28, 1788. The summer was remarkably
tempestuous. On the 29th of August, a severe gale of wind did great damage in
many of our ports. Of 30 sail of vessels, in certain rivers and bays of
North Carolina, 26 were destroyed. A tempest in the beginning of the month had
been terribly destructive. No one event is more certain, than a vast increase
of tempestuous weather during the approach of comets. The tempest of the 19th
extended over the whole face of the country, penetrating to Vermont, levelling
buildings, trees and corn. Many cattle and one child was killed by falling
timber and trees. To enumerate the particulars, would fill many pages.

Courant, Sept. 1, 1788, and 8. It is remarkable that this tempest in the
United States was but two or three days after a tremendous hurricane among the
windward islands, which was supposed to do more injury than the great tempest
of 1766. At the leeward also the same calamity befell the islands. In Martinico
the barometer fell nearly to 27 inches.

Courant, Oct. 27, 1788. About the same time similar disasters befell France and
England. A tornado of great violence occurred about Paris, in which, the
gazettes declare, fell hailstones of 8lb. weight. During a tempest in London,
a fire ball entered a house and struck down two persons.

Courant, Oct. 27, 1788. In the West Indies hurricanes were repeated in
September with destructive rage.

On the evening of the 17th of October 1788 was seen, at various places, in
Connecticut and New York, a meteor or fire ball, whose apparent diameter was
equal to that of the sun in the meridian. It passed from the eastward to the
westward with amazing rapidity, illuminating the earth, and approaching near
the western horizon, it burst with a heavy report. This meteor was seen at
Poughkeepsie, on the Hudson, nearly in the zenith. In Suffex county, west of
Cape Henlopen, it appeared to be about ten degrees above, the horizon, Courant,
Dec. 8, 1788.


Courant, Oct. 27, 1788. The comet already mentioned first appeared about this
time. It rose about 3 o'clock in the morning in the north-east. A violent
north-east gale occurred on the 11th of November.

Courant, Nov. 3 and 17. This summer in America was very rainy; earthquakes
happened in Italy and Mexico; and a shock was felt in July in the isle of Man.

Sinclair's Scot. vol. 6. 625. The thermometer on one day in July rose to 103
in Columbia College, in New York; but the general heat of the summer was not
excessive.

Museum, vol. 7. 36. In November 1788 appeared the measles in New York. On its
first invasion, it appeared with great malignity. The same distemper appeared
in the northern liberties of Philadelphia, in December; and spread till it
became epidemic in February and March.

Courant, Nov. 24, 1788, and Rush, vol. 2 234. The eastern parts of Europe were
sickly during the summer of 1788. The immense armies on foot, in the war
between the Austrians, Russians and Turks, contributed to increase the
mortality. It was estimated that 80,000 Austrians perished, mostly by disease.
The year however was generally healthy.

The winter of 1788-9 was colder than usual in the United States. On the
morning of the 2d of February, the mercury in Farenheit fell to 28 degrees. below
cipher; 4 degrees lower than had before been observed in Hartford. The season
however was on the whole less severe than in 1780 and 1784.

Courant, Feb. 1789, and 9th. In Europe, the winter appears to have been
unusually severe. The frost penetrated to the southern parts of Spain and
Portugal; and the rivers in Estremadura and Alantejo were covered with ice. The
Pyrenees were involved in deep snow in March.

Courant, Aug. 3, 1789. Univ. Mag. 1789. It should have been related under the
year 1788, that almost all the cod-fish taken on the banks of Newfoundland, in
that year, were thin and sickly; when dried, they were of a dark or bluish
color, little better than skeletons, and not well received in foreign markets.
This condition of that fish was confined to those banks; as the cod taken at
other places were in their usual state.

M. S. letter from Dr. Holyoke. On the 28th of May 1789, appeared in
Connecticut a most singular halo, of which the public prints contain a
particular description. This phenomenon seems to indicate the approach of
tempestuous weather, and was in this instance, followed by a heavy wind and
rain. But when this appearance is of singular brightness or extent, it
indicates a state of the atmosphere highly electrified perhaps and certainly
tempestuous, and storms are numerous and violent. Thus the remarkable
hurricanes of 1780 were preceded by as remarkable haloes. The halo of May 28th
was preceded by a most splendid lumen boreale.

The instance under consideration was surprising and to gloomy minds, awful. A
clergyman, since dead, wrote a moral essay on the occasion in which he
predicted great calamities to happen; and he mentioned other events, of that
period, as unusual numbers of flies, caterpillars, locusts, and dearth of corn,
in confirmation of his opinion that the arm of the Lord was extended in wrath
over our land.

Courant, June 8, 1789, and June 15. It is true that our crops had been thin,
in the preceding year, and the northern states, in the spring of 1789,
experienced a dearth, approaching to famine. In Vermont, people were reduced to
the necessity of feeding on tad-poles boiled with peastraw. In one instance
four potatoes sold for nine pence. None of the human race were actually starved
to death, but a few died of a flux in consequence of bad diet. In old
settlements, there was food enough for man, but the failure of a surplus in
this country, is a rare event.
Cattle however perished in considerable numbers. Such were the gazette
accounts of the day. It is certain that a similar scarcity had not been
experienced in America for many years. Whether the failure of crops and the
sickly state of the cod-fish marked a derangement of the elements, let the
philosopher determine.

Courant, June 15, 1789, and June 22. The spring of 1789 was cold and
vegetation tardy, beyond what could be recollected by the oldest persons
living. Part of the summer succeeding was excessively hot. For nine or ten days
successively, in August, the heat was above 90 degrees. and in the midst of the
day, it rose nearly to 100 degrees. The mean temperature of the summer was however
not much above what is usual. Rush, vol. 2. 234. Courant, Aug. 24 and 31. On
the 4th of June ice at Wioming was as thick as window glass.

Courant, June 22. The failure of crops in the Carnatic in 1788 occasioned a
severe famine, by which thousands perished in the succeeding year.

Courant, April 27, and Sept. 28, 1789. The hydrophobia showed itself in
America early in 1789.

A man in Coeyman's precinct, state of New York, died in July of that dreadful
malady, taken as was supposed, by skinning a cow that died of the disorder in
the April preceding.

Courant, Aug. 3, 1789. In Maryland, the autumn was distinguished by an
unexampled mortality among horses.

Courant, Dec. 31, 1789. In Europe also crops had failed, and England, Holland
and France apprehended the most calamitous effects. In Paris the cry of bread,
bread was every where heard, and many riots and mobs marked the distress of the
inhabitants.

Courant, Oct. 12, 1789. The empire of China experienced the same calamity, and
the people suffered indescribable distress from famine and disease. In Madras
died 30,000 people by famine in 1788. Courant, April 27, 1789. In this instance,
crops failed over the whole earth, in the same year.

On the 10th of July a most tremendous earthquake convulsed Iceland. Large
chasms were opened in the earth, and some mountains were rent asunder. Several
shocks happened on subsequent days, and a violent shock in September is
mentioned in the 6th volume of Sinclair's Statistical works, 625.

Courant, January 21, 1790. On the 30th of September occurred a violent
earthquake in Tuscany, by which some villages were destroyed and several
thousand lives. On the same day, but not at the same hour, a small shock was
felt at Edinburgh. On the 5th of November, a shock was felt at Crieff, 50 miles
from Edinburgh; and on the 10th and 11th, severe shocks were felt at other
places.

Courant, Dec. 7, 1789. Sinclair, vol. 6. 625. On the 4th of December arrived
at Lies, Capt. Stewart of the ship Brothers, from Archangel in Russia; who
informed that on the coast of Lapland and Norway, he sailed many leagues among
multitudes of dead haddock floating on the water. He spoke several ships which
also passed among them.

Sinclair, vol. 6. 627. Whether these fish were killed by an earthquake or a
discharge of subterranean vapor or heat, or died by sickness, is not known. If
they were killed, it would seem probable that other fish in the same seas,
would have shared the same fate; which does not appear to have been the case;
for the accounts make no mention of the death of other kinds. And what renders
it probable that they died of disease, and a disease peculiar to that kind of
fish, it, that for some years after, no haddock came to the markets in
Scotland, as before that mortality. That species appeared to be almost extinct;
whereas there is no mention made of a failure of other kinds of fish. Careful
observations and precise dates would assist our researches into the causes of
these wonderful phenomena.

In October, Vesuvius was in a state of eruption for several weeks, and
discharged small streams of Lava. The plague prevailed at Constantinople and
Smyrna.

Gent. Mag. 1789. On the 29th of October from 2 o'clock P. M. to half after 4,
Kentucky was enveloped in thick darkness, so that people were obliged to use
candles.

Courant, January 4, 1790. It will be observed that this darkness, and the
beginning of the influenza in America coincide nearly in time with the eruption
of Vesuvius, and many earthquakes.

Such universal disorders in the elements never fail to produce epidemic
diseases; and those here related were the heralds of the most severe period of
sickness that has occurred in the United States for 30 years.

The first appearance of that series of epidemics to be hereafter described,
seems to have been in the measles at New York in November 1788, and at
Philadelphia in December following. This disease became epidemic over the
northern states in 1789, but I have not the means of describing its progress. I
find, in bills of mortality, from various places, deaths by measles are
mentioned in 1789 and 90.

In autumn 1789 appeared the influenza or epidemic catarrh. The precise time
and place of its appearance, are not ascertained. Some accounts say, it
originated in Canada. But I shall confine my observations to its progress in
Atlantic America. It was first observed about the close of September 1789, in
New York and Philadelphia. Dr. Rush informs me, that it was brought to
Philadelphia by the members of Congress, who returned from New York, about the
first of October. Another account, written by one of the faculty in
Philadelphia, and published in the 7th volume of the Museum, mentions its first
appearance there, about the time of the Friends Yearly Meeting, in September.
The precise time is probably not ascertainable; the opinion of its propagation
by infection is very fallacious, as I know by repeated observations. It
probably appeared in detached cases, some days before it became a subject of
observation.

Museum, vol. 7. 231. From the middle states, it moved rapidly over the whole
country. It appeared in Hartford, where I then resided, about the middle of
October. On the 19th of that month, I left Hartford for Boston and arrived the
next day in good health. I was seized with the influenza on the 23d, and by the
aid of a diluting regimen, recovered in four days. No person who attended me
was seized with the distemper, sooner than the other inhabitants of that town.
I mention this to disprove the common opinion of its infection; not that I deny
it to be in a degree, infectious; although my own observations do not warrant that
concession; but I aver that its propagation depends almost entirely on the
insensible qualities of the atmosphere. Two ladies who left Boston with me on
the second of November, before the disease had appeared in their family, and
before it was a subject of conversation, were seized with it in Hartford, at
the same time, that it became epidemic in Boston, one on the 8th and the other
on the 12th. -- The disease had then passed Hartford, and there is no evidence
of their being exposed to any person infected. This fact shows a regular
progress in the state of air producing the disease -- as persons leaving Boston
and traveling one hundred and twenty miles distance, were effected precisely
at the time the disease became epidemic in that town.

This disease pervaded the wilderness and seized the Indians -- it spread over
the ocean and attacked seamen a hundred leagues from land, and as to infection,
entirely insulated -- it appeared in the West Indies nearly at the time it did
in the northern states. It overspread America, from the 15th to the 45th degree
of latitude in about 6 or 8 weeks; and how much further it extended, I am not
informed.

It should have been mentioned that, in September, anterior to the invasion of
the catarrh, the scarlatina anginosa appeared in Philadelphia; but in October
it yielded to the influenza, the controlling epidemic. The scarlet fever
re-appeared in December, and became epidemic; often blending itself with the
influenza. It exhibited one predominant feature of the whole series of
succeeding epidemics, a prevalence of bilious matter, which was often
discharged by purging and vomiting. This disease continued to prevail in
Philadelphia, and if my information is correct, in some parts of New Jersey,
till the spring of 1790. The measles occurred in some cases, but was not
epidemic.

Museum, vol. 7. 120, 175. It is remarkable that the scarlatina anginosa was
cotemporary in Edinburgh with the epidemic measles in America in 1789, and
nearly so, with the death of the haddock on the coast of Norway.

It will be observed that the scarlet fever, tho epidemic in Philadelphia, did
not spread over the country in 1790. It was little known in the northern
states, till two years after -- this is among the proofs that this disease does
not depend on infection for its propagation. If infection was its only or
principal means of propagation, the fomites existed in great abundance, in
particular places in 1790, and sufficient to have spread it over the United
States. But a disease however infectious, will not spread far in an atmosphere
that will not generate it. Indeed scarcely a year passes in which sporadic
cases of scarlatina, or anginas of other kinds do not appear in particular
places; but they never spread without some uncommon concurrence of causes.

The winter of 1789-90 was one of the mildest that is ever known in this
country; there being little frost, except for a few days in February. There
fell frequent snows and in great abundance; but they were immediately followed
by warm southerly winds, and dissolved.

Early in the spring of 1790 we had a second epidemic catarrh. I was attentive
to its origin and progress. I found it at Albany in the last week in March, and
heard of it in Vermont about the same time. I returned to Hartford, but although
exposed repeatedly to its infection on my journey, I was not seized earlier
than others in Hartford, where the disease appeared about the middle of April.
It spread to the southward, arrived at Philadelphia near the close of that
month, and disappeared in that city about the middle of June. In the northern
states, as far as my knowledge extends, the disease was more violent, than in
the preceding autumn. Many plethoric persons of firm habit almost sunk under
it; while consumptive people and hard drinkers fell its victims.

Museum, vol. 8. 65. The spring and summer of 1790 were mostly rainy; but
otherwise seasonable weather. No remarkable epidemics prevailed, except those
already described, but an increase of mortality, in some places, is visible in
the registers of deaths. Severe earthquakes occurred on the African coast.

Let it be observed that the measles appeared in autumn 1788, just after great
volcanic eruptions, and a most tempestuous summer, when the element of fire
appeared to be in universal commotion; just after the meteor, and during the
appearance of the comet. In 1732 a dark day occurred in August preceding the
influenza. In 1789 a darkness at Kentucky occurred, during the epidemic catarrh.
Let it be observed also that the harvest failed, at this time, in China,
India, Europe and America, and let any man deny the all-controlling influence
of the elements in producing these events.

The winter of 1790-91 commenced early and with severe weather. The last week
in November was cold; Connecticut river at Hartford was closed with ice on the
9th of December, and not open till the 12th of March. On the whole, the season
was not of unusual severity. The spring and early part of summer were, in most
parts of the country, very dry, until the middle of June.

On the 15th of January, a considerable shock of earthquake was experienced at
Richmond in Virginia. At the same time catarrhs were so prevalent in that state
and in Pennsylvania, as to excite an apprehension of another visit of the
influenza. Inflammatory diseases were very frequent during the winter. In
Philadelphia the scarlatina anginosa appeared late in January and was very
prevalent in February. In the interior of Carolina it was sickly, but I have no
particulars. The whooping cough prevailed in many parts of the country.

Courant, Jan. 21, 1790. See Museum, vol. 9. 65. In the month of April, some
fishermen at the Narrows, near New York, caught fourteen thousand shad at a
single draft; to secure which, it was necessary to add several seines, one upon
the other. This circumstance is mentioned, because several medical authors have
related that an extraordinary abundance of fish is among the precursors of
pestilence. It will be noted that the pestilential fever, which has prevailed
for many years past, first appeared in New York, in the autumn succeeding this
singular draft of fish.

Courant, April 25, 1790. It may excite surprise that there should be supposed
a connection between an uncommon abundance of fish, and pestilence. But the
theory that resolves this into the unusual powers of excitement, is rational.
The state of the elements that causes pestilence, always produces unusual
numbers of insects; and often the human race is more prolific than at other
times. See the London Registers of births and deaths. Mait. Hist. Land.
On the 16th of May, at half past 10 o'clock P. M. in a serene, moonlight
night, an extensive earthquake was felt in the northern states. It was
preceded, a few seconds, by a rattling sound; its duration was short; its
course as usual in America, from N. W. to S. E. No injury was sustained.

Courant, May 23. On the morning after the earthquake, was observed at
Middletown in Connecticut, a substance like honey or butter, covering the grass
and earth for a considerable extent. See an account of a similar phenomenon in
Ireland under the year 1695.

To these phenomena succeeded in Connecticut the generation of millions of that
species of black worm, described under the year 1770. I believe they were far
less numerous than in 1770; they however appeared in Hartford and in Norwich,
and disappeared at the same time. They were very destructive to the grass and
corn, but their existence was short; all dying in a few weeks.

A paragraph in a Maryland paper dated June 1, 1791, mentions animals, there
called caterpillars, but evidently the same species of worm. They are
represented as marching in legions from place to place, and devouring the grass.

About the same time appeared at Lansingburg on the Hudson, a species of worm
that greatly injured the fruit trees.

Courant, June 25, 1792. But the most extraordinary phenomenon was the
existence of the canker-worm, in numbers before unexampled. Whether these
animals had made their appearance in the preceding year or not, I do not
recollect But in 1791 they devoured the orchards over the New England states;
and their ravages were repeated in the two following years. Orchards, standing
on stiff clay and in low grounds which are wet in spring, escaped; but on every
species of light and dry soil, the trees were as dry on the first of June, as
on the first of January. Many trees have never recovered from the effects of
their ravages.

Another worm of a distinct species, and called at the time, palmer-worm,
overspread our forests in this or the next year, devouring the leaves of oak
and other species of wood.

It is a prevalent opinion that uncommon flights of wild pigeons in America,
indicate the approach of a sickly season. I am not inclined to credit any
popular opinion, without good grounds; but this seems to have been formed on a
long series of observations. Certain it is that pigeons in the summer of 1791
were unusually numerous. In Maine, there were tracts of forest of miles in
extent, the trees of which were covered with their nests.

Courant, July 11. The summer of 1791 was excessively hot. At Salem the
thermometer was at and above 80 degrees. no less than 55 days, and above 90, twelve
days -- an instance that had not happened in many years, in that cool place;
although it often happens in the middle states.

Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 2. 91. On the 27th of November Lisbon sustained severe
shocks of earthquake.

Courant, April 2, 1792. In autumn, bilious remittents assumed, in
Philadelphia, the inflammatory diathesis, so predominant in the last
pestilential constitution. Dr. Rush, in his public lectures, mentioned this
fact at the time, although he little suspected what effects that constitution was
to produce in subsequent years. It was found necessary to bleed from one to
three times. In most cases, the liver was affected with all the symptoms of
Hepatitis.

M. S. letter from Dr. Rush. At this period the pestilential or epidemic
constitution of the atmosphere began to show itself in the infectious yellow
fever. It appeared in New York, in autumn, along the east river, and carried
off about 200 persons. This gave some alarm, which soon subsided.

It must be noted that the measles in 1788, the disease which marched in the
van of this series of epidemics, appeared first in New York -- this was
probably the fact also in regard to the influenza of the succeeding year -- and
the scarlatina anginosa at the close of 1792. The scarlatina of 1789 and 91 in
Philadelphia was local, or if it appeared in a few other places, it did not
spread over the country. All the last great epidemics have originated nearly in
the same longitude between Connecticut and Pennsylvania. It is not to be
concluded from this fact that they have been propagated by infection from one
spot, as from a center; we know this is not the fact; the same diseases
originating in remote places. The mild scarlatina, the herald of the epidemic,
appeared at New York and at Bethlem in Connecticut, in 1792, in the same month.
But it serves to show that the cause or principle of disease in the elements
is of various force, and will first show its effects in places where it has the
most strength.

In the same summer of 1791, the pestilential principle began to exhibit its
effects in the increased malignancy of the tropical fevers. The "unusual
epidemic fever" in Grenada, described by Dr. Chisholm, in the Edinburgh Medical
Commentaries for 1793, and which was the occasion of no small surprise, was the
commencement of that series of fatal diseases, which, in subsequent years, made
dreadful havoc in the Islands. This fever became so violent and infectious,
contrary to the common fever of the tropics, that a labored attempt was made to
trace it to fomites from the coast of Africa. The truth is, the fever was
nothing more than the common fever of the climate, with the super added
malignancy derived from the existing constitution of the elements. The same
fact took place on the African coast; that is, the usual fevers of the climate
became more malignant.

This idea is suggested by a series of similar events in other climates; all
the diseases of America, at the same time, assuming a similar augmented
violence, and sporadic cases of malignant fever appearing in all parts of our
country. Such has been the fact in all other epidemic periods.

To confirm this idea, let it be observed that in the same year, when this
malignant fever appeared in the African Seas on board of ships, in Grenada, and
in New York, as well as in sporadic cases in other parts of America, the plague
carried off two or three hundred thousand people, These numbers are to be
suspected of exaggeration.
in Egypt, and raged in Constantinople with great mortality. In all these
distant countries, the same or similar effects were nearly cotemporary. The
plague in Egypt continued into the next year; but I have no details of its
progress and termination. The same general principle was experienced in
Great Britain, and the bills of mortality in London continued to swell, till
the year 1793.

The winter of 1791-2 was somewhat colder than usual. The month of January was
remarkable for severe weather of three weeks duration. In March a slight
earthquake was felt in the middle states, but I have no particulars.

Courant, March 19, 1792. The spring months were very rainy in the southern
states and the islands, which experienced distressing inundations.

Courant, May 28, 1792. In the northern states there was a period of singularly
cold weather in the beginning of June, occasioned by a dry N. E. wind. Some
persons used fires as late as the tenth day of that month. The heat of the
following summer, in general, was not extreme.

In May and June, a species of locusts appeared in the northern parts, of the
state of New York, which committed ravages among the grain. The wheat-insect
continued its ravages, and appeared this year as far southward as Elk Ridge in
the state of Maryland. On Long Island the destruction of wheat was great and
distressing.

Courant, June 25, and July 2, 1792. In July happened at Philadelphia ^ violent
tornado; but the summer was not distinguished for the number of this species of
tempest. In one instance, in Vermont, the hailstones which fell are said to
have been from 3 to 6 inches in circumference.

About this time, a malignant fever began to rage in Charleston,
South Carolina, carrying off the patient in three days, and occasioning a
considerable mortality.

Courant, August 6, 1792. In the following winter, Egypt was a prey to famine;
and the streets of Cairo were filled with dead bodies.

In November 1792 several smart shocks of earthquake were felt in Perthshire, a
county in Scotland.

In Philadelphia appeared an insect in the form of a fly, which generated a
small worm or caterpillar, that attacked the tree, called Lime Tree, which is
there used for shade. From that year to the year 1798, this insect has ravaged
those trees, and destroyed some of them. Just philosophy will not hesitate to
believe the cause of this phenomenon and of the pestilence succeeding, to be
connected.

In this year, 1792, commenced that scarlatina anginosa which became epidemic,
with great mortality. I regret that a want of exact registers, will not permit
me to trace it to its sources with the precision desirable in all such cases.
I am informed that well defined cases of the disease were observed in New York,
as early as the month of August. But it occasioned no considerable mortality in
that city, until the following winter.

At Bethlem, in the western part of Connecticut, there were five deaths in this
year by the cynanche trachealis. I have not heard of any other instance. In
August, there were seven or eight cases of the scarlatina anginosa, but so mild
as not to prove mortal. The reader will note the last circumstance; for I am
able to prove, that this disease in Connecticut, was progressive in a
remarkable manner, and from the fact, which I believe is not uncommon, will be
drawn most important consequences.

The autumn was one of the mildest ever known, November was so warm that we sat
with open windows, at Hartford, on the 19th of the month. This moderate weather
was succeeded by severe cold, and Connecticut river was closed by ice on the
10th of December. The latter part of winter however was not very severe, except
a week or two in February.

On the 11th of January 1793 appeared a comet in the constellation of Cepheus.
It was seen for the last time by Mr. Rittenhouse on the 8th of February.

Phil. Trans. Phil. vol. 3. In the course of this winter and the spring
succeeding, the scarlet fever raged in New York, with considerable mortality.
It became epidemic also in Philadelphia, in the course of the spring months.

Catarrh was very prevalent in the northern states, at the same time; and the
smallpox by inoculation at Hartford proved unusually obstinate and fatal;
indicating an insalubrious state of the atmosphere.

In February 1793 the scarlet fever invaded the town of Bethlem, like "an armed
man," says Mr. Backus, Medical Repository, vol. 1. 524. He calls the disease
angina maligna, and it doubtless put on the symptoms of i^ in many places. It
seized almost every family and child. It abated in May, disappeared in
November, and re-appeared in January 1794 with nearly its former violence.
Nineteen children died in the first invasion, and fourteen, in the second.

We have here distinct marks of progression. The disease in a mild form
appeared in August 1792, then disappeared. In February following, it invaded
the town in its worst form. Six months therefore intervened between its
precursor, or mild form, and its invasion with full force.

The same disease appeared in the neighboring district of country and in
distant parts, in nearly the same longitude, in the course of this year; but I
have not materials for a detail of facts.

I find however, it prevailed in Litchfield in 1793, and was supposed to be
imported into that town from Vermont. It was also very mortal in New-Fairfield,
the same year. I therefore presume the disease to have been very general
through the western districts of Connecticut, Massachusetts and Vermont, and to
have prevailed as far westward as Pennsylvania, in this year. Of its progress
beyond that state, I have no information.

In September and October of this year, about the time the distemper subsided
in Bethlem, it began to exhibit appearances of approach, in the maritime towns
of Connecticut. Its precursors at New Haven, as described by Dr. Monson, a good
judge of the subject, were "slight influenza, slinging pains in the jaws and
limbs, soreness in the muscles of the neck, with a slight fever."

In November and December following, several cases of ulcerous sore throat
occurred, but they had a favorable issue, and the symptoms were not alarming.

In January 1794 arrived the crisis of this disease; it put on its malignant
symptoms, and in the course of the six following months, seized more than seven
hundred persons, principally youth, of whom died fifty two.

See Dr. Monson's account in my Collection, p. 173. Here again is distinctly
marked a regular progression of symptoms from September to January; the
precursors being four or five months in advance of the disease in its most
violent form.

In Hartford, on Connecticut river, about thirty miles east of Litchfield and
Bethlem, I had an opportunity to make personal observations on the origin and
progress of this epidemic.

I do not know the date of the first case: but in my own memoranda, its
appearance in my eldest daughter, then in the 3d year of her age, is noted
under the 12th of May 1793. The attending physician informed me, that the
disease was then epidemic. Its first appearance therefore must have been a week
or two earlier.

This disease was a mild scarlatina anginosa. The patient had considerable
fever -- the parosisms were daily, and terminated in prosuse sweats -- there
was a partial efflorescence of the skin about the neck and breast, and some
affection of the throat. Its crisis, if I do not misremember, was about the
eighth day. I was informed that in no case, did this disease prove mortal,
during this invasion.

The reader will observe the dates -- this mild angina invaded Hartford in
April and May, about the time, the severity of the disease began to abate in
Bethlem.

Nine months after the invasion of this mild angina, that is, in February 1794,
this disease appeared in Hartford in its formidable array, and many children
became its victims.

Nothing can prove more clearly that infection had no concern in the origin of
this distemper, than this gradual augmentation of its symptoms. If any fact
were necessary to demonstrate the all-controlling influence of the elements, in
the propagation and termination of the disease, this progression alone would be
sufficient. The mild epidemic of May 1793, was the same species of disease with
that which was then destroying life, in the western parts of the state, and in
New York and Pennsylvania; but the condition of the atmosphere at Hartford was
not, at that time, fitted to give the disease its full degree of violence. The
summer season perhaps suspended the operation of the general cause, by means to
us unknown. In February following arrived the crisis of the disease.

I know not whether other epidemic anginas have been characterized by the same
progressiveness in the symptoms. It is not improbable that they have; and that
age after age has passed away, without noticing the circumstance; a
circumstance that throws more light on the origin, causes and philosophy of
epidemics, than all the dissertations on the subject, since the days of
Hippocrates.

My own children were affected with the mild angina in May. I removed, with my
family, to New York in November 1793, before the fatal angina invaded Hartford,
and after it had finished its course in New York; my children escaped its
violence, and probably in consequence of this removal. This was an accidental
circumstance in my family, but I suspect a similar removal of children, during
the progress of that malady, might save a multitude of lives; although the
circumstances of many people will not permit them to avail themselves of the
expedient; and in some cases probably it would fail of success. It however
deserves consideration. The angina had completed its course in New York in 1793
or nearly. It did not invade Boston till 1795. A removal of the children from
the atmosphere of Boston in 1795, to an atmosphere where the disease had
ceased, would probably have secured most of them from an attack.

The summer of 1793 was excessively hot, after a dry spring, and produced a
great number of violent gusts, with rain and hail. The autumn was very dry. A
fatal dysentery prevailed in Georgetown, on the Potomak, and in the vicinity,
which swept away many hundreds of the inhabitants. The same disease prevailed
in Coventry, in Connecticut, and killed almost every person whom it seized. A
nervous or long fever prevailed in Wethersfield. In short, in most parts of the
United States, the pestilential principle exhibited its effects, in some form
or other, and every where swelled the bills of mortality. It extended to the
West Indies, and so violent was the epidemic at Grenada, that the physicians
and inhabitants, unable to account for it, really supposed it an imported
disease. The treatise written by Dr. Chisholm to prove it imported, is
satisfactory evidence to me that the disease was an epidemic. The disease
corresponds in its principal character, with the pestilential fevers of this
country, many of which are known to be generated in our own climate.

In August 1793 commenced in Philadelphia that dreadful pestilence which
alarmed the United States, and spread terror and dismay over that city. The
spring diseases, which ushered in this malady, were influenza, scarlatina and
mild bilious remittents. See Rush's Treatise on that fever. These are the most
certain and immediate precursors of pestilence, in this country; and the
influenza seems to be so, in all countries.

During this epidemic, the weather was very sultry and dry. About the 12th of
September, fell a meteor between the city and the hospital. The number of
victims to this disease was 4040.

A controversy arose among the physicians in Philadelphia, relative to the
origin of the plague, one party tracing the disease, as they supposed, to
infected vessels from the West Indies; the other ascribing it to exhalations
from damaged coffee and filthy streets. This controversy has occasioned an
unhappy schism among the medical gentlemen, and the citizens of Philadelphia.

It is greatly to be regretted that gentlemen of the faculty committed
themselves, by prematurely giving positive opinions on that important question,
and thus laying the foundation for permanent evils to the country. It would
have been wiser to have instituted a regular enquiry into historical facts,
relating to pestilential diseases, antecedent to any positive decisions on the
subject.

By an account of the deaths in Algiers, kept by Capt. O'Brien, while a
prisoner, I perceive that 4893 persons died in 1793 by the measles and plague.
There was a considerable increase of mortality in that year; and we observe the
measles and plague prevalent in the same year -- an evidence that on the
Barbary coast, as well as in Europe and America, these epidemics are allied.

By this account also it appears that in 1789 a number of persons died by the
asthma. It is not probable this was epidemic, and I suspect by this name was
intended catarrh or influenza. As this disease was then epidemic in the United
States, it would be gratifying to know whether the same epidemic prevailed on
the African coast, at the same time.

It is remarkable that in the spring of 1793, when the scarlatina anginosa had
first commenced its progress in America, it began also in England. It appeared
first in the villages about London, and afterward descended into the city.
Med. Mem. vol. 4. It continued to prevail for several years, with different
degrees of violence, at different times. See the Monthly Magazines.

The winter of 1793-4 was milder than usual in America. The thermometer in
New York, in a northern exposure, descended no lower than 13 degrees. above 0, and
but twice to that degree.

On the 17th of May was a singularly severe frost in the northern states of
America, which destroyed garden vegetables and the leaves of trees. The wheat,
oats and flax in many places turned yellow, and fruit was destroyed.

This frost was preceded by a few remarkable hot days, such as we usually have
in June; and speedily followed by a long series of rains, with easterly winds.

This frost has been supposed to kill the canker-worms, which had ravaged the
orchards, for some years preceding. Another opinion is, that a hard frost in
April, destroyed them, just after they were hatched. A third opinion is, that
they had run through their period of existence, and perished in a natural way. In
confirmation of which opinion, it is said they were evidently declining in the
preceding year. There is probably truth in both the latter opinions.

The summer of 1794 was, on the whole, not intemperate. We had hot weather, but
frequently was the earth refreshed by showers, and cool westerly winds. The
whooping cough prevailed in New York.

The scarlet fever, in the course of this year, spread over Connecticut. Its
effects are very apparent in the bills of mortality.

It appeared in 1795 in Boston, in the spring or early in summer, and continued
to prevail in Massachusetts and New Hampshire in 1796. Its progress from
New York to Maine, about 300 miles or perhaps 400, was run in about four years.
It traveled therefore about 100 miles in a year. Such also was the fact in the
preceding period; as well as in 1735. It should be observed also that its
direction, in the two last epidemic periods, has been opposite to that of the
disease of 1735. The latter began in New Hampshire and marched to the westward;
the former began in the middle states, and advanced to the eastward.

On the 10th of June 1794, the bilious plague made its appearance in New Haven,
a seaport in Connecticut. The person first seized with the disease was, the
wife of Isaac Gorham, living on the wharf, and the nature of her complaint was
not understood, nor suspected, till near the time of her death, on the 15th.

No sooner was it known that a pestilential fever was in the city, than the
inhabitants took the alarm, and directed an examination to be made into the
causes. On enquiry, the following appeared to be the sources of the disease, or
were reported to be the probable causes.

In the beginning, of June, Capt. Truman arrived from Martinico, in a sloop,
which was hauled up by the store of Mr. Elijah Austin, a few rods from the
house of Mr. Gorham. This sloop was supposed to be infected with the
pestilential fever of the West Indies. From this sloop was landed a chest of
clothes, which had belonged to a seaman who died with the fever in Martinico;
which chest was opened and the contents inventoried by Mr. Austin, in his
store, in presence of Capt. Truman, of Henry Hubbard, a clerk in the store, and
of Polly Gorham, a niece of Isaac Gorham. Mr. Austin and his clerk were seized,
a few days after the opening of this chest, (but how many days is not stated)
and died about the 20th of June, Polly Gorham was seized on the 12th and died
on the 17th of June.

These circumstances appeared to the people at that time, to be clear and
decisive evidence of the importation of the fomites of the disease; and
especially the fact, that Mr. Austin and his clerk were attacked with the
symptoms, nearly at the same time. This acquiescence in an opinion so important
to society and truth, renders it necessary to state the result of more careful
enquiries.

In the first place, the opinion that the sloop could communicate the
infection, is unfounded; for it does not appear that any person, ill with
yellow fever, had been on board -- there certainly had not been any sick on
board, after her leaving Martinico. The sloop was taken by the British troops,
when they took that island, and lay in port some weeks, unoccupied; until Capt.
Truman had an opportunity to purchase her. In the mean time, some of the crew,
to keep themselves employed and procure bread, went in the business of droging;
that is, transporting goods from place to place. One of them died with the
fever, but on shore, and he had not been on board of the sloop, after his
illness. On the passage home, the seamen were all in good health. Then, is
therefore not the least ground to suppose the sloop contained any infection,
and no part of her cargo was supposed to be in a bad state. The external parts
of a vessel or house cannot retain or communicate infection.

Secondly. As to the chest of clothes, it is probable it contained no infection
from diseased persons; for by the affidavit of Capt. Truman, taken before
Alderman Furman of New York, at the request of Dr. Baily, the Health Officer of
that port, which affidavit I have consulted, it appears that the clothing, worn
by the seaman who owned the chest and died at Martinico, was all wrapped in his
blanket with his body and buried. As Capt. Truman is a man of good character
and has made his affidavit, four years since the disease at New Haven, when all
apprehensions of injury from declaring the truth, have subsided, there seems to
be no reason to question the fact.

But as men, who have not attended to the great operations of nature in
producing epidemic diseases, naturally look for the causes among visible and
tangible substances, they still found a resource in a British regimental coat,
which was in the chest, and which, it was supposed, might have belonged to a
soldier who might have died of the yellow fever. In consequence of these
suspicions, the contents of the chest were all burnt.

On examination it appears that the coat was new -- and the mate of the sloop
has sworn that he saw the coat plundered by the seaman from a bale of goods,
and he believes it had never been worn. It was taken by the seaman in the
business of droging, from among the packages of clothing sent by the British
government for the use of the troops. But had we no such evidence, common sense
might inform us, that a man, laboring under a fever in the sultry climate of
the West Indies, would not wear his regimental.

In the chest the (...), as in the sloop, we can find no infection of yellow
fever. If Mr. Austin and his clerk received the seeds of disease from the
clothing in the chest, as it is possible they did, the sources of the disease
must have been the fetid effluvia or dirty clothes, which had been kept a long
time, close packed in a chest, in a sultry climate. It is not necessary to
suppose the clothes to have been worn by a diseased person. The sweat and filth
from a body in health, if confined in the hot season, will ferment and produce
a poison injurious to health, and productive of yellow fever or other disease.
It is a well authenticated fact, that Mr. Daniel Phoenix, treasurer of the city
of New York, and his sons were infected with a violent yellow fever, by means
of the fetid effluvia from packages of bills of credit, which had been returned
into the treasury, after being long used, passing through dirty, sweaty hands,
and then being close packed for some weeks, in a hot season. The fact is
related to me by Mr. Phoenix himself. The at^ack in the first case, was severe;
and on a subsequent occasion, a second attack passed off with a nausea.


But as some reports have been circulated, in contradiction of the testimony of
Capt. Truman, and as there is a possibility that he might have mistaken the
facts, I lay out of this question all the evidence respecting the sloop. For
whether the trunk contained infected clothes or not, is wholly material; and
without any reference to that point, the evidence that the fever in New Haven
did not spring from any imported source, is complete.

Mr. Austin went on business to New York, was seized with fever and died. His
body was conveyed in a sloop to New Haven, and buried. It is an agreed point,
that no friend, nurse or other person took the fever from him.

Mr. Hubbard went on business to Derby, ten miles distant, was taken ill and
died. His body was carried to New Haven, and buried. It is agreed that no
person took the disease from him.

It is not known that Polly Gorham was ever near the trunk of clothing -- the
report of her being present rests on the story of a child. But if she was, it
makes no difference, for no person who attended her was affected, except her
mother, who had a slight fever. She lived and was ill, a mile from the wharf,
and no person in that neighborhood was afterward affected. In short, it is not
pretended that the infection proceeded from either of these persons -- the only
persons who could possibly have taken the disease from the trunk of clothing.

It is admitted on all hands that the infection must have proceeded from the
house of Isaac Gorham. Now it happens that Mrs. Gorham who was first seized and
five days before Mr. Austin and his clerk, had never been near the trunk of
clothing, nor was an article of clothing from the sloop carried into the house.
For this assertion, I have the authority of Mr. Gorham himself, who is admitted
to be a man of veracity.

Had the origin and phenomena of epidemic diseases ever been understood, the
people of New Haven would have foreseen, with a good degree of certainty, that
they could not escape pestilence. This will appear from the following facts.

In the winter and spring of 1794, the scarlatina anginosa prevailed generally
in New Haven and the neighboring towns; manifesting a highly pestilential
condition of the elements. One case of bilious fever, attended with a vomiting
of black matter, occurred as early as the last week in March.

For many months preceding the invasion of the fever, the oysters, on the coast
of Connecticut, were in a very sickly state. Many people can testify to the
truth of this fact; but I have an account of it recorded at the time by the
late President Styles. In a letter to his son-in-law, the Rev. Mr. Holmes, of
Cambridge in Massachusetts, dated Sept. 25, 1794, be writes, that for twelve
months past he had eaten very few oysters, as they were diseased, poor and
dropsical. He remarked this of the oysters from New York to Boston. Those
caught on the shores of Branford, Killingworth, and at Blue-Point on the south
side of Long Island, were intolerable. At the date of the letter they were
recovering and becoming more palatable. This is a striking proof of the
derangement of the elements.

Further evidence of this fact was furnished by the multitudes of caterpillars
which overran the city of New Haven, in the summer of 1794. Some persons say,
this was in 1773, but it is not material.
In such numbers were these insects, that they almost covered the trees,
fences, and houses to the tops of chimneys. The preceding history furnishes
many instances of this phenomenon, preceding and accompanying pestilence.

Had these phenomena been understood, the people of New Haven would have had no
occasion to appoint a committee to examine into the causes of the fever. It was
hardly possible, in the nature of things, that the human race should escape the
calamity of epidemic diseases, under the operation of cause so general and
powerful.

But these were not all. Mr. Gorham, whose ^ily first suffered by the fever,
had, in the month preceding the invasion, cleaned a great number of shad, upon
the wharf by his door, and thrown the garbage, to the amount of a car^ load
perhaps, into the dock.

The alternate washing of the tide, and action of a hot sun, had rendered the
putrefaction of this mass of filth extremely rapid; and there being no current
to remove it, the stench became intolerable. On the other side of the wharf, a
few rods distant, a boat load of clams had been deposited an the mud, that the
water, during the slux of the tide, might preserve them; but a great part of
them were soon spoiled, and added to the fetor of the atmosphere.

To complete the list of nuisances, some barrels of damaged pickled cod-fish
had been thrown from a store into the dock, and the whole was left uncovered
during the recess of the tide. So noisome was the air of the place, for
sometime before the fever appeared, that the proprietor of the wharf desisted
from his usual morning visits before breakfast. For all these facts I have the
declarations of the persons concerned and eye witnesses.

The putrefaction of flesh, from thirty years observations, I can testify, will
not always produce disease. But in a pestilential state of air, the dissolution
of flesh is unusually rapid, and the acid evolved, peculiarly noxious. In such
circumstances, putrescent substances of all kinds appear to be powerful
auxiliary causes of disease. The condition of the elements accelerates
putrefaction, and that putrefaction in turn increases the deleterious quality
of the air. I may add to these causes of the fever, the water of the well used
by the people living on the wharf, which happened at that time to be covered
over with dead rats in a state of putrefaction. This was discoverd by the
offensiveness of the water.


Under the operation of so many causes of disease, instead of being surprised
at the appearance of a pestilential fever, we are rather to wonder that its
ravages were not more extensive.

That the putrefaction of the fish was an exciting cause of the fever in
New Haven, is probable from the early appearance of it in summer. The first
cases occurred about the 10th of June, which is earlier than the epidemic
pestilence of America usually occurs; and which indicates the existence of
strong local causes. What further confirms this opinion, is, that after a few
weeks the distemper was nearly or wholly extinct. In July died only three
persons, and for about two weeks, no new case occurred. But in August, the
usual time of the appearance of this disease in this part of America, it broke
out with fresh violence. It is probable therefore that the morbid local causes
induced the fever in one small spot, before the proper season for it to
prevail. These causes being gradually extinguished by the tides and a hot sun,
the disease subsided, until the usual season for such fevers. The same took
place in New York in 1795 -- in 1796 -- and 1798.

That the plague in New Haven was the effect of a condition of the elements
united with local causes, is proved by subsequent events. In the following
year, a malignant dysentery originated and prevailed in New Haven, destroying
more lives than the bilious plague of 1794. This disease is acknowledged by
able physicians to be of the same species as the yellow fever. See Lind on that
point, and Rush's Works vol. 5. 5, where it is stated, on the authority of Dr.
Woodhouse, that several persons took the yellow fever from soldiers, laboring
under the dysentery. It is well known also that an epidemic yellow fever has
been converted, by a sudden change of weather, into an epidemic dysentery, and
vice versa; as at Baltimore in 1797. It is also true that the yellow fever in
autumn passes off in dysentery, as in New London in 1798. The same is at times
true of the plague in Asia.

This disease in 1795, as well as a similar dysentery in Derby in 1794,
demonstrated the deleterious condition of the elements in that region or
vicinity.

If further evidence was necessary, we have it in the bad state of the water in
some of the wells in New Haven, during the prevalence of these diseases, in
which, one of the physicians of the city has informed me, were animalcules
visible to the naked eye. This fact corresponds with what occured in Athens,
during the plague, where the badness of the water, it is supposed, led the
people to ascribe the disease to the poisoning of the wells by the
Lacedaemonians. A similar fact probably led the Germans, in 1349, to suspect the
Jews had poisoned the wells, and on suspicion alone to massacre them without
mercy. This state of the water, and the sickness of the oysters alone decide
the point, that the principal sources of the epidemics of 1794 and 5, were in
the elements.

It has been asserted that no person in New Haven was affected by the fever,
without intercourse with the sick or with infected clothing. On careful
enquiry, I find this is not true. Several persons were affected who were not in
the rooms, nor even in the houses of the sick, and who could not be exposed,
otherways than by passing along the streets. But such persons could not take
the fever from the effluvia of the diseased. Men who suppose this, are
unacquainted with the powers of infection. Dr. Chisholm states expressly that
the infection of that disease in Grenada never exceeded ten feet; that it was
easy to avoid it, and many who lived in the houses of the diseased, escaped.
Med. Repos. vol. 2. 288. Dr. Lind, the ablest writer on the subject, who spent
his whole life in jails and hospitals, has advanced the same doctrine. A great
number of sick in a narrow close built street, may render the air of it
infectious, but a few diseased persons in the wide streets of New Haven could
not produce this effect. In general however the disease in this place was
propagated by infection; the pollution of the atmosphere being confined to a
small district on and near the wharf, on low ground, to the leeward of the
putrid substances before mentioned, and near the creek.

But there is one fact that will decide the question relative to the origin of
the pestilential fever in New Haven, and every other place. It is stated by the
physicians that all other diseases yielded to this fever. After it appeared in
June, the scarlatina subsided, and "in September, when the fever was most
prevalent, the inhabitants in general were almost entirely free from every
other complaint."

See Dr. Monson's account of the fever, in my Collection, p. 178. Here we have
an infallible criterion by which to determine whether a disease is an epidemic
of the place, or introduced and propagated solely by infection. A disease of
mere infection can never extinguish other diseases of the place. The smallpox
introduced by variolous matter, and communicated to every family would not
absorb a dysentery or scarlet fever prevailing in the same place; every
hospital will demonstrate this principle. A disease of mere infection would not
affect another disease even in the next house. Every disease that extinguishes
another disease current in a town, is an epidemic originating in that place. It
not only proves that the atmosphere will produce that distemper, but it proves
that it will produce no other. On this principle I will rest the question, as
it regards not only the fever in New Haven, but every pestilence that ever
existed.

The summer of 1794 was, in most places, less sickly than in 1793 and 1795; yet
the scarlatina extended its ravages over Connecticut, and Philadelphia and
New York experienced the predominant epidemic constitution. In Philadelphia
died from 70 to 100 persons of the bilious plague; in New York twenty or thirty
cases of the same disease indicated the same condition of the atmosphere. It
was the general opinion in New York, that the city was remarkably healthy; but
this opinion, so flattering to the people, was a fallacy. The bills of
mortality were higher than in healthy years, and this augmented mortality was a
prelude to the epidemic of the succeeding year.

On the 15th of June was a great eruption of Vesuvius, nearly equal to that of
1779. The lava ran down the mountain on the west and extended to the sea,
overwhelming the town of Tome del Greco.

See Universal Mag. for Aug. 1795. In this year the bilious pestilence
prevailed in Baltimore. No suggestion has been made that it was imported, and
the physicians and inhabitants seem to admit the disease to have been only a
more malignant form of the ordinary autumnal remittent.

In the succeeding winter, the epidemic of the summer and autumn changed, in
Philadelphia, into the form of catarrh or pleurisy, and in many cases, was
attended with delirium and mania. See Rush on this subject.

Pestilential epidemics, or rather the state of the atmosphere which produces
them, usually affects the brain, in a most sensible degree. This is obvious
from the vertigo, so frequent during sickly periods; pains in the head,
dizziness and nervous debility often complained of by studious men. In some
periods, this affection of the brain has appeared in epidemic madness. See the
years 1355; 1373 and 4.

A few cases of a disorder of this species appeared in New Haven and its
vicinity in the winter after the pestilence. The patient was seized with a
violent pain in the head, between the Os frontis and the Coronal Sutures, which
was periodical, commencing about 11 o'clock A. M. and increasing till 2 P. M.
In some cases, the paroxism was accompanied with delirium; but the pain was
limited to the head, and unattended with fever. Bleeding, purging and opium
produced no alleviation; but a blister on the forehead or temple, soon relieved
the patient, and effected a cure. This account is taken from Dr. Hotchkiss, the
attending physician.

The winter of 1794-5 was very cold in Europe, and in January 1795, the French
troops marched into Amsterdam, over the rivers and canals, on the ice. This
severity was to be expected from the great eruption of Vesuvius in the
preceding summer.

The catarrh was epidemic in January and February, in the British channel
fleet. In one ship it assumed the symptoms of a pure typhus.

Trotter's Med. Naut. p. 366. In America, the same winter was milder than
usual. Persons walked on the battery at New York, for pleasure, on Christmas
day, with no covering but their ordinary autumnal clothes; and vessels sailed
up the Hudson and Connecticut till January. In the latter part of the winter,
we had some cold weather, and a cool late spring.

About the 20th of July, began a series of hot, damp, rainy weather, with light
southerly winds; a season answering to the description which Hippocrates has
given of a pestilential constitution. Heavy rains were followed by a humid,
close, sultry air; no thunder and lightning; no north-westerly winds to cool
and refresh the fainting bodies of men. For many weeks the atmosphere was so
loaded with vapor, that no electricity could be excited with the best
instruments. Fruit perished on the trees and fell half rotten and covered with
mold. Sound potatoes from the market perished in my cellar in thirty-six hours.
Cabbages rotted off, between the head and the stalk, as they stood in gardens.
The moisture penetrated into the inmost recesses of desks and bureaus, covering
books, papers and clothes with mold, under two locks. The walls of houses, and
the paper of inner apartments became white with mold and required scraping.
This state of the air produced also musketoes without number; while flies
disappeared. It is observable that these two kinds of insects thrive in
different conditions of the air -- flies in a hot, dry air; musketoes, in a
hot, moist air.

It is necessary here to correct a mistake of Dr. Currie on bilious fevers,
page 12, where he mentions the years 1795 and 7 as "wetter and cooler than many
preceding seasons." The truth is, the latter part of the summer of 1795, was on
an average three degrees by Farenheit, warmer than the weather had been in the
ten preceding years. See a letter from Professor Kemp in Dr. Bailey on yellow
fever, p. 54. In the course of my life, I never experienced a state of air so
debilitating and unfriendly to animal spirits, as the month of August 1795. The
effects of it are very visible in the bill of mortality for that year in
Philadelphia, which contains double the usual number of deaths.

In July of this year appeared the bilious plague in New York. The first case
that excited public attention was that of Dr. Treat, the Health Officer of the
port, who fell a victim, on the 29th of the month. His disease has been
ascribed by some persons, to infection taken on board a vessel from the
West Indies, the brig Zepher in which a person died, whom Dr. Treat assisted in
burying. But it is not probable, that this was a just opinion; as many other
persons visited the same vessel, and the wardens of the port were on board,
while a part of her cargo, some damaged coffee, was thrown into the stream,
without the least inconvenience to their health. The plethoric habit of Dr.
Treat, and his great fatigue in an open boat and in a burning sun, are
sufficient to account for his disease.

But admitting him to have taken his disease from the fomes of a sick or dead
person, or from the foulness of the brig, the fact does not in the least aid
the advocates of infection, for no person, nurse, attendant or visitor,
received the distemper from him, nor did the disease prevail, in the street
where he died, during the subsequent season.

It was said that three or four seamen, belonging to the ship William, were
seized with the distemper in consequence of visiting the brig Zepher. But on
enquiry, it was found, that these men only came along side of the brig and
purchased some fruit. To suppose these men should all take a disease from the
brig, when two or three wardens of the port, who were some hours on board,
while a damaged cargo was discharged, escaped without the least affection, is
ridiculous.

But what cuts short all controversy on this subject, is, that fourteen days at
least before the death of Dr. Treat, a man in the hospital died of a similar
fever; and the late Dr. Pit Smith, informed me in the autumn of 1795, that he
visited another patient a blacksmith, with a similar disease, early in July. In
fact then, the disease was in New York before the arrival of the supposed
infected vessels; and the cases which occurred early in July, were precursors
of the epidemic which was to follow.

It must also be observed that the disease in New York never spread over the
whole city. It ran along the low streets on the East river, in what was
formerly the swamp and in the narrow alleys. The high grounds in the center of
the city, and the western side of the island, were healthy as usual; and the
disease, when carried from the infected streets, upon the elevated parts of the
city, exhibited no contagion, but disappeared. -- A small part only of the
citizens fled; most of them remained, and pursued their occupations, in the
greatest part of the city, with perfect safety. The deaths were about seven
hundred and thirty; among which at least five hundred were foreigners, most of
whom had recently arrived from Scotland and Ireland. Four hundred and sixty two
belonged to the Catholic Congregation under the Rev. Mr. O'Brien, most of whom
had been so short a time in the country, that he did not know them.
The mortality in New York was mostly owing to this influx of foreigners, not
seasoned to our climate.

This fever in New York was preceded in spring by epidemic measles, which
disappeared totally during the three months, when the fever was the ruling
disease, and re-appeared in November -- a decisive evidence that the fever was
produced and controlled by the same cause, as the measles.

In this year also appeared the same disease at a landing, called Mill-river
four miles from Fairfield, in Connecticut, and about sixty miles from New York
-- a small village, near the water. It was reported that this distemper was
propagated at Mill-river, by infected persons from New York. I have taken pains
to enquire carefully of both the attending physicians and the clergymen, who
visited the sick, who all agree, that one man from New York had died of the
fever in the village, that summer, and he was dead, three weeks before, Mr.
Tharp, the first man seized, was taken ill.

The disease affected others of his family, but spread no further; and the
gentlemen abovementioned do not believe it to have been derived from imported
infection.

The bilious remittent fever, is annually the disease of autumn in some parts
of the southern states; and strangers, visiting that country from the Delaware
to Florida, in the hot season run the hazard of a fever. Drs. Tailor and
Hansford, two old practitioners in Norfolk, Virginia, speaking of the yellow
fever of 1795, say, "The same fever, with all its malignant and uncontrollable
symptoms, occurs every year, in scattered instances, and about the same season."

See my Collection on Bilious Fevers, p. 151. But during pestilential periods,
this disease in that unhealthy country, takes a wider spread, and becomes
infectious.

In 1795 this was the case at Norfolk -- a town that is situated on low flat
land, a few feet only above high water, and subject to autumnal fevers. The
disease prevailed most in the narrow streets and poor small houses, and was
most fatal to strangers.

Two remarkable facts occurred there and are related in the account last cited,
to prove that the disease was occasioned solely by a general state of the
atmosphere in and about the town, without a dependence on infection. The first
is, that traders who visited the port, although they were not known to have had
intercourse with the sick, took the disease and died on their return into the
country. But a more remarkable fact is, that the seamen of a ship from
Liverpool, which did not approach nearer than five miles distance from the
town, and which had no communication with the shore, except by means of the
health-boat, were almost all attacked with the disease, in ten days after their
arrival. This was late in the season, and when the disease had nearly
disappeared in town.

In the year 1794 several cases of the same disease had occurred in Norfolk. In
1797 the disease was again frequent. In 1795 and 7, the disease was supposed to
have been augmented by the great rains and floods which had preceded, and which
had brought down the river and spread on the shores, large quantities of
vegetable substances.

The extreme unhealthiness of the summer of 1795, was manifested by unusual
mortality in various other parts of the country. On the level plains of Duchess
county in New York state, prevailed a mortal dysentery and typhus fever. At
Coxsakie on the west of the Hudson, raged similar diseases with fatal effects.
In some western parts of the state, near the marshes which border the waters of
the country, a malignant bilious fever was more terribly fatal, than the fever
in New York.

In Sheffield, a western township of Massachusetts, near two large ponds which
form marshy grounds, bilious fevers, which had not been known there for many
years, before, prevailed and in some cases were mortal.

See Dr. Buel's account of these diseases, in my Collection, p. 53. In that
town, the progressiveness of the morbid principle of this pestilential period,
was clearly discoverable. Many cases of intermittents occurred in 1793; and a
few instances of bilious remittents. This was during the plague in
Philadelphia. In 1794, early in spring, inflammatory diseases of the pneumonic
kind, were unusually frequent. These were succeeded by intermittents, which
were more frequent than in the preceding year. In July, the bilious remittent
appeared, and 80 inhabitants out of 150, who lived within a mile and a half of
the south pond, were affected. In 1795, of 200 inhabitants within three fourths
of a mile distant from the north pond, 150 were affected with the same disease
-- but few died.

In 1796, the dysentery, which had not appeared in many preceding years, began
its attacks on children, and not long after adults were taken either with the
same disease or with the bilious remittent. Of one hundred families living
within a mile and a half of one of the ponds, not ten escaped sickness -- more
than half of the inhabitants were, in the course of the season, attacked with
one or other of the abo^^ mentioned diseases. Of 150 persons who lived nearest
to the pond, not ten escaped. The deaths by these diseases were forty-four.
Here then was a regular increase of malignancy in the autumnal diseases, from
intermittents, to the worst form of dysentery and bilious remittent.

Med. Repos. vol. 1. 456. In the preceding period, great mortality prevailed
among the geese in some parts of our country; and in the year 1796, a similar
mortality among other fowls. I have not been able to obtain a particular
description of the symptoms, but it was observed the transition from apparent
health to death, was very rapid.

In 1796 the measles which commenced in New York in 1795 was epidemic in
Connecticut; and unusually prevalent in London.

In 1796 also the bilious plague again appeared in New York, but in a different
quarter of the city from that which was principally affected, the year
preceding. In 1795, it began and was most general in the north-eastern part --
in 1796, in the south-western part, near the battery; and in both summers, its
seat was along the wharves on the East river, and in the adjoining streets and
alleys. All this part of the city is a level, formed by extending the land and
wharves into the East river. The land is of course loose and porous, admitting,
in many places, the water of the sea into the cellars of the houses; some of
which are penetrated, on every flux of the tide. These artificial streets,
Front and Water streets, are not easily washed clean, on account of their level
position, and they receive the filth washed from the higher grounds of the
city. To these streets, and similar ones in the swamp on the north-east, was
the malignant distemper principally limited.

In 1796 a new wharf below Exchange slip, which had been timbered the preceding
autumn, and left unfilled, had become a reservoir for all kinds of putrid,
filthy substances, and was supposed to be a powerful cause of disease.

Besides, the quarter in which the disease raged this year, is almost wholly
covered with old wooden houses, and many of them, built before the raising and
paving of the street, have their lower floors two or three feet below the
surface of the pavements. In this district appeared the yellow fever in June;
but a series of rainy weather and cool westerly winds, suspended its action, in
the beginning of July. Succeeding hot weather renewed it, and in the limits
above described, extending about forty or fifty rods, about seventy persons
fell victims. The other parts of the city remained in the usual autumnal state
of health, with only a few scattering cases of the plague.

At Wilmington, North Carolina, prevailed a similar disease. It was preceded by
the dysentery, in July, after a very wet spring. When the bilious fever
commenced in August, the dysentery declined, and those who had been affected
with it escaped the fever. About one hundred and fifty deaths, by these two
forms of disease, occurred in 130 families. Different opinions were entertained
about the origin of the fever; but the physician who gives this account has no
doubts of its domestic origin. He informs us further that a few cases, in that
town, occur annually, which assume all the symptoms of a violent yellow fever.

Med. Repos. vol. 2. 153. Dr. Rosset's letter. In this year, the disease
occasioned a considerable mortality in Charleston, South Carolina, and in
Newburyport, in Massachusetts. It appeared in Boston also, but was not general
nor severe.

In Charleston, it succeeded one of the most destructive fires, ever known in
that city; and was in part ascribed to the stagnant water which accumulated in
the open cellars.

In Newburyport, there was no plausible pretext for ascribing the disease to
imported infection; and the general belief was, that the immediate exciting
cause, was, the remains of large quantities of fish which had been left to
corrupt on the wharf, near which the distemper originated, and which occasioned
an intolerable stench. But in that town, a previous increase of mortality
indicated a sickly state of the elements; as in all other places, where the
pestilence has made its appearance. In none of the northern states, which are
usually healthy, has the bilious plague occurred without other diseases for
precursors. -- The disease in Newburyport was confined to a low street or two,
and when carried upon the high grounds, it exhibited little or no infection,
but disappeared with the death or recovery of the patient.

M. S. Letter from Nicholas Pike, Esquire. In Boston, the disease spread only in a
small part of the town, adjoining the water. The physicians were unanimously of
opinion, that it was not occasioned by any fomites from infected articles
imported, but generated in the town.

See Dr. Warren's Letter in the Medical Repository, vol. 1. p. 136. The
pestilential state of the elements was strongly marked, this year, by the
poorness of the shad brought to market in New York. These were all thin, lean
and small; and for this reason, I purchased none for my own use, during the
season. Other persons observed the fact; and I am since informed that such of
those fish as were pickled, perished in defiance of all human care to preserve
them. The same state of the shad was observed in Connecticut.

Some cases of yellow fever occurred in Philadelphia in 1796; catarrh was
frequent in the winter, followed by measles of a most inflammatory nature. A
remarkable halo appeared on the 25th of July.

Rush, vol. 5. 9. It has been already observed that the winter of 1795, was
remarkably severe in Europe. In America the same winter was as mild as usual.
But in the summer and autumn of 1796, the northern states experienced a most
severe drouth.

The following winter was very severe; the cold exceeding what is usual, and
being of long duration. The summer of 1797 was cool and wet. The winter of
1797-8 was severe -- and the cold of very long duration. It commenced early in
November and continued till March. The Hudson and Connecticut were closed in
November; a very rare occurrence. For several weeks in November and December,
the wind, without much snow on the earth along the Atlantic coast, was from the
north-west and intensely dry and cold.

In August 1797 appeared a comet, which, according to calculations of
astronomers, passed near the earth, although it was of small apparent magnitude,
and seen by few people.

The influence of this species of bodies in occasioning great tides, and
violent storms, has been already mentioned, and of that influence, in the
present instance, I was a witness. In 1797 my residence was, as it had been the
preceding year, on a height of York Island near Corlaer's Hook to the northward
of which is a flat, which is never covered with water by a common tide, but is
overspread by spring tides, or any unusual swell in consequence of easterly
winds. I observed, as early as the last week in May, high tides were unusually
frequent and the swell extraordinary. In the city of New York, the same fact
was observable; and the inhabitants about Beekman slip will recollect how often
the wharves and street were covered with water. These tides were not to be
accounted for, on any known principles of lunar influence, and I frequently
mentioned the phenomenon to my friends, but without suspecting the cause. The
same phenomenon was noticed at other places. In Norfolk, the epidemic fever
was, in part, ascribed to unusual tides; as I was afterward informed. On the
Delaware, the overflowing of the low lands, below Philadelphia, was
extraordinary, and some physicians ascribe to this cause the yellow fever,
which swept away most of a family by the name of Whitall.

I was lately mentioning these events to a respectable gentleman in Stamford,
The Hon. John Davenport, now representative in Congress.
who instantly recollected a fact which confirms the foregoing account. He
remarked that the common practice in that town, is to mow the salt meadows, at
the quadratures of the moon, on account of small tides; but in 1797, the
calculations failed, and the people were much troubled to collect their hay, on
account of high tides -- a circumstance that was very surprising to him at the
time, but he did not advert to the probable cause. This was in August; about
the time that the comet was first observed. The fact then of the influence of
comets, in raising the waters of the ocean, is well established; and the
appearance of a comet in autumn explained the phenomena of the tides to my
satisfaction.

The influence of comets in augmenting tempests is equally certain and
remarkable.

On the 19th of August, a storm and whirlwind in South Prussia tore up forests
carried trees along like sheaves of wheat, and levelled several villages.

In Rome and Naples happened a most extraordinary tempest on the 25th of
September, such as the oldest man could not recollect. It took up men and
carried them some distance. The astronomers were consulted and they ascribed it
to the approximation of the comet.

A storm of hail in the province of Macconnois, in France, and on the borders
of Burgundy, destroyed the vines and fruits of the earth in thirty-four
villages. In the appropriations made afterward by the councils of France, four
millions were granted to repair the losses by hail, inundations and other
disasters.

On the 7th of September, a considerable shock of earthquake was felt in the
Western Pyrenees. On the 28th of the month was a volcanic eruption in
Guadaloupe; and many earthquakes occurred during the autumn.

In England, the summer was so rainy and wet, as to injure the corn and
threaten the inhabitants with scarcity. It would require pages to relate all
the accidents by floods in Great Britain from August to the close of the year.

During the autumnal months, the Black sea also was unusually tempestuous, and
the loss of shipping alarmed Constantinople, with apprehensions of a scarcity
of provisions.

In February, 1797, South-America was terribly convulsed. Quito and the
neighboring provinces suffered, by the destruction of almost every house.
Mountains were detached from their stations and rolled against each other,
burying villages in ruin. Volcanoes emitted fire, lava, and rivers of water. It
is said, that 40,000 inhabitants perished.

On the 11th of January 1798 a shock of earthquake was felt in Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, and the neighboring towns, during which appeared to issue from
the earth a flame or blaze, like the burning of a chimney.

In this month, the severe cold reached the West Indies, and frost appeared,
for several mornings, on the windows in Port Royal Parish, in Jamaica. A small
earthquake was felt there in January.

Royal Gazette, Jan. 29, 1798. In February 1797 also violent earthquakes were
experienced on the western coast of Sumatra, in the East Indies.

This year, 1797, was remarkable for other singular phenomena in Europe and
America.

In England a pestilence among cats swept away those animals by thousands. It
seems that this disease began as early as April, and succeeded an epidemic
catarrh among the human race. The same cat-distemper was afterward epidemic in
France. A society at Montpelier instituted an enquiry into this remarkable
phenomenon.

The cat-distemper appeared in Philadelphia, as early as June, and proceeded
northward and eastward, like the catarrh of 1789. In August it was very fatal
in New York, and in the course of the summer and autumn, it spread destruction
among those animals over the northern states.

In August, dead fish, in great numbers, were seen to float down James' river,
in Virginia, for many days in succession.

Canine madness, during the same year, was unusually epidemic and attended with
fatal effects, of which full accounts may be seen in the first volume of the
Medical Repository.

These phenomena indicate an unhealthy state of the elements. But it is a
remarkable fact that, in some places and seasons, the principal force of the
epidemic constitution seems to be spent on one species of animals, while others
are exempt. Thus in England, the catarrh, which had affected mankind in 1797,
ceased, before the epidemic seized the cats. In America, the northern states,
with the exception of a few places, were remarkably healthy, in 1797, while
cats died in multitudes. And it is a frequent occurrence in Europe, that while
the plague or some other malignant disease is afflicting (...) human race in
one country; in another country, mankind w^ escape, and a most terrible
mortality will occur among cattle, horses or sheep.

In 1797 the bills of mortality in the northern states, which had been swelled
very high by angina and malignant fevers, fell nearly to the standard of
health. There are a few exceptions.

The plague appeared in Philadelphia, Baltimore, Norfolk and Charleston. In the
two latter cities, it is considered, as the usual autumnal fever, with
aggravated symptoms, from season or other local or temporary causes.

In Baltimore, the disease appeared first in the form of a common remittent,
but increased in malignancy till late in aut^mn and became infectious. The
history of this epidemic is minutely stated by the magistracy of Baltimore, and
is too interesting to be passed with a slight notice. The following is a
correct abstract of the statement made and published by authority.

The commissioners state to the mayor of the city;

That the first appearance of the fever was near the end of June in two young
men, Parkin and M'Kenna, who occupied a warehouse in South-street and who died
in a few days. The warehouse was examined, and was found to contain nothing
which could be the special cause of the fever; nor is it suggested that they
were infected from abroad. No person received the disease from them. From this
time till the close of August, West Baltimore remained in a state of unusual
health.

In East Baltimore (Fell's Point) a bilious fever had showed itself early in
the season, and gradually spread and grew worse; but was supposed to be no
other than the common sickness of the season. It therefore excited no alarm,
till the 26th August, when a rumor prevailed, that the fever was something more
than common. The chairman of the board addressed a letter to each of the
physicians in that part of the city, requesting to be informed whether any case
of contagious disease had come under his observation.

Dr. John Coulter wrote for answer that since the third week in June, a fever
had prevailed and become epidemic, affecting all descriptions of people, but
mostly those who labored hard, in the heat of the sun, intemperate persons and
those who exposed themselves to night air after the labors of the day. The
disease was violent, and unless speedily assailed with powerful remedies,
proved fatal. It had on that day, August 26th, become general, and "assumed to
itself the sole government of the diseases," in that part of the city. "During
the wet weather, in the last of July and beginning of August, it yielded, for
near two weeks, to the dysentery," which aftewards gave way to a recurrence of
the yellow fever. [The reader is desired to note that fact.]

Dr. Coulter calls the fever an epidemic, in contradistinction to imported
contagion, and says, "it is in the locality of our atmosphere, the source of
which I can perceive in every ten steps I take in our streets, ponds of
stagnant water, and sinks of putrid animal and vegetable matters, exhaling
perpetually under a hot sun the most offensive effluvia." The conclusion he
draws is, that the disease was not individually infectious. He then mentions
the uniformity of the symptoms, and the correspondence of the fever with the
diseases which have prevailed in that city and in other parts of the continent
for a number of years past. He enumerates the symptoms, which are exactly the
same, as observed in New Haven, New York and Philadelphia.

Doctors Alexander and Jaquitt agree in the facts that the disease was not
imported nor specifically contagious.

The board of health then called a meeting of the physicians in West Baltimore,
and inquired whether any contagious sickness had come under their knowledge.
They answered in the negative. Three of their number, at the request of the
meeting, went to East Baltimore and visited a number of the sick. They reported
on the 29th of August, that the disease was not a malignant, contagious or
yellow fever, but the bilious remittent. Their report quieted the alarms of
people.

On the 2d of September the commissioners were alarmed with the opinion of the
physicians in that part of the city, that the disease was something more than
common.

Five members of the board, with Dr. Moors, went to the point to examine for
themselves. They found the disease had spread, chiefly among the poor, who
lived in confined dwellings -- a few persons were dangerously ill; but on the
whole, were convinced that the disease was not contagious.

The next week, the disorder assumed a more threatening aspect. The launching
of the frigate on the 7th of September, collected many people together, who
were exposed to a hot sun and fatigue, which spread the disease to West
Baltimore. The next day the board of health received regular information that
there was contagion in the disease. A meeting of the faculty was called, and
suitable directions given to check and alleviate the calamity.

The whole number of interments in the city and precincts from August 1 to
October 29th -- Adults 408; children 137. Total 545. Number of inhabitants at
Fell's Point (where the disease principally raged) who removed during the
sickness 671. Those who remained were 2679. Total 3350.

This plain and candid narrative of facts, which is certified by the presidents
of both branches of the city council and by the mayor, Mr. Calhoun, does great
honor to the integrity and diligence of the commissioners; and if the laws of
nature are to be relied on as uniform in their operation, this report alone
will decide every disputed point relative to the origin and phenomena of the
yellow fever.

It is here decided by unequivocal evidence; evidence that precludes the
carping of prejudice and the casuistry of interest, that the yellow fever and
the bilious remittent are the same disease, differing only in degrees of
violence; and it is agreed on all hands that the remitting and intermitting
fevers are the same disease, with a similar difference in violence.

The disease began at Baltimore early in the season, in June, and for more than
two months, prevailed as a remitting fever of the common kind, without
infection, and it is agreed on all hands not to be of imported origin. During a
wet season, the damp weather cast the disease upon the intestines, and it
appeared in the form of a dysentery -- a most important fact, which proves what
Dr. Lind has asserted, that a dysentery is a yellow or malignant fever seated
in the bowels. The wet weather ceasing, the fever resumed its former
appearance, and gradually increased, till it exhibited its worst forms and
became infectious.

Had the advocates for the domestic origin of this fever contrived and directed
a series of facts, to prove their own doctrines, it would not have been
possible to collect stronger evidence in their favor, than the report of the
board of health in Baltimore.

In Philadelphia, the disease in 1797 appeared, in a few cases, as early as
June -- one on the 5th -- one on the 9th -- one on the 15th and another on the
22d. These cases, instead of being considered as proofs of a pestilential air,
and precursors of more general sickness, are thrown entirely out of the
question, by the advocates of imported fomites. The division of opinions, which
originated in 1793, relative to the causes and origin of that disease, was
revived with asperity. One party among physicians contended that the distemper
was introduced into the city by the ship Arethusa, which arrived from Jamaica
and Havanna, on the 23d of July. Another party believed the sources of the
disease to have been, noxious exhalations from putrid substances in the city,
with an augment from the foul air of the snow Navigation from Marseilles. The
evidence to support each of these opinions, is published in the proceedings of
the College of Physicians, and of the Academy of Medicin.

The city of Philadelphia was deserted by a great proportion of its
inhabitants, and thus the mortality was limited to about one thousand victims.
It prevailed principally in the suburbs.

This epidemic was followed as usual by the influenza.

By foreign publications, it appears that the catarrh was epidemic in England
in the four first months of 1797. I have no particulars of the violence or
extent of this disorder; but if it was severe and general, no event is more
certain than that sickly seasons will follow.

What confirms this opinion, is, that in the following summer, the plague raged
in Constantinople, on the Barbary coast, and in Corsica. It appears by an
official letter of the French minister Sotin, that there was a difference of
opinion in regard to the epidemic in Corsica -- some calling it the plague;
others, a malignant fever. Those who called it the plague, were prepared to
account for it, by the tale of a Turkish vessel wrecked upon the island, with
diseased people on board. But the disease subsided without very extensive
ravages.

This malignant fever however occasioned no small alarm in England. The
government sent orders to ships cruising in the Mediterranean to have no
communication with vessels from Corsica, and a proclamation was issued ordering
strict quarantine to be performed by all vessels from Corsica, Minorca,
Gibraltar and Spain within the Mediterranean.

In 1797 the bilious plague carried off forty-five of the inhabitants of
Providence. Of this disease, I have a minute and judicious account from Mr.
Moses Brown, which is here abridged.

In 1791, the year when the disease first appeared in the West Indies and
New York, several persons died of a similar fever in Providence. Two women died
in one family, near the center of the town, after three days illness. They
vomitted bilious matter, and were yellow, with livid and purple spots. The
second, being seized two days after the death of the first, might have taken
the disease by infection; but no suspicion existed that the first had access to
any infecting cause.

On the 14th of August died another person in a different part of the town, and
on the 21st of September, a fourth, with similar symptoms. As no alarm had then
been excited by yellow fever, little notice was taken of these cases; but the
attending physician, a respectable character, who visited many patients in 1797
and was affected with the disease himself, has since pronounced the disease of
1791 and of 1797 to be the same.

A case very similar to these occurred in September 1792; and on the west side
of the river, prevailed a singular epidemic, in which persons became yellow,
with black urine, costive bowels, pains in the right hypochondrium, without
fever. Some had petechial spots, and one person, petechia, vibices and
hemhorage, yet the disease was not mortal, nor malignant.

In 1793 a person from Philadelphia was ill and died of the yellow fever in
Providence, but no other was infected.

In 1794 several persons had the same disease, but they took it probably in
Carolina, where they had been on a voyage; the disease did not spread by
infection.

On the 11th of July 1795, died Capt. J. Gifford, a respectable man, of the
same disease. No infection was supposed in the case -- he was buried under
arms, but no inconvenience was experienced from it, at the time. Yet two years
after, viz. in 1797, his family were affected with the disorder, at the time
when it became epidemic in the neighborhood.

Several other cases occurred, in the same year, and one of them exhibited
infection.

These cases demonstrate a pestilential principle existing in that town, in
every season from 1791 to 1795 inclusive; at the time when other parts of the
United States were more severely afflicted. They were the distant precursors of
a more general calamity in that town, which did not arrive till 1797.

Sporadic cases of pestilential fever do not render it certain but probable,
that the disease will, in a future season, become epidemic. In 1796 cholera
infantum and dysentery were prevalent.

In 1797 the hydrophobia was prevalent in the state of Rhode Island, as well as
in other states. One T. Lion was bitten by a dog, the wound healed, and he was
seized four months after, and died. The pestilence among cats prevailed also in
Providence.

In this year also prevailed at Westport in the same state, and on Nantucket
island, a very malignant epidemic dysentery. At Westport died 30 patients of 79
who were seized. On Nantucket the disease was less mortal; about 100 died out
of 2000 patients. On examination, it was found that under the house of the
family first seized, there were some barrels of putrid fish, and other nauseous
matter.

It was supposed also, that the disease might have been augmented by the
effluvia of a large pond, at some miles distance, which had become stagnant,
filled with grass, and the shores strewed with dead fish. A number of men, on
this discovery, opened a trench to drain off the water, and let in the tides,
after which, it was supposed, the disease assumed a less malignant aspect.

The pestilential condition of the air at Providence in 1797, manifested itself
very early in the season; the first death occurring as early as May 5th -- the
next on the 25th of June -- the third on the 4th of July -- the fourth on the
27th -- the fifth on the 29th, and the sixth on the first of August. The
symptoms in all these cases, were the predominant ones of the true yellow
fever; and the bodies exhibited more or less petechiae and bices. These cases
occurred before the arrival of the schooner, to which popular clamor afterward
imputed the whole evil. These were the scattered precursors, which, had the
subject of pestilence ever been investigated, with philosophical ingenuity and
Christian candor, would have rendered the epidemic a probable event to the
citizens of Providence, as early as July and would have taught them to use all
human means to avoid or mitigate the calamity.

On the 8th of August arrived the schooner Betsey, Capt. Barton, from the Mole
of Cape Nicholas, after 24 days passage. Her cargo was only a few hogsheads of
coffee. She lay at the wharf, till the 20th, when an increasing alarm from new
cases of the fever induced the police to order her to be removed and cleansed.

On enquiry, it was found that three of the schooner's people had been ill in
the West Indies, but no one died. One of these only had been ill on the
passage, but had recovered so as to do duty, seven days before her arrival.
There were five persons on board, during the passage, none of whom were
affected by disease from infection or other cause.

The death of Mr. Arnold, the custom-house officer, who was said to have
visited the schooner, and several of his family, gave rise to the report that
the fever began from fomes on board of her. This point will be hereafter
disproved. Certain it is, that another officer of the customs slept on board of
the schooner seven nights; another five, and another young man two nights, with
Brown, the owner of the blankets hereafter to be mentioned; all of whom escaped
disease of any kind.

It was also said that the woman who washed two blankets, belonging to a
diseased seaman, took the fever and died. On investigation, this proved to be
an idle tale. The blankets were owned by one Brown, who had not been sick; and
not having any use for them in warm weather, they had lain in his chest. On his
arrival, they were carried home, spread out on the fence to air; they were then
carried to his sister's to be washed and lay two days before the work was
undertaken. The day after the washing, the women were taken ill; which was two
early for the operation of infection, unless highly concentrated. But in fact
the blankets were not infected; never having been used by any diseased person;
and the mother and others who handled them, when first opened, never had the
disease.

But stronger circumstances attended this case. The blanket belonging to Rophy,
the only sick man, on the passage, and his other clothes, worn during his
fever, and colored yellow, by his perspiration, were carried to his house; the
blanket spread out for children to play on, before it was washed; afterward
washed by his wife; and no person took any disease from his clothes or blanket.

Such are tales of imported diseases, raised by ignorance and propagated by
interest, pride or credulity, to which the business of the merchants and the
commerce of the country are to be sacrificed!

Many other reports were spread about the infection from this schooner which,
upon strict enquiry, were found to be equally groundless. Such as the
introduction of the fever into Warren, where the vessel stopped, on her way to
Providence. The case was, one Cole, an officer of the customs, sculled a large
boat a mile or two, against the tide, in a foggy evening; went on board, wet
and fatigued; without refreshment or change of clothes, slept in a cabin with
broken windows, took a severe cold; repeated his visit to the schooner the next
day; on the third day went to Providence, a distance of ten miles in the rain;
tarried two nights without a change of clothes; returned on foot, and was taken
ill of a bilious fever and died in about seven days. Yet after all this fatigue
and imprudence in the man, enough in all conscience to kill him, men are found
weak enough to charge his disease to the schooner.

But it happens, that other similar cases of fever occurred in Warren, in
persons who had never visited Cole or the schooner; and one at the distance of
three miles from the town. The whole tale therefore comes to nothing.

One fact more, and I will quit the subject of correcting the popular errors on
this head. The men belonging to the schooner were dismissed at Providence and
returned to their families, with their sea clothes of course. My informant took
pains to enquire of every family, whether any of them had been infected; and he
found not one instance, although the families consisted of about forty souls! --
The case of the unfortunate family of Mr. Arnold would a ford some slight
ground to suspect the infection to be communicated from the schooner to him or
his son, the latter having visited her; It is not rendered certain that the
father had been on board; but that the son had, is not questioned; so had at
least one hundred others, who were not afterward affected with the disease.
but it happens that Mr. Arnold's wife, who had not been on board, nor
otherwise exposed, was seized fifty-six hours before her son and more than
three days before her husband. Thus the reports of infection from abroad, when
well sifted, vanish into smoke; and I am persuaded this would generally be the
result, if men would be faithful to themselves, to truth and their country.

On the 12th of August, the fever took a more rapid spread, probably from a
sudden alarm by the burning of two tons of hemp, by means of a spark from a
blacksmith's shop, as it was passing the door. This was four days after the
arrival of the schooner, and occasioned the popular clamor which was raised
about her infection. But the appearance of the disease long before her arrival
is decisive of the question.

This disease had its own atmosphere; raging mostly in a part of Providence
much exposed to the effluvia of great collections of filth in vaults, from a
distillery, and in other places. Some cases however occurred in other
situations; and many parts of the state exhibited the pestilential principle,
in sporadic cases, or local epidemics, as at Bristol, Warren, Greenwich, Indian
Point, Gloucester, Warwick, etc.

In Providence, the disease affected fifty-six families -- 8 before the arrival
of the schooner, and 48 afterward. In 33 of these families, only one person in
each, had the fever; and as some of the families are large, the infecting
principle could not have been very powerful. In the large house, where lived
the women who were first taken ill, after the schooner arrived, resided 9
families, consisting of 37 persons, only 12 of which were affected. In the
hospital the nurses and attendants all escaped.

Some instances of this disease appeared in the following winter; and there
were cases also of the ulcerous sore throat. In the north part of the town,
some cases of the yellow fever occurred in the last summer -- 1798.

In 1797 a malignant fever is said to have been introduced into a village in
Chatham, on Connecticut river, by a vessel from the West Indies. I understand
that it was confined to a cluster of houses by the water; but I have not been
able to collect the facts in detail, although I have written letters for the
purpose.

During the late pestilential period, the state of the atmosphere produced its
usual effects in winter; which appeared in the extraordinary symptoms of
pleurisy and peripneumony.

It has already been remarked that in periods when plague and other mortal
epidemics rage in summer, the diseases of winter assume new symptoms. The
pleurisy, at such times, has often become epidemic and even infectious. It is
in fact a modification of the same pestilential principle, as that which
renders bilious fevers in summer epidemic and infectious. The fatal effects of
this species of pleurisy in Connecticut, in the winter of 1761, have been
mentioned.

In the winter of 1795-6, after the epidemic in New York, several cases of a
similar kind occurred, and an able physician of plethoric habit and strong
fibers, fell a victim to a peripneumony, with anomalous symptoms.

In the following winter, a similar disorder attacked many people in
Connecticut. Three men in Hartford, of one family, two brothers and a cousin,
all men of robust health, were attacked and carried off in the compass of a few
days. Others of the same family, and several persons of a similar habit were
affected, but recovered. It was far less general than in 1761.

This species of pleurisy appeared in Philadelphia as early as September 1791,
the month when the malignant fever prevailed in New York. A patient of Dr. Rush
had a "red face, inflamed eyes, a perpetual tossing and sighing, strong animal
powers, but weak pulse and sizy blood." In February 1792 many cases of similar
pleuritic fevers occurred in Philadelphia -- diseases assumed the inflammatory
diathesis which has remarkably characterized the epidemic of the last
pestilential period.

In the spring of the year 1798, a mortal fever raged in Fredericktown,
Maryland, beginning with lassitude, chills and pain in the head, and producing,
on the third day, vertigo and spasm in the breast.

Letter from Dr. Baltzell to Dr. Rush, dated May 2, 1798. In summer and autumn
of 1797, a malignant fever, attended with dysentery, was epidemic in Portland
and its vicinity, in the district of Maine. The dysentery subsided in October,
but the fever continued. It appeared in the country, as well as town; and was
usually conquered by the use of alkaline remedies. Many of the patients had a
yellow skin and the predominant symptoms of the yellow fever of our cities. In
one instance, this disease put on the form of pestilence. A merchant, in a
country village, where no suspicion of infection could be entertained, was
seized with a malignant fever; he lingered till the 36th day, and died highly
putrid. His nurse was seized and died; after death appeared livid spots on the
body. A servant also took the disease and died. The nurse communicated the
disease to three persons in the family where she lay ill.

This last instance is decisive evidence that the pestilential yellow fever not
only originates in our country, but in villages, in the 44th degree of
latitude, a more temperate climate than that of New York and Philadelphia.

In the winter succeeding, the pestilential principle still exhibited its
effects. The fever continued to prevail, being ushered in with nausea, vomiting
and chills succeeded by heat; but it was generally accompanied with a sore
throat and scarlet efflorescence. It prevailed in almost every town in the
county.

Dr. Barker's letter, Med. Repos. vol. 2. 147. The year 1798 was remarkable for
the most general prevalence of the plague of our climate, that has been known;
and in some cities, the disease was peculiarly malignant.

The preceding winter had been unusually long and cold -- the May following was
dry beyond what is recollected in any former years -- June was remarkable for
deluging rains, which occasioned floods in the Connecticut, Delaware and
Susquehannah rivers, which did no inconsiderable injury. Two or three of the
first days of July were excessively hot, and succeeded by twenty days of very
cool weather -- then commenced a long period of the most sultry weather ever
known in our climate, accompanied, in some places, with great rains.

Catarrhous fevers were frequent in the spring, the constant forerunners of
autumnal sickness. Bilious fevers also occurred, in a few cases very early,
indicating the predominant condition of the atmosphere. In summer and autumn,
the grass-hoppers multiplied to such a degree from Pennsylvania to New England,
as to devour vegetables, and essentially injure the pastures and grass fields.

The pestilential fever in Philadelphia appeared early in the season -- a
number of cases in June, and still more in July. In August early, the city was
alarmed and soon deserted by at least three fourths of its inhabitants. The
disease was unusually mortal; and extended to the remotest parts of the city,
where it had not formerly prevailed. Owing to this circumstance, some families
suffered, which had escaped in former years. The number of deaths amounted to
about 3440. The disease, as usual, abated with the appearance of frost; but
individuals were attacked with it, and carried off, in the midst of the
following winter.

It is alleged by some persons that the fever was introduced into Philadelphia
by the ship Deborah, which arrived from Jeremie, and anchored near Race-street
wharf, on the 18th of July. It is admitted that persons who went on board, soon
after sickened and died; and so did others sicken and die, without going near
that ship. The truth is, many cases of the disease had occurred three or four
weeks, before her arrival. The ship had lost people by fever on her passage and
might be infected; and persons visiting her might receive that infection; but
these facts do not reach the point. The epidemic began in all parts of the
city, in scattering cases, previous to the arrival of this fomes, and had the
ship never arrived, that epidemic would have ravaged the city. This is evident
from the number of its precursors.

This pestilential fever carried off fifty-seven persons in the village of
Marcus Hook, where the first persons seized were a shallop-man and others from
Philadelphia. But many cases occurred which could be traced to no infection.
See Dr. Sayre's letter in Currie's Memoirs, p. 136. In Chester died 50 of the
same fever.

At Wilmington, in the state of Delaware, thirty miles from Philadelphia, the
same disease raged with more than its ordinary mortality. Its victims amounted
to 250. It appears that the disease was introduced by the fugitives from
Philadelphia, and by watermen who ply between Wilmington and Philadelphia.

See Dr. Tilton's letter in Dr. Currie's Memoirs, p. 138. The fever also
prevailed in New Castle and at Duck creek in the same state.

Letters from respectable physicians, in the public prints, have informed us
that this disease prevailed also in some parts of New Jersey, as at Bridgetown
and Woodbury; and especially near the meadows on the borders of the Delaware.
From careful examination, it was found that the disease must have originated
where it existed; no intercourse having been held with infected places. In some
instances the fever was probably infectious.

At Norwalk in Connecticut several persons died of the same distemper. The
physicians are doubtful as to its origin; as some cases may be traced to a
diseased person who had been in New York. Three cases however occurred at some
miles distance from the heart of the town, in persons who had not been in the
least exposed to infection.

M. S. letter from Dr. Betts. In the first week of August, appeared a bilious
fever in New York, between Old slip and Coenties slip, in the street next to
the water; a place remarked for great accumulations of filthy substances. By
the exertions of the Health Commissioners, in covering these nuisances with
fresh earth, this alarming fever subsided in that neighborhood, and disappeared
by the 26th of that month.

But on the 12th, the pestilential fever appeared in other parts of the city,
and about the 20th, began to extend and assume a more formidable aspect. The
district of the city, subjected to its most deadly effects, was that section
comprehended between John-street and Beekman-street, particularly in
Cliff-street and its neighborhood. The probable cause of this effect, was the
fetid air from large quantities of spoiled beef, stored in the cellars in
Pearl-street, on the windward side of this section. The cellars were filled
with water by heavy rains, or were otherwise damp; which circumstance, added to
the extreme heat of the season, occasioned a greater loss of salted provisions,
than perhaps was ever before known. To augment the effect, large quantities of
pickle had been discharged, in the process of repacking beef not yet spoiled,
but in a bad state, which pickle had been carried by the gutters into a sewer
in Burling slip, from which issued a very offensive smell. There is reason to
believe, that salt, if not sufficient to preserve the article to which it is
applied, renders it doubly noxious in a state of putrefaction; and that a small
quantity of salt will accelerate the process of putrefaction. From an
experiment related to me by Mr. Moses Brown of Providence, it is proved that a
piece of flesh, in pure water, will not putrefy as soon as in water, in which a
few grains of salt have been dissolved.

Do not the saline particles of the air, on the sea coast, render the
putrefaction of flesh and vegetables more rapid, and the exhalations more
deleterious, than perfectly fresh water? And is not this one cause, why
pestilential diseases appear first, and are most general, in maritime places?

Dr. Cogswell informs me that a boat-man on Connecticut river, in the hot
weather of 1798, contracted a violent fever of which he died, by sleeping in an
open boat, near a quantity of pickle which had leaked out of a barrel of salted
provisions. The disease was of a very malignant kind.




About the last of August, the inhabitants of New York were greatly alarmed;
some removed from the east to the west side of Broadway, a part of the city
which has hitherto been exempted from the violent effects of the yellow fever;
but a great proportion of the people deserted the city. The disease was more
malignant, than in its preceding visits, and exhibited more frequently the bubo
and carbuncle. It extended over two thirds of the city, and numbered with the
dead about two thousand of its inhabitants. I am informed the disease was less
generally characterized with the inflammatory diathesis, and that venesection
was less generally attended with salutary effects, than in former years.

This disease exhibited little infection, beyond the limits of its own
amosphere. In the hospital, at a little distance from the city, were admitted
about 300 patients, ill with that disease; yet sixteen nurses, seven
washerwomen, and the boatmen who conveyed the sick from the city to the
hospital, all escaped. Dr. Douglass, the attending physician, escaped the
disease, until October, when he visited his friends and slept in the city,
three days after which he was seized with the fever.

See Letters from the Health-Office, by Dr. Bailey, whose zeal, talents and
industry, in his employment, have rarely been equalled. The last fact is very
important toward correcting the popular errors respecting the contagion of
this fever. In the city persons took the fever -- in the hospital they did not.
That is, the distemper has an atmosphere, in which it is readily contracted --
beyond that atmosphere, it is not infectious. In other words, it is a condition
of the atmosphere, and not the effluvia from the sick, which is to be dreaded.

Thus, in 1797, the fugitives and sick from Philadelphia did not spread the
fever in Wilmington -- in 1798, they did. That is, in 1797 the atmosphere of
Wilmington would not generate and nurse the disease -- in 1798, it would.

In Boston, the disease began near the town dock and the neighboring wharves,
in the month of June; but its most violent effects were experienced on the
south side of Fort-Hill, an elevated part of the town and exposed to free air.
This circumstance has occasioned no small surprise; but as the fever of 1796
began in that part of the town, perhaps we may find the cause in the very
extensive flat, between Boston and Dorchester point, which is uncovered at low
water; perhaps in the exposure of that hill to the direct rays of the sun;
perhaps in the nature of the soil which is clay of a solid texture, and fitted
to retain on its surface whatever impure substances are thrown from houses.

The fever afterward invaded the north part of the town, and a street near the
pond; supposed to be excited by noxious exhalations. Some parts of the town,
which are low and filthy, escaped the fever.

At first it attacked the most robust young men, and the diathesis was highly
inflammatory. Later in the season, it attacked persons of all ages and habits.
At first it was not infectious, but in the later stages of its progress, it
exhibited infection. Is disappeared with the arrival of frost, after carrying
off nearly 200 patients.

M. S. letter from Dr. Eliot. See a full account of the disease in a letter
from Dr. Rand, published by order of the Academy of Arts and Sciences. This
gentleman observes that no infection appeared, except in places where the
disease was originally contracted. That is, infection was attached to the
place, rather than to the persons of the diseased -- a fact which is true of
every pestilence.


Massachusetts Mercury, Feb. 8, 1799. The same malady appeared in Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, with equal mortality, as far as it extended; but its progress
was limited to one street near the water.

New London, in Connecticut, is situated in a very healthy part of the country,
on a harbor, whose shores as well as the surrounding lands, are dry and rocky
-- its population about 3000 inhabitants.

In the last week in August 1798, t^ town was suddenly invaded by the plague of
our country, which began in the family of Mr. Bingham, keeper of the Union
coffee-house. No vessels from the West Indies, no sick from other places,
occur, in this instance, to help out popular credulity. The idea of importation
is abandoned by the citizens of the town. The fever was very fatal within its
atmosphere, which was confined to Bank street and its vicinity; a part of the
city well built, clean and airy as any street in the town. Within a small
space, were fifteen houses, inhabited by ninety-two persons -- of which ninety
were affected with the disease; thirty-three of this number died, and two only
escaped the fever. The disease prevailed about eight weeks and destroyed
eighty-one lives.

Printed account of the fever by Charles Holt. On enquiry I find that this
disease in New London had its precursors, in sporadic cases of the same fever,
in the three preceding summers. In 1795, died Dr. Joseph W. Lee with all the
symptoms of the yellow fever. Some instances occurred in 1796; and in 1797 died
of the same, Matthew Griswold, Esquire. and soon after his mother; indicating the
communication of infection. Yet in these years, it did not spread and become
epidemic. The pestilential period however was progressing in that town, as
appears by the bills of mortality; for the ordinary number of deaths does not
exceed 60 in a healthy year; but in 1795, the number amounted to 86 -- in 1796,
to 80 -- in 1797, to 101 -- in 1798, to 133. Here we observe a great
augmentation in the mortality of the town, several years before the crisis of
pestilence, and especially in the year next preceding it. The importance of
this fact toward a right understanding of the causes of epidemic pestilence,
cannot be mistaken.

Considerable quantities of salted fish, which lay in certain stores in
New London, and which had not been well cured with the usual quantity of salt,
became fetid and offensive, although not putrid, and assumed a red cast with a
slimy feeling -- it also lost its texture and firmness. This was opened and
spread in the streets for the purpose of being dried; and from its
offensiveness and vicinity to the place where the disease first appeared, it is
supposed to have been an exciting cause of the fever. This opinion has
doubtless some foundation; but putrid fish will not always occasion disease. It
is probably true that the bad state of the fish was partly owing to a previous
bad state of the air; although it afterward became a cause of a worse state of
the air.

What seems to put this beyond doubt, is, the unusual number of musketoes, in
the adjacent country, and the multitudes of flies of uncommon size, exceeding
what had been before observed. With these phenomena before our eyes, we can be
at no loss to account for the pestilential fever of New London.

The usual lake and river fever prevailed in the same season, in many of the
interior parts of the country; as at Royalton in Vermont, on the Grand Isles in
Lake Champlain, at New-Milford in Connecticut, and in various parts of the
state of New York; in which places, it was attended with considerable
mortality. Sporadic cases occurred in all parts, and in the healthiest
situations, of the country. In many places, intermittents and dysentery were
unusually violent and obstinate.

I have no account of the temperature of the weather in any part of Europe,
during the summer of 1798; except that in some parts of Sweden, the first
months of the summer were excessively dry, as the month of May was in America.

A pestilential fever appeared in Italy in June; but I have no details of its
progress. It is however to be observed that this fever was preceded by a
violent earthquake in some part of the Tuscan territories, in the month of May,
which did no small injury.

In autumn broke out a pestilential fever on the Baltic, in Dantzick or its
vicinity. The government of Denmark, in consequence of official information of
the prevalence of this disease, directed all ships from Dantzick and the
neighboring ports to be watched with vigilance, and appointed a committee of
quarantine.

According to the report of a master of a vessel, there was an eruption in
Teneriffe in the summer of 1798, which lasted several weeks. This volcano had
been quiet for 94 years.

In November and December, the pestilence in America was succeeded as usual by
influenza, which was very prevalent in all parts of the country, and in the
southern states attended with some mortality. This was merely a change of the
form of the epidemic.

The winter of 1798-9 was very long and severe in both hemispheres. In the
United States, it began about the middle of November, with snow, and a heavy
fall of snow on the 18th and 19th was followed by severe cold that lasted till
the second week in January. From this time, there was a relaxation of cold for
about three weeks, and the ice in Connecticut river gave way. But in February
commenced severe cold, which continued, for the most part to the vernal
equinox. April was also cold; severe frosts occurred often, and checked
vegetation. On the 2d and 8th of May were considerable falls of snow, followed
by frost. On the morning of the 4th and 5th, we had ice at New Haven as thick
as window-glass. Peaches blossomed about the middle of May, and apples were not
in full bloom, till the 22d. This long duration of cold exhausted all the barns
of hay and other fodder, and multitudes of cattle perished in various parts of
the country.

In Europe, the winter was equally severe. The rivers in England, Germany,
Holland and France were covered with solid ice, and at the breaking up of
winter, the Rhine rose and burst its barriers, inundating many parts of Holland
with terrible destruction. The severity of the winter was felt even in the
south of Italy, and the French and Neapolitan troops suffered greatly from snow
on the Appenine, in the vicinity of Naples. In Siberia, we are informed by the
public prints, perished whole villages of men and cattle by the severity of the
frost.

In America, the diseases of the winter were characterized by the predominant
diathesis of the reigning epidemic constitution, a yellow skin and bilious
discharges. An earthquake of considerable extent was felt in the Carolinas on
the 12th of April. What will be the state of health in the ensuing summer, must
be left to be determined by the event. The present pestilence has been long and
severe and the citizens look with impatience, for the usual salubrious state of
their atmosphere.

In August, about the time the pestilence began to show itself in New York,
immense numbers of flies died suddenly, and occasioned no small speculation and
alarm. Some were found on the floors; others adhering to the ceilings of rooms,
and what is singular, their bodies became whi^^. A pestilential air usually
generates flies in unusual numbers; but on this occasion, some sudden change in
the elements, destroyed their lives. How little do we know of the powers of the
elements, and the nature of the alterations in them which produce such
astonishing effects. Will imported infection account for such phenomena?

This is the best statement of facts I have been able to make from sixteen
months investigation. It is not improbable that some mistakes have occurred,
which more time and more ample materials, would enable me to correct. But I
trust that the substance of the statements is accurate, and that no error of
consequence will be found to result from them, to impeach the general
principles suggested in this work.

POSTSCRIPT. Additional facts, collected on a journey which I made through the
Northern States, while this volume was in the press.
IN the autumn of 1732 raged in New York a malignant, infectious fever, of
which died seventy persons in a few weeks.

M. S. of Mr. Alexander. In 1745 a malignant bilious fever prevailed in
New York, of which died an eminent physician of the city, Dr. Nicoll. By the
description of the disease, given to me by a gentleman who was affected with
it, there appears to be no question that it was the same disease now called
yellow fever.

About this time, for the year is not exactly known, a malignant epidemic
disease laid waste the Indian tribes. By the description of the symptoms, as
given by Indian traders, then among the tribes, and still living, it is certain
this was the infectious yellow fever. In consequence of this distemper, the
Senecas removed their quarters two or three times, in a few years -- it being a
practice among the natives to abandon the place infected with this plague. The
disease was confined to the Indians -- the white people, living and trading
with them, not being affected.

In 1746 the Mohegan tribe of Indians, between New London and Norwich, was
wasted by the same malady. Dr. Tracy of Norwich now deceased, was the only
white man affected -- he attended them as their physician. From Mr. Philemon
Tracy, a son of the doctor, who has taken the trouble to examine a Mohegan
priest, a man of good sense and integrity, who was himself affected by the
disorder, I have the following account of this pestilence. -- That it appeared
in August and prevailed till cold weather -- that about one hundred of the
tribe perished -- that it was the year after the reduction of Cape Breton (of
course in 1746 -- and Dr. Tracy's books confirm the dates mentioned by the
Indian) -- that the patient first complained of a severe pain in the head and
back, which was followed by fever -- in three or four days, the skin turned as
yellow as gold, a vomiting of black matter took place and generally a bleeding
at the nose and mouth, which continued, till the patient died. These are the
words of the old Indian, as penned at the time by my informant.

It will be remarked that this was a local pestilence, the fever being confined
to a single tribe of Indians and not prevailing in the neighboring towns. But
it will be remarked also that this was the same year, it prevailed in Albany,
when the bills of mortality were generally high.

I have ascertained that the canker-worm, which lately ravaged the fruit trees
in New England, appeared as early as 1788 or 1789.

A fatal malignant disease raged among the tribes of the Mohawk Indians, about
the year 1776, and reduced some of them to a few men.

From Dr. Wheeler of Redhook, on the Hudson, I learn that the angina scarlatina
appeared there in January 1789 and prevailed till April -- it prevailed also in
the two succeeding winters.

The influenza, in that year, first appeared there about the middle of October,
and prevailed two months, among all ages and both sexes. Catarrhal coughs have
been prevalent every year, since that time. In the spring of 1793, angina
scarlatina, mumps and catarrhal coughs prevailed till June, and disappeared.
Soon after commenced the remitting fever. In some cases the paroxysms invaded
the patient in the form of madness.

The reader will note that in our interior country, the remitting fever of that
distinguished year, 1793, had nearly the same spring precursors, as the yellow
fever in Philadelphia.

The measles at Redhook in 1795, partook of the character of the preceding
epidemic fevers; beginning with a highly inflammatory diathesis, and sometimes
ending in typhus, with petechiae, vibices and hemorrhagy. Pleurisies had the
same character.

At Brattleborough, on the Connecticut, a family by the name of Morgan were
seized in 1791 with a fever of the typhus kind, and six of them died. Several
persons who visited the family took the disease and died, and there its
progress ended. The family resides in a healthy situation, near a small active
stream of water; and no visible cause could be assigned for the origin of this
distemper. These facts are taken from Dr. Hall of that town. It will be
remembered that this was the year when autumnal diseases first put on the
malignant aspect of our late pestilence, when the plague broke out in Egypt and
the yellow fever in the West Indies began to assume what Dr. Chisholm calls
unusual symptoms.

Dr. Center of Newport informs me that in 1798 occurred in that place many
cases of a bilious fever bearing some resemblance to the infectious fever; and
one case of decided carbuncular and glandular plague, in a man of robust
constitution. There is no pretense of foreign origin, in any of those cases.

From sundry gentlemen living in Chelsea, a village at the landing in Norwich,
I learn that two or three cases of malignant bilious fever occurred there in
1798, marked with the usual symptoms of the infectious fever. Some of these
cases could not possibly have been derived from infection. One of the patients
might have contracted his disease at New London.

Dr. Holyoke of Salem, in Massachusetts, informs me that in 1798, many cases of
malignant bilious fever occurred in that town, which could not have been
derived from infection.

From Dr. Woodruff and Dr. M'Clellan of Albany, I learn that several cases of
malignant bilious fever appeared in that city, in 1798, marked with all the
symptoms of the pestilence of our cities and which must have originated in that
place. About one half who were seized, died.

The first case of influenza at Albany in 1789 is noted by Dr. M'Clellan to
have occurred on the 30th of September. This was precisely the time of its
appearance at Philadelphia, and a little after its first appearance at
New York. In the country, between New York and Albany, it did not appear till a
week or two later. These facts prove that this disease falls on distant places
at the same time.

The scarlatina anginosa appeared at Albany in the winter and spring of 1793,
about the time it did in New York and Philadelphia.

In every part of our country, one remark has been made by physicians, that
from the year 1792 or 3, intermittents and remittents have become more numerous
and obstinate, and attended with unusual symptoms. In many places, these
diseases have been multiplied in a ten-fold ratio; elucidating the principles
of the great Sydenham, relative to "Constitutions of Air," and demonstrating
the existence of a general cause in the insensible properties of the
atmosphere, to which we may and must ascribe the pestilence of our maritime
towns.

In 1798 multitudes of dead pike were observed to float down the Mohawk and
Hudson.

From Dr. Thatcher I learn that for some years past, an autumnal fever has
prevailed in Plymouth, in Massachusetts, of the remitting kind, with low typhus
symptoms. In winter it takes the type of the nervous fever. It was very
prevalent in 1798 in that and a neighboring town.

From Dr. Smith of Hanover, in New Hampshire, and Drs. Green and Trask of
Windsor, in Vermont, I have obtained information respecting a very infectious
fever which prevailed in those towns and the vicinity in 1798. This disease is
described by Dr. Spalding in the Medical Repository, vol. 3. p. 5. It
approaches nearly to the typhus mitior of Cullen, but the fiery red eye at the
invasion seems to indicate its alliance to the infectious fever of our cities;
and it resembles the disease known by the popular name of long fever.

This fever, in Windsor and Hanover, was preceded by dysentery of uncommon
malignancy in 1797, which, in Windsor, was attended with an unusual
inflammation of the lungs. The disease which preceded these epidemics was the
scarlatina anginosa, which was very prevalent in 1796.

It is worthy of notice that in all parts of our country, the autumnal
infectious fevers have had precursors in other epidemics, especially catarrhal
complaints and anginas. I do not find an exception to this remark.

This fever at Windsor deserves further to be noticed for its infectious or
contagious quality. It was far less fatal, but more infectious than the yellow
fever of our cities. Nurses often took the disease, and when they returned to
their dwellings in distant towns, rarely failed to communicate it to the whole
family. This is a phenomenon rarely, perhaps never exhibited by the pestilence
of our maritime towns, which has an atmosphere of its own out of which it is
not communicated.

I have examined personally the positions of many of the towns where this fever
and dysentery have been most prevalent, and I find no where any marsh that can
rationally be supposed to originate these distempers. In general the towns are
situated on a basis of clay, between high ridges of land or mountains, where
the heat of the sun is greatly concentrated, and on the margin of rivers. To
this description, there are some exceptions as to the soil; some towns being on
sand or gravel. The neighborhood of fresh streams of water cannot be admitted
as a cause of these fevers -- nothing being more falubrious than such streams.
But I am persuaded from careful observation, that, under a pestilential
constitution of air, great heat is the immediate exciting cause of autumnal
fevers, in situations not exposed to marsh effluvia.

With respect to the origin of the pestilential fever in Portsmouth, in 1798,
the facts are as follow.

A laboring man, who was given to liquor, received his wages on Saturday
evening. He was seized with the malignant fever, and died on the next
Wednesday. While he lay ill, a vessel arrived which had lost a man or two by
the fever on her voyage, but no person was ill on board, at the time of her
arrival. Some of the persons who afterward died of the fever, had been on
board of that vessel; but whether they took the disease from infection or not,
cannot be known. The first case occurred before the arrival. This is an agreed
point. I have these facts from two of the principal gentlemen of that town, one
of them a respectable physician; the other, the person who paid the wages to
the man who first died. All my enquiries have been made at the sources of
correct information; and I find every where popular reports are false or
incorrect. Yet popular reports are received as truth by many physicians and
writers, and are made the basis of false and pernicious theories, both in
America and Europe.

The fever in Portsmouth was limited in its progress to the northern part of
the town. In the southern part, at the same time, prevailed a malignant
dysentery, which was as mortal as the fever in the northern part. The line of
division was drawn by a wide street or square on which stands the courthouse.
The scarlet fever had been prevalent in the town for two years preceding.

In 1799, the present summer, many persons have taken the pestilential fever
from vessels arrived from the West Indies; but in most, or all cases, the fever
has become extinct, without any considerable mortality. In Boston, the
mortality was limited to two or three persons.

The case at Newburyport was singular. A vessel went and returned from the
West Indies, without a case of malignant fever; but as she arrived at the mouth
of the river Merrimack, 18 days from St. Thomas's, a boy was seized with the
fever, and afterward one or two others Several persons took the disease and
died; but people left the vicinity, and the disorder became extinct. This was a
fever generated on board of the vessel.

The beginning of the summer of 1799, tho late, was favorable to vegeta^ion,
and the first crops were good. Wheat, which had been blasted, for several
preceding years, in the eastern states, was excellent.

But in July commenced a most distressing drouth, in all the northern states;
and particularly in the middle states, and the interior country; by which the
maize, buck-wheat and potatoes were greatly injured. In some parts of the state
of New York, the maize was totally destroyed.

Over the eastern states, a species of caterpillar of small size appeared in
unparalleled numbers, covering the wild cherry-tree, the apple, the willow, the
ash, and the hickory. In some parts, a large caterpillar, with variegated
colors, stripped the black oak of all its leaves. Grass-hoppers were as
numerous as the blades of grass, and in some places, injured greatly the grass
and other vegetables. But especially to be noted were the small toads of the
color described by Fernelius, "Coloris cineritii" like ashes; of the size of a
filbert, and in numbers not to be estimated. These were numerous also in 1798.
They answer the description of those which medical writers of former ages
observed to be the forerunners and companions of pestilence. At what time they
appeared and disappeared, is not exactly known -- they were most generally
observed in July.

In the spring prevailed influenza or catarrhal fevers; in some places cynanche
maligna; and generally rheumatic complaints, and slight ulcerations of the
throat. In many places, the fevers of winter were characterized with a yellow
skin and bilious discharges. All these marked the continuance of a pestilential
atmosphere.

The plague showed itself early, in scattered cases, in Philadelphia; but
disappeared, to the unspeakable joy of the inhabitants. Alas! When such cases
appear in July, and especially if other diseases in winter and spring manifest
symptoms of the pr^vailing epidemic, it is hardly possible that our cities
should escape a pestilential fever in autumn. This terrible scourge renewed its
ravages in Philadelphia and New York; and in various parts of our country,
bilious fevers appeared with malignant symptoms.

At Hartford, on the Connecticut, appeared the malignant fever in August, to
the surprise of the inhabitants and of the state. People who have no just ideas
of the nature and origin of this disease, attempted to find the cause in some
vessel from the West Indies; but being disappointed, resorted to a small
coasting vessel. On examination it appears, that this vessel was used as a
market boat between Connecticut river and New York -- the master had died in
June, but of what disease, I am not able to learn. Another master took
possession of her, and finding her very dirty, with the remains of various
vegetables, he overhauled her and gave her a thorough cleansing. He took in at
New York a cargo of salt, and sailed to New Haven, where the vessel lay some
time, about the middle of July. Here the salt was purchased by a merchant of
Hartford, and the vessel ordered round to that place, where she arrived and
discharged her cargo, in the beginning of August. From the time the vessel left
New York, to the time of discharging the salt, must have been from four to six
weeks. After leaving Hartford, and going down the river, the master and mate of
this vessel were seized with the fever and died. Instead therefore of being
imported, the fever was exported.

Some attempts were made to trace all the first cases of the fever to that
vessel; but it does not appear that more than one person who had the disease,
was ever on board; and it is proved that most of the persons affected were
never near that vessel and never visited the sick. It is proved further th^^ of
^en or twelve persons employed in unloading the vessel, not one was ever
affected by the malady. Yet even in this case, the silly tale of importation is
swallowed with eagerness by the advocates of that doctrine.

I confess myself weary ^^d ashamed of refuting such gr^^ndless opinions and
surmises; but it is a task which truth and justice and public happiness demand.
The truth is, the spot where this fever arose, is low ground, retaining water
to stagnate after the spring floods -- built upon in a crowded irregular manner
-- extremely filthy -- penetrated by a creek which has been dried and
neglected, and become the reservoir of every unclean thing -- in the vicinity
is a slaughterhouse, where loads of garbage contribute to render the air foul
and noxious. Let any man walk over the ground and examine it with care, as I
have done since the fever, and he will be convinced that no imported fomes was
necessary, in that place, to breed a pestilence.

But one of the strongest arguments to prove the domestic origin of the malady,
is, what people rarely consider. Numerous fevers of the remitting kind, and
typhus mitior, have originated on the same ground, for several years past; and
in 1798, two cases of malignant yellow fever -- one of which terminated in
three days. These fevers marked the predominant state of that local atmosphere,
and decide the question of domestic origin.

On the 15th of July a tremendous hail storm passed over Connecticut from the
westward, attended with violent wind and thunder. The stones and pieces of ice
were of various sizes, from that of a walnut to that of a hen's egg. In Goshen,
Cornwall* New-Hartford, etc. on the west, and Lebanon, Franklin, etc. on the
east of the Connecticut, the grass, corn and every green thing was injured or
destroyed; glass was broken, trees galled, and small animals killed. The
champain country on the Connecticut was less injured. This storm, unexampled in
Connecticut, resembles numberless hail storms described in history, as the
precursors and companions of pestilence.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF EPIDEMIC AND PESTILENTIAL DISEASES; WITH THE PRINCIPAL
PHENOMENA OF THE PHYSICAL WORLD, WHICH PRECEDE AND ACCOMPANY THEM, AND
OBSERVATIONS DEDUCED FROM THE FACTS STATED.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

BY NOAH WEBSTER, Author of Dissertations on the English Language and several
other Works -- Member of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences -- of the
Society for the Promotion of Agriculture, Arts and Manufactures, in the State
of New York -- of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and corresponding
Member of the Historical Society in Massachusetts.

VOL. II.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. 1799.

[PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.]

CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
SECTION IX. BILLS of mortality for the two last centuries, with the principal
phenomena of the elements, Page 1 SECTION X. Remarks on the History and Tables,
10 SECTION XI. Pestilential periods exhibited by means of an increase of
mortality in distant parts of the world, 17 SECTION XII. Of the Influenza or
epidemic Catarrh, 30 SECTION XIII. Of the order, connection and progression of
pestilential epidemics, 37 SECTION XIV. Of the Extent of a pestilential state
of Air, 62 SECTION XV. Of the Phenomena which attend pestilential periods, with
conjectures concerning the causes, 78 SECTION XVI. Of Contagion and Infection,
135 SECTION XVII. Of the means of preventing or mitigating pestilential
diseases, 214 SECTION XVIII. Of the disappearance of the plague in some parts
of Europe, and of new diseases, 256
ADDENDA.
Of the Lunar Influence, 282 Of Electricity, 305 Of the popular modes of
guarding against Infection, 327 On Venesection, 330 On Vapor or Mephitic Air,
332 On the Revolution of certain Comets, 337 Postscript, 340
ERRORS.
VOL. I.
PAGE 337, line 12, erase the following words -- " but its progress wa^ limi^^d
to one street near the water." See the fact in page 345. 340, The last
paragraph, save one, is misplaced -- it belongs to the postscript about the
middle of page 347. 310, line 20, for Tome, read Torre.
VOL. II.
PAGE 3, In the account of deaths in Dresden in 1631, for 144, read 844. This
correction is material, as the true number marks the increased mortality
preceding the plague in the two following years; that is, the progression in
the pestilential condition of the elements. 52, line 9 from bottom, read
Horstius. 178, line 11, for elysian read Etesian. 182, line 14, for By read
But. 191, line at bottom, read repealed. 216, line 3, read axillary. 292, line
4, from bottom for observed read obscured.
A few literal errors are not noticed; and possibly some material ones may have
escaped observation.

SECTION IX. Bills of mortality for the two last centuries, with the principal
phenomena of the elements.
OUR accounts of diseases and the phenomena of the world, which appear to be
connected with them, are altogether imperfect. But in the two last centuries,
we have a tolerable history of diseases, and occasionally an account of the
seasons, and remarkable occurrences. In the following tables, the reader will
find the bills of mortality for London, Augsburg, Dresden, Boston, one Church
in Philadelphia, with a few bills of Paris and Dublin; to which are prefixed
such of the remarkable phenomena of the elements, as I have been able to
collect. As winter makes a part of two years, the word severe is set against
the year which preceded the winter. Thus against the year 1607, the word severe
refers to the winter of 1607-8. The blanks denote, either that nothing singular
occurred in those years, or that I have no account of the occurrences. Further
enquiries might probably enable me to fill many of those blanks.

Bills of mortality do not exhibit a complete view of epidemics; as some of the
more remarkable, especially influenza, destroy but few lives, and the bills of
the years when that disease alone prevailed, are remarkably low. It is often
the immediate precursor of pestilential diseases in autumn; in which cases, the
bills of the year are very high.

SEASONS. Other phenomena. Burials in London. Buri. in Augs A. D. Summer.
Winter. Comets Volcanoes. DISEASES. By common dis. By the plague. Total. 1600
general pestilence 1775 1601 very dry severe S. America plague in Portugal and
other places 1570 1602 cool and dry cold Eng. influenza, plague 1567 1603 Etna
plague London, and general famine 5773 36269 42042 1488 1604 comet S. America
4323 896 5219 1298 1605 5948 444 6392 1361 1606 5796 2124 7920 1371 1607 hot
severe comet Etna plague in Cork 5670 2352 8022 2595 1608 hot plague in Cork,
dysentery 6758 2262 9020 1476 1609 severe comet Etna plague in Denmark 7554
4240 11784 1469 1610 very dry influenza, sore throat in Spain 7486 1803 9289
1941 1611 plague in Constantinople 6716 627 7343 1891 1612 very dry comet
malignant fevers 7778 64 7852 1625 1613 plague in Constantinople, fatal fevers
in France 7503 16 7519 1722 1614 severe Etna fatal smallpox epidemic, measles
in Persia 7367 22 7389 1444 1615 cool 7850 37 7887 1771 1616 hot and dry
quartan agues general 8063 9 8072 1631 1617 hot and dry 8280 6 8286 1514 1618 4
comets pestilence among Indians in America, angina Naples 9596 18 9614 1354
1619 Iceland pestilential fevers in France 8000 9 8009 1485 1620 cold comet
fevers 9691 21 9712 1667 1621 smallpox 8112 11 8123 1517 1622 dry Amer. comet
9420 16 9436 1959

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes DISEASES. London. Augs Dres 1623
malignant fevers, precursors of the plague 11095 17 11112 1875 421 1624 the
same, increased mortality, previous to the plague 12199 11 12210 1370 411 1625
comet Icela. and Canaries plague in London, Denmark, Italy and Holland, etc.
18848 35417 54265 1392 481 1626 hot plague in Lions, Wirtemberg, etc. 7400 134
7534 1440 740 1627 plague in France, etc. 7713 4 7717 2494 412 1628 plague in
France, Augsburg, etc. 7740 3 7743 9611 469 1629 plague in Amsterdam, etc. 8771
0 8771 1265 398 1630 plague in Vienna, Cambridge, etc. 9228 1317 ^0545 909 480
1631 Vesuvius erysipelous fevers, diseases of the throat 8288 274 8562 859 144
1632 Vesuvius eruptive fevers, plague in Dresden 9527 8 9535 3485 3129 1633 hot
severe En. comet Etna plague in Dresden, mortality in America, pestil. fevers
8392 0 8392 3364 4585 1634 hot seve. Am. Etna plague at Ratisbon, fevers in
London precursors of the plague 10899 1 10900 4664 721 1635 mild Et. and Ves.
plague, Augsburg, Leyden, Mentz, etc. 10651 0 10651 6243 597 1636 Et. and Hec.
plague, London, Nimeguen, Rome, etc. 12959 10400 23359 790 594 1637 hot Eng.
severe plague in Holland, Denmark 8681 3082 11763 823 1897 1638 hot and dry
sickly year in America, smallpox and fevers 13261 363 13624 638 531 1639 dry
Ame. 9548 314 9862 674 1845 1640 severe En. 11321 1450 12771 586 935 1641 seve.
Am. 11767 1375 13142 587 525 1642 11999 1274 13273 593 601 1643 hot and dry Et.
and Ves. malignant fevers 12216 996 13212 638 1041 1644 9441 1492 11933 659 489
1645 hot Eng. sickness among Indians, America 9608 1871 11479 758 532 1646
plague, London 10415 2365 12780 1488 481 1647 hot Ame. comet plague Land.
influenza Amer. fevers 10462 3597 14059 1388 471 1648 malig. fevers in Italy,
France and Spain, plague in Ireland and Shropshire 9283 611 9894 1208 606

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes DISEASES. London. Augs Dres 1649 plague
in Spain, smallpox in Boston 10499 67 1056^ 940 597 1650 Etna plague in Cork,
influenza Europe 8749 15 8764 533 494 1651 hot quinsy in Italy 10444 23 10467
577 511 1652 dry Eng. comet fevers 12588 16 12604 616 450 1653 dry Eng. sickly
New England 10081 6 10087 575 535 1654 severe plague Denmark, Chester, Turkey,
etc. 13231 16 13247 764 558 1655 dry Eng. Vesuvius influenza America, general
plague Europe 11368 9 11377 570 525 1656 hot plague Italy, etc. 13915 6 13921
641 560 1657 hot severe plague Genoa 12430 4 12434 731 663 1658 wet Ame.
influenza Europe, mortality America 14979 14 14993 731 518 1659 cynanche
trachealis America 14720 36 14756 831 599 1660 Ves and Ice. measles England
15104 14 15118 657 542 1661 comet measles, tertians 19791 20 19811 668 649 1662
dry Ame. sickly in America 16542 12 16554 788 637 1663 mild fevers Venice,
among cattle England, plague Holland 15347 9 15356 836 620 1664 wet severe
comet Etna purple fever Prussia, corn mildewed 18291 6 18297 761 662 1665 comet
Etna plague London, and over Europe 28710 68596 97306 745 699 1666 hot and dry
comets Etna dysentery over Europe, smallpox Boston 10840 1998 12838 737 824
1667 Etna fevers Persia, etc. 15877 769 823 1668 severe comet Etna fever
New York, Europe smallpox 17294 711 703 1669 hot severe Etn. great dysentery,
fevers, measles, cat plague Westphalia 19436 743 794 1670 Etna measles London,
smallpox 20198 734 776 1671 Etna 15729 733 743 1672 cold comet Etna measles
and smallpox 18230 768 909 1673 cold Eng. Etna catarrhs numerous 17504 751 909
1674 Etna fevers, measles London, and smallpox 21201 842 846

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes DISEASES. London. Augs Dres 1675 wet
and cool E severe meteor Etna influenza Europe 17244 913 947 1676 cold Eng.
meteor Etna measles and smallpox Genoa, England 18732 913 1284 1677 comet Etna
smallpox Charleston, Mass. dysentery Denmark 19067 934 887 1678 dry and hot
comet Etna dreadful plague Morocco, smallpox Boston and S. America 20678 943
1020 1679 severe comet Etna catarrhs, plague, Vienna 21730 945 975 1680 hot and
dry severe comet plague Dresden, coughs epidemic, dysentery 21053 976 6414 1681
very dry 239^1 860 753 1682 comet Et. and Vesu. murrain among cattle, spotted
fever Dublin, plague at Halle 20691 734 1023 1683 very seve. comet fevers 20587
808 1200 1684 hot and dry E. cold malignant dysentery over Europe 23202 858
1154 1685 hot and dry E. 23222 848 937 1686 dry Italy comet Etna 22609 981 1199
1687 rainy Eu. 21460 855 927 1688 severe Vesuvius influenza Europe 22921 860
1011 1689 autum. rainy comet Et. and Vesu. spotted fevers Germany, smallpox
Boston 23502 806 1163 1690 rainy severe corn mildewed 21461 1071 1200 1691 hot
and dry spotted fevers Europe, corn blasted, diseases among cattle 22691 785
1166 1692 hot Etna malignant fevers 20874 935 999 1693 cold Eu. Etna and Icel.
influenza Europe 20959 1084 1071 1694 hot Ves. and Band. malignant fevers 24100
1106 1426 1695 rainy Euro. apoplexies, measles, chin cough, sickly America
19047 1048 1227 1696 cold, wet E. dysentery among children, spotted fevers
18638 927 1055 1697 severe spotted fever Europe, catarrh America began 20970
777 1070 School severe comet S. America influenza America, spotted fever Europe
2018^ 879 919 1699 hot America comet influenza Europe, plague Philadelphia and
Charleston and Levant 20795 940 1139 1700 mild sore throat and catarrhs Europe,
measles 19443 786 1198

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes. DISEASES. London Augs Dres. Bos^. 1701
hot and dry Vesuvius plague in the east 24071 906 992 146 1702 hot and dry
comet Etna plague Poland, yellow fever N. York, smallpox Boston 19481 900 946
441 1703 plague Poland 20720 1245 1078 159 1704 dry Euro. Ves. and Ten. plague
in Poland and Hungary, spotted fevers 22684 1313 964 220 1705 plague in Russia
22097 748 1346 282 1706 hot, dry E comet coughs, dysentery among children 19847
842 1098 261 1707 very hot comet Ve. new isla. measles England, plague at
Warsaw 21600 805 1523 263 1708 very seve. meteor catarrh began in Europe,
plague in Thorn 21291 908 1119 291 1709 catarrh, plague in Dantzick, apoplexies
21800 805 1340 377 1710 plague in Lithuania, catarrhous fevers Eng. and Holland
24620 811 1214 295 1711 cold Eur. plague in Copenhagen, and among cattle
terrible 19833 855 1222 363 1712 wet Eng. comet Vesuvius catarrh Europe, plague
in the east 21198 894 1140 316 1713 wet Eng. mild measles America, plague in
Austria 21057 860 1383 480 1714 dry and hot 26569 948 1250 413 1715 dry
smallpox and measles England 22232 1024 1353 336 1716 very dry severe 24436
905 1274 355 1717 severe comet Vesuvius catarrhous fevers Europe 23446 988 1908
451 1718 hot, wet comet malignant fevers, plague Turkey 26523 768 1412 380 1719
cold Am. meteor plague Levant, pestilential fevers, malig. pleurisy Amer. 28347
997 304 1720 dry Euro. plague in Levant and Marseilles, malig. pleurisy Amer.
25454 934 1733 329 Episcopal Chapter Philadelphia. 1721 Iceland smallpox Boston
26142 1850 1102 1722 cold, wet measles England 25750 1519 273 1723 cold comet
smallpox in England, plague Barbados 29197 1654 413 1724 wet Eng. whooping
cough England 25952 Dublin. 1761 407 1725 wet Eng. 2 in Iceland 25523 1642 324
1726 plague in Egypt 29647 2763 343 69

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes. DISEASES. London Dub. Bost. Phil. 1727
dry hot A. comet Vesu. and Ice. sickly year 28418 2946 479 130 1728 hot Ame.
severe Eu. Iceland plague in Egypt and Carolina 27810 498 86 1729 comet Iceland
universal catarrh Europe, plague in Aleppo, measles America and malignant
pleurisy 29722 3206 570 88 1730 very cold E. Ice. and Vesu. smallpox in
Boston, pestilential fevers S. America 26761 2184 909 81 1731 anginas in
Holland, smallpox New York 25262 408 166 1732 severe Ame. comet plague in
Syria, Charleston and New York, catarrh began 23358 2534 499 97 1733 dry Eng.
catarrh universal, plague in Aleppo 29233 2608 458 103 1734 scarlet fever
Edinburgh, smallpox and fevers 20062 2466 528 116 1735 wet sore throat Am.
measles, swelling in jaws, coughs, catarrhs fevers, hydro. 2^538 2196 455 96
1736 wet sore throat Am. and Fr. measles Eng. dreadful plague in Egypt 27581
2101 617 144 1737 very sev. A. comet Vesuvius sor^ throat, univers^l catarrh,
diseases of horses 278^^ 607 112 1738 pestilence in Barbados, O^zakow and
New-Spain, measles 2582^ ^50^ 576 107 1739 wet Eng. very sev. Eu. comet
pestilence Charleston, measles America 25432 ^20^ 554 97 1740 very sev. A.
measles America, whooping cough and spotted fever Eng. 30811 704 98 1741
pestilence Philadelphia and Virginia, spotted fevers England 32169 2790 555 162
1742 severe Syria comet sore throat America and England, plague Aleppo, etc.
27483 2320 517 123 1743 hot comet at Catapax^ in S. Amer. pestilence Syria,
Messina, N. York, catarrh Italy and France 25200 2193 620 116 1744 e^idemic
catarrh Europe 20606 1705 499 114 1745 infectious fevers and dysen. p^^va^ent
Am. plague Egypt, etc. 21296 780 125 1746 S. America infectious fever Albany
and am^^g the Indians, dysen. Switz. 28157 1957 578 186 1747 hot and dry severe
Etna influen. universal, pestilence Phi^ ^nginas Eng. sickly Boston 25494 777
192 1748 dry pestilence Charleston, anginas E^^ng fever Am. and measles 23869
1530 740 175 1749 very dry dysenteries Europe and America ^nginas Europe 25516
1819 677 128 1750 very hot very severe comet dysenteries America and Europe,
plague Barbary coast 23727 2088 604 125 1751 wet Eng. severe Ame. Vesuvius
plague Turkey, dysenteries fatal America and anginas 21028 624 144 1752 ve. hot
A. smallpox in Boston, anginas in Ireland and America 20485 1844 1009 129

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes. DISEASES. London Dub. Bost. Phil. 1753
severe malignant fever in Rouen from vapor, anginas America 19276 1825 481 105
1754 mild Amer. Vesuvius gangrenous sore throat England, Ireland and America
22696 1897 434 94 1755 severe Euro. Etna catarrhs Europe, anginas Europe and
Am. plague Constanti. 21917 2002 484 99 1756 severe Syria comet Iceland
influenza America began 20872 1550 526 213 1757 influenza America, measles
21313 1825 434 97 1758 hot meteor influenza Eu. plague began in Egypt and Smyr.
measles Am. 17576 1558 524 129 1759 severe comets Vesu. great measles and
dysentery America, plague Levant 19604 1752 629 271 1760 Vesuvius plague
extends in Levant, terrible fever in America 19830 1993 576 174 1761 ve. dry A
Azores influenza America, plague extends Levant, fever America 21063 2292 456
144 1762 ve. dry A severe comet influenza Europe, pestilence Phila. crisis of
plague Levant 26326 2490 531 200 1763 meteor Etna pestile. at Nantucket and in
Bengal, diseases among animals 26143 2605 407 180 1764 hot Euro. Etna yellow
fever Cadiz, pestilence in Naples, smallpox Boston 23202 2307 548 139 1765 hot
Euro. severe Euro. dysenteries 23230 2275 560 186 Paris 1766 hot and dry Eur.
very severe comet Etna, Vesn. and Heckla dysentery America 23912 19664 445 133
1767 cold comet Vesuv. great influenza Europe 22612 19875 468 121 1768 hot
diseases among horses America 23639 20808 417 123 1769 hot comet sore throat
Boston and other places, measles Am. diseases among cattle 21847 18427 645 188
1770 wet Eng. comet Ter. and Ves. sore throat America and West Indies, plague
Constantinople 22434 18719 483 127 1771 wet A. E. cold Europe meteor Vesuvius
plague in Russia, diseases among cattle, catarrhs Am. pestilence Bengal 21770
18941 482 139 1772 hot Ame. A. gr. snow catarrh America and measles 26053 20374
517 157 1773 measles, affections of the throat, dysentery Am. plague Bassora
and Bagdadt 21656 18518 595 179 1774 severe Euro. scarlet fever Edin. in some
places in Am. 20884 596 161 1775 meteor Pac. in Gua. catarrh in Europe,
dysentery in America and anginas 20541 18400 156 1776 hot severe Euro. Vesuvius
dysentery America and anginas 19048 180 1777 Ferro dysentery in America and
measles 23334 222

A. D. Summer. Winter. Comets Volcanoes. DISEASES. London Paris. Phil. 1778 hot
mild typhus fevers, plague Constantinople 20399 17112 183 1779 hot Eng. very
severe Vesu. great health 20420 142 1780 halo Etna bilious fever Philadelphia,
general health, plague in Smyrna 20517 Salem 155 1781 influenza Americ. 20709
Mass. 179 1782 dry Ame. me'rs many influenza Europe, scarlatina began in
Edinburg 17918 175 198 1783 hot very severe Heckla gre. measles and scarlatina
Amer. famine India, plague in Egypt, etc. 19029 189 232 1784 hot comet Vesuvius
plague in the east, angina America, canine madness 17828 140 230 1785 dry Euro.
cold Vesuvius angina, fevers America 18919 114 166 1786 cool cold yellow fever
Cadiz, angina America and England 20454 138 156 1787 cool comet meteor Et. and
Vesu. plague Barbary coast 19347 110 147 1788 rainy Am. cold meteor measles
began N. York and Phila. codfish sickly, influenza Eu. 19697 144 126 1789 cool
spri. hot sum. severe Eur. mild Amer. halo Vesuvius famine in Asia, dearth in
America, measles America and influenza, death of haddock Europe, plague in the
east. 22744 129 164 1790 influenza America 18038 203 145 1791 ve. hot A. cold
plague began in Egypt, bilious pestilence began in New York and Grenada 18760
148 183 1792 plague in Egypt, scarlet fever began in America 20213 148 125 1793
hot, dry A mild Amer. comet scarlet fever Am. and Eng. pestilence Phil.
dysentery Maryland 21749 148 393 1794 severe Euro. great, of Ve. scarlatina,
pestilence New Haven and Baltimore, dysentery 19241 122 172 1795 America hot,
rainy scarlatina, pestilence New York and Norfolk, dysentery New Haven,
influenza England 21179 195 223 1796 autumn ver. dry A cold Amer. scarlatina,
pestilence N. York, Boston, Charleston, Newburyport, measles America 19288 216
213 1797 cool Am. severe Ame. comet Andes and Guadaloupe influenza Europe,
pestilence Phil. Balti. Prove. Norfolk, and among cats and other animals in
Turkey, canine madness 17014 147 197 1798 very hot long and severe A. and E.
comet Teneriffe pest. Phil. N. York, Bost. N. Land. Ports. Wilming. in Turkey
1799 ve. dry A pestilence Philadelphia, New York, Hartford

SECTION X. Remarks on the preceding History and Tables.
IMPERFECT as ancient history is, in regard to the accounts of diseases, and
the extraordinary phenomena of nature, we find that between the year B. C. 480
and the Christian era, a number of violent plagues occurred, most of which
coincided in time with the following phenomena, comets, eruptions of volcanoes,
earthquakes, drouth, severe winters, diseases among cattle. Of thirteen comets
mentioned in the foregoing history, which are all whose dates I am able to
ascertain, eight of them coincide with volcanic eruptions of Etna, the only
volcano of any note, which the history of that period has recorded; and ele^^
of them coincide in time with pestilence. If we consider the scarcity of our
materials for a history of these phenomena, at that period, and make due
allowances for the uncertainty of chronology, we shall find reason to be
surprised at such a number of these coincidences. In several instances we find
extreme drouth and very severe winters to correspond in time with comets and
eruptions of Etna, conformable to facts in modern days.

On this subject, history is barren also for many centuries after the Christian
era. Yet in every period, even in the dark ages, we find numerous coincidences
of the great phenomena above mentioned. All the great plagues that have
afflicted mankind, have been accompanied with violent agitations of the
elements. Modern philosophy objects to the popular sense in which the word,
elements, is used; since it appears that what has usually been considered as an
element, is found by modern chemistry to be a compound substance, resolvable
into parts, in their nature and properties, distinct. Notwithstanding th^se
discoveries, I cannot consent to discard the popular use of the word element.
Nature presents to the senses of man, fire, earth, air and water, in a
particular and predominant form. This is the form in which they appear to be
most useful to man, and to be the constituent materials of other substances, as
well as the agents in carrying on the great visible operations of the system. I
therefore consider the popular distribution as natural and convenient.


This observation rests particularly on the events that preceded and attended
the pestilences of the following periods. A. D. 80 -- 167 -- 252 -- 375 -- 400
-- 445 -- 542 -- 558 -- 590 -- 639 -- 679 -- 682 -- 745 -- 762 -- 802 -- 905 --
994 -- 1005 -- 1031 -- 1044 -- 1069 -- 1106 -- 1135 -- 1142 -- 1162 -- 1181 --
1222 -- 1242 -- 1300 -- 1347 -- 1368 -- 1400 -- 1477 -- 1500 -- 1531 -- 1577 --
1602 -- 1625 -- 1636 -- 1665 -- 1699 -- 1709 -- 1719 -- 1728 -- 1743 -- 1751 --
1760 -- 1770 -- 1783 -- 1789. Many facts in other periods concur to prove the
truth of the remark.

The phenomenon most generally and closely connected with pestilence is an
earthquake. From all the facts that I can find in history, I question whether
an instance of a considerable plague in any country, can be mentioned, which
has not been immediately preceded or accompanied with convulsions of the earth.
If any exceptions have occurred, they have escaped my researches. It does not
happen that every place where pestilence prevails, is shaken; but during the
progress of the diseases which I denominate pestilence, and which run, in
certain periods, over large portions of the globe, some parts of the earth, and
especially those which abound most with subterranean fire, are violently
agitated.

By adverting to the foregoing history, the reader will find that all those
years, in which considerable earthquakes have occurred in America, have been
remarkably sickly. These years are 1638, 1647, 1658, 1662 and 3, 1668, 1727,
1755, 1783. See the history and the bills of mortality. Even the slighter
shocks, have been attended with considerable sickness, or have introduced a
series of epidemics, being cotemporary with the measles, influenza or sore
throat; as in 1669, 1720, 1737, 1757, 1761, 1769, 1771, 1791, 1797.

To enumerate the instances in Europe and Asia, would be a useless repetition
of the events related in the preceding history, to which the reader is referred.

Another phenomenon, which, next to earthquakes, appears to be most closely
connected with epidemic diseases, is the eruption of fire from volcanic
mountains. In this article, history is deficient, or I have not been fortunate
enough to find the works necessary to furnish a complete view of these
phenomena. There are whole centuries in which the books I have consulted,
mention no eruption of Etna and Vesuvius. The account of eruptions in Iceland,
from the year 1000, taken from Pennant's Arctic Zoology, vol. 1. 331, is
probably complete, or nearly so. Of the volcanoes in the Andes, we have very
few accounts; as well as of those in the Moluccas. Of those in the Arctic
regions of Asia and America, we know very little.

Notwithstanding these defects, we are able, by the eruptions in Italy, Sicily
and Iceland, to arrive to some very important conclusions. The reader must have
noticed, in the preceding history, the coincidences in time between volcanic
discharges, and winters of unusual severity. These discharges either precede or
follow the winter. Thus the eruptions of 1766, 1779 and 1783, were immediately
followed by intensely cold winters. The severe winters of 1762-3 and 1779-80,
were speedily followed by eruptions. These instances will serve as samples of
the ordinary course of these events. Sometimes the eruptions continue or are
repeated, for a number of years in succession; but the eruptions when continued
are moderate and the seasons variable. When the volcanoes have been, for some
years, quiet, and that suspension is followed by a great discharge, it appears
to me that severe winters invariably follow or precede the discharge, within a
few months. So also when an eruption is continued for a number of years, if at
any time the discharge becomes violent, a severe winter attends it; as in 1669.
Etna was in a state of eruption from 1664 to 1679; but in 1669, the discharge
was immensely augmented, and the winters next preceding and following, were
very severe.

There are some years in which eruptions are noted, of which I find no account,
respecting the seasons. Perhaps some of these will, on further investigation,
be found to be exceptions.

It is to be observed that, in some cases, a severe winter extends to both
hemispheres, sometimes to one only, and in a few cases, to a part of a
hemisphere only. Thus in 1607-8 -- 1683-4 -- 1762^3 -- 1766-7 -- 1779-80 --
1783-4, the severity extended to both hemispheres. In 1640-41 -- 1739-40, and
in other instances, the severe winter in Europe preceded, by one year, a
similar winter in America. In a few instances, severe frost takes place in one
hemisphere, during a series of mild winters in the other; but this is less
common. In general, the severity happens, in both hemispheres at once, or in
two winters in immediate succession; and as far as evidence has yet appeared,
this severity is closely attendant on volcanic discharges, with very few
exceptions.

Another phenomenon which usually coincides in time with severe winters, is the
approach of comets. I have been struck with surprise at the coincidences of
this kind. There are a few instances on record of mild winters, during the
appearance of these bodies; but in these cases, the comets have appeared to be
small, or to pass the system at an immense distance from the earth. The large
comets and those which approach near to the earth, seem to produce almost
uniformly great heat, excessive drouth, followed by very cold winters,
tremendous storms of wind, rain, snow and hail, unusual tides or swell of the
ocean, and usually, volcanic eruptions. How far these phenomena are connected,
as cause and effect, future observations may determine. Some of them occur so
uniformly in the same year, that I cannot resist the evidence of their
connection.

After a volcano has been many years quiet, its discharges are, I believe,
always preceded by extreme drouth; and this defect of water is not only
observable in the vicinity of the volcano, but often extends over a whole
continent, if not over the world. Many instances have been related; it is
sufficient here to mention the excessive drouth in 1762 and 1782, preceding
eruptions of Etna and Heckla. In these years, almost all springs were exhausted
over a great portion of America.

Cold winters sometimes follow wet seasons, but more generally a very hot
summer or very dry autumn. Sometimes two or three severe winters occur in
succession, as in 1766, 67 and 68 -- and in America from 1796 to 1799.

The years when comets approach, or volcanoes discharge fire, and when the
atmosphere exhibits fiery appearances, as meteors, streams of light, and mock
suns, are, beyond comparison, the most tempestuous. Witness the years 1766,
1771 and 72, 1780, 1783, 4 and 5, 1788, 1797. In such years, the risk on
vessels at sea, is greatly increased.

As dry seasons usually precede volcanic eruptions, so very wet seasons often
follow them. This seems not to be the invariable course of events; but there
are remarkable instances of deluging rains after these discharges. Witness the
seasons following the universal convulsions of the earth in 1692 and 3, and
1766. Thus, the electricity is re-conducted to the earth.

In every case, I believe this remark will be found t^; that the approach of
comets, and volcanic eruptions distu^ the regular course of the seasons. The
heat of summer and the cold of winter are in extremes; more snow is generated
in winter, and more hail in summer; tempests are more violent and frequent;
meteors more numerous, and rain more unequally distributed over the earth.

A series of epidemic diseases, measles, influenza, affections of the throat,
followed by pestilential fevers, appear generally to commence and take their
departure, from some of the great agitations of the elements above recited.
This at least has been the case in America in the four last periods, beginning
with 1756-7, 1769 and 70, 1782 and 3, 1788 and 9. This fact will want no
authority but a bare inspection of the preceding history, and tables.

The continuance and the varieties of the diseases seem to depend on similar
disturbances in the elements; and as the discharges and motions of the
electrical fluid depend on no certain laws that are known, they are irregular,
and may contribute to vary the order, and the nature of diseases. In some
cases, there has been a continued series of epidemics, for twenty years, in
which the common order is not exactly observed; but this is not frequent. A
remarkable instance occurred between 1727 and 1744.

Those periods in general have been most distinguished for sickness over the
world, in which the fire of the earth has exhibited the most numerous and
violent effects. Witness the period from 1631 to 1637, when the three most
noted volcanoes discharged immense quantities of fire and lava; and severe
pestilence extended over all Europe and America. A similar remark may be made
concerning the period of the last universal pestilence in Europe from 1663 to
1666 -- also from 1691 to 1695 -- from 1727 to 30 -- 1759 to 1764 -- 1769 to
1772 -- 1774 to 1777 -- 1783 to 1786 -- and concerning some shorter periods,
all of which produced epidemics in both hemispheres.

Slighter eruptions and earthquakes, which are almost annual, seem to have less
effect. The fire of the globe is in perpetual motion or action, and to this
great agent, philosophers are agreed, are to be ascribed the changes of
seasons, and the generation of rain, hail and snow. Its operations however are
not all of them visible, nor even perceptible, until they appear by their
effects. It is probable that the invisible operations of the electrical fluid
produce more effects than those which are seen. Indeed, we may question whether
most of the visible phenomena of that principle, are not mere effects of that
action which influences the vegetable and animal world. It is probable to me
that neither seasons, earthquakes, nor volcanic eruptions, are the causes of
the principal derangements we behold in animal and vegetable life, but are
themselves the effects of those motions and invisible operations which affect
mankind. Hence catarrh and other epidemics often appear, before the visible
phenomena of eruptions and earthquakes.

P. S. After this work was prepared for the press, I was favored by Dr.
Mitchill, with some extracts from a paper of Mr. Holm, a Swede, on the subject
of a volcanic eruption in Iceland, in 1783, by which it appears that the
atmosphere is rendered pestilential by discharges of fire and lava from the
earth. This effect is supposed to be wrought by a combination of the septous
and oxygenous parts, and may confirm and improve Dr. Mitchill's theory of
pestilential air.

This eruption I understand to have been a bursting of fire from the earth, in
a place distant from Heckla. In the neighborhood of the column of flame were
generated snow, hail and extreme cold. The water that fell in rain was acid and
corrosive; destroying cattle and men -- covering the bodies of cattle with
pustles and ulcers, and excoriating the hands and faces of men when it fell on
them. It also killed vegetables. The effects were felt not only in Iceland, but
in Norway, and other parts of Europe.

Had this treatise fallen into my hands some months ago, I might have been able
to illustrate particular parts of my theory by authentic facts, taken from that
work. As it is, I must content myself with observing, that Mr. Holm's
observations verify my ideas, respecting the agency of electricity in producing
pestilence, and extremes in the seasons. On this theory not only pestilence,
but severe cold, and extreme heat, hail and snow are all familiarly explained,
and their connection with volcanic eruptions, and other electrical operations,
visible and invisible, demonstrated.

SECTION XI. Pestilential periods exhibited by means of an increase of
mortality in distant parts of the world.
AS there are certain periods when particular epidemics prevail over the world
or over a hemisphere, and when all other diseases assume peculiar malignancy, I
have here subjoined a number of bills of mortality, for different and distant
places, to show the effect of the general principle of disease in remote
countries or towns. -- Some of these periods appear in the foregoing tables, as
that between 1623 and 1627; and between 1631 and 1637. --

A similar period occurred between 1718 and 1721. BURIALS IN
A. D. London. Amsterdam. Vienna. Breslaw. 1716 24,436 7078 17 23,446 7451 5205
1458 18 26,523 8644 6110 1255 19 28,347 9726 20 25,454 7820 6825 1816 21 26,142
7632 6490 1482

The plague raged in Turkey and Syria in 1718-19 and 20, also at Marseilles in
1720, in which years or one of them, the bills of mortality were swelled, even
in the north of Europe. I regret that some of the bills are deficient.

The period from 1725 to 1732 is equally remarkable. BURIALS IN
A. D. London. Amsterdam. Dublin. 1725 25,523 26 29,647 9,275 2763 27 28,418
13,775 2946 28 27,810 11,164 29 29,722 9,618 3206 30 26,761 2184

Plague in Egypt and the Levant during this period. From 1739 to 1743. BURIALS
IN
A. D. London. Amsterdam. Dublin. Boston. Church in Phila. 1739 25,432 7566
2201 554 97 40 30,811 10,066 704 98 41 32,169 9864 2790 555 162 42 27,483 2320
517 123 43 25,200 2193 620 116

Plague in Levant, Italy and America.

From the year 1744 to 1757 there were many sickly years, out no one distinct
period when an increase of mortality is observable in all parts of the world,
at the same time.

From 1758 to 1764. BURIALS IN
A. D. London. Amsterdam. Dublin. Boston. Church in Phila. 1758 17,576 1558 524
129 59 19,604 1752 629 271 60 19,830 7700 1993 576 174 61 21,063 7720 2292 456
144 62 26,326 8412 2490 531 200 63 26,143 9876 This bill is stated in the
Annual Register at 10,506.
2605 407 180 64 23,202 8585 2307 548 138 65 23,230 7725 2275 560 186

Plague in Egypt and the Levant from 1758 to 1763. Yellow Fever in Philadelphia
in 1762.

From 1770 to 1773. BURIALS IN
A. D. London. Paris. Amsterdam Boston. Church in Phila 1770 22,434 18,719 483
127 71 21,770 18,941 7983 482 139 72 26,053 20,374 10,609 517 157 73 21,656
18,518 In Anderson's History of Commerce, Continued, vol. 5. 228, the number of
deaths in Paris in 1773 is stated to have been 28,518.
595 179 74 20,884 596 161

Plague raging in the east.

The series of epidemics, in this period, measles, influenza and sore throat,
were followed by dysentery in America from 1775 to 1777 inclusive, the
mortality of which will appear from the following bills.

BURIALS IN
A. D. A Church Phi. Hartford. Litchfield. Trinity Church Boston. Total. 1774
161 31 27 24 243 75 156 74 31 48 309 76 180 79 82 30 371 77 222 72 120 48 462
78 183 58 32 63 336 79 142 49 34 35 260

It is probable the mortality in the northern states of America was every where
in that proportion. The same disease made similar ravages between 1749 and 1753
-- in 1759 -- 1765 and 6 -- in some places in 1769. -- It was remarkably mortal
in 1773. This latter year was in America unhealthy. In Salem, Mass. the bill of
1773, was raised to 208, (double the usual amount) by the dysentery. The bill
for St. Petersburgh in Russia, was swelled in 1773, one fifth, and in 1777, one
fourth.

The last epidemic period, save one, was from 1781 to 1787 inclusive. The
diseases were influenza, measles and scarlatina. These were in general lighter
than usual. In the interior of New York state, Vermont Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, the scarlatina was more severe and mortal; but on the sea board
and especially in Connecticut, it was milder, and many places wholly escaped
it. Yet every where the bills of mortality were swelled in 1783, 4, 5 or 6,
when the plague was raging in the Levant and Egypt. This period was closed by
remarkably cool summers, and no dysentery or pestilential fever of any
considerable violence or extent, succeeded.

BURIALS IN
A. D. Episco. Church Philad. Trin. Chur. Bosto. Hartford Con. Wethersfield.
Litchfield. Guilford. North-Haven. Total. 1779 142 35 49 25 34 17 11 303
health. 80 155 44 36 17 24 25 10 311 health. 1781 179 41 37 20 35 17 15 344
influenza. 82 198 39 34 31 34 18 9 363 do. Europe. 83 232 56 42 46 42 19 8 445
measles and angina. 84 230 61 33 31 34 22 15 426 measles and angina. 85 166 41
44 24 30 18 6 329 angina. 86 156 49 50 37 36 19 9 356 angina. 87 147 32 37 19
34 24 8 301 health.

The scarlatina and measles produced their principal effects, it will be
observed, in Philadelphia and Boston. The plague raged in Egypt principally in
1783 and 4, and the scarlatina appeared in Britain, but without very
considerable mortality. In 1787 the plague prevailed in Egypt and on the
Barbary coast; and diseases of the throat were prevalent in England and some
parts of America.

Last epidemic period from 1789 to 1797 inclusive. BURIALS IN
A. D. Philadelphia. Episco. Chapter N. York. Presby. Chapter N. York. Ger Lu. Chapter N.
York. Total. 1789 1027 337 109 59 1532 measles and influenza. 90 888 310 107 52
1357 influenza. 91 1290 257 84 60 1691 fever began New York. 92 1497 404 121 66
2088 scar. began. plague Egy. 93 5304 467 101 76 5948 scarla. pesti. hot and
dry. 94 1135 413 71 71 1690 some fevers, tempe. sum. 95 2274 554 137 71 3040
pestilence, hot and humid. 96 1602 540 186 62 2390 pestilence New York. 97 1689
399 130 51 2269 pesti. Phil. cool summer.

The results above are not perfectly accurate, for the bills in Philadelphia,
it is understood, are from August to August; those in New York commence with
the year. The bill of the Presbyterian Church in New York, for 1797, is by
estimate; the others are taken from registers.

View of this epidemic period in Connecticut: A. D. Two Soci. Hartford. N.
Haven City. Guilford. Litchfield. Wethersfield. North-Haven. Cornwall.
Southington. N. London. Oxford Derby. Total. 1789 48 51 Note -- The number of
deaths in New Haven for 1789, 90 and 91, is set down by estimate, the other
bills are from registers.
20 33 35 10 6 17 58 21 299 measl. and 90 38 50 Note -- The number of deaths in
New Haven for 1789, 90 and 91, is set down by estimate, the other bills are
from registers.
20 54 36 10 10 24 81 18 341 (influen. 91 41 50 Note -- The number of deaths in
New Haven for 1789, 90 and 91, is set down by estimate, the other bills are
from registers.
21 41 20 4 6 10 60 17 270 health. 92 41 51 15 23 37 7 8 12 51 12 257 health.
93 65 70 29 80 40 18 10 20 70 11 413 scarlatin. 94 109 180 54 56 47 32 19 34 60
39 630 do and fever 95 88 159 55 35 34 15 9 15 86 11 507 dysentery 96 75 67 19
40 42 12 15 27 80 14 391 measles. 97 59 58 25 40 18 7 8 17 101 12 345 health.

It will be observed that the principal effect of the epidemics, was in 1794,
except in Litchfield, in the western part of the state.

View of the same period in Boston and the neighborhood:
A. D. Dr. Lathrop's Church. Dr. Elliot's. Late Dr. Belknap's. Tri. Chapter Stone
Chapel. Salem. Charlestown. Total. 1789 52 37 10 50 10 129 22 310 influenza. 90
51 40 8 46 14 ^03 35 397 do. and meas. 91 34 37 8 31 16 148 26 300 health. 1792
43 46 16 60 32 148 32 377 do. ex. sm. pox. 93 24 30 11 44 22 148 32 312 do. 94
45 43 12 33 22 122 26 303 do. 95 34 37 12 45 28 195 38 389 scarlatina. 96 37 34
16 50 28 216 65 446 scarla. fev. 97 37 25 10 47 22 147 49 337 health.

Let it be noted that the effect of the scarlatina was here in 1795 and '96.
The progress of the disease is distinctly marked to be from New York eastward,
from 1793 to 1796. The scarlatina in 1785 and 6, was most severe in
Massachusetts -- that in 1794, in Connecticut. The bills in Boston for 1792
were swelled by the smallpox by inoculation, which is not to be taken into
this account of epidemics. The year selected was rather unfavorable, as the
condition of the atmosphere was inflammatory, and inclined to produce eruptive
complaints. The scarlatina was then making its appearance in the middle states.
The spring of 1793, when inoculation was begun at Hartford, was still more
unfavorable; and the smallpox was so unmanageable as to surprise the faculty.
The principles unfolded in this treatise will solve the difficulty.

By a bill of mortality for Madeira, it appears that the pestilential principle
of the years from 1760 to 6^ extended to that healthy island.

A. D. BURIALS. 1759, 1136. 60, 1356. 61, 1746. 62, 1366. 63, 1118. 64, 1325.
65, 1267. 66, 1037.

The following bills for several religious societies in Connecticut, will
exhibit a general view of epidemics from the year 1750.

BURIALS IN
A. D. Guilford 1 society. Hartford 2 societies. Litchfield 1 society.
Middletown 1 society. New Haven 1 society. 1750 19 -- -- -- -- 51 65 64 -- --
-- dysentery and angina for 3 or 4 years. 52 28 -- -- -- -- 53 25 29 -- -- --
54 15 20 21 -- -- anginas. 55 22 33 16 -- -- anginas in some places. 56 46 32
28 -- -- dysentery in many places. 57 17 30 12 -- -- catarrh. 58 17 36 15 -- --
measles. 59 20 48 28 -- -- measles, dysentery and fevers. 60 29 36 24 -- -- 61
18 42 16 -- -- influenza. 62 18 34 22 24 -- plague Philadelphia. 63 18 34 16 22
13 64 28 42 25 25 19 65 15 24 22 35 17 dysentery.

A. D. Guilford 1 society. Hartford 2 societies. Litchfield 1 society.
Middletown 1 society. New Haven 1 society. Wethersfield 1 society. Cornwall.
1766 12 46 17 29 20 -- -- dysentery in some places. 67 20 34 22 26 15 -- -- 68
21 17 31 30 21 -- -- 69 43 27 19 27 31 -- -- angina and dysentery, measles. 70
14 34 18 41 15 -- -- angina, measles. 71 10 32 35 38 18 -- -- catarrh, angina.
72 17 33 36 38 19 -- -- influenza and measles. 73 35 32 36 39 42 -- -- measles,
angina, dysentery. 74 13 31 27 30 21 -- -- 75 29 74 31 63 21 59 10 angina and
dysentery very fatal. 76 32 79 82 78 31 59 20 angina and dysentery very fatal.
77 29 72 120 42 14 40 21 angina and dysentery very fatal. 78 21 58 32 37 15 27
3 79 17 49 34 19 21 25 13 80 25 36 24 35 12 17 6 81 17 37 35 37 15 20 16
influenza. 82 18 34 34 45 21 31 8 influenza in Europe.

A. D. Guilford 1 society. Hartford 2 societies. Litchfield 1 society.
Middletown 1 society. New Haven 1 society. Wethersfield 1 society. Corwall.
1783 19 42 42 70 12 46 17 measles, angina began, but scarcely perceived by the
burials in Connecticut. 84 22 33 34 41 12 31 8 85 18 44 30 40 17 24 5 86 19 50
36 28 23 37 4 87 24 37 34 26 20 19 20 88 23 45 27 24 41 22 4 89 20 48 33 43 14
35 6 measles, influenza. 90 20 38 54 34 26 36 10 measles, influenza. 91 21 41
41 30 12 20 6 some fevers, but no epidemc. 92 15 41 23 24 11 37 8 93 29 65 80
35 12 40 10 angina, fevers. 94 54 109 56 28 50 47 19 angina, fevers. 95 55 88
35 16 38 34 9 fevers. 96 19 75 40 35 8 42 15 measles in many places. 97 25 59
40 25 14 18 8 health in general.

From the bills of mortality and preceding history may be deduced some
interesting observations.

1. We observe an order and progression in the epidemics, which is in a degree
uniform. Periods of pestilence, with some exceptions, seem to be introduced by
measles and influenza; then follow diseases of the throat, or anginas; lastly
pestilential fevers. During the whole period, the measles, influenza and
angina, occasionally appear in spring, autumn and winter; and rarely, if ever,
does a pestilential fever, as plague and yellow fever, occur in a particular
city or country, without influenza, angina, measles or inflammatory fevers in
the spring preceding, for immediate precursors. This is true in the tropical
climates, in cases of epidemics; and so uniform has been the fact in the
temperate latitudes, that I am nearly prepared to say, that if none of those
precursors appear in winter and spring, no pestilential fever will be epidemic
in the following summer and autumn, unless the dysentery may be excepted. It
holds true in every case of great pestilence.

2. The progressiveness in the pestilential principle is obvious in the
augmented bills of mor^ality, which immediately precede the plague. This arises
from the number and violence of the malignant diseases which always precede an
epidemic pestilence. This augmentation is visible some times two years before
the plague appears, and almost always in the spring months preceding. See the
London bills in the years preceding the plague in 1625 -- 1636 -- 1665 The same
is observable in other bills, both in Europe and America. In a few instances,
the bill of the preceding year is low; but in this case, some other epidemic
has usually gone before, and finished its course; or the plague is preceded by
influenza only, which does not swell the bill of mortality.

3. Sometimes a series of epidemics falls with more violence on one hemisphere
than on the other; but perhaps in no instance has a course of diseases spread
over one continent, without showing themselves on the other. I have not been
able to find an instance in which the plague has made great ravages in the
east, except when the American continent has been more or less affected by the
epidemics above mentioned; and in some instances it is proved that the violence
of the sore-throat, influenza, measles or yellow fever, in America, has
corresponded with the violence of pestilence in Egypt and the Levant. The
commencement of each period of epidemics is nearly cotemporary, in both
hemispheres. It sometimes happens that pestilence occurs in Constantinople,
Smyrna or Cairo, when it is not epidemic beyond those cities; owing to peculiar
seasons and local causes. But it never spreads to Syria, the islands of the
Archipelago, and other neighboring countries, except when epidemic diseases
spread over the world. At least I have not found an instance.


Thus the great plague in Constantinople was cotemporary with the fatal angina
and dysentery in America in 1751 -- also in 1755. Cotemporary with the measles
in America in 1758 and 9, was the commencement of the extensive Levant plague
of 1760. Pestilence in Persia was cotemporary with the epidemics of 1773 -- In
1783 commenced plague in the east and epidemics in America -- the same in 1792
and 3. Diseases of the throat in almost every instance prevail at the same time
in Europe and America.

4. In two periods within half a century, a severe angina and dysentery have
been epidemic together and once for a series of years, as in 1751, and from
1773 to 1777. This is an exception to the usual order, and other deviations
sometimes occur.

5. As catarrh precedes, so it follows every severe epidemic pestilence, and
the persons who have been affected with a pestilential fever in summer, are
most apt to be affected by catarrh at the commencement of cold weather.

6. After severe pestilential fevers in summer, the inflammatory fevers of
winter, wear the livery of the summer fevers. They generally carry with them
bilious discharges, and a yellow skin. They have also this remarkable
character, that they speedily run through the inflammatory diathesis, and
become typhus. They are the pestilence of winter; and sometimes appear before
the pestilence of summer. This fact alone decides the question, that
pestilential fevers of summer are generated on the spot where they exist; and
derive their malignant and infectious quality solely from the state of the
elements.

This species of inflammatory fever has occurred in many cases during the
winter months, since the year 1790. In some cases it has extinguished three
four and five members of a family; as in Hartford and New Haven. But it is a
most consoling reflection, that it is less frequent than formerly in this
country. It has not been epidemic in the northern states since ^^61, as far as
I can learn. Formerly it was as frightful a calamity as the yellow fever is in
this age. In the foregoing history, many examples have been mentioned -- as at
Fairfield in School -- at Waterbury in 1713 -- at Hartford and Duck Creek in 1720
-- at Farmington in 1729 -- at Bethlem, Hartford, East-Haven and New Haven in
1761 -- at Holliston in 1753, etc. Whether the disappearance of this disease is
owing to the clearing of the country, by which the quantity of debilitating
miasmata of summer has been diminished, or whether it is the consequence of
other alterations in our climate, is not easily determined.

The disappearance of the Long Fever, so called, is another most consoling
circumstance. This species of typhus fever was formerly one of the most
terrible diseases of our climate. At present i^ is a rare occurrence.

On the whole, we have very clear proof that the quantity of disease in this
country, has been diminished, within half a century. The yellow fever, that is,
the pestilential fever of summer and autumn, was formerly as frequent and as
malignant as in this age; while the inflammatory fevers of winter, and the long
fever, have almost disappeared as epidemics. The intermittents and remittents
of autumn, are greatly decreased in the northern states; and the dysentery has
not increased in frequency or virulence. Anginas have never been so fatal as
they were between 1735 and 1743.

It is probable that some of these changes in the character of diseases may be
ascribed to alterations in our climate, or modes of living -- and therefore may
be permanent. In some cases, improvements in medical science and the practice
of physic may have disarmed diseases of their terrors. But it is possible that
some of the changes mentioned are only revolutions in disease, occasioned by
temporary causes, and that the same disorders may, in future periods, recur,
with the whole train of formidable symptoms.

Note. -- It has been observed that the long fever, so called, has nearly
disappeared from our climate. On further enquiry, it appears that this
observation must be restricted to the maritime states. The bilious remitting
fever that prevailed in Vermont and New Hampshire in 1798, and which has
re-appeared in this summer (1799) is of that species. See Medical Repository,
vol. 3. 5. In the interior of our country, this is a new disease; while on the
seacoast it has become extinct. Shall we conclude from these facts, that the
disease follows or springs from a particular state of cultivation? In the
interior, where the disease is now prevalent, the clearing and cultivation of
the country were begun about 30 years ago. On the seacoast, where the disease
has disappeared, the country has been settled 150 years, and is generally under
cultivation.

SECTION XII. Of the Influenza, or Epidemic Catarrh.
AS the catarrh appears to be the disease which is most closely connected with
pestilence, and the least dependent on local causes or the sensible qualities
of the air, I have collected all the well-defined instances of this epidemic
which have occurred to my researches, and arranged them in chronological order;
placing against the year the most remarkable physical occurrences, and
mentioning those which fell within the years next preceding and following: A.
D. CATARRH EPIDEMIC IN 1174, the year before an eruption of Etna, and followed
by great mortality. [Chasm in the accounts of this disease.] 1510, the same
year with an eruption in Iceland, and following great earthquakes. Humid air --
a comet appeared the next year. [Chasm.] 1551, the year after an eruption of
Etna, and a comet. Season wet. 1557, the year after an eruption of Etna. Season
mostly wet; but in some countries dry; a comet the same year. [Chas.] 1580, the
year after an eruption of Etna. Cool dry north wind -- A comet. 1587, the same
year with an eruption in Iceland -- and after a comet. 1591, after earthquakes
in 1590, and a comet. 1597, the year after earthquakes and a hard winter; rainy
season, and a comet the same year. 1602, the year after earthquakes, volcano
and severe winter. Cold and wet season. 1610, the year after an eruption of
Etna, a comet and severe winter. Season very hot and dry. [Chasm.] 1647, First
catarrh mentioned in American annals. The same year with violent earthquakes in
South-America. A comet. 1650, In Europe the same year, with an eruption of Etna
and earthquakes. 1655, in America, same year with violent earthquakes in
South-America, and eruption of Vesuvius. 1658, in Europe, after a severe
winter; summer cool. 1675, in Europe, while Etna was in a state of explosion;
mild winter. 1679, 80, in Europe, during or just after the eruption of Etna;
wet season and a comet. 1688, in Europe, same year with an eruption of
Vesuvius, after a severe winter and earthquakes; this began in a hot summer.
1693, in Europe, same year with an eruption in Iceland, and great earthquakes;
cool season. 1697, 8, in America, after a great earthquake in Peru; a comet the
same year, and severe winter. 1699, in Europe, in spring; great earthquakes the
same year, and a comet. 1708, 9, in Europe, in a severe winter, after a comet
and volcano. 1712, in Europe, the same year with an eruption of Vesuvius and a
comet; wet season. 1717, in Europe, the year of a comet, eruption of Vesuvius,
and a severe winter. 1729, 30, in Europe, the same year with an eruption in
Iceland and Vesuvius; dry summer; a comet. 1733, universal, after a comet, a
severe winter and great earthquakes. 1737, in Europe and America; an eruption
of Vesuvius, great earthquakes and a comet. 1743, in Europe, violent
earthquakes. 1744, a comet; earthquakes. 1747, in America and Europe, with a
comet and eruption of Etna. 1755, in Europe, with violent earthquakes and
eruptions of volcanoes, and severe winter. 1757, in America, soon after a
comet, and followed by an earthquake. 1758, in Europe, followed by earthquakes
the next year. 1761, in America; an earthquake during its prevalence. 1762, in
Europe, before an eruption of Etna; a comet the same year. 1767, in Europe; an
eruption of Vesuvius the same year, and of Etna and Heckla in the preceding
year, with a comet and earthquakes. 1772, in America, after an eruption of
Vesuvius and Heckla, and a severe winter. 1775, in Europe, preceded by
earthquakes, small eruption of Lipari the same year, and in New-Spain. 1781, in
America, the year after an eruption of Etna, and a most rigorous winter. 1782,
in Europe and Asia, the year before the great eruption of Heckla. 1788, in
Europe, soon after eruptions of Vesuvius and Etna, and earthquakes. 1789, in
America, with an eruption of Vesuvius, just after a great earthquake at Iceland
and in Europe; warm summer; mild winter followed. 1790, in America, after a
mild winter. 1795, in England, after an eruption of Vesuvius and a severe
winter. 1797, in Europe, after earthquakes; a comet the same year.

The accounts of the seasons are mostly from English writers, and refer to
England, with some exceptions. In regard to heat and cold, the seasons are
generally uniform in most countries, on the same continent; but not in regard
to drouth and moisture.

Of these forty-four instances of influenza, it may be observed, from the
preceding history.

1. That most of them happened, after or during severe cold, or during moist
weather, and in spring, winter or autumn. Some however, occurred in dry hot
seasons, and others in mild winters.

2. Nineteen instances occurred in years when there was a volcanic eruption in
Italy or Iceland, and eleven others, though in different years, were within a
few months of eruptions; making 30 out of the 44. Two or three others happened
near the time of volcanic discharges in South-America.

3. Almost all happened in years of earthquakes, or within a few months
preceding or following them.

4. Thirty instances occurred within the year, or a few months preceding or
following the appearance of comets.

It is further to be observed that some of these epidemics have been limited to
the American hemisphere, at the distance of three, four or five years from an
epidemic of the same kind in Europe. Such as those of 1647 -- 1655 -- which
coincide in time with violent earthquakes in South-America.

In other instances this disease spread over the whole globe; usually beginning
in America: That is, in the instances of which I can obtain any correct
information. Thus in four instances, viz. in School, 1757, 1761 and 1781, it
spread over the American hemisphere one year prior to its pervading the other
hemisphere. And the universal catarrh of 1733, which encircled the globe,
commenced in America two months before it appeared in Europe. The epidemic of
1782 invaded Europe from the side of Asia, the year after it appeared in
America. In 1788, the influenza in Europe preceded the same disease in America.

I regret my want of materials to complete a view of this subject. No regular
register has been kept in America, of the seasons, diseases and phenomena, from
the first settlement, and whether any notices of all the catarrhs in this
country, are in existence, I do not know. I have found no account of any,
between 1655 and School -- nor between the latter year and 1733. One of these
instances, that in School, came to my knowledge by accident, as I have mentioned
under that year, in the foregoing history. From the uniform appearance of this
epidemic as often as once in ten or twelve years, in other periods, we have
ground to believe, it has always occurred in nearly the same periods.

This epidemic is evidently the effect of some insensible qualities of the
atmosphere; as it spreads with astonishing rapidity over land and sea,
uncontrolled by heat or cold, drouth or moisture. From these circumstances and
its near coincidence in time with the violent action of fire in earthquakes and
volcanoes, there is reason to conclude the disease to be the effect of some
access of stimulant powers to the atmosphere by means of the electrical
principle. No other principle in creation, which has yet come under the
cognizance of the human mind, seems adequate to the same effects. I do not
consider earthquakes and volcanic eruptions as the causes of this epidemic, but
as effects of the common cause and evidences of its existence.

The courses of this epidemic are very various. That in 1510 proceeded from
Africa to Sicily, Italy and the north of Europe. This disease could not be the
effect of the eruption in Iceland; for it appeared first in southern latitudes.
If there was a volcanic discharge about that time in Africa, we might be
inclined to ascribe the disease to that cause; but it is more probable that it
is to be ascribed to an insensible action of atmospheric fire, I use this word
to express the principle manifested in electrical operations, although this is
usually supposed to be a cold fusion. Of the nature of this principle, we know
little. We see only its effects.
which is more general and violent, about the time of eruptions; and which fire
is probably agitated in all parts of the globe, although it produces visible
effects in explosions, in some particular places only. I think no man can
question the fact, after reading the preceding history.

The course of the epidemic in 1551, I am not able to ascertain; nor that in
1557. This invaded Spain in August.

The severe catarrh of 1580 began in the south of Europe, in the heat of
summer, and proceeded to the north. The season in general was temperate.

From that year to 1708 -- 9, I find no account of the course of the epidemic
catarrh; but that in 1708 -- 9, began in the north of Europe and proceeded to
the south.

The epidemic of 1729 -- 30, proceeded from Poland and Silesia, to the west and
south, and ended about the time of an explosion from Vesuvius.

The universal influenza of 1733, began in America in the autumn of 1732. It
appeared in Europe in December. That of 1788 appeared in April, May, June and
August, in different places.

The epidemic in America in 1789, began in the middle states, and spread
southward and eastward. In 1790, it began in about the same longitude, but in
the interior country, and spread eastward and southward.

The influenza of 1782 in Europe, came from Asia. Possibly it might have
traveled from America, across the Pacific to China and Kamschatka; as it was
epidemic in America in 1781.

This is all I am able to discover of the origin and direction of this singular
epidemic. It is greatly to be desired, that we might learn precisely the dates
of its appearance, the place, the direction of its progress, in all cases, and
compare these circumstances with the extraordinary agitations of the elements,
which occur about the same time. But for this purpose my materials are
incomplete.

It is observable, however, that the influenza is closely allied to the
measles. Sometimes the symptoms are combined in the same attack, and rarely
does one disease become epidemic, except just before or after the other. This
proves their alliance: indeed I consider them as different modifications of the
same epidemic.

Catarrh is also closely connected with pestilential fevers, and sometimes this
is true of the measles. It is rare indeed that epidemic plague and yellow fever
do not begin and end in catarrhal affections -- that is, catarrh precedes in
spring, and follows in autumn. Sometimes pestilence is preceded and followed by
measles and angina.

Every epidemic constitution seems to commence with measles or influenza. To
these succeed angina, in some of its various forms, which are all the offspring
of the same parent. Then follow pestilential fevers, in the form of dysentery,
yellow fever and plague. Whenever the epidemic constitution is manifested by
measles, influenza and affections of the throat, common diseases, even in
places apparently healthy, become more malignant, and sporadic cases of
pestilential fever occur in almost every situation.

These facts are curious, and without attending to them, the philosophy of
epidemics cannot be understood.

P. S. After writing the foregoing history, I was able to ascertain further
particulars of a severe influenza in America in 1737. Warren, on the yellow
fever, mentions this catarrh in Barbados in the winter preceding the bilious
plague in that island in 1738. I have now learnt from two elderly gentlemen,
who were then arrived to adult years, that in November 1737, this epidemic
invaded all parts of the country, so suddenly and severely that neighbors could
not visit each other, and that there were scarcely people in health to perform
the ordinary domestic labors necessary to support life.

If my informants are correct as to the time, this epidemic invaded Europe and
America in the same month -- the only instance that I have found; and an
exception to the foregoing remarks. It will be observed also that this instance
coincides with an eruption of Vesuvius, and the most tremendous tempest in the
East Indies ever known. Let it be noted also, that this catarrh was the
immediate precursor of the most fatal pestilential fever in the West Indies,
and one that nearly depopulated Mexico. The catarrh commenced with or a little
before a most severe winter.

It is remarkable that the extent and violence of this distemper mark exactly
the severity of the pestilential fevers which precede and follow it. The two
epidemic catarrhs of 1733 and 37, invaded the whole globe in the same year.
They were very severe, and so were the anginas and plagues of this period; far
beyond what has occurred at any other time, during this century, until the last
period.

SECTION XIII. Of the order, connection and progression of pestilential
epidemics.
IN the early periods of the world, little notice appears to have been taken of
a connection between epidemic diseases; nor have modern writers supplied this
defect in the history of medicin. Hippocrates and Sydenham seem to have been
aware of such a connection, and the latter author has laid broad and firm
foundation for a complete system of truth, on the subject of epidemics. His
observations were confined to the city of London. Had he extended his view to
all parts of Europe, and generalized his observations, he would have found a
multitude of facts to justify his theory, and probably would have raised it
above the reach of that obloquy and ridicule, which succeeding professors of
physic, of less genius and learning, have c^^t on his occult qualities of air.

Indeed, it is surprising that medical men have not pursued the ideas suggested
by these great fathers of their science. Hippocrates led the way, unlocking the
great doctrine of a constitution or state of the atmosphere, calculated to
produce particular epidemic diseases; a doctrine which Sydenham has pursued with
wonderful success. Any man who reads the history of diseases, must see that
certain species of them appear nearly together in time and place. The order in
which they appear, may not be exactly the same at all times, and in all
countries; but they occur so nearly together, as evidently to prove their
alliance, and their dependence on the same general causes.

All popular diseases must have, for their causes, some principles as extensive
as the effects. These causes most probably exist in the elements, fire, air and
water; for we know of no other medium by which diseases can be communicated to
whole communities of people*

Bad food indeed is a fruitful source of diseases; but this must always proceed
from the qualities of the elements which enter into its composition. A defect
therefore in the nourishing powers of food, is a consequence of a defect or
superabundance in the elements, or in their combination in animal and vegetable
productions. It may be considered as a disease in the animal and vegetable
kingdom, which most probably proceeds from the same causes, as epidemic
distempers among mankind.

The principal epidemic distempers which invade mankind, are, catarrh or
influenza, measles, whooping or chin cough, the different species of angina,
small pox, bilious fevers, petechial fever, dysentery, plague. Of these,
catarrh is the most decidedly an epidemic dependent wholly on a particular
state of atmosphere. Cullen calls it "catarrh from contagion," to distinguish
it from sporadic cases of the same disease; but, after careful observation,
during the progress of it in the United States in 1789, and again in 1790, I am
confident the progress of the disease depends very little on a communication
from person to person. It has been doubted whether it is an infectious disease;
and I have some evidence to prove it not so; but certain it is, that its sudden
invasion of whole families, whole towns and even whole countries, and the
rapidity of its progress over sea and land, absolutely preclude the supposition
of its dependence on specific contagion.

The other diseases above enumerated may arise from both causes -- infection
and a peculiar state of air. Some of them depend mostly on a constitution of
air, fitted to produce them; others are seldom produced without a connection
with diseased persons. It is however proper to observe that the smallpox,
dysentery and plague are not usually, and in strictness of language, epidemic
diseases. They seldom invade whole countries. They are more properly endemic;
yet this epithet is not strictly applicable to them; being used more properly
to denote a disease which is peculiar to a particular place, whereas those
diseases may invade any place on the globe. The elephantiosis is an endemic in
Egypt and certain other places in warm climates; the smallpox, dysentery and
plague usually appear in cities, camps, or other unhealthy situations, without
affecting neighboring places, which contain not the same local causes of
disease. They might therefore, in strict propriety, be denominated temporary
endemics, in opposition to epidemics which spread to all places alike; and to
endemics, which constantly or usually appear in particular parts of the world.

This distinction however is not very material; and I shall therefore speak of
the smallpox, dysentery and plague, as epidemic diseases; meaning by this
epithet, that they, at certain times, spread generally over a particular town
or region.

The nature and kinds of contagion will be more particularly considered, in a
subsequent section; the present subject, is, the order, connection, and
progression observable in pestilential epidemics.

The influence of a certain state of air in generating epidemics was observed
by Hippocrates, who has described the prevalent diseases, in different seasons.
In his second section on epidemics, he describes what he calls "Katastasis
loimodes," a pestilential state of the air or seasons. He does not indeed in
this passage mention the plague, but he speaks of those malignant diseases
which are, in modern times, the precursors of the plague, and which are now
produced by the state of weather which he describes.

This state of the seasons he represents thus, "The year was austrinus,
remarkable for southerly breezes, rainy and without winds. The first part of
the year dry, and autumn rainy, with southerly winds, humid and cloudy. In
winter, southerly winds, moist and mild weather. About the vernal equinox,
severe cold, but the north winds, with snow, were of no long duration. Spring
was again calm, southerly weather -- great rains continued till August -- then
clear hot weather -- the cool Elesian winds blew but little and for short
periods. A rainy autumn, with north winds."

The southerly, hot, humid air here described, whenever of long continuance in
summer, proves the cause of numerous malignant diseases, in the United States,
as well as in Europe, although not certainly productive of pestilence.

Hippocrates proceeds to mention the diseases which prevailed in this state of
seasons. "Before spring, even during the cold weather, appeared many
erysipelous diseases of a malignant type. Diseases of the fauces, accompanied
with hourseness, ardent fevers, with phrenitis; ulcers in the mouth;
inflammation of eyes, carbuncles, etc. These diseases spread and became
epidemic and mortal." The author then proceeds to describe the erys^pelas and
other diseases here named. These cases differ from the plague in Athens; and
prove that the pestilence in Thasus, where he wrote, was of milder symptoms,
though probably cotemporary with that epidemic in Athens.

My particular reason for reciting these passages from Hippocrates, is, to
prove a progressiveness in a pestilential state of air, and the diseases which
it produces. The diseases here mentioned are the same, substantially, as those
which precede the plague in modern times, in the countries bordering on the
Mediterranean, and with little variation, the same with those which precede the
plague in all parts of the world. Erysipelous, or other eruptive diseases,
catarrhous affections, or ardent fevers, are the constant precursors of the
plague, wherever it appears. Hippocrates does not mention any fatal plague, in
the state of air described; and it often happens, at this day, that the
strength of the pestilential principle is arrested in its progress, and the
epidemics are limited, in their violence, to diseases of a type less malignant
than the true plague, or arising to the plague only in a few scattering cases.
But whatever may be the degree of the pestilential state of the air, or at
whatever point, it may be destined to cease, and yield to a more salubrious
constitution, the class of diseases which mark its rise and progress, are
always similar, or the same, modified only in the violence of their symptoms,
by accidental circumstances.

A careful attention to these facts, cannot fail to convince the observer of
the justness of Sydenham's doctrines, in regard to constitutions of air; and
the facts themselves demolish, at one stroke, all the common medical doctrines
of the communication of pestilence from place to place by contagion, or fomites.

Unfortunately, the histories of ancient plagues furnish but little light on
this subject; yet the barren annals of antiquity and the middle ages, are not
wholly destitute of evidence to this point. The progression of the plague in
Rome, growing more general and fatal to the second and third year, is a fact
recorded by Livy, and is related in the preceding pages.

The remark of Dion Cassius, that the ashes from Vesuvius, in the great
eruption of 79, produced, that year, only slight diseases, but the next year,
an epidemic, has already been noticed. It leaves no room to question, that the
destructive plague of the year 80, was preceded by epidemic disorders of a less
malignant type.

The middle ages furnish facts in confirmation of this doctrine. Witness the
great plague in 1112, which was preceded by erysipelous diseases in England in
1109, and great mortality in 1111. The plague of 1242, which was preceded by
great mortality in 12^0 -- the same fact is observable in the pestilence of
1252, 1368, 1379, 1390, 1517, 1527, 1575, 1636 -- and in many other instances.

This fact did not escape the notice of that accurate observer of nature, Lord
Bacon, who lived at a period when the plague frequently infested England. He
says, "The lesser infections of the smallpox, purple fever, agues, etc. in the
preceding summer, and hovering all the winter, portend a great pestilence the
following summer, for putrefaction rises not to its height at once." Works,
vol. 3, p. 59.

That state of air which produces pestilential diseases, Lord Bacon denominates
putrefaction; but whatever appellation we may give to the cause of pestilence,
the remark is demonstrably well founded, that this "rises not to its height at
once." It is progressive; producing first the "lesser infections." The plague
is rarely, if ever, an original, distinct, isolated disease; but the last or
most mortal form of a series of malignant distempers. The purple fever
mentioned by Lord Bacon is nearly allied to the petechial fever, which is the
usual precursor of pestilence in the Levant.

The universal plague of 1635, 6 and 7, was preceded by the usual diseases, and
the progress of them is distinctly traced by the learned Diemerbroeck. He
remarks, chap. 3 de peste, that "the spring of 1635, was warm and moderately
humid, to which succeeded a very hot, dry season, in which appeared many
malignant epidemics. In the first place, a severe plague broke out at Leyden,
and destroyed more than 20,000 lives. At Nimeguen, in Gueldres and other
regions, a certain pestilent fever spread with dreadful mortality. In autumn,
the severe heat still continuing with excessive drouth, many other malignant
diseases appeared, as smallpox, measles, diarrhea and dysentery of a very bad
type; but above all, the above mentioned pestilential purple fever, called in
Italy petechial, increased daily in extent and violence, until it turned into
the true plague -- "donec tandem in apertissimam pestem transiret." -- The
author goes on to remark that from November through the winter, scattering
cases of plague occurred in Nimeguen. In January 1636, it increased, and in
March spread and became epidemic -- rose to its height in April, and continued
till October. See pages 5 and 6.

This passage contains a number of important facts. First -- the seasons were
insalubrious. Secondly -- the pestilential state of air extended to many places
at the same time: In another page, the author says the pestilence spread over
almost all Germany and the low countries. Thrdly -- this state of air was of
different degrees of malignity or violence, in different places at the same
time. Thus, the plague appeared at Leyden early in 1635, but cotemporary with
this, was the appearance of the purple fever in Nimeguen and in other places;
and during the summer and autumn, this and other epidemics continued to rage
with great mortality, and at last, the strength of the pestilential principle
increasing, the fever changed its form, and appeared in the true plague.

Now, the modern way of accounting for the plague in Nimeguen, would be to
allege or suppose some infected goods to have conveyed the contagion from
Leyden, where it first appeared; and then to suppose the infection to be
carried to Leyden from the Levant.

The philosophic Diemerbroeck, who was present and observed all the
circumstances, supposes nothing. He relates plain facts just as they occurred,
and admits that the plague must have originated in the country.

By considering the malignant epidemics that prevailed at that time, as
connected and depending on the same general cause, we solve all the
difficulties attending the origin of the plague. The petechial fever, which
appeared at Nimeguen and other places, in 1635, was one of the forms in which
the general contagion of the period, exhibited its effects on the human
constitution. It was a part of the pestilence -- it could not be conveyed from
Leyden, for it appeared in most parts of the low countries and in Germany, at
the same time. The same general cause, an indisposition in the elements to
support healthy life, produced various pestilential diseases, according to
place, season, age, habit of body and constitution, until its strength and
violence arose to their height, and gradually introduced the worst form of
pestilence.

The idea of Diemerbroeck, that the purple fever "turned to the plague," must
give great offense to the followers of Mead and Cullen, the advocates for the
doctrine of the propagation of the plague solely by specific contagion. It
opposes efficaciously their whole theory, and levels it with the earth.

The fact is however indisputable. In the distressing period from 1569 to 1577,
when Europe was almost depopulated by the spotted fever, physicians observed
that this disease frequently turned into the plague, and the plague into the
spotted fever. The same fact was often noticed by writers of the 16th and 17th
centuries, in which the plague frequently overran Europe. -- These two
diseases, are therefore two distinct forms or modifications of pestilence --
probably bearing an affinity to each other, like that between the distinct and
confluent smallpox. This fact shows that the distinction made by medical
writers, between pestis and pestilentia, the plague and other pestilential
distempers, however useful in practice, is not authorized by truth and
philosophy. The ancients classed all contagious epidemics together, and
denominated them pestilence; and this distribution, in regard to their causes
and origin, was doubtless most philosophical. The distribution made by modern
physicians, seems to have arisen out of differences of symptoms, and to be best
adapted to practice. At the same time, it has probably been the occasion of the
common error of considering different species or forms of pestilence, as
diseases of generical difference, and proceeding wholly from distinct causes,
when in fact they all have one general cause in common, and the varieties of
their symptoms proceed from distinct local and temporary causes.

On this subject the learned Riverius, in his Praxeos Medicae, lib. 17. has
many judicious remarks. He observes, "That authors, who wrote on fevers,
distinguish a pestilent from a malignant fever -- by pestilent fever they
understand the true plague; by a malignant one, the fever vulgarly called
purple, or other fever, which tho epidemic and contagious, is less dangerous,
and in which more patients survive than perish -- whereas the essence of the
true plague consists in this, that it destroys more than half who are seized
with it." He however considers these fevers as differing mostly in degree of
malignity, and therefore treats of them under one head.

A pestilent fever this author considers as not proceeding solely from
intemperate heat, or putridity; but from a malignant and poisonous quality; and
whenever this quality appears in a fever, whether quotidian, hectic or putrid,
he thinks it ought to be denominated pestilent. A pestilent fever differs from
the plague as species from genus because there may be plague without fever.

This author remarks also the connection between certain epidemics. "Many
deadly diseases accompany the prevalence of pestilence -- as phrenitis,
anginas, pleurisies, peripneumonies, inflammations of the liver, dysenteries and
many others." He ascribes epidemics to the state of air, as a common cause, to
which he adds the usual local or particular causes, which modify its influence.

Prosper Alpinus informs us that these diseases prevail also in Egypt, at
certain times; but he gives no account of their order or connection. Vol. 2. p.
73.

Bellinus describes the phenomena which precede the plague, which he calls its
antecedents. After mentioning food of a bad quality, impure air from
exhalations, intemperate seasons, vapors emitted during earthquakes and the
like, he says, "Mox terraemotu Achaia universa commota est, et duae tunc
civitates, Bura et Helice, abruptis locorum devoratae."

Muratori, Genesis Hist. vol. 1. 7. Other authors refer this catastrophe to the
period of pestilence last mentioned, which some writers place in the year of
Rome 388, and others, in 384; but all agree that it was during the
approximation of a comet. This last pestilence was dreadful in the extreme,
sparing no age or sex. The year after it, the earth opened and exhibited a vast
chasm in the midst of Rome, into which M. Curtius precipitated himself for the
salvation and prosperity of the city.

Livy, b. 7. 7. P. Orosius and P. Diaconus, followed by Muratori, place the
commencement of this plague in the year of Rome 384. Orosius says that "in the
103d and 105th Olympiad, Italy was shaken a whole year, by tremendous
earthquakes. The hundred and third Olympiad, according to our common
chronology, comprehends the years of Rome from 386 to 389, inclusive. It is
probable that in one of the shocks of this series of earthquakes, the chasm was
made in Rome as already related. It will be observed that this event followed
the pestilence.

The comet that appeared, during this calamity, was probably that mentioned by
Aristotle, Meteorol. lib. 1. ca. 6, of which he was an eyewitness.

But I must not omit what authors relate concerning the peculiar character of
this plague. Orosius says, it was not such a pestilence, as usually proceeded
from irregular seasons, extreme drouth, sudden heat of the spring, unseasonable
moisture of summer and autumn, or the impure air blown from the Calabrian
groves; but severe and continued, attacking all descriptions of people, and
either destroying their lives, or leaving them in a weak and miserable
condition.

The winter when the comet appeared Aristotle relates to have been cold; but
the severity and duration of the plague cannot be accounted for on the
principle of changes or irregularities in the seasons. It was one of those
violent epidemics which never afflict mankind, without some essential
alteration in the invisible began to appear, six months before the arrival of
the infection from Syria!

In Aleppo, the plague which appeared in 1742, was preceded by an acute fever;
and after the disease abated in July, appeared diarrheas and dysentery of a
malignant type, attended in many cases with petechae, and intermittents which
often proved fatal. These diseases, in their acute forms, prevailed also with
the plague, which in this year was not severe, nor wholly the predominant
epidemic.

This continued acute fever and pleurisies, ran through the winter. In November
appeared a few cases of the plague. Where the infection had lain dormant from
July to November, the author of this account, Alexander Russell, has not
informed us.

In the spring of 1743, the plague again appeared and spread in the city, and
at the usual time in summer subsided, being again succeeded by other acute
disorders, which by bleeding and purging, were formed into tertians, double
tertians and quotidians.

Here again we have the same progression in the state of the pestilence, which
had been remarked by Hippocrates, Bacon and Sydenham. During the existence of
this pestilential constitution in Aleppo, all the ordinary diseases of the
country assumed a more malignant type; or as Sydenham remarked of the diseases
which preceded the plague of 1665, they "differed from the same diseases in
other years, by new and unusual symptoms, which in short amounted to this, that
they were all more violent." See vol. 1, p. 20.

The diseases changed their form with the seasons -- the acute fever preceding
ran into plague, and plague ran into malignant dysentery, tertians, and other
acute distempers.

Similar facts are observed in America. The plague has been preceded by acute
diseases, as anginas, remittents of a bad type, etc. and followed by
remittents, dysentery and malignant pleurisy.

The dreadful plague at Messina in 1743, which destroyed two thirds of its
inhabitants, was introduced by a malignant fever. One physician alone out of
thirty-three, pronounced it the plague; the others denied it, because the
disease was not attended with glandular swellings.

A similar fever preceded the severe plague at Venice in 1576, and the same
uncertainty at first embarrassed the physicians and magistracy.

The terrible pestilence at Naples in 1656, was announced by the usual herald
of the disease, a malignant fever. One physician alone pronounced it the
plague, and for his audacity was imprisoned by the Viceroy.

The extensive pestilence which spread over all the Levant countries and
islands, from 1759 to 1763, was every where preceded by a similar increase of
malignant diseases, and especially by the petechial fever, which appeared, at
Aleppo, in the year next previous to the plague. Yet the author of this
account, Patrick Russel, labors very gravely to trace the disease to Turks from
Egypt and their old clothes.

The uncertainty among physicians, at the commencement of a plague, with
respect to the nature of the disorder, is a strong proof of the doctrine for
which I contend. Van Helmont, Diemerbroeck and others have found it necessary
to lay down rules with a great degree of care and caution, to enable themselves
to determine, whether a malignant disease is the plague or not. Van Helmont
observes, p. 1138 that he could perceive no difference in the pulse, in plague
and continual fevers of the malignant kind -- that buboes in the groin,
paroitides, etc. are not unfrequently found in fevers free from plague; and
sometimes spots and carbuncles. But, says he, if many of these appearances do
concur, there is no difficulty in pronouncing it the plague, especially if they
appear before or early after the fever.

Diemerbroeck declares, that no one symptom determines a disease to be the
plague -- neither fever, buboes nor carbuncles are essential to that disease,
for it often passes off without either -- many of its symptoms are common to
that and other distempers -- the existence of the disease therefore is to be
determined by a view of all the circumstances, and one criterion, he remarks,
is, the prevalence of the plague in neighboring towns.

This last remark indicates that the author had observed the existence of
pestilence in various places at the same time, to be a common event.

The difficulty at first in ascertaining the existence of the plague, proceeds
wholly from the progression in the series of diseases -- the malignant fevers,
preceding gradually incr^asing in violence, and changing their form.

It has been the same in the United States. The first cases of the bilious
plague have occured early in summer, usually in July, sometimes in June. These
have not excited much alarm, for they have not usually prov^ ^fectious; and
they have theref^^e been classed among the ordinary diseases of the hot season.
This however has ever been a mistake; they were the less malignant forms of
approaching pestilence; yet five or six weeks after their appearance, when the
epidemic has showed itself in its formidable array, our citizents have hunted
out some vessel from southern climates and palmed the evil on her seamen or
cargo.

Van Swieten, Comment. vol. 16, 3. remarks, "that the plague has sometimes lain
concealed under the mask of other diseases. When the plague raged at Vienna in
1713, it frequently assumed the appearance of a pleurisy, catarrh, or quinsy,
but soon after, broke out buboes and carbuncles, most certain signs of the
plague, accompanied with the usual symptoms."

Here we observe the usual precursors and companions of the plague and the
progression of the pestilential principle.

Hippocrates has remarked the augmented violence of diseases, in particular
periods. He says, "There are times when almost all the diseases that occur, are
extremely malignant, and in general, fatal, so that coughs, phthisis, angina,
are all equally mortal. He assures us, that the truth of his observations had
been confirmed, in countries very different from each other, and in a variety
of seasons and climates." See the passage cited in Zimmerman on physic, p. 163.

We have multiplied proofs of the justness of these remarks. During the periods
which I call pestilential, the common diseases of a country, as dysentery, and
intermittents, become more obstinate and mortal; and even the pleurisy and
peripneumony, acquire unusual violence. And it may not be improper to repeat an
observation before made, that the malignant or epidemic pleurisy never appears,
excep^ during these pestilential periods. It precedes or follows, in winter,
spring or autumn, those summers alone when pestilence invades our cities. Such
was the dreadful disease in America, in 1697-8 -- in 1761 -- and which has
showed itself, in several towns, during the present pestilential constitution.

But a most satisfactory proof of the progressiveness in a pestilential state
of air, and in the corresponding malignity of diseases, is found in the bills
of mortality. Thus, before the London plague in 1625, the bill of mortality
rose from 8 or 9000, the standard of health, to 11,000 in 1623, and to 12,000
in 1624. The approach of pestilence was clearly announced, two years before it
appeared. And as the time of its appearance drew near, the extension or
malignity of the preceding fevers was greatly augmented; for in the year of the
plague, almost nineteen thousand persons died of other diseases than the
plague. As the plague usually prevails from June or July to November, and other
diseases are mostly merged in it, almost all the deaths by common diseases must
have been in the beginning of the year, from January to June or July. Now,
eighteen thousand deaths in the six months preceding the plague, or even two
thirds of the number, mark a prodigious increase of mortality -- the common
sign of approaching pestilence.

In the pestilential period in London, from 1634 to 1636, the bill of mortality
rose two years previous to the plague.

The last great plague, in 1665, was announced by unusual malignity in
diseases, four years before its appearance. In 1661, according to Sydenham,
began a series of epidemics, which greatly swelled the list of burials. There
was however some abatement in 1663; but in 1664, and the first five months of
1665, the mortality again increased with rapidity, till a dreadful pestilence
laid waste the city.

A similar increase of mortality is observable in the bills for Augsburg,
previous to the plague in 1628, and in 1635 -- in Dresden, in 1632 and 3 -- in
Philadelphia in 1793, in New York in 1795, and in New London in 1798.

It must however be observed, that the bills of mortality will not, in all
cases, exhibit the augmented number and malignancy of the diseases which
precede pestilence; for it sometimes happens that the year next preceding the
plague, is very healthy, and the malignancy in the distempers, which mark the
beginning of the pestilential state, does not appear till the winter or spring
previous to the plague. In this case, the augmented mortality falls within the
year and the same bills, as the deaths by the plague. This was the case in
Augsburg in the year 1535. In such cases, there is an interval between the
preceding epidemics and the plague; such as we have observed in the New England
States, between the influenza and the scarlet fever, and the latter disease and
the yellow fever.

Monthly bills will exhibit the progress of pestilential epidemics, with more
accuracy.

Fernelius remarks page 161, that "infection is to be perceived in the air,
when it produces fevers not pestilent, but which are at the threshhold of
pestilence," -- plainly intimating that certain malignant diseases precede the
plague. He speaks of the fact as general and well understood.

Even in the West Indies, the infectious yellow fever has its precursors. That
fever in Barbados, in 1738, was preceded by catarrh and suffocating cough in
1737 and spring of 1738. Yet authors pretend the disease to have been imported
from Martinico!

See Warren and Short, vol. 2. 164. The different modes in which pestilence
invades mankind, seem to depend on different causes. Sometimes, the principal
cause seems to be an essential alteration in the invisible properties of the
elements; in which case, the diseases of a particular constitution, tho
somewhat modified in their symptoms, are not controlled or arrested by the
seasons. On the contrary the atmosphere continues to be pestilential, and to
multiply disorders of a malignant type, through every variety of seasons and of
weather. Thus, we observe many instances of violent plagues in the most
pleasant, and to all appearance, the most salubrious seasons. Several instances
have been mentioned in the preceding history, and we have demonstration of the
fact in the United States. The present pestilential state commenced with the
measles and catarrh of 1789 and 90. -- The summers of 1794 and of 1797 were
apparently temperate and salubrious; yet in both these summers, the plague
renewed its ravages in some towns, tho with less mortality than in the sultry
and unhealthy summers of 1793-95 and 98.

On the other hand, pestilence sometimes proceeds principally from excessively
intemperate seasons, as in severe heat, after a cold winter. In this case, the
pestilence may invade a city very suddenly and without a regular augmentation
of mortality from previous diseases. But even in this case, the plague has its
precursors, which appear at leas^ a few weeks, if not two or three months
previous to its attack.

Thus the plague in Aleppo in 1742, first showed itself in the suburbs in
April; but was preceded by an acute fever in March. The bilious plague in
Philadelphia in 1793, according to Dr. Rush, was preceded by the influenza,
scarlatina and bilious remittents. The same disease in 1797 appeared, in
scattering cases, as early as June.

In New York, the epidemic of 1795 was preceded by angina trachealis with
anomalous symptoms, some cases of obstinate dysentery, at a premature stage of
summer, and by febrile complaints accompanied with bilious evacuations. At a
meeting of the medical society, early in July, these facts were mentioned, as
denoting an uncommon state of air, and the society came to a resolution, to
make particular observations on the diseases that might occur, before their
next meeting. But, in the interval, the crisis of the pestilence arrived, and
removed all doubts.

See Dr. Baily on the epidemic of 1795, p. 55, and sequel. The severe
pestilence of the year 1798 doubtless owes its violence to a series of most
intemperate weather -- most excessive heat, following a long and severely cold
winter. Yet this disease was preceded by premonitory signs, especially
catarrhal fevers. Of all the disorders to which mankind are exposed, none seem
to indicate a pestilential state of air, with so much certainty as catarrhal
affections. They almost always precede the plague -- usually accompany it, and
sometimes tread close upon its heels.

In addition to the numerous authorities already cited, in proof of the
progression of pestilence, let me mention Skenkius, who, in speaking of the
diseases of 1564 and 5, observes, that anginas, pleurisies and peripneumonies
became epidemic; abortions were frequent, pains in the joints, small pox and
measles "quos tanquam praecursores sequebatur epidemica lues, incredibili
grassationis saevitia," depopula^ing towns and country, in Turkey, Egypt,
France, England and Germany. Observations, p. 748.

Skenkius remarked that the plague followed the other epidemics, as its
precursors.

The same author takes notice of a malignant angina, in 1564, which often
proved fatal in a few hours, like the plague. I mention this, because the
learned Dr. Fothergill, and tribes of modern physicians who follow a celebrated
name, have alleged that the angina maligna is a new disease, not known in
Europe till about the year 1610, although it never was more fatal, than in England
in 1517.

In 1573 prevailed dysentery, measles, and purple fever, which in 1574, says
Skenkius, changed into the plague. His words are remarkable. "Dudum sane
praesagiebat animus mihi, malignum hoc febrium genus, quod toto biennio Europae
partem non minimam peragravit, velut sparsis quibusdam praeludiis, in pestem
apertissimam transiturum. Neque me adeo mea fefellit opinio." Observe. p. 761.
This author foresaw the plague, by means of its precursors.

"Eodem modo variolae, morbilli, dysenteriae grossantes, saepissime sunt
praecursores internuncii pestis." Epidemic smallpox, measles and dysentery,
are very often the forerunners of the plague.

Hostices, p. 253. It is a common remark that the reigning epidemic subdues all
other diseases, or compels them to assume its character. This remark, as a
general one, is just; and is of no small weight, in proving the connection
between certain species of epidemics. In the spring of 1795, the measles
prevailed in New York, but of a mild type. In August, this disease disappeared,
being completely merged in the bilious fever that spread from August to
November. No sooner had the fever subsided, than the measles re-appeared, and
was of a less favorable type. This is a contagious disease, and yet how
impotent was its contagion, in the instance related, under the all-controlling
influence of the season and the elements. -- It disappeared in summer in
defiance of the powers of specific contagion, and was reproduced in autumn,
without its assistance.

This fact demonstrates that a general cause operated in the production of that
disease; which general cause, in summer, was controlled, by the heat of the
season and local causes in that city; these temporary and local causes operated
during a particular time, and gave a different complexion to diseases; when
they gave way, at the approach of winter, the general cause again assumed its
empire and reproduced the measles, which is a disease little affected by local
causes.

But while local causes predominated, in producing bilious plague, the general
cause was not altogether inefficient; no bilious pestilence ever becoming
epidemic and infectious, but under the influence of a pestilential constitution.

A fact related in Fairfield's diary, relative to the smallpox in Boston in
1702, is very much in point.

This disease appeared in June and gave much alarm; but proved to be of a mild
type, and none died of it for several weeks. It continued to be favorable, till
September, when it assumed a more formidable aspect; being attended with what
the writer calls a scarlet fever. The season was excessively dry. In December,
the scarlet fever abated, but the smallpox continued to be very mortal, till
the following spring. These facts are related by an unlettered, observing man;
but they are evidence of a progressiveness in the disease. The efflorescence
that accompanied the disease from September to December was only a particular,
malignant symptom or modification of the smallpox, produced by season or other
temporary cause.

The measles often exhibits a similar progression. This circumstance explains
the difficulties mentioned by medical writers. Dr. Rush mentions the
circumstance of persons in 1789, who had a fever, cough and all the symptoms of
measles, except a general eruption. Some had a trifling efflorescence about the
neck and breast. The same happened in 1773 and 1783. Vol. 2. 238. The fact is
also mentioned in Edinburgh Medical Essays, vol. 5. Persons thus affected have
the measles, months or years afterward. This lighter species of the measles is
produced by the same general cause which produces the disease in full force;
but the constitution, at that time, resists the further operation of the cause.
At a future time the cause will produce the disease complete.

Under the history of the diseases of 1792 and 3, I have related the progress
of the late scarlatina in this country. There cannot be stronger evidence of
the progression of an epidemic influence in the atmosphere than the history of
that distemper has furnished. The violent stage of that disease, was preceded
four, five, and in some places eight months, by a milder species of the
disorder; and this mild form was, in some places, an epidemic. These facts
entirely overwhelm all the pretended influence of infection, in originating the
disease. They prove incontestibly that a state of air suited to the production
of that disease, was not the effect of any sudden, visible change in the
seasons; for the mild form of the scarlatina appeared indifferently, in any
season of the year; as at New York in August, at Hartford in May and at
New Haven in November; but that it was a progressive change, gradually inducing
debility in the human body, or whatever else may be its predisposition to a
particular disease.

Whether the scarlatina appeared, in any part of the country, without being
announced by this slight form of the disease, is a question that cannot be
solved, without particular information from every town. And very possibly the
fact itself may have passed, in some places, unobserved. But the
progressiveness of the distemper was distinctly marked in New York, in
Fairfield, in New Haven, in Bethlem and in Hartford.

The same phenomenon was observed in the same disease, in 1786, in London. The
first case appeared in March, was of a mild kind and excited no great
apprehension. No other case occurred to the knowledge of the physician, except
in the same family, till May, when another case appeared, but of a light kind.
In June, the disease became epidemic and malignant. Here we observe the
progress of the pestilential principle, in England, like that which has been
observed in America.

See Memoirs of the Medical Society, London, vol. 1. 388. A remarkable fact
mentioned by the great Mr. Boil, in the fifth volume of his works, p. 724,
serves to show the regular progression of that state of air which produces the
plague. In 1665, three months before the plague broke out in London, a man sent
for a physician, complaining of ^ swelling in his groin, from which
circumstance he predicted the plague which was to follow, and said he had
experienced the same swelling in the former plagues, which he considered as the
certain forerunner of the disease. Boil took this account from the physician
himself.

This was no whim, for it is perfectly philosophical. It is a common fact,
that, during the plague, in a city, persons in health experience severe pains
in the glands, as in the groin and under the arms, those sensible parts which
are peculiarly affected by the disease. Sorbait mentions that he felt such
pains, during the plague in Vienna in 1679, and others did the same, but
without any tumor. Dr. Gothwald experienced similar pains in the plague at
Dantzick in 1709.

See Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 6. 12. Boil, vol. 6. 429, relates that one Beale
knew a woman who could certainly tell when the plague was in the neighboring
country, by a pain in the wounds of three sores she had, when affected by the
plague in her youth. The relation is altogether credible; for we know that the
state of air producing the disease, occasions pains in the glands of persons in
health; much more therefore would the same parts, after being rendered more
sensible by plague sores, be affected with pain, during a similar state of air.
The facts demonstrate that the plague is produced by a peculiar state of air,
which may be perceived before the disease appears; and much more, during its
prevalance, by persons in health.

Another fact demonstrative of the same doctrine of a progression in the
pestilential principle, is, the unusual number of abortions, which precede the
invasion of a severe plague. This fact was observed by Diemerbroeck, previous
to the plague in Nimueguen, in 1636, and is numbered by him among the presages
of the disease. De peste page 11. Other authors have recorded the same fact,
among whom Diemerbroeck cites Alexander Benedictus, Forestus and Seunertus.

The cause assigned for this phenomenon, is, "the debility of the heart and
other viscera, which renders the tender body of the foetus incapable of
resisting the malignity of the pestilential poison, and which exposes the woman
in a pregnant state, to continual irritation."

In confirmation of this principle, we may cite the facts, so frequently
mentioned by writers on this subject, that the plague rarely or never spares
pregnant women. This was remarked by Livy and Dionysius in Rome -- by Procopius
and Evagrius, in the plagues of 543 and 590, and by subsequent writers.

The fact authorizes the supposition, that a pestilential state of air induces
extreme excitement or irritability, and consequently indirect debility,
especially in the nervous and vascular systems. The effect of this general
cause must of course be first visible in persons most susceptible of excitement
-- among whom are pregnant women, which is obvious from the facility with which
they receive impressions from the sight of unnatural objects. The appearance of
the effect of the pestilential state of the atmosphere, on such persons,
previous to its fatal effects on other persons, leaves no room to question its
gradual increase in strength.

Of the progressiveness of pestilential epidemics therefore we can have no
doubt, nor of their connection through a common cause. The order i^ which they
show themselves is not exactly the same; being varied by a multitude of
subordinate causes, as seasons, weather, noxious exhalations, and sometimes
perhaps by infection.

The accounts of diseases in the two or three last centuries are recorded with
so little regard to just arrangement, that it is no^ easy to collect from them
the exact order in time, in which the epidemics of any particular period have
appeared. Sydenham however has left an admirable sample of the hi^^ory of
epidemics in London from 1661 to 1680 -- a samp^e that throws immense light on
the principles here maintained -- a sample which ought to be well studied, and
which it is inexcuseable in medical writers not to imitate. Let any man observe
the regularity with which certain eruptive diseases, as the measles and
smallpox, appeared and subsided, according to the seasons, during the
constitution of air fitted to produce them, until both yielded to a different
constitution, and then say, whether he can question Sydenham's principles, or
the existence of a general contagion, operating in the production of a
particular class of diseases. Under a philosophical view of such facts, into
what trifles will dwindle all the formidable vulgar doctrines about infection!

It must however be remarked, that the smallpox, in modern times, will not
exhibit similar effects as formerly; since the art of inoculation has nearly
banished the disease as an epidemic, from our cities, where alone it used to
prevail to any considerable extent.

Let us then attend to the order of the epidemics which have marked the latest
periods of pestilence in America; many of which are within the memory of the
present generation.

A. D. 1733 influenza. A. D. 1734 unknown. A. D. 1735 angina maligna. A. D.
1736 angina maligna. A. D. 1737 severe influenza. A. D. 1738 pestilence in
Barbados, Charleston and Mexico, measles New England. A. D. 1739 pestilence in
Barbados, Charleston and Mexico, measles New England. A. D. 1740 measles
America. A. D. 1741 angina, pestilence Philadelphia and Virginia. A. D. 1742
anginas. A. D. 1743 pestilence in New York. A. D. 1745 dysentery, pestilence
New York and Charleston. A. D. 1746 pestilence at Albany and among the
Mohegans. A. D. 1747 influenza. A. D. 1748 measles, dysentery and angina. A. D.
1749 measles, dysentery and angina. A. D. 1750 measles, dysentery and angina.
A. D. 1751 measles, dysentery and angina. A. D. 1752 measles, dysentery and
angina. A. D. 1753 measles, dysentery and angina. A. D. 1754 angina. A. D. 1755
angina. A. D. 1756 dysentery in some places. A. D. 1757 influenza. A. D. 1758
measles. A. D. 1759 measles, dysentery, fevers. A. D. 1760 unknown, till
autumn, then A. D. 1761 influenza and inflammatory fevers very fatal. A. D.
1762 pestilence in Philadelphia. A. D. 1763 pestilence among the Indians on
Nantucket. A. D. 1764 A. D. 1765 dysentery. A. D. 1766 dysentery. A. D. 1767
unknown. A. D. 1768 unknown. A. D. 1769 measles, angina. A. D. 1770 angina,
fevers. A. D. 1771 catarrh, angina. A. D. 1772 influenza and measles, angina.
A. D. 1773 angina, dysentery. A. D. 1774 angina, dysentery. A. D. 1775 angina
and dysentery very fatal. A. D. 1776 angina and dysentery very fatal. A. D.
1777 angina and dysentery very fatal. A. D. 1778 fevers, but no epidemic. A. D.
1779 health. A. D. 1780 health. A. D. 1781 influenza. A. D. 1782 influenza
Europe. A. D. 1783 measles, angina. A. D. 1784 anginas and bilious fevers. A.
D. 1785 anginas and bilious fevers. A. D. 1786 anginas and bilious fevers. A.
D. 1787 anginas and bilious fevers. A. D. 1788 measles began in autumn. A. D.
1789 measles, influenza. A. D. 1790 measles, influenza. A. D. 1791 pestilence
began in New York, but not severe. A. D. 1792 angina began in New York. A. D.
1793 angina, plague, dysentery. A. D. 1794 angina, plague, dysentery. A. D.
1795 angina, plague, dysentery, measles. A. D. 1796 angina, plague, dysentery,
measles. A. D. 1797 plague, dysentery. A. D. 1798 plague, dysentery, typhus
mitior. A. D. 1799 plague.
Such has been the general course of epidemic diseases in America, as far as I
can obtain information. Further enquiries may render the account more accurate,
and more nearly perfect.

It will be observed that the order is not quite uniform; nor is this to be
expected, considering the various causes which concur in the production, and
diversification of diseases. In general, measles and catarrh precede anginas,
dysentery and pestilential fevers. And it is remarkable that these diseases
belong to the class of inflammatory diathesis: So does the mild smallpox,
which, before the practice of inoculation, was almost regularly a precursor of
the plague in the cities of Europe.

In general then epidemic diseases first attack the brain and the throat,
before they seize the whole nervous system and the abdominal viscera. It is
observable also, that winter, spring and autumn, produce mostly diseases of the
stenic diathesis, as measles, catarrh, and inflammatory fevers; and summer,
diseases of astenic diathesis, as typhus fevers, dysentery of a malignant kind,
and plague. Indeed the plague seems to begin and end in catarrh -- that is, it
begins in catarrh in winter and spring, takes the form of plague, during the
hot season, and re-assumes the catarrhal and inflammatory form in the
succeeding winter. The measles and influenza, however, prevail at any season.

When I arrange epidemics under particular years, I speak of those diseases
which extend over a whole country, or occur in many places. If we look into
large cities, we shall find some of these diseases, almost every year. But my
observations relate only to those diseases when they become general, or occur
in various parts of a country in the same year.

When I place angina, plague and dysentery against a particular year, it is not
intended that these diseases were all epidemic in the same place. Thus, while
in 1793 the plague was in Philadelphia, the scarlatina began to prevail in
New York and the western part of Connecticut. For it must not be overlooked,
that although measles and influenza appear nearly at the same time in all parts
of the United States, yet the pestilential fevers that follow them first show
themselves in the larger cities in the southern latitudes. Thus the measles and
influenza were universal in 1789 and 90, at least this was the case with the
influenza; but the bilious plague broke out in New York, Philadelphia and
Charleston, before it did in Boston and Newburyport. The same is observable in
the other hemisphere. The influenza spreads over Asia, Europe and Africa, in a
few weeks, but the following pestilence first appears in Egypt or the Levant,
or in Turkey, then in the northern parts of Europe. To these remarks there are
few exceptions.

It is also observable, that the pestilence in cities takes the form of
petechial fever and plague; but in country towns, more generally terminates in
dysentery.

It is a popular opinion that measles and smallpox never originate in the
human constitution, without contagion. The palpable absurdity of such an
opinion has not prevented its propagation and belief, among even well-informed
men. So far is this opinion from truth, that the first cases of these diseases
in every epidemic period, are always generated in the human body, without
contagion. When the condition of the elements is fitted to produce these
diseases, they appear in all parts of a country, without contagion, they spread
rapidly, and decline when the general causes cease to operate. During this
period, contagion is efficacious in propagating them, and no longer. When the
condition of the elements is not fitted to produce them, if sporadic cases
appear in particular habits of body, they will not always spread the diseases.
This is here meant of the natural contagion of the diseases from the breath and
effluvia, which is not always efficacious in spreading them. The variolous
matter of smallpox is excepted; for, if good, this will generally communicate
the disease at any time.
Sydenham long ago taught this truth, in describing the changes in the
epidemics of 1670 -- 1672. Measles and smallpox came and went with the seasons
and condition of the air.

The truth is, that certain conditions of the elements tend to produce eruptive
diseases, and before the practice of inoculation, the small pox was almost
regularly one of that series of epidemics which I class together, as of one
family, and the precursors of plague. It is nearly allied to the measles, and
appears usually about the same time. I am convinced that catarrh, measles, mild
smallpox and whooping cough, are but varied forms of disease, occasioned by
modifications of the same elemental causes.

Certain it is, they are all predominant about the same time, and as a general
remark, they precede the invasion of diseases which bear the character of
typhus.

I have never conversed with a physician who could not name instances of
smallpox, originating without any known contagion, and generally medical
gentlemen admit the disease to be generated in the constitution. This principle
is unquestionably just, and ought to be known, and received as truth; for the
belief that contagion is necessary to the existence of the disease, has
produced most mischievous consequences. An instance happened in Sharon a few
years ago, in which a woman was seized with the smallpox; but as she had not
been exposed to contagion, her disease was mistaken, till just before her
death; and twenty or thirty persons were supposed to have taken the disease
before the true nature of it was understood.

In the winter of 1797-8, occurred in Hartford two sporadic cases of measles,
which could not possibly be traced to contagion. At another time, a family was
infected by means of a stranger; but in neither of these cases was the disease
propagated to others, who were exposed to the breath of the patients. See Dr.
Cogswell's letter, Med. Repos. vol. 2. 301. Innumerable similar instances may
be mentioned.

In the same manner the various species of angina and the plague occur in
sporadic cases under the operation of powerful local and constitutional causes,
which, if not favored by the condition of the elements, will not spread and
become epidemic.

SECTION XIV. Of the extent of a pestilential state of air.
FROM a view of the facts related in the preceding history, it appears that
epidemics, agreeable to the definition already given, are of two kinds --
first, those which are limited to a particular town, city or country; secondly,
those which pervade whole quarters of the earth, or the whole globe. The first
may be called local, the last, general or universal epidemics.

The local epidemics, most usual, are dysentery, remitting and intermitting
fevers, and pestilence. The epidemic, most frequently universal, is the catarrh
or influenza. Angina is often a general epidemic, sometimes local. Pestilential
fevers, in certain periods become general over vast tracts of the earth. The
same is observable of the measles.

The epidemic catarrh is the disorder which most decisively proves a rapid and
universal change in the essential properties of the atmosphere. This disease
sometimes invades the human race so suddenly, that half the inhabitants of a
town or city are seized in a night. I do not find the same fact related of any
other disease, except the sweating plague in 1529, whose progress through
Europe was as rapid nearly as that of the catarrh, and utterly precludes the
supposition that infection from fomes, had any share in its propagation.

Catarrh however is not always a universal epidemic. In many instances, it is
confined to one hemisphere, as in 1647, 1655, to America; and in 1650, 1775, to
Europe.

In other instances, this disease spreads over the whole world, in a short
period, but is progressive, appearing in the two hemispheres, in two different
years. Thus in 1761, it was epidemic in America; in 1762 in Europe. -- In 1781
in America; in 1782 in Europe; in School in America; in 1699 in Europe. In two or
three instances, I find it in both hemispheres in the same year.

The compilers of the Encyclopedia say that catarrh from contagion has "seldom
appeared in any one country in Europe, without appearing successively in almost
every different part of it; and in some instances, it has been also transferred
to America, and has been spread there, so far as we have had opportunities of
being informed."

See article, Medicine, No. 253, from Cullen. No source of errors, in the
science of medicin, is more fruitful than the doctrine of contagion. It would
seem from the passage recited, that the writer considered catarrh as propagated
by fomites from diseased persons; and conveyed across the ocean by the sick, or
in goods or clothing. The words will admit of no other interpretation; and yet
it is hardly credible that, in this period of science and observation, an
obvious and common phenomenon should be so egregiously misunderstood.

The catarrh, whenever it has appeared as a general epidemic, instead of being
transferred to America, has usually appeared in America before it has in Europe
or at the same time; and so far is contagion from being the necessary cause of
its origin and propagation, that the disease invades seamen on the ocean in the
same hemisphere, when a hundred leagues from land, at the same time that it
invades people on shore. Of this I have certain evidence from the testimony of
American Captains of vessels, who have been on their passage from the continent
to the West India Islands, during the prevalence of this disease.

If further evidence is required, we have the fact, that the epidemic catarrh
in America rages with as much violence in the islands as on the continent, and
at the same time. And in the preceding history, it is stated on the authority
of a medical publication in Scotland, that the universal catarrh of 1733,
appeared in the Isle of Bourbon, in the Indian Ocean, about the time it did in
Europe.

From these facts, it is evident that the disease is occasioned by an
alteration in the atmosphere. In many instances it is limited to one
hemisphere; but it is observable, that whenever it appears on the American
continent, it appears also in the islands of the West Indies. Its range is
through a certain section of the globe, nearly in the same longitude, north and
south, on one of the great divisions of the earth, and in the vicinity of the
continent. The epidemic catarrh of America extends certainly from the northern
limits of the United States to the island of Barbados. Whether it appears at
the same time in South-America, I cannot find a hint in any author to guide my
opinion, except in regard to the last epidemic, which pervaded that part of the
continent.

The catarrh of 1733 extended over the globe, but it appeared first in America.
Possibly there may have been other instances, since the settlement of America,
but I have little information on this point, in regard to this country. It is
not probable, for instance, that the severe catarrh of 1708-9, was confined to
Europe, but it is useless to indulge conjecture.

The remote cause usually assigned for catarrh is a sudden change of weather,
from heat to cold or from cold to heat -- the proximate cause, an increased
afflux of fluids to the mucous membrane of the nose, fances and bronchiae, with
some degree of inflammation. Some medical writers seem to think the remote
cause to be the application of cold only to the human body, checking the
perspiration by the skin, and turning the fluids upon the mucous membrane. See
Cullen on this point.

The proximate causes of the disease are the province of medical men; but to
the influence of the remote cause above stated, physicians will pardon me for
stating a few objections.

1. The application of cold to the body cannot be the sole cause of catarrh,
because it appears, and usually with most severity, in the spring, on the
abstraction of cold. It is observable also, that in many instances its
principal violence and mortality, are, after the return of warm weather -- the
disease augmenting in violence with the increase of heat. Thus the catarrh of
1709 appeared in Italy, says Lancisius, in January in severe cold weather, but
increased in violence, as the spring advanced and the weather moderated.

The same fact took place in the catarrh of 1762 at Edinburgh, where it began
in April and increased in violence till June.

In the same manner, the catarrh in this country in 1790, appearing in March
and April, on the moderation of cold, was far more severe than that of the
preceding autumn, when the weather was changing from heat to cold. At least
this was the fact in many of the northern states.

2. It is not always true, that the epidemic catarrh appears in spring or
autumn, or after great changes of weather. The noted catarrh of 1580 began to
appear in Sicily in the month of June; at Rome in July; at Venice and
Constantinople in August -- in the midst of summer. It is against all
probability, that this disease can be ascribed to the application of cold. On
the other hand, its progress was evidently steady, and uninterrupted by either
heat or cold -- A careful attention to the history of this epidemic at other
times, will doubtless furnish other similar facts.

The catarrh of 1688 seized Germany in summer; that of 1557 appeared in Spain
in August; that in America in 1655 began about the close of June.

3. The appearance of catarrh in tropical climates, as in the West Indies, at
the same time it appears in northern latitudes, is a strong argument against
ascribing it to the application of cold. In the West Indies there is no change
of any great consequence, in the temperature of the weather; nothing like cold
is known in those regions. Yet catarrh, if credible accounts are to be admitted
as evidence, is as fatal at times within the tropics, as in any other climate.

It is true, that in autumn winds called norths, northerly breezes, are
experienced in the islands, and these produce colds and coughs similar to what
we all experience, in temperate latitudes, on the change of weather in spring
and autumn. But these are very different, at least in degree, from a general
epidemic influenza, which seizes mankind in all climates, with pain in the side
and bones, accompanied often with fever. The universality of this disease,
bursting suddenly upon all climates, and raging with equal violence in all
seasons, and in defiance of heat or cold, leave us no room to question its
dependence on some other cause than changes of weather or application of cold.

4. If the application of cold was the sole cause of this epidemic, it would
appear at the same time in all places which experience a sudden change from
heat to cold at the same time. And further, a necessary consequence would be,
it must be epidemic on every such change. Neither of these cases occurs. On the
other hand, the disease begins indifferently in any climate and in any season
of the year, and spreads speedily over whole countries, without the least
obstruction from heat or cold: And as far as I can observe from the accounts of
it before me, it is as mortal when it invades people in hot climates, as in
cold or temperate regions and seasons. It is also progressive in point of
place; but it moves with a celerity unknown to all other diseases. Sometimes it
passes over Europe in six weeks. In America, its duration in 1789 and in 1790,
was nearly the same. Different epidemics, however, differ in the rapidity of
their movements: That of 1580 was about six months in traversing Europe.

Different epidemics also differ in point of generality and violence. Sometimes
the catarrh is a light complaint; at other times it is attended with fever, and
occasions no inconsiderable mortality. The catarrh in the spring of 1790, was
much more severe than that of the autumn preceding. In 1789, it resembled a
severe and universal cold -- in 1790, it bordered more on the pleurisy and
peripneumony. To these remarks there may have been particular exceptions.

5. It appears to me also, that, with deference to the faculty, a strong
argument against deriving the disease from sudden changes of weather only, may
be drawn from a difference in the symptoms of an epidemic influenza and of
sporadic cases of the disease, obviously contracted by cold. Let me ask
practitioners, whether in the epidemic catarrh, there do not appear symptoms
altogether unknown in sporadic cases? But as this is a point that regards
practice, it is not proper for me to discuss it.

The celebrated Boil very justly observes that sudden epidemic colds, are not
to be accounted for by changes of weather. Vol. 5, p. 49.

I do not, however, deny the influence of heat and cold in the epidemic
catarrh. In some violent epidemics of this sort, heat and cold seem to have
little influence -- the disease appearing to rage, independent of all the
sensible qualities of the air. Yet in ordinary cases, the temperature of the
air seems to modify, but not to generate or destroy the epidemic.

Brown, in his elements of medicin, arranges catarrh among diseases of the
stenic diathesis. Whether he meant to extend his observation to sporadic cases
from cold only, or to the influenza also, I do not know; but it may not be
improper in me to mention, that in many epidemics of this sort, bleeding has
proved injurious or fatal. The most generally successful remedies have been the
diaphoretic, although there have been a few exceptions, in which bleeding was
salutary. Indeed no disease seems to admit of a greater diversity of symptoms.

Next to the catarrh, in the list of general epidemics, we may perhaps arrange
the measles, which, though sometimes a local disease, often appears over whole
countries, and sometimes in both hemispheres at the same time.

This disease is attended with specific contagion, which aids its communication
from place to place; but it derives its origin from a particular state of the
atmosphere. Hence it appears in one season and disappears in another, yielding
to some other disease, as Sydenham remarked in the year 1672, and which we
observed in New York in 1795. It is nearly allied to the catarrh as is evident
from the catarrhous symptoms that attend it. Brown classes the measles in the
number of stenic diseases.

It will be found on examining the history of diseases, that the measles
usually precedes or follows an epidemic influenza. The two diseases therefore
manifest a close alliance in the remote causes.

My accounts of epidemics are too imperfect to authorize the assertion, that
these diseases always appear nearly together; but this has been the fact, with
respect to a number of the last epidemic periods in America. The order however
is varied. Sometimes also a slight degree of one or both of these diseases is
experienced in particular places, when neither of them is epidemic. But when
they become violent and general, they are nearly cotemporaneous, spreading
successively over a large portion of the earth, and sometimes over both
hemispheres.

In 1772 the catarrh and measles raged in the same year, from Boston to
Charleston. To these succeeded anginas and dysentery, for a series of years. In
1781 and 2 catarrh pervaded the globe. In 1783 began measles in May, and angina
in August. In 1789 measles preceded the influenza. In 1757 influenza preceded
the measles.

An epidemic which used formerly to make a figure in medical history, as one
nearly cotemporary with measles, was the smallpox. The disease was observed by
Sydenham, to rage alternately with measles in different seasons of the year.
Like the measles, it is an eruptive disease, of the stenic species specifically
contagious, and evidently depending on the same general cause, though on
different temporary or local causes. Inoculation has nearly banished this from
the list of epidemics. It is a common error that this disease never originates
without contagion. Before the art of inoculation, it was an epidemic in large
cities, appearing and disappearing with as much regularity and certainty as the
measles. I can name many instances of its originating in this country without
contagion or infection, and I have the authority of many old practitioners of
medicin for the fact. It most usually appears in those years which manifest a
disposition to produce other eruptive diseases.


But a more formidable epidemic, and perhaps the most formidable to which the
human race is exposed, is the angina, using this word to denote all the
different kinds of affections of the throat. I call it the most formidable,
because hitherto no means have been discovered of arresting its progress. Its
horrors and fatality are not mitigated by inoculation, like those of the
smallpox, nor are its usual ravages limited to populous towns, like those of
the plague. Under all aspects, therefore, I consider it as a far more dreadful
disease than either, because the others may be mitigated or avoided.

Affections of the throat, either in the form of scarlatina anginosa, angina
maligna, cynanche trachealis, etc. are among the epidemics which belong to
almost every pestilential period. In the order of appearance they have not one
uniform place; but in America, anginas have usually succeeded catarrh, the
first or second year, and continued to the fourth or fifth. In the three last
epidemic periods, this order has been very uniform. I speak of epidemic angina
which spreads over the whole country; for in particular places we hear of it
almost every year.

These diseases in our large cities have been succeeded by the bilious plague,
and in the country, by violent remittents, typhus fevers and dysentery.

Sometimes angina prevails without being followed by the plague: That is, the
constitution of air terminates at that point of its pestilential progress. Such
seems to have been the fact with the angina of 1755. And in all cases in which
it is of a mild kind, or not universal, strong hopes may be entertained, that
no plague will follow it. The epidemic anginas from 1783 to 1786, were of this
kind.

With respect to the universality of the cause of these epidemics, it is to be
observed, that it is of two kinds -- sometimes it extends to both hemispheres,
at other times it seems to be limited to one. Those diseases, however, which
are least influenced by heat or cold, or which depend most on some invisible
state of the atmosphere, appear most frequently in both hemispheres, at the
same time. This fact, with respect to the catarrh, has been particularly
noticed.

The same fact is observable very often with respect to the measles, and
especially with regard to anginas. These affections of the throat, when
violent, are nearly cotemporary in Europe and America. Witness the periods from
1751 to 1756 -- from 1773 to 1776 -- 1783 to 1786 -- from 1793 to 1796, and in
1742.

This cotemporaneousness of certain epidemic diseases, in both hemispheres, is
an important fact which has hitherto been little noticed, but which opens a new
field for philosophical investigation. It demonstrates that such diseases are
occasioned solely by a constitution of air, without the influence of contagion,
although when the diseases are formed, they are contagious.

But we have further facts of a similar nature. It is observable that the
pestilential principle often extends from Egypt, Syria and Turkey, over all
Europe and to America. But the same diseases, that is, the same forms of the
pestilence, do not always appear in Egypt or Turkey, and in France, England and
America, in the same year. It is a general fact, that the worst form of
pestilence, the inguinal plague, appears first in Cairo, Smyrna or
Constantinople; and from this circumstance, the advocates for the propagation
of that disease by specific contagion, have drawn their most powerful arguments
in support of their theory. But this argument is founded on a view of the
subject, most miserably narrow and obscure.

In every pestilential period, there is a series of epidemic diseases. The
order in which they appear depends on local or temporary circumstances. Thus in
Grand Cairo or Constantinople, the climate or the strong local causes, speedily
bring the pestilential principle to its crisis, in the production of the
plague. For this reason, that disease appears in those cities, some time before
it does in northern latitudes or in more healthy cities.

But at the very time the plague appears in Constantinople or Cairo, some
lighter epidemic disease, belonging to the series, appears in other parts of
the world, indicating the approach of pestilence. Thus, in 1580 and 81, Cairo
was desolated by a hideous plague; but, at the same time, a severe epidemic
catarrh burst forth on all Europe, the certain forerunner of pestilential
fevers, and which, in that instance, was succeeded by plague in 1582 and 3, as
far north as England. Let facts within late periods, decide this question.

The plague appeared in the Turkish dominions in 1718, but in 1719 became more
general. In 1718 the bills of mortality were considerably swelled in Amsterdam,
London and Vienna, but in 1719 they rose, in the two former cities,
considerably higher -- the pestilential state of air pervading the most of
Europe. I have no account of the state of diseases in Marseilles, in 1718; but
in 1719 appeared a pestilential fever, which increased the mortality, although the
pestilential principle did not rise to its height till the subsequent year.

In this period, cotemporary with the plague in the Levant, was a universal
increase of mortality in Europe, and the same state of air was experienced in
America, although, in very few parts of Europe, did the pestilential principle
arise to the degree of plague.

In 1726 we again hear of the plague in Egypt, and for two or three years
succeeding, the bills of mortality were swelled in Europe and America. Of the
epidemics that prevailed in America, I regret my want of information. -- I only
know that measles and malignant pleurisy prevailed in this country.

In 1735 and 6 raged the most desolating sore throat in America, and at the
same time, the most fatal plague in Egypt, that has appeared in this century.
This pestilence, like that in the time of Thucydides, took its rise in the
interior parts of Egypt or Ethiopia. And it must not be overlooked that the
violence of the pestilence in Egypt corresponded with that of the sore throat
in America -- a fact which, as far as I can discover, is generally true, that
the more fatal the epidemics that prevail over one quarter of the globe, the
more violent are the same or other pestilential diseases, in the other
hemisphere. It makes little difference, that in one country rages the glandular
plague, and in another the petechial fever or putrid sore throat -- These are
only different forms of pestilence, the effects of one common cause, modified
by local causes. The great point is, that such epidemics are cotemporary in
countries the most remote. Slight epidemics may appear alone, but never the
more severe and deadly forms of pestilence; excepting perhaps dysentery, or
some other complaints that depend mostly on the seasons.

The years 1740-41 and 42 were also pestilential. At what time the plague of
this period first appeared in the east, I am not informed. But it raged in
Syria from 1742 to 1744, and it rarely happens, that it is not a year or two
earlier in Egypt or Constantinople, than in Syria. Cotemporary with the plague
of this period was great mortality in London and Amsterdam from the petechial
fever, which fell but little short of the plague. See the bills.

At the same time, raged in America a series of epidemics, particularly
measles, anginas and the bilious plague; the latter appearing in Philadelphia
and Virginia in 1741, and in N. York in 1743, the same year with the dreadful
pestilence in Messina.

The year 1755, the year of a great plague in Constantinople, was distinguished
for catarrh in Europe, and sore throat both in Europe and America.

In 1758 commenced the pestilential period, which was universal and felt in
both hemispheres, in some one or all of the years from 1758 to 1763. Here, it
is observable, our information is more correct. In 1758, cotemporary with the
beginning of this pestilence, was an epidemic catarrh in Europe. Then followed
other epidemics of a more malignant type. During this pestilential period
appeared in America, the catarrh and measles, and the plague in Philadelphia in
1762; but especially the fatal epidemic pleurisy in 1761.

The next period commenced in 1769 or 1770, in which the plague spread over the
east. This period was begun by measles and anginas, if my information is
correct, in 1769 -- catarrh was epidemic in 1771 and 2, and in the latter year
measles of a bad type. Then followed angina, and the epidemics all closed in
dysenteries. The plague in the Levant was cotemporary with the commencement of
this period.

I am not informed of the precise time when the plague of the next period
commenced in the Levant, but it was raging in 1783 and 4, during the prevalence
of measles and angina in America.

In the last period, the plague in Egypt was very violent, about the time the
mortality commenced in America. Of the precise time when it began in Egypt I am
not informed; but it prevailed in 1791, the year it appeared in New York and
Grenada, and was most destructive the following year, 1792, the year when the
scarlatina first appeared in the northern parts of America.

I have no further accounts of the plague in Egypt, but the public prints have
informed us, the disease prevailed in Constantinople in 1797, and was more
general in the Turkish dominions in 1798, the most fatal year in America.

The reader will be pleased to remark, that when I speak of the plague in Grand
Cairo or Constantinople, I refer only to violent and destructive epidemics. The
plague, in a light form, and in a few cases, occurs almost annually in those
great cities, where the common causes and ordinary seasons are adequate to its
production in particular constitutions. But, let me observe, that no extensive
and desolating plague ever ravages either of those cities, except under the
influence of general contagion, or an epidemic state of air, which is
experienced, nearly at the same time, in Europe and America.

These facts enable us to solve the whole difficulty which has puzzled
physicians, in regard to the different kinds of yellow fever, which appear, at
different periods, in the West Indies. The simple truth, is, that in ordinary
seasons, when no pestilential constitution of air exists, the fever of the
West Indies, is not contagious. It attacks strangers with violence and destroys
life, but is not communicable per se. Hence the authors who have written on the
subject are correct, in asserting this ordinary fever, not to be contagious.

But after catarrh has pervaded the hemisphere, and during the increase of
mortality in the Levant, in Europe and on the American continent; that is,
during a pestilential state of air, the fever of the West Indies assumes double
malignity, and becomes contagious. In years of health, the disease rarely
attacks natives of the islands; but in unhealthy periods, not only native
whites, but even blacks are sometimes affected with the disease. Among these
however it is less destructive.

Thus we solve the problem which has embarrassed all the medical writers on the
yellow fever, the most able of whom have been compelled to declare that the
fever in the Islands is sometimes contagious, and at other times, not.

This view of the subject would have prevented the trouble of authors who have
labored to prove the disease imported from Siam, or the African coast. -- Dr.
Chisholm, instead of attempting to trace the Grenada fever of 1793 to Africa,
through the ship Hankey, had only to remark, the prevalence of the catarrh in
1790, of the plague in Egypt in 1791, and of the scarlatina in the United
States in 1793, and he would have seen the beginning of a most extensive and
malignant series of diseases. The truth is, the pestilential state of air first
manifested itself in Grenada in 1791, [the year it commenced in New-York] by
new and singular symptoms, which surprised Dr. Chisholm. And this, by the way,
was before the beginning of the present war, on the part of Great Britain, and
of course, it could not be ascribed to that circumstance. The same fact, when
justly considered, is demonstration, that the disease was not brought from
Africa.

It must be remarked however, that the fever of the tropical climates, though
not contagious in sporadic cases, in healthful years, may at any time become
epidemic and contagious, under certain circumstances. Thus large bodies of
soldiers and seamen, passing suddenly from high northern latitudes into the
West Indies, may contract the disease, and render it so virulent by crowded
camps and ships, as to render it very infectious. This is usually the case in
wars between England and France, which call great numbers of men from
Great Britain into the islands.

Yet even in this case, the mortality of the disease is increased by a
pestilential state of air, concurring with such local causes. Such was the
state of air from 1760 to 1763, during which the British and American troops
perished before Havanna. Such also has been the state of air for eight years
past, in which the destruction of the British troops in the islands has been
unparralleled.

This circumstance has led a respectable college of physicians in Philadelphia,
to insinuate that war is a cause of the disease. Their words are, "it exists in
the West Indies, particularly in time of war, when great numbers of strangers
are to be found there, and reference to dates will show, that in most of the
instances of the occurrence of the disease in the United States, there has been
war in the West Indies." Memorial to the Legislature of Pennsylvania, Dec. 5,
1797.

This assertion, however, is not authorized by facts. The deplorable plague in
Philadelphia and Charleston in 1699, was in time of peace. That in New York in
1702 was in the first year of a war, but could not have been derived from that
circumstance, in so short a time.

The same disease at Barbados and Martinico, in 1723, was in time of peace, in
Charleston in 1728, in time of peace -- at Carthagena the next year, in time of
peace -- at Charleston and New York in 1732, in time of peace -- at Barbados
in 1738 and 1764, in time of peace. The instances which happened between 1740
and 48, were in time of war, as was that in Philadelphia in 1762. The present
war has exhibited melancholy effects of diseases in the West Indies; but it is
an indubitable fact that the plague of the present period commenced in 1791, a
year before the war, and before numerous reinforcements of troops had been sent
to the islands. It must further be observed, that during the eight years war
between America and Great Britain, no yellow fever appeared in the United
States! a striking fact.

It is certainly a most unfortunate circumstance for the credit of the college
of physicians, that the longest interval of peace during the present century,
from the treaty of Utrecht in 1713, to the Spanish war of 1740, includes in it
the longest and most severe state of pestilential diseases, in Europe, Africa,
America and the Islands, that has occurred, during the century. A simple
inspection of the bills of mortality, during that period, will demonstrate the
fact!

One thing, however, may be asserted with truth, that whatever may be the
extent and violence of the bilious plague in the West Indies, it never has
appeared in the northern parts of the United States, except in periods when a
pestilential or sickly state of the air is manifested by the prevalence of
other epidemics. In tropical climates and in the southern parts of America,
particular circumstances, as great bodies of fresh troops from northern
latitudes, or unfavorable seasons, may generate the disease in any year,
however healthy in temperate latitudes. But from Maryland northward, this
American plague has never appeared without being preceded by other epidemics.
Let facts be resorted to for confirmation.

We read of malignant diseases in America, anterior to the year 1699, but the
order of them is not described. The fatal plague of that year was preceded by
epidemic catarrh, and the plague raged, at the same time, in the Levant. The
same disease in New York in 1702, belongs to the same period, which seems to
have commenced in 1697 and ended in 1702.

The next sickly period was from 1709 to 1713, beginning in Europe with the
severe catarrh of 1709, which was followed by plague in the Baltic towns, in
Hungary, Vienna, etc. accompanied with a most desolating sickness among horned
cattle and horses, in Germany and Italy. Of the effects of this constitution of
air, in America, I have but two instances, which were a most distressing
sickness in Waterbury, in Connecticut, which almost depopulated the town, and
epidemic measles in 1712.

Of the next pestilential period, about 1720, I have also but two instances in
America; the mortality at Duck creek, as already related, and the malignant
pleurisy in Hartford.

The plague in Philadelphia and Virginia in 1741, and in New York in 1743, was
preceded by the usual epidemics, influenza, measles, angina, etc. and at the
same time the plague was raging in the Levant and in Sicily.

The same disease in Philadelphia in 1762 had its usual precursors, measles and
catarrh, and this occurred during the prevalence of the plague, in the Levant.

I hardly need to mention, in proof, the present epidemics. It is well known,
we have passed through the whole series of precursors, catarrh, scarlatina,
measles, etc. the two former being far more general and severe than usual,
indicated, with infallible certainty, the violence and extent of the plague
which was to follow.

From a long series of facts, then, we demonstrate that the plague of our
climate depends on some general cause. And it must abash and confound the
sticklers for the propagation of this disease from country to country by fomes,
to know that the disease never occurs in the temperate latitudes of America,
except under a pestilential constitution of air, manifested by other malignant
diseases in this country, which are certainly not imported, and during also the
prevalence of similar diseases in the Levant, and an increase of mortality in
other countries. It must still more confound these persons, if they have any
susceptibility of conviction, to observe that these very pestilential diseases,
instead of being conveyed from place to place, appear at one and the same time
in Egypt, Turkey, the West Indies, and in the United States. This is very
common, and probably is always the fact.

If the pestilence were introduced into this country, from the islands, and if
the disease is capable of being propagated as an epidemic, from fomes, why, let
me ask, has it never been propagated in the United States, in healthy periods?
It has been imported probably in hundreds of instances, from the islands, ever
since the commencement of the West India trade.

Not a year passed from 1763 to 1791, in which multitudes of seamen or
pessengers were not brought into the United States, into large and small towns,
and into hospitals filled with patients, with the yellow fever upon them and
all their infected clothing. Yet in all this long period, no contagion
appeared, although no precautions, at least in many parts of the country, were
ever taken to prevent it. If the disease contains specific contagion, surely
that contagion must take effect under all circumstances. Every man knows that
the variolous matter of the smallpox regards neither time nor place; its
contagion acts in all years, seasons and climates, tho not with equal certainty.

This fact alone, that the bilious plague never shows itself in the temperate
latitudes of America, except when the current epidemics of this country,
manifest a general constitution of air, unfriendly to health, is sufficient to
explain all the difficulties that have occured to medical men and to others, on
the subject of the origin and peculiar symptoms of the disease.

Some of these remarks are in anticipation of the subject of another section,
but they fall naturally enough under this head, the design of which is, to
establish the doctrine of the universality of certain diseases, at particular
times, occasioned by a cause or causes extending often over a whole hemisphere,
and sometimes over the earth. -- That such is the fact, is demonstrated by the
history of epidemics, from the earliest ages to this day. A successive series
of similar facts, occurring age after age, leave no room for cavil or
controversy.

I have confined my remarks, on this head, to the latest periods of the world,
because the evidence is more complete. But a simple inspection of the preceding
history, will convince any candid person, that the phenomena of pestilence have
been uniform, from the highest antiquity. In the most barbarous ages, when
commerce was unknown, all the severe plagues appeared in almost every part of
the earth, in high northern latitudes, and among savage tribes which had no
intercourse with the Mediterranean. The custom of deriving all plagues from
Egypt, Syria or Turkey by specific contagion, is modern -- it is pointedly
contradicted by all history -- is unworthy of the enlightened period in which
it has been advanced -- and marks an extreme degeneration in philosophy.

SECTION XV. Of the phenomena which attend pestilential periods, with
conjectures concerning the causes.
IT will not escape the most inattentive reader of the foregoing history, that
all the violent and general plagues have been preceded or accompanied with
remarkable phenomena in the physical world, as comets, earthquakes, explosions
of volcanoes, and others of a subordinate kind.

We are to admit, with great caution, the influence of the planets in producing
the calamitous diseases which at periods afflict mankind. It is an influence
very uncertain and undefinable. It is not indeed unphilosophical to suppose,
the several immense orbs that compose the solar system, to have an influence on
each other by means of the great laws of attraction and repulsion. The contrary
supposition would be most unphilosophical. But it might be very difficult to
ascertain precisely what that influence is, because it might not be possible to
separate its effects from those which are produced by other causes.

The ancients went much too far in ascribing events on this earth to planetary
influence. They ascribed not only natural, but moral effects to that influence,
and by their extravagant system of judicial astrology, brought into contempt
the study of the influence of heavenly bodies.

We are not however to discard all considerations of such an influence. We are
naturally led to suppose that all parts of our system are connected by
principles of attraction, and that a certain order and equilibrium are
necessary to keep all parts in due harmony. It is very obvious that the moon
has a most material influence in regulating the seasons and changes of weather
on this globe, especially the weekly and monthly vicissitudes. The more distant
bodies may have a similar effect, tho less obvious.

Comets, which approach and enter the solar system at certain unequal periods,
may also have some influence upon the seasons. To ascertain this point, I have
collected all the information my reading has enabled me to discover.

The ancients believed these bodies to be the causes or at least the harbingers
of pestilence; according to that line of Claudian

"In coelo nunquam spectatum impune cometam."
"A comet in the heavens is never beheld with impunity."
But should the fact be admitted, it might be still a subject of enquiry, by
what means these erratic bodies injure the health of mankind. That they have
some effect of this kind, seems to be very probable, not only from the opinion
of the ancients who were careful in their observations, but from the very
uniform coincidence of their appearance with extensive pestilence.

It is certain that comets have a very sensible effect on the weather. This was
observed as long ago as the days of Aristotle, who remarks, Meteorol. lib. 1.
ca. 7. "That comets denote great tides and winds." He instances the swell of
the sea when Achaia was inundated, which was during the appearance of a comet.
Pliny makes a similar observation. "Ventos autem ab iis graves aestusque
significa^i." Not. Hist. lib. 2. ca. 25. Seneca was of the same opinion, and he
mentions storms of rain also among the effects of their approach. Seneca, Not.
Qust. lib. 7. sect. 28.

It is true that great heat and drouth, and violent tempests mark the periods
of the approach of comets, and it is equally true that the winters of the same
periods are remarkably cold. Aristotle himself mentions the cold of the winter,
during the appearance of the great comet, when Aristaeus was archon at Athens.

The preceding relation of facts furnishes a confirmation of these opinions.
All the comets which have approached this earth, in their passage to or from
the sun, especially those which have passed very near us, have been preceded,
attended and followed by most extraordinary effects, as great heat and drouth,
in summer, and severe cold in winter; deluging rains, violent tempests and
unusual tides. These we may consider as the constant and certain attendants on
comets. They occur so uniformly with the appearance of those bodies, and for
some months preceding and following, as to leave no room to question the
influence from which they proceed.

Through the medium of such great changes in the seasons, we may rationally
suppose comets must affect the health of mankind. Extreme and unusual heat
seldom fails to produce a multitude of autumnal diseases, as may be seen by the
bills of mortality, and as the observations of every person can verify.

It is obvious from the foregoing history, that one of the most certain effects
of the approximation of a comet, is, a most severe winter. The almost uniform
coincidence of these two phenonena leaves us no room to doubt their connection.
Now it is a law of the seasons, that the mean temperature of the air is nearly
the same every year. This has been proved by seven years observations made at
Salem by Dr. Holyoke, and published in the first part of the second volume of
the Memoirs of the American Academy. Whenever therefore the cold of winter is
long or severe in an unusual degree, it must be counterbalanced, in the
succeeding seasons, by an extraordinary degree of heat. This may happen to be
effected by long mild weather in spring and autumn; but it is more usual, that
severe winters are followed by excessive heat in the summer months. In this
case, the human body never fails to suffer. In such summers, bilious fevers and
dysenteries are commonly numerous and violent.

If therefore comets do in fact produce unusually cold winters, which are
necessarily preceded or followed by excessively hot summers, they may be
considered as the remote cause of numerous diseases.

But comets do most evidently occasion at times excessive drouth; and at other
times, extraordinary quantities of rain; and these intemperate seasons not
unfrequently succeed each other within a few months. No man can question this
fact, who attends to the preceding history. All such unusual seasons are apt to
injure the vegetable kingdom. In too dry seasons, corn may be defective in
quantity; in too wet weather, it is deficient in nourishing qualities; and in
both cases, it may contain the germs of epidemic diseases.

That comets should affect the health of mankind in any other way, than through
the means of the seasons or weather, is possible; but is not to be admitted
without most indisputable evidence. It is indeed certain that the oriental
nations believe, and have, from high antiquity, believed these bodies to be the
forerunners of plagues; and the enumeration of facts in the foregoing history,
evidently confirms their opinions. That history is probably defective in
accounts of comets; but imperfect as it is, it affords proof that most of the
plagues which have been extensive and severe, have been preceded or attended
with the approach of comets.

From numerous facts in the history of pestilence, I am led to suspect that
comets have some effect on the fire or electricity which surrounds and
penetrates this globe. One of the most certain, as well as most remarkable
phenomena, which attend plagues, is, earthquakes; and in general, the more
severe or numerous have been the earthquakes, the more violent and destructive
the plagues. This remark applies to most of the countries in Europe, where the
plague has been epidemic; but is more especially true of Italy and the Syrian
coast, with the whole of Asia Minor.

In confirmation of this remark, we need not resort to facts in ancient times,
when earthquakes seem to have been more frequent and violent, than in modern
times. Within the present century, the shocks which have uniformly attended
pestilence, leave no room to question that some connection exists between the
two phenomena.

Now it is a fact that will appear from an inspection of the preceding history,
that, during the approximation of comets to our system, earthquakes have been
most numerous, general and violent. A great proportion of the tremendous
eruptions of volcanoes have happened during the same periods. To prove this, we
need not go back to the terrible concussions and violent discharge of Etna,
which closed the long pestilence in Athens, in the fifth and sixth year of the
Pelopponesian war -- nor to the dreadful earthquakes and eruption, which
preceded the destructive plague in the reign of Titus. We have similar facts in
modern times. The plagues in the Levant in 1743, and especially in Messina,
were accompanied or preceded by violent earthquakes and a comet. The extensive
plague of 1760, was attended with all the great phenomena -- comets, eruption
of Vesuvius and tremendous earthquakes. The pestilential periods of 1770 and
1783, were introduced by the same phenomena.

These facts afford strong evidence that the approach of comets, not only
influences the weather, but also calls into action the subterranean fires. By
what means those erratic bodies produce this effect, may be a curious question.
That the internal fires explode at times, without the attractive powers of
comets, is undoubted; but the concurrence of earthquakes and violent discharges
from volcanoes, during the appearance of comets, or near the time, seems to
render it certain that those bodies have a most powerful effect on the element
of fire which is diffused through the globe and the surrounding atmosphere.

Many authors have observed the connection between comets, earthquakes and
pestilence, but seem not to have included volcanic eruptions among the causes
of disease.

"In coelo per quindecem dies apparens crinitum sidus siccatis plane terris
attulerat; says Paulus Jovius; pestilentia quoque contagiis serpens, et in urbe
et in Castris." Hist. vol. 2. 111.

This observation of the writer is well founded -- comets seldom fail to
occasion a universal defect of rain and springs in some countries, and
pestilence marches in the train with its other effects.

"Inter prognostica pestis est etiam cometes, jaculum et aliae sigurae
ardentes, diutius in suprema aeris regione subsistentes." Horstius from Angelus
Sala, de peste, p. 253.

These remarks also are justified by our own observations. They were remarkably
verified in the comet, the meteor and the brilliant halo which marked the
commencement of the last series of epidemics in 1788 and 1789.

Riverius is express to the same point. He asserts that comets never appear
without being followed by epidemic and pestilent diseases, and various changes
in the physical world. He instances that of 1618, in his own days. The
observation is verified by the testimony of all ancient writers and by a
uniform series of modern facts.

The order of events is exemplified in the epidemic periods of 1769 -- and of
1782. In the first period, excessive drouth during the approach of the comet in
1769 -- failure of crops -- famine and plague and insects in 1770 -- volcanoes,
earthquakes and tempests in 1770 and 1771 -- catarrh and measles in 1772 --
then, for several years, anginas, putrid fevers and dysenteries.

In the period of 1781 and 2, catarrh began the epidemics -- in 1782 a
universal failure of water, and of crops in India and Egypt -- in 1783,
volcano, famine, measles, angina and plague -- 1784 a comet, followed by
tempests, etc.

Earthquakes constitute a part of the visible effects of the general cause
which produces pestilence.

It has sometimes happened that in these convulsions of the earth, a vapor has
been extricated which has produced immediate disease. The great earthquake in
South-America in 1730 was speedily followed by a pestilential fever. The
destruction of Port Royal in Jamaica in 1692 was soon succeeded by a mortal
fever in all parts of the island; and the universality of the fever would lead
us to suspect that vapor, in this instance, could not have been the cause. At
Venice in 1343, the plague soon followed an earthquake.

In the year 615, violent earthquakes in Italy were followed by "lues
elephantiae." Baronius, vol. 8. 243. Baglivus relates that the great
earthquakes in Italy in 1703, were succeeded by numerous diseases, especially
opthalmia, erysipelas, mesenteric fevers and double tertians. In autumn, the
smallpox became epidemic, apoplexies were frequent and sudden deaths almost
daily. With respect to apoplexies and sudden deaths after earthquakes, we have
also the authority of Seneca.

Baglivus further remarks "post terraemotus frequenter succedunt pestilentia,
vel morbi graves et epidemici, imo nova et inaudita morborum genera." p. 530.
The idea that new and unknown species of diseases follow earthquakes, if well
^ounded, leads us to suspect that the changes in the characters of diseases are
attributable to the various action of the electrical fluid.

The terribly destructive earthquakes in Naples and Sicily in 1693, were
speedily followed by malignant fevers, tertians accompanied with delirium and
lethargy, and the smallpox which was very fatal to children.

Baddam's Mem. vol. 3. 91. "Frequent earthquakes, says Fracastorius de
contagione, p. 136, announce future pestilence, and by means of exhalations,
tend to produce it." Van Swieten agrees in this opinion.

Seneca asserts, Not. Quest. art. 27, that pestilential diseases usually follow
great earthquakes. He supposes the air, enclosed in the earth, to become
vitiated, either by stagnation or through the defect of the internal fires
"internorum ignium vitio." He thinks this air when forced into the atmosphere,
renders it impure and unwholesome, generating new kinds of diseases. He reasons
by analogy that as water corrupts by stagnation, so will air. Hence after
earthquakes, "subitae continuaeque mortes et monstrosa genera morborum, ut ex
novis orta causis -- nec prius pestilentia definit, quam spiritum illum gravem
exercuit laxitas coeli, ventorum jactatio."

This opinion of Seneca is certainly entitled to respect, and has been followed
by many distinguished authors, Van Helmont, Van Swieten, Sydenham, Hodges,
Baglivus and others.

But I suspect the modern discoveries will enable us to furnish a more rational
solution of the phenomenon. I am inclined to believe that a superabundant
stimulus, occasioned by the shock of an earthquake, and an atmosphere
surcharged with electricity, will more rationally account for the apoplexies,
sudden deaths, smallpox and malignant fevers. If a deleterious vapor were the
cause, I should suppose its effects would be speedy, and its force soon
expended, the atmosphere being speedily purified by winds. But, if stimulus is
the cause, it may exist for a long time in the atmosphere, and the human body
not yield to its force in many weeks or months. This would better accord with
facts, for although diseases appear soon after an earthquake, yet the worst
effects are often many months or a year after, as was the case in the reign of
Titus, when the pestilence was the year after the earthquake and eruption of
Vesuvius.

There are however many authorities in favor of the vapor. Seneca relates that
a vapor caused by an earthquake in Campania, destroyed six hundred sheep. Van
Helmont says that "popular plagues do draw their first occasional matter from
an earthquake." Page 1125.

The fact that a visible vapor, without an earthquake, sometimes appears
suddenly in a place and evidently produces disease, is a strong confirmation of
Seneca's opinion. A memorable example happened at Rouen, in 1753, as related
under that year. Forestus relates that an epidemic catarrh or sore throat, in
Alemar, A. D. 1557, suddenly invaded 2000 persons, of whom 200 died. He
ascribes it to a vapor, for the disease was preceded by thick clouds of an ill
smell.

See Van Swieten, vol. 16. p. 31. Mazeray relates that the black pestilence of
1347 arose in China from a vapor, which burst from the earth with a smell most
horribly offensive. This fact is cited by Boil vol. 5. 60. in proof that
pestilential diseases spring from vapors evolved from the earth. This author
supposes new diseases may be generated by vapors, and remarks further that
countries abounding with cinnabar escape the plague.

But it seldom happens that pestilential diseases can be traced directly to
earthquakes. On the other hand, although great plagues are almost invariably
accompanied with shocks of the earth, yet it more usually happens that the
pestilence appears before the concussion. Thus the shocks which alarmed and
laid waste Italy in 1348, 1349 and 1350, were preceded by the dreadful plague
of 1347.

Sometimes the earthquakes precede the plague, but more generally the
pestilence appears first, or at least the petechial or other malignant fever,
which marks the commencement of the pestilence. Thus the plague of 1760 was
preceded by a spotted fever in 1759, which marked the approach of the calamity;
which spotted fever appeared in Syria, before the terrible earthquakes of that
period.

In the well known plague at Oczakow in 1738 and 39, an earthquake happened
about the time the disease began to abate. Van Swieten, vol. 16. 47. Such was
the fact in the days of Thucydides. Numerous observations on these phenomena
lead me to suspect, that the electricity which is to produce the explosion, is
in action for a considerable time before the shock, and that it is this
previous action which occasions epidemic diseases. That is, the stimulus of
fire or electricity produces sensible effects on the bodies of animals the more
susceptible objects, before it does on the less susceptible substances in the
bowels of the earth.

The earthquakes do not always occur in the seat of the pestilence. I find no
concussion mentioned to have happened at London in 1665, or in the years next
preceding or following; but shocks were experienced in the neighboring counties
in 1665, and 1666.

This seems to have misled the able Diemerbroeck, who, in reasoning on the
causes of the plague, objects to the influence of earthquakes, because no
shocks occurred at Nimeguen, before the pestilence of 1636. It is probably true
that earthquakes are not usually the cause of the plague; but that they have
some connection with the cause, I can hardly doubt. The mistakes of
Diemerbroeck and others on this point seem to have arisen from considering the
plague as an isolated disease, and as depending on a cause local and temporary;
whereas a just view of the subject must comprehend all the diseases of
increased malignity which precede the plague, very often for two or three
years. Such a view also must include, among the causes of the disease, the
agitations or derangement of the elements in remote parts of the country. Thus,
although no earthquake was experienced at Nimeguen, about the time of the plague,
yet a severe shock was felt at Lausanne in 1634. -- Keysler's travels 190. This
marked some general action of internal fire, which, tho it might not explode so
as to shake all Germany, might have produced effects, by means of an insensible
vapor or stimulus, in all parts of Europe. Certain it is, that for the period
between 1631, the year of the tremendous eruption of Vesuvius, and the year
1637, all Europe was afflicted with mortal epidemics. The philosopher who would
obtain just views of the causes, must extend his inquiries to all the great
phenomena, which occurred during this whole period, in all Europe at least, if
not in the American hemisphere; for such a view only will comprehend the whole
extent of the pestilential state of the atmosphere.

It must not be forgotten, that during this period from 1633 to 1637, when the
plague or other desolating diseases, spread over both hemispheres, Etna was in
a continual state of eruption; as it was for fifteen years, during the
pestilential constitutions described by Sydenham in his days.

In looking over the list of comets, and the history of earthquakes, I am
compelled to believe the approach of comets to have no small influence on the
electricity and subterranean fires of the globe. Such a vastly great proportion
of the violent concussions of the earth have happened, within a few months of
the appearance of comets, that no reasonable man can suppose the coincidences
to be the result of accident.

Equally remarkable have been the coincidences in time between the appearance
of comets and the explosions of volcanoes. And this fact is no trifling
confirmation of my opinion, respecting the influence of comets in producing
earthquakes; for earthquakes and eruptions of volcanoes are often
cotemporaneous. It is not only during the appearance of comets, that their
effects are perceived in the elements, but for many months before and after. I
can testify from careful observations that the effects of that in August 1797,
were very obvious, in anomalous tides, as early as the last week in May; and
the inundations in England during the autumn and winter following, show its
effects several months after its departure. The whole history of comets and
their effects warrants this conclusion. Seneca made this remark seventeen
centuries ago. These are his words.

"Aristoteles ait, cometas significare tempestatem et ventorum intemperantiam
atque imbrium. -- Non statim cometes ortus ventos et pluvias minat^r, sed totum
annum suspectum facit. -- "Aristotle observes that comets indicate storms and
violent winds and rain. -- These effects however do not immediately follow
their appearance, but are to be expected, during the whole year." He then
mentions that such was the fact, with the comet predicted by Aristotle and
Theophrasius, and which appeared in the consulship of Paterculus and Vapiscus.
Not. Quest. lib. 7.

I would further observe that comets move in trajectories of an eliptical or
parabolic form, the sun being situated in one of the foci. The time when we
observe them is when they pass this part of the ellipsis. Now according to the
universal law of planets, by which they describe equal area^ in equal times,
their motion must be most rapid when nearest the sun, and within our sight.
Before their appearance, and after their departure, their movement is slower,
than when within the solar system, and they may be near the earth, many months
before they enter the system or become visible. Hence their influence on the
earth so long before and after their appearance.

It is further to be observed that many comets doubtless enter the system and
pass round the sun without ever being seen, and such as come from regions of
space directly opposite to the earth, must be invisible, unless we can see them
in the splendour of the sun's rays. This remark is as old as Seneca and older.
He relates an instance, in which Posidonious discovered a comet, in the
darkness of a solar eclipse, which would not have been seen, had not the
eclipse happened. Lib. 7. sect. 20.

Newton and Halley have made the same remark. Hence perhaps we may account for
violent seasons, like the severe winter of 1780, which happened without the
appearance of any comet. This is mere conjecture.




I cannot however admit, that the explosions of subterranean fires, are the
direct exciting cause of pestilential diseases. It is indeed ascertained,
beyond all question, that periods of extensive pestilence and mortality are
remarkable for earthquakes and eruptions of volcanoes. But the explosions of
fire do not so generally precede epidemic diseases, as to authorize the
supposition that they produce those diseases. Earthquakes occur, during the
prevalence of pestilential or other mortal epidemics, but in the midst of the
period, or sometimes at the conclusion.

Hence I deduce an opinion, that pestilence and earthquakes depend on one
common cause; which excites into action the internal fires. But I suppose the
action or fermentation may precede, for months and even years, the explosion in
earthquakes and volcanoes and by means of an insensible vapor, or heat or
electrical discharges, the elements of water and air may be essentially
affected, in such a manner as to impair the principles of animal and vegetable
life. Whether this is a just explication of the cause, may be a question; but
so many phenomena concur to authorize it, that I cannot withhold my assent to
the general principle.

The same effect perhaps may be produced by the excessive action of mere
stimulus upon the animal system, without the infusion of a deleterious vapor
into the air.

A remarkable evidence of the effects of fire or electricity on the earth and
air, before its explosion, is the extreme drouth which is often experienced
over whole continents or the whole world, for six and even twelve months
antecedent to a great eruption of volcanoes.

In confirmation of my principle, that the changes in the elements producing
epidemic diseases, are effected by the all-pervading action of electricity, the
usual appearance of meteors or celestial lights, in pestilential periods, must
be mentioned. For the truth of the fact, we have ample proofs in every age. The
instances of meteors or other celestial appearances of fire, which are recorded
of pestilential periods, are so numerous, as to leave no room to question the
connection between the cause of pestilence, and the fire that belongs to the
system. Sometimes these fiery appearances are stationary lights in the sky,
which the frightened imaginations of men have formed into armies ready for
combat, and considered as the preludes of bloody battles. Sometimes the heavens
have been filled with those small meteors, called falling or shooting stars. At
other times immense globes of fire have traversed the celestial regions, and
burst with a tremendous report.

During a plague in Vienna in 1679, says Van Swieten, vol. 16. p. 19. from
Sorbait, several bluish fiery balls were seen in the air, some of which fell
and sensibly increased the heat.

In October 1709, when the plague was in Dantzick, a blue fiery globe came from
the north west and shot over the town with amazing celerity, illuminating the
town and falling at the southward.

Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 6. 14. During the plague in Philadelphia in 1793, about
the 12th of September, a meteor fell between the city and the hospital.

Rush. p. 108. During the extreme heat which introduced the pestilence of the
last summer, 1798, about the 9th of August, the small meteors or falling stars
were incredibly numerous, for several nights. They almost all shot from the
north-east to the south-west, and succeeded each other so rapidly as to keep
the eye of a curious spectator almost constantly engaged.

Diemerbroeck remarks that during the summers of 1635 and 6, at the time of the
severe plague in Holland, there was a vast number of ardent stars, gliding
through the celestial regions and falling to the earth. "Stellarum ar^lentium
in Coelo oberrantium magnus concursus, et in terram prolapsio." He mentions
likewise almost continual flashes of light, in a serene sky, or silent
lightning.

Livy mentions that the heavens appeared to be in a flame, previous to the
severe pestilence of the year ^90 from the building of Rome.

A flame in the heavens is noted under the years, 733, 742 and 788, all which
were pestilential. This flame is not described, and whether it was of the
species of Aurora Borealis, which extended over the celestial region, or of
that species of light, or yellowish red color, which distinguishes our modern
dark days, cannot perhaps be determined. But a curious phenomenon of this kind
happened in the severe winter of 1741, which was too remarkable to be passed
over in silence; especially as it may possibly explain what Livy and many other
historians have recorded, that at certain times, "it rained blood." The
assertion is often found in historians of credit, and has by the moderns, been
numbered among the extravagancies of popular credulity. But an appearance which
would warrant such an assertion occurred in this country, and is still
recollected by old people.

In the month of January 1741, in the midst of one of the coldest winters of
this century, there was a little relaxation of the rigorous cold, during which
the heavens were overcast with clouds and a little rain fell. Late at night,
during this falling weather, the heavens appeared all in a flame, so bright as
to illuminate the earth and render objects every where distinctly visible. Many
people saw it and were alarmed, supposing the great day was at hand. The rain
which fell during this light, had precisely the appearance of drops of blood
distilling from the clouds.

This relation is taken from my father, who was then nineteen years old, and
recollects all the circumstances more minutely than the events of the last year.

The well known dark day in May 1780, was distinguished by a similar light in
the heavens; but not occurring in the night, it was less an object of wonder.

I strongly suspect a similar phenomenon will account for those passages in
many histories, which speak of raining blood, and enable us to do justice to
the veracity of the writers.

Appearances of this kind have usually occurred in periods of pestilence, when
the imaginations of men have been subject to alarm; and they have often
happened during extraordinary seasons. The light of 1741, was during a most
severe winter, and in the most sickly period, that has occurred this century.
See the London bills of mortality. In America, that winter was followed by
pestilential diseases.

The dark day of 1780, was on the opening of spring, after a most severe
winter, and although that year was not sickly in general, yet in the year
following, we had an epidemic catarrh, succeeded by a series of epidemic
diseases of other kinds. It is remarkable too that on that very day began a
violent eruption of mount Etna.

In 1716, in the month of October, happened a dark day; this was after a most
severe winter in Europe. I have no account of the seasons in America, but the
next winter was unusually severe, and snow fell in extraordinary quantities.

On the 9th of August 1732 happened another dark day. This was followed by
earthquakes, a severe winter and universal catarrh.

The 19th of October 1762 was equally remarkable for darkness, with the
phenomenon of a red, or yellowish tinge in the heavens, which gave to the sun,
when it appeared, the color of blood. Some rain fell during the day, and the
water was of a dirty sulphurous smell. There had been two earthquakes, with
epidemic catarrh, in America in 1761. In the same year with the darkness, 1762,
the catarrh was epidemic in Europe; and the winter of that year was excessively
severe in both hemispheres. A comet appeared in 1762 and an eruption of Etna
followed the severe winter, in 1763. There were earthquakes also in Asia in
1762. Who can doubt that the vapor, occasioning such darkness, is the effect of
the agitation of the fire of the globe?

Similar instances of extraordinary darkness have occurred in every age. They
are mentioned in the years before Christ 366 and 295 -- and of the Christian
era 252, 746, 775, and in many other periods. And the reader will observe, this
darkness is cotemporary with pestilence, in almost every instance. During the
plague of 746, the darkness was of several days duration -- in 252 it was of
three days, and in 775 of six days continuance. A similar darkness accompanied
the pestilence in Egypt, in the days of Pharaoh. Many other instances have been
mentioned in the preceding history.

In America, it has been customary to ascribe this unusual appearance to
condensed volumes of smoke, after the burning of immense tracts of woods in the
western parts of the country. But I cannot learn that any great fires have
usually preceded these dark days; and negative evidence, in so many instances,
amounts to proof that no great forests have been burnt. Besides, the same
phenomenon has been often observed, in countries where there were no forests,
as in Italy, Syria, Asia Minor and Egypt, and especially in England.

That the smoke of burning forests cannot be the cause may be rendered very
certain by these considerations. First, the cause is not equal to the effect.
Had the woods from the 40th degree of latitude in America to the 50th been all
consumed in a day, the smoke would not have been sufficient to cloud the sun
over the territory covered by darkness on the 19th of May. Any person may judge
of this who has seen large tracts of forest on fire. That thirty or forty miles
of burning forest, should cover five hundred miles with impenetrable darkness,
is too absurd to deserve a serious refutation.

In the second place, the color of smoke, when elevated into high regions of
the atmosphere, is very different from that of the vapor which causes the
darkness on all such occasions.

But what decides this question is the lightning, thunder and rain, and
especially the meteors that accompany these clouds of vapor. As far as I can
learn, some or all of these phenomena attend dark days. Thunder was heard on
the morning of the 19th of May, in most places. Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 1. 238.
Violent thunder squalls and a meteor followed the great darkness in Canada in
1785. These phenomena demonstrate that the clouds, on such occasion, have a
connection with electricity. This is further evidenced by the smell of sulphur,
in the water that falls, and the scum that is left on objects -- smoke would
not produce either; nor would the largest volume of smoke ever raised into the
air, spread over an extensive region, a dense substance that should become
visible and tangible on the earth. Besides this darkness or vapor sometimes
occurs in winter, when the earth is covered with snow.

When we connect with these facts, the circumstance that these dark days always
occur, during or near the time of volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, or the
unusual seasons which accompany pestilence and epidemic dieases of other kinds,
we shall be at no loss to charge them to the account of the central fires, or
the discharges of electricity. This accumulation of vapor is not a more
surprising phenomenon, than the sudden change in the properties of the
atmosphere which produces universal catarrh.

Hodge, who wrote on the plague of London, and who appears not to have been
rewarded with celebrity equal to his merits, supposes the cause of pestilential
diseases to be a subtle aura, or vapor exhaled from the bowels of the earth,
which has, by too much heat and humidity, lost its wholesome qualities. He
says, in proof of his opinion, that a given quantity of earth, infused into
water in spring, deposits more salt than at another time of the year.

His idea seems to be not very different from that of Van Helmont, who supposes
the cause of pestilence to be a gas or air, which has putrified by continuance,
as the translation is; by which is meant, probably, a stagnation in the earth.

The doctrine of an insensible vapor, infused into the atmosphere from the
bowels of the earth, may perhaps be thought wholly conjectural. But there are
some phenomena which can hardly be resolved without resorting to the action of
the electrical fluid. The sudden changes of weather cannot be accounted for, in
all cases, by changes in the winds. Indeed the most reflecting philosophical
men acknowledge themselves puzzled to assign reasons, for many of the rapid
transitions from heat to cold and from cold to heat. It has been suggested,
that the heat may ascend and descend in the atmosphere, by means of physical
laws, to us unknown; but this supposition is not supported by any clear proofs,
perhaps not by rational probabilities.

There are many reasons which incline me to believe that the principle of fire,
the most subtle, penetrating, active fluid in creation, and unquestionably the
most powerful agent in all the movements of matter, passes more frequently and
rapidly from the earth into the atmosphere and vice versa, than is commonly
imagined. I suspect that an intimate connection subsists in this respect,
between the interior of the globe, and the atmosphere which surrounds it.

To the rapid passing of heat from the earth to the air, and from the air to
the earth, we may perhaps ascribe many of the amazing changes which take place
in the temperature of the air, in a few hours, and often without a change of
wind. The increase and the moderation of cold are sometimes very obvious, long
before the change of winds to which we usually ascribe such changes; and I
suspect that the changes of winds are more frequently the effect, than the
cause, of a change in the temperature.

But there are some appearances, in the atmosphere, previous to shocks of
earthquake, which demonstrate a close connection between the atmosphere and
subterranean fire. A remarkable one in this country, and generally in others,
is a universal serenity and tranquillity in the atmosphere. The sky is
cloudless, and all nature, if at night, is wrapped in profound silence. This
phenomenon is too uniform a precursor of earthquakes, to be deemed an
accidental circumstance. It must be an effect of some connection between the
air above, and the cause of earthquakes.

It is remarkable also that seamen sometimes observe a swelling of the ocean,
without wind, and before any shock of the earth; and this fact, Pliny mentions
among the signs of an approaching earthquake. Is not this swelling of the
ocean, previous to an earthquake, analagous to the tides? May not both be
ascribed to the force of electricity; the swell of the water preceding
earthquakes being irregular, as depending on no regular visible cause; and the
tides being more regular, as being the effect of the moon's influence on the
electrical principle. This idea seems to derive some strength from the known
fact that earthquakes usually happen in periods of the moon's revolution, when
that orb exerts its greatest influence on the earth. From numerous
calculations, it appears that earthquakes usually occur near the moon's perigee
or apogee or the change or conjunction of sun and moon; generally about three
days before or after the conjunction -- this, by the way, is the very time when
epidemic diseases usually invade the patient, or come to fatal termination,
according to the remarks of all modern physicians -- a singular fact that may
lead to important conclusions.

In a few instances, earthquakes happen near the full moon -- the other
position in which that satellite exerts more than her ordinary influence on the
earth.

Let these facts be compared with the occurrence of violent tempests about the
same time of the moon's revolution, the invasion of epidemic diseases and the
full tides.

A strong confirmation of this opinion is derived from the swelling of the sea,
just before a hurricane in the West Indies. There is a visible intumescence,
before the atmosphere is clouded, or the least breeze o^ wind. What can be the
cause, but the electrical fluid which is passing (...) the earth to the
atmosphere, and is speedily to produce most tr^^ous effects. See the Addenda.


The same author mentions a well known fact that sometime before the
concussion, birds appear to be greatly agitated, and retire. In Italy, a common
prelude of an earthquake is, a thin white oblong cloud or vapor, nearly
resembling the color of wool. This sign was seen for several days in the year
1702, before the earthquake. The same was observed by Cassini in 1668, in the
same part of the heavens, the sign of the whale.

See Pliny, lib. 2. 81. Baglivus, page 543. The evening before a violent
earthquake in Sicily in 1693, a bright flame was observed, apparently about a
mile distant from the spectator; this flame vanished as soon as the shock
occurred. A similar light was seen at Derby in Connecticut, in the evening
preceding a local explosion of fire, about thirty years ago.
The day succeeding the first shock, the sky was darkened, and tinged with a
deep yellow. This was the presage of a most tremendous concussion, which
demolished many towns in Naples, Sicily and Malta,

Seneca relates that a violent earthquake in Campania, although in winter, was
preceded by a calm of several days duration.

Not. Quest. lib. 6. 12. For sometime before the great earthquake in Italy in
1638, the air was perfectly calm, and the heavens serene, but the sea was
covered with little bubbles, as if agitated by drops of rain.

The phenomena that occurred in Germany and Holland, on the day, but not at the
hour of the tremendous earthquake which demolished Lisbon in 1755, were very
remarkable. The water was violently agitated, buoys were broken from their
chains, large vessels snapped their cables, smaller ones were thrown ashore,
boats in canals were forced from their fastenings, chandaliers vibrated in the
chu^^hes, water in small vessels was agitated and dashed over the (...) and all
this without any sensible motion of the earth or buildings.

See Encyclopedia, art. Earthquake. These phenomena indicate a connection
between the atmosphere and the subterranean fire, which is altogether
invisible, and to men, imperceptible. We perceive nothing, before the shock but
universal serenity and calm; but the delicate senses of the fowls of heaven are
affected; they fly about in a fright and appear to want the usual support from
the air. The waters of the ocean also swell, although no concussion of the earth
or water can be perceived. Do not these phenomena indicate, either a want of
the usual weight or elasticity of the air? Or what defect is there in the mass
of air surrounding the earth, which is to be supplied by an explosion of
subterranean fire? That there is a connection or dependence of the fire above
on that beneath the earth, and that this subtle fluid acts and reacts between
the earth and the air, with a rapidity and a force beyond all calculation, is
to me extremely probable. The appearances that precede earthquakes indicate,
that the fire which is to produce the shock, is in violent action, for a
considerable time, before the shock. For several days before the earthquake at
Oxford, Sept. 17, 1683, ignes fatui, luminous appearances, were frequently seen.

Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 2. 208. It sometimes happens that hot springs burst
forth before earthquakes; and miners perceive heat in the earth.

Often have earthquakes been preceded by a perturbation, a stench, or
discoloration of the water in wells and springs.

Sometimes the water in wells and rivers recedes or is evaporated before the
explosion. It is said that Pherecydes once predicted an earthquake in
Lacedemon, from the disappearance of the water in a well.

Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 2. 79. The rivers and small streams in Iceland are
observed to become entirely dry for some weeks before an eruption of Heckla, as
was the case in 1783. Meteors also, earthquakes and sometimes flashes of
lightning precede or accompany the eruption^.

See Van Troil's Letters on Icela^d. The various sounds or noises which precede
and attend earthquakes, are a strong confirmation of these ideas. The usual
premonitory sound is compared to the rattling of carriages on a pavement.
Sometimes it is described, as the rumbling of distant thunder. But in truth the
sound is different at different distances, and resembles no other sound in
nature. It is altogether sui generis. It is most analogous, when near, to the
rattling sound from a near explosion of the electrical fluid; as those can
testify who have been near the place where lightning has fallen upon objects.
It bears no resemblance at all to any artificial sounds, made by the explosions
of gunpowder, or other human contrivances. It is most unquestionably the
effect of the electrical fluid, rushing from one part of our system to another
-- probably from the earth to the atmosphere, to restore the equilibrium, which
has been, by some means, destroyed, or to answer other unknown purposes. This
idea corresponds with the modern theory of earthquakes, which ascribes them to
the electrical fluid. See the Encyclopedia, art. earthquake. Let it be observed
that at sea, no sound precedes an earthquake; water being a good conductor of
electricity.

Eruptions of volcanoes have also been preceded many weeks by a visible fog or
vapor, suspended over the mountain, as happened before the great discharges of
Heckla in 1783. To what cause shall we ascribe this, but to the action of fire
which precedes the explosion? And if a visible vapor may be extricated by this
action, for months before the explosion, of which we have certain evidence, why
may we not suppose, a smaller action or force to expel an invisible vapor, in
any place and at any time?

Other facts authorize this conjecture. On the 12th of September 1784, the
water of the Loch Tay in Scotland, suddenly receded 300 feet and left the
channel dry; then returned; continuing this vibration for every seven minutes
for two hours, and at the same hour in the day, for a week, with less violence.
No wind was stirring, and no visible cause could be assigned for this novel
phenomenon. To what cause shall we resort for a solution, but to the invisible
en^^y of electrical fire?

Sinclair, vol. 6. 623. If we admit then the action of electricity to be the
cause of earthquakes, we shall have reached the general proximate cause of
those epidemic diseases which speedily succeed concussions of the earth. The
cause must be the action of fire, the most energetic principle in nature. The
manner in which this effect is produced, whether by forcing an unwholesome
vapor from the interior of the earth, and vitiating the atmosphere; or whether
by simply changing, on mechanical principles, the proportion of oxygen
contained in atmospheric air, or by mere stimulus or other unknown means, is a
question of a curious nature, and worthy of philosophic investigation.

One thing is very evident, that what I denominate a pestilential principle,
does, at certain times, pervade not only the element of air, but the water
also. The proofs of this are abundantly numerous and convincing. In all the
great plagues which have afflicted the human race, other animals, as horses,
cattle, sheep, sometimes cats, dogs and fowls, together with the fish in rivers
and the ocean, and even vegetables, have borne their share in the calamity. The
pestilential principle has extended to every species of life. The beasts of the
field perish with deadly epidemics; the fish die on the bottom of rivers and
the sea, or become lean and sickly; while corn is blasted on the most fertile
plains, and the fruits in gardens and orchards, wither or fail to arrive at
their usual state of perfection.

In the destructive plague which desolated Italy in the time of Romulus,
Plutarch and Zonaras mention a general sterility of the earth; the very trees
were affected, and all nature appeared to be defective in its powers of
production.

In the beginning of the pestilential period, in the reign of Justinian,
Baronius states that corn was deficient in quantity, and defective in its
nourishing qualities.

About the year 1600, crops failed in all parts of Europe; as they did in both
hemispheres, about the close of the last century. Such was the case in 1740, in
some parts of Europe; and in 1766. The (...) of grain in India in 1770, and in
1783 and 1789, are still remembered; and in some of these instances, the crops
failed, at the same time, in China, India, Europe and America.

When excessive rains or dry seasons precede this failure of crops, men are at
no loss to assign the cause; although, in these cases, they may sometimes mistake
the true cause. But it often happens that grain fails of its usual perfection,
in seasons apparently the most temperate and favorable. Observing farmers
remark that, in certain years, when blast or mildew is expected from
intemperate weather, grain proves to be good; at other times, the grain will
shrink very much, under a series of weather apparently the most propitious.
This has been observed in Fairfield county, in Connecticut, where the excellent
lands formerly produced great crops of wheat, with as much certainty as any
other grain; but within a few years past, wheat has failed, without any
apparent cause. In some cases, the farmer scarcely receives his seed, although the
seasons are favorable and no insect appears. The same was the case in all the
eastern states for three or four years; but in this summer, 1799, the wheat has
every where a full grain.


The failure of certain species of fruit trees and shrubs is a fact equally
remarkable.

Some kinds of apple, for a few years past, have been small, knotty and
sprinkled over with specks.

The plum-tree has become full of warts, or bulbous excrescences, which kill
the tree, and in some parts of our country, bid fair to extinguish the species.
These have been suspected to proceed from a fly or small worm; but on
examination by a microscope, I find reason to question this fact. Some of the
excrescences contain a small white worm, about a line in length; but they
perforate the wood after the excrescence is formed, as appears by their path;
and some of these warts contain no insect whatever. The insect therefore finds
a nidus in the excrescence, but is rather an effect, than a cause. The bursting
of the bark is a disease, which seems to have begun or been very much
increased, during the present pestilential period.

The peach-tree has, within a few years, been particularly subject to be
destroyed by a worm, which attacks it just below the surface of the earth, and
separates the bark from the wood. If this is a common evil, still the vast
increase of it, at particular periods, is among the phenomena of pestilence.
The locust is perishing by a similar malady.

Cotemporary with these diseases of the plum and the peach, has been a
distemper of the pear, usually called the pound pear, one of the most delicious
of the species. For eight or ten years past, that fruit has been, universally
in the part of the country to which my observations have extended, subject to a
blast, from a species of rust which covers a large portion of its surface. In
my own garden, not one in five is fit to eat; but I have seen one gentleman in
a neighboring town, who thinks the pear is beginning to recover.

The universal death of the prim is a phenomenon still more extraordinary, and
a most severe calamity. The town of East-Hampton on Long Island, lost, in two
or three years, two hundred miles of hedge -- a greater loss, says Mr. L.
Hommidieu, in a paper published among the transactions of the New York
Agricultural Society, than if every house in the town had been burnt to the
ground; as no proper substitute for fences has yet been discovered. The English
black thorn has been tried, but has failed, owing to a fly that perforates the
bark.

See part 2. 103. The cause of the death of the prim is not known, nor the
precise time when it began. But in Connecticut the failure was observed about
twenty-five years ago; between the years 1770 and 1777, during the prevalence
of the terrible angina and dysentery among men. It contiuned gradually to
extend for some years, and the prim has at last totally disappeared.

It is remarkable that these diseases among corn, fruit trees and shrubs have
generally, if not always, appeared first on the Atlantic shore, and gradually
extended themselves into the interior country. This is an observation made by
many men in different parts of Connecticut. May we not from this circumstance,
deduce an argument, that the infection is imported!!!

But these phenomena are not new in the world; they are new only to people who
do not read. Aveienna, the Arabian physician, an author of great celebrity,
says, that "the state of air, called corrupt, either impedes the growth of
plants or covers them with rust." Diemerbroeck, de peste, p. 40. 41,
enumerates, among the effects of a pestilential air, ^e corruption of grain and
fruits, the production of mice and noxious insects which corrode and devour the
corn; the sterility of the earth, which fails to yield the usual quantity of
grain and fruits. He takes notice also of another fact, which is, the unusual
disposition to putrefaction in all kinds of fish, flesh and vegetables, during
pestilence. This putrefaction, is, by the moderns, considered as a fruitful
source of diseases. In some cases it may be so; but it is always an effect of
the same cause which produces epidemics.

Another remarkable fact to prove the universality of the pestilential
principle, is the sickness and death of fish in rivers and the sea. Several
examples are recorded in ancient history. See the years 590, 994, 1240 and
others. The number however of such facts is not great, in the old books; and
whenever this phenomenon occurred, it was ascribed to frost, to a battle among
the fish, or other improbable cause.

In modern times we have many examples recorded, but probably many others have
escaped observation; or been considered as things of no moment to mankind; for
within a century past, the opinion that the plague is propagated, in northern
climates, by contagion only, seems to have suspended all rational enquiries
into the cause of the disorder.

That the fish on the British coast or in the rivers, perished, during the last
great plague in 1665, I find no where related, in a manner to render the fact
certain; but I find Hodge has mentioned a fact of that sort as a proof that
pestilence is occasioned by an unwholesome vapor from the earth.

The death of the haddock on the coast of Norway in 1789, has been already
mentioned, but as there were many shocks of earthquake in Scotland, about that
period, it is not impossible that the haddock might have been suddenly killed
by some concussion of the water. A similar event took place on the American
coast, in the great earthquake of November 1755, when some whales and
multitudes of cod were killed, and seen afterward floating on the water. I
throw all such cases out of the question, and confine myself to the sickness
and death of fish, when there has been no concussion of the waters, to occasion
a violent death.

The disappearance of the blue-fish from Nantucket, in 1764, just after the
great mortality among the Indians, is a remarkable fact. Not less singular was
the sickness and extinction of the Wellfleet oysters in 1775, the year of a
fatal dysentery in America. Still more remarkable was the sickness or ill-state
of the cod-fish taken on the banks of Newfoundland in the year 1788. They were
thin, unfit for use and when preserved, turned to a blue or dark color.

Aristotle remarked that no one pestilential disease appears to affect all
kinds of fish; but that these animals are subject to sickness, which is known
by their being thin, and not changing their colors.

De Hist. Animal. lib. 8. ca. 20. But to come still nearer to the present time.
In the years 1793 and 4, the oysters on the coast of Connecticut and
Rhode Island, were all sickly, watery, and tasteless; wholly unfit for food,
and in some instances, brought on nausea or sickness in those who ate of them.
This was the very time when the scarlatina was spreading over the country, with
malignant dysentery and typhus.

The shad which came to the New York market in the spring of 1796, which was
the period of pestilence in New York, were leaner than usual, and perished, in
defiance of the powers of salt.

In 1797, multitudes of small dead fish floated down James river in Virginia.
It is remarkable that in the summer following, all the country from Norfolk to
Philadelphia, the very latitudes through which that river passes, was very
sickly; Norfolk, Baltimore and Philadelphia were all afflicted with the bilious
plague.

I have been informed, that many dead shad were seen to float down the
Susquehanna, in June 1798; but of the fact, I have not satisfactory evidence.

The reader cannot fail to remark here, the correspondence in place between the
epidemic diseases in the water and the air; the fish and the human race, in
contiguous regions, being diseased about the same time -- a fact too remarkable
to be permitted to escape particular observation.

The mortal pestilence among cats, in Europe and America, in 1797, is a fact
too well known to be repeated. The sickly state of the water in the wells of
New Haven, during the pestilential period of 1795; was evidenced by the number
of animalculae it contained.

Paracelsus mentions the death of fish but ascribes it to the influence of the
planets.

Vol. 1. 167. Sorbait relates that in the time of the plague at Vienna, I
suppose in 1679, a fountain in the suburbs, which had been esteemed for the
salubrity of its waters, exhaled a stench which appeared to increase the
mortality in the vicinity. Van Swieten Vol. 16. 47. It is probable that Sorbait
has mistaken the effect of this stench; it is probable the great mortality in
the vicinity and the impurity of the water proceeded both from one source, an
uncommon effusion of subterranean vapor in that particular quarter, or other
unknown cause.

All these phenomena denote a pestilential cause in water as well as air.
Whether that cause is a positive substance infused into the elements from
subterranean regions, increasing the due proportion of oxygen; whether it is a
negative state of the elements, occasioned by the abstraction of oxygen; or
whether it is occasioned simply by a chemical alteration in the elements, by
the mechanical operation of the electric fluid, which may produce new
properties in air and water, by means of new combinations of their parts, are
questions not easily solved. But without attempting to penetrate into the
mysteries of nature, and unfold primary causes, we may be certain of their
effects, and from this branch of knowledge, may deduce useful conclusions.

We know, for we see, the effects of some mortal principle, which, at
particular periods, destroys or impairs the usual powers of life, through the
animal and vegetable kingdoms. We rationally conclude that this cause must be
general, affecting the elements of life, over whole regions of the earth, and
beneath the waters of the ocean. Of so much we are certain. As to the primary
or remote causes, we shall probably remain in the dark -- and as to the
proximate causes, we can only indulge a rational spirit of philosophical
enquiry, that may lead to probabilities.

Sydenham is among the most respectable authorities for the doctrine of a change
in the properties of air from a subterraneous vapor. His words are, vol. 1. p.
8. Wallis's Edit. "There are various general constitutions of years, that owe
their origin neither to heat, cold, dryness nor moisture; but depend rather on
a certain secret and inexplicable alteration in the bowels of the earth, whence
the air becomes impregnated with such kinds of effluvia, as subject the human
body to particular distempers, so long as that kind of constitution prevails,
which after a certain course of years, declines and gives way to another."

The reader will recollect that when the plague first broke out in Athens, the
people alleged that their enemies had poisoned the wells. In the mortal plague
of 1349, the Germans suspected the Jews had poisoned the wells, and vented
their rage upon the harmless Israelites. These suspicions doubtless arose from
the bad quality of the waters, similar to what was observed in New Haven in
1795: And the suspicion of poison was full as well founded, as the modern
doctrine of importation, in most cases of pestilence.

The death of fish in rivers and the ocean, is one of the strongest arguments
to prove the cause of pestilence to be a subtle vapor, expelled or exhaled from
subterranean regions. That fish do in fact die of epidemic diseases, is a fact
as well authenticated and as certain, as that epidemic diseases affect the
human race -- and it is equally certain that such mortality among the fish, is
usually cotemporary with pestilence among men, on the adjacent shores. From
these facts, we are powerfully inclined to believe, the general cause which
affects the one species of animals, to be the same which affects the other
species. This conclusion is easy, natural and irresistible.

What then can be the principle which penetrates the waters, and reaches the
animal functions of fish and oysters on the bottom of the sea? Can it be a
vitiated state of the superincumbent atmosphere? Can a deleterious principle,
belonging to the air, find its way through a mass of water, and destroy life,
as effectually as in its natural fluid, on the surface of the earth? These are
questions, I pretend not to solve. But cannot help thi^king that the only
efficient cause, within our narrow comprehension, capable of extending the
principle of destruction through the different elements, is the all-pervading
energy of fire or electricity. The modus operandi is among the impenetrable
arcana of the physical world.

It may not be useless to introduce here an observation made by elderly people
in America, that in sickly years, the aurora borealis does not appear. It is
certain that during the present pestilential period, since 1790, that
phenomenon has never been observed, at least not in any distinguished degree of
brightness.

But the history of the aurora borealis does not warrant the justness of this
observation, as a general fact. The years 1564 and 5, which were distinguished
by northern lights, were sickly in Europe, and in many parts raged the plague.
The same lights were very splendid in November 1575, a year when the plague was
spreading over Europe with unusual violence and mortality. The same were
repeatedly observed in 1580, the year of a most severe universal catarrh, when
the plague raged in Paris, and when Cairo lost 500,000 people by the same
disease. These lights were again visible in 1621, and described by Gassendus in
France, who it is said gave them the name of aurora borealis. That year was
noted for a most fatal epidemic smallpox and the Hungarian fever in Europe;
and the plague which raged among the Indians in America in 1618, had not ceased
in 1621.

From this time to the year 1707, we have no account of the appearance of these
lights. In that year, they appeared, but not of a remarkable brightness. If
these lights appeared in this long interval, from 1621 to 1707, it is strange
that astronomers should have left us no account of them. Certain it is, that
the great Halley never saw this phenomenon till the year 1716, when he was 60
years old, and he began to despair of ever beholding it. During this long
suspension of the aurora borealis, epidemic pestilential diseases occurred very
often in both hemispheres.

In the same interval, these lights were never seen in America; and our
ancestors, when they first beheld them, at the beginning of this century,
supposed them a new phenomenon in creation; the memory of them having been lost.

In 1719, in November, appeared these lights; which was at the commencement of
a sickly period of great severity and extent -- the plague was then raging in
the Levant. A splendid phenomenon of the same kind was observed in Feb. 1720,
the most unhealthy year of that period. The same in the three following years,
and in 1725, 1726, 1728, 1730, repeatedly in 1733, a sickly year, repeatedly in
1735 and 36, very sickly years, when the mortal sore throat prevailed -- also
in 1737.

From these facts, we conclude that the cause of pestilential diseases, has no
connection with these visible phenomena of the electrical fluid, as they are
observed indifferently in healthy or sickly years. It is evident however that
the lumen boreale, is, in a certain degree, periodical.

Let us attend now to the effects of a pestilential state of air and water, in
the production of insects and small animals. This is one of the most remarkable
symptoms of a sickly state of the elements, and it is the more necessary to
insist on this phenomenon, because it is visible to every eye, and carries with
it, during pestilence, a demonstration of the doctrines for which I contend.

In the threshold of the history of plagues, we meet with accounts of myriads
of noxious insects, accompanying these calamities. The ten plagues of Egypt are
numbered among the miraculous interposi^ions of providence, in favor of his
chosen people. But so far as regards most of those plagues, we find, by
subsequent events, they are usual occurrenc^s during pestilential periods. Such
are swarms of insects c^^led in scripture flies and lice, and especially
locusts, which, at this day and in every age, are generated, in unhealthy
periods, in such m^n^ers as to darken the sun, when on the wing, and which
often devour every species of plants, and even the bark of trees. These animals
seem to have their origin in the deserts of Arabia, bordering on Egypt and
Syria; but they have often overspread all Palestine, Judea and Italy --
sometimes they have penetrated into Germany, Poland and Russia. It is
unnecessary here to enumerate the instances related in the foregoing history,
of the ravages of these animals; the reader has observed that instances of
their appearance have often occurred in different periods, and that they are
always the harbingers or the companions of the plague.

This fact leaves no room to question, that the same state of air in the
oriental regions, which will generate epidemic diseases, will often produce
those animals in unusual numbers. They do not indeed always attend the plague;
the particular season most favorable to their generation is an excessively dry
one; but it is obvious, that they rarely appear in desolating swarms, except in
periods when the neighboring countries are afflicted with mortal epidemics.

It is true that, in two or three instances, history informs us, dreadful
plagues have originated from the putrefaction of these animals -- the instance
of the pestilence on the African coast, about 126 years before the Christian
era, is memorable. But while this fact is not disputed, we must observe that
the same period was distinguished for pestilence in other countries, where no
such local or particular cause existed. Great swarms of locusts therefore in
the eastern countries, may be the cause of pestilential diseases, but always by
accident; whereas they are certainly the forerunners or companions of that
calamity.

See the years 394, 590, 677, 1031, 1084, 1091, 1186, 1234, 1337, 1476, 1646
and 7. Also before the Christian era, the locusts of the year 206 and 174.

In the destructive pestilence which almost extinguished the human race, in the
reign of the Antonines, about the year 167, the earth was overr^n with
caterpillars.

During a most mortal period, about the year 590, an inundation deluged Rome,
and such multitudes of serpents were brought down the stream and lodged on the
champaign country, as to occasion a great stench and contribute to the
subsequent mortality.

Worms and myriads of flies and other noxious animals are mentioned, in the
foregoing history, as the attendants on pestilence. See the years 763, 1001,
1106, 1234, 1286, 1348, 1390, 1575, 1598, 1610 and 12.

Lord Bacon informs us that during a plague in his time, there were found in
the ditches and low grounds about London, a species of animals which he calls
toads, with tails two or three inches long -- a kind of animals doubtless which
we often see in (...) waters, but of larger size. He remarks further, that
"those years have been noted for pestilential and unwholesome, wherein there
were great numbers of frogs, flies, locusts, etc."

Works. vol. 3. p. 166. Aristotle mentions the multitudes of frogs in sickly
years.

Prob. see. 1. Horsti^s informs us that unusual numbers of frogs, toads,
locusts, serpents, canker-worms, mice, snails and similar insects, are the
infallible signs of a pestilence. To these he adds an extraordinary abundance
of fish in the sea and in rivers.

See p. 253, de peste. The commencement of the present pestilential state in
America was distinguished by an unusual plenty of shad, of which fourteen
thousand were caught at one draft of a seine, near the harbor of New York. I
have met with one or two writers besides Horstius, who have mentioned this
phenomenon, among the presages of pestilence, particularly Paracelsus in vol.
1. 168.

The plague of 1635 and 6 in Holland was accompanied or preceded by an
incredible number of insects, as gnats, butterflies, beetles, wasps,
grass-hoppers, but especially flies, which were so numerous, as to cover the
ceilings of houses, and even to obscure the sun in the open air.

See Diemerbroeck, de peste, p. 10. In the plague at Lausanne, in 1613, flies
were in similar abundance.

Ibm. The approach of the plague at Dantzick, in 1709, was announced by
incredible numbers of spiders, in the preceding year.

Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 6. 13. The year 1633, which produced a pestilential
fever among the settlers at Plymouth in America, was remarkable for swarms of
large flies, which filled the woods with their humming sounds.

In the month of August, during a dreadful drouth at Bengal in 1770, which cut
short the rice-crops and produced a terrible famine, and subsequent epidemic
fever, the air was filled with a cloud of insects, of the size of a
horse-stinger, with a long red body and large head; they continued to obscure
the sun for some days, during which all toads, frogs and insects on the earth
disappeared, but this cloud in the air did not descend to the earth. The next
year, a million of people perished with epidemic diseases.

The present pestilential period in America was introduced by such multitudes
of canker-worms and palmer-worms, as were never before known. Musquetoes have
been the harbingers and attendants on the diseases in New York and Philadelphia
in 1793, 1795 and 1798. In this latter year, the whole country has been
overspread with grass-hoppers, which very much injured the meadows, pastures
and gardens.

On these facts I will just remark, that they serve to confirm the historical
truth of the scriptures. The whole series of facts, relative to the great
plagues that have afflicted mankind, is a tissue of proofs, that the history of
the ten plagues of Egypt was written on the spot, and is a faithful record of
facts. If the operations of nature are uniform, the scriptures cannot be a
spurious production. They describe Egypt and Syria, as to every thing
respecting climate and productions, precisely as they are at this day; and this
fact is alone sufficient to establish their authenticity, against all the
infidels on earth.

It may be impossible to define precisely those qualities of air and water
which favor the production of unusual multitudes of any particular sort of
insects. It has been customary for writers to ascribe them to putrefaction in
the air; an indefinite and unintelligible term. It is true that musquetoes and
some other insects are generated in hot, moist, stagnant air, and in marshy
places, when the putrefaction of vegetable and animal substances, is uncommonly
rapid. But they are produced in pure water, also, without any apparent mixture
of vegetable matter, beyond what is common to all water.

Flies, on the contrary, are most numerous in a hot and dry season. Moisture is
hostile to their existence; and in the year 1795, when the rainy season
commenced about the 20th of July, preceding the fever in New York, the flies
almost wholly disappeared, and were succeeded by musquetoes. Putrid substances
are the food of flies, but the seasons most favorable to putrefaction, do not
always produce flies in the greatest numbers.

In short, it is not possible to account for the myriads of insects which
appear in particular years, on any known principles of the animal economy, or
any visible properties of air and water. If unusual numbers of a particular
insect appear periodically, as in case of the canker-worms, tho I have not
satisfactory evidence of the regularity of their appearance, in uniform
periods, we should naturally conclude such animals to pass through other forms
of existence, and to re-appear in a particular noxious form, at the end of
definite intervals of time. But were this the fact, it would still remain a
problem of a most embarrassing difficulty, to discover the reason of their
appearance in unhealthy periods only. For such is the fact, with most of the
insects, and their transmigration, if admitted, will not in the least help us
to account for their existence, in those times only when the state of the air
is unfriendly to human life.

But in truth, as to most of the noxious insects which mark periods of epidemic
diseases, we know them not to change their forms of existence, nor are the
times of their appearance, periodical. On the other hand, we observe they
appear in sickly periods; and in unusual numbers, at no other time. We conclude
therefore that a state of the elements, unfriendly to the health of man, is
favorable to the generation of noxious insects, but without attempting to
explain the particular properties of the elements, which possess that prolific
power. May it not be the effect of excitement, owing to unusual electrical
stimulus?
All I contend for, by these facts, is, that the pestilential principle,
whatever may be its nature or properties is a general principle, affecting all
the elements of life, and that to this general cause are we to ascribe the
deleterious diseases which, at times, spread over extensive regions of the
earth. Under this just and philosophical view of the subject, infection sinks
to a very trifling consideration, among the causes of epidemic distempers.

The order in which insects and diseases appear, is not uniform; but it usually
happens that the insects are the first in order of time. This was the fact in
1770, when the flies clouded the heavens in Bengal, and the worms darkened the
earth in America. Such was the fact in 1791 when canker-worms in June gave to
our orchards the aspect of winter. But the whole progress of epidemics is more
or less marked by noxious and troublesome insects.

In 1798 and 1799, the meadows in some parts of Connecticut have been almost
covered with small toads, of the size of a chestnut, and as described by
Fernelius, "coloris cineritii," of the color of ashes. These animals, in such
numbers, are unusual -- they are not of the color of the common toad, and never
grow to the same size. They come suddenly and in a few weeks disappear! Who
knows their origin or their end? Fernelius numbered them, more than two
centuries ago, among the presages of pestilence, and we are witnesses to the
truth of his observation.

If we attend to the state of a pestilential air, in respect to its effects on
inanimate objects, we are furnished with further proofs, that epidemic diseases
are the production, not of fomites from the sick, but of a general deleterious
principle.

A remarkable instance of the corrupt or defective state of air, happened in
the mortal plague of the year 252. See the description of it under that year.
It covered objects with what the historian calls "ros tabidus," a putrid
corrupt dew or mould. A state of air so extremely imperfect must have been
utterly insufficient to support healthy life, in the animal system.

The air of New York in 1795 produced astonishing effects in the generation of
mould, and the rapidity in the process of putrefaction, in flesh and
vegetables, was almost incredible.

The fatal angina maligna among cattle in 1682 was attended with a blue mist or
dew on the herbage of pastures. See the description of it under that year.

It is not an unfrequent thing that a visible and offensive mist or fog arises
in places, during the rage of pestilential diseases. Such a mist arose and
spread over Dantzick, in August 1709, during the plague. This fog was so thick
as to darken the air, for some time, and had a very offensive smell.

Baddam's Mem. vol. 6. 14. Schreibner, cited by Van Swieten, Vol. 16. mentions
that a small cloud often hangs over the infected place. It is suggested by that
able author, that the contagion, collected into such a cloud, may be dispersed
by winds, and afterward collect at a different place. It is however more
probable, that such collections of impure vapor, are produced where they exist;
and that, if once dispersed, the particles are not afterward collected. The
phenomenon however is no inconsiderable evidence, that a pestilential state of
the atmosphere, is caused or increased by vapors exhaled from the bowels of the
earth.

In the mortal pestilence at Rome A. U. C. 576, Livy mentions a bow extended
over the temple of Saturn, three mocksuns, and in the evening following, many
transient meteors.

Lib. 41. 21. A similar fog or vapor during easterly winds, appeared in
New York, in September 1798, in the most fatal period of the plague. Persons
who felt and saw it, describe it as most disagreeable to the senses; and its
effects were very remarkable. The pavements of the streets and other objects
were covered with a coat of dew or mould, not however exactly resembling either
of those substances; not unlike perhaps the "ros tabidus," or "ros sanci
similis," of the year 252. Its effects were equally wonderful on the leaves of
trees, which were covered with spots, which appeared as if corroded by an acid.
And I have seen a cotton garment, which had been washed, and hung out on the
night of the fog, which was also covered with spots of a dark, gray color, and
which could not be taken out by any process of washing. During this period
also, iron railings and pump-handles were suddenly covered over with scales of
rust, or a ferruginous color. These phenomena correspond with the effects of
the pestilential air at Oczakow in 1739, in which surgical instruments became
livid or black, as did the silver hilt of a sword.

These recent facts which have come under my own observation, have enabled me
to give due credit to historians, who mention spots in garments, appearing
suddenly, during the plague. The writers who mention this phenomenon were
mostly monks or other ecclesiastics, whose relations are highly tinged with
superstition; and as their imaginations have usually wrought up these
appearances into the figure of a cross, or other chimerical form, and ascribed
to them some miraculous qualities, I had passed over the passages with very
slight consideration.

I have however transcribed or rather abridged one of these accounts, under the
head of plagues in the reign of Justinian. It is from Warnefred, who relates
that in the pestilence at Liguria, the Genoese territory, there appeared
suddenly "quaedam signacula," certain signs or spots, on doors of houses,
garments and utensils which could not be washed out, but grew brighter by
washing. See the account in the foregoing history, under the description of the
plagues between 542 and 600. I recollect reading several other accounts of
similar phenomena, which, for the reasons just assigned, I neglected to
transcribe when the authors were before me, which I now regret.

The celebrated Boil mentions similar phenomena during pestilence, and
particularly an instance in Naples in the year 1660, which happened after an
eruption of Vesuvius, and which he ascribes to a vapor. The vapor, he remarks,
made impressions of curious figures on garments; and he cites Thuanus and
Kircher, as authorities for his opinion. See vol. 5. p. 60.

In the dreadful plague of 746, similar figures appeared on the garments of
people, which the writer calls cruciculae, little crosses, which seemed as if
drawn in oil. These marks excited no small terror, wherever they appeared.

Paulus Diaconus, Aug. History, p. 1012. Similar figures were impressed on the
bodies of the men who were employed by Julian to rebuild Jerusalem in 362 or 3,
and who were driven from their work by earthquakes and eruptions of fire. From
these facts we may be led to ascribe the formation of such spots to some
electrical process, or combination with an acid.

These phenomena indicate a peculiar state of the air, which is not common even
during pestilence. It is a state which marks the highest degree of derangement
in its ordinary healthful qualities, and such, as blessed be God, does not
often occur.

Another strong proof of the doctrine here maintained of a pestilential
principle in the elements, is the well known fact, that during the plague,
fowls abandon the atmosphere of the infected places.

Livy mentions that in the terrible plague in Rome, anno urbis conditae 571,
not a vulture was to be seen for two years.

Dr. Gottwald remarks that in the Dantzick plague of 1709, sparrows, daws,
storks and swallows deserted the place for four months. Dr. Schelwig has
recorded a similar fact; and Sorbait affirms that birds deserted Vienna during
the plague. Those kept in cages died.

Diemerbroeck has informed us that in the Holland plague of 1635 and 6 birds
were unusually rare. He remarks that birds more readily perceive the poisonous
state of the air, and change their residence to places more salubrious, even
abandoning their nests and their young. The same fact has been observed by many
medical and historical writers.

The ancient physician and compiler of medical science, Aetius, mentions, among
the signs of approaching pestilence, the death of birds and quadrupeds. If,
says he, the circumambient air is the cause of the disease, it will first show
its effects in destroying birds; if vicious exhalations from the earth, are the
cause, quadrupeds will be first affected.

The fact goes to demonstrate that the pestilential principle pervades the
aerial fluid and is offensive to the delicate organs of fowls. It may be
further mentioned, that the deleterious principle is often fatal to small birds
in cages, before it is perceived by the human race. It is a curious and well
authenticated fact, that in the progress of a plague, in cities, small birds
sicken and die; and not long after, the people in the same house, are seized
with the pestilence. Diemerbroeck was frequently an eyewitness to the fact,
and he observed, that wherever the small birds died in cages, the plague never
failed, sometime after and often in two or three days, to attack the
inhabitants of the dwelling. This is another proof amounting to demonstration,
that the pestilential principle is a quality of the atmosphere, and that it is
progressive in its malignity, having little or no dependence on the powers of
contagion.

See Diem. de peste, p. 11. After all, the cause of violent and destructive
epidemic diseases may remain a secret. We see the causes of the ordinary
diseases of the seasons, in marshes, stagnant waters, confined air, and the
like; but it often happens that pestilence commits most cruel ravages, in
seasons apparently the most temperate, and in places evidently the most
salubrious.

The plague in 542, and in subsequent periods of the fifty years plague of
Evagrius, ascended to the tops of the hills and mountains. The terrible plague
of 252, in the reign of Gallus and Volusian, invaded every village and almost
every house. The deadly plague of 1348 penetrated likewise to the most healthy
spots on the globe and even to the regions of Greenland, sweeping away the
human race, with undistinguishing severity.

Hildanus informs us that in the plague of Lausanne, in 1613, the huts of the
peasants on the hills and mountains were not exempt from the malady, tho
detached and having no intercourse with the infected. The same fact is recorded
of the plague in 1720, which extended to the villages and mountains of Provence.

In the Traite de la peste, p. 29, it is asserted that in the melancholy plague
at Lions in 1628, the filthiest houses, the crowded places, narrow streets and
confined apartments, were places of the most safety; while the most airy
situations, as houses on hills, were most exposed to the ravages of the
disorder. No place was exempt -- the change of air was useless or pernicious;
in some cases, those who enjoyed health in the impure air of the city, on
removing into the country, were attacked with the malady. Malouin declares that
the most populous and dirty places in Lions and Marseilles were least affected
with the plague.

These facts are very singular; yet it is not difficult to account for them, on
the principle of a superabundance of oxygen, stimulus, or principle of life in
the atmosphere. If, as is supposed, a usual cause of pestilential disorders, is
a too great quantity of oxygen in the air, producing first the stenic or
inflammatory diathesis, and of course indirect debility, then those places must
be most healthy, in such a general state of the air, where there is the
smallest proportion of oxygen. This remark however is a mere conjecture; and
the facts related of the plague in Lions stand as an exception to a very
general rule, that the most filthy, unventilated places suffer most severely by
all kinds of pestilential maladies. In Lions, tanners and curriers escaped the
plague, as did those who cleansed sewers and privies. The same has generally
been the case with the sextons, and others employed in burying the dead. See
Lancisius page 160 In London, shipwrights who labored in the vapor of (...) and
pitch, escaped.


It is also true in general, that the poor, who inhabit narrow streets and
alleys, amidst filthy substances, suffer more by malignant complaints than the
rich, who live in wider streets, and more airy, cleanly houses. To this however
history presents us some exceptions; cases have occurred in which the rich have
been the principal sufferers, as in 1361.

While it may be difficult to assign precise reasons for such differences in
the operation of the principle of destruction, the facts prove that this
principle consists in some hidden qualities of the elements, and does not arise
from any of the ordinary visible causes of disease. Riverius is explicit on
this point. He avers that pestilential diseases often occur, without any
apparent change in the visible qualities of the air, and when the air appears
to be more pure than at other times, when no such diseases prevail.

Lib. 17. Further, although it is generally true that pestilence is attended and
greatly augmented in violence by some peculiarity in the seasons, as excessive
heat and moisture or drouth, yet to this there are frequent exceptions. The
reader may turn back to an instance of this, recorded by Livy and other Latin
historians, in which it was remarked as a matter of surprise, that a violent
plague, and one of the most destructive kind, should assail the city of Rome,
in a mild, temperate season. A similar observation was made respecting the
plague in Paris in 1580. The summer was temperate and the fruits good. No
visible cause could be assigned for the malady. Yet a most certain, or rather
an infallible symptom of a deranged state of the elements, had occurred in that
year; I mean a most severe universal influenza. Hence it appears, that although
peculiar seasons may prodigiously increase, and perhaps produce a pestilence;
yet the general cause is often some principle which has no dependence on season
or changes of weather. In the last London plague, in 1665, says Hodge, the
season was mild, the heat moderate, and fruits abundant and good.

We have, in America, proofs of the truth of this doctrine. The last
pestilential period commenced with the measles in 1789 and severe epidemic
influenza in 1789 and 90; and has already continued ten years. Some of the
summers, during this period, have been very temperate, as those of 1794 and
1797. Yet every summer has produced the pestilential fever of our climate; and
even our winters have exhibited symptoms of the diseases which prevail in
summer. Not one year, even the most temperate, of the whole period, has failed
to show the predominant diathesis of the pestilence. The sultry dry summers of
1793 and 98, and the sultry humid summer of 1795, have rendered the diseases
more violent and fatal in the northern states.

Yet in the more favorable seasons of 1794, 96 and 97, the morbid cause
produced its effects in New Haven, Providence, Newburyport and Boston, as well
as in Baltimore, Norfolk and Charleston.

Hence we observe that the elemental cause of the diseases of this period, may
be, in some degree, modified, but not controlled or subdued by the most
temperate and favorable seasons.

Indeed all writers of reputation on this subject agree, in this one opinion,
that the plague cannot be ascribed, either to intemperate seasons, or to
putrefaction, or to any species of exhalations from animal and vegetable
substances. These are allowed to be secondary causes, operating to modify or
vary the operation of the primary cause; but one uniform series of observations
from the beginning of history to this day, has driven medical writers from the
defenseless ground of intemperate weather, and putrid exhalations.

Hippocrates learnt that pestilence could not be ascribed solely to visible
causes; he therefore admits to theion, something divine, or beyond human
investigation, to be a primary cause of this calamity.

Tacitus informs us that the plague in the time of Nero could not be ascribed
to any visible intemperature in the seasons.

Fernelius observes that although immoderate heat augments the plague and every
acute disease, yet he had known an excessively hot season, pass off without
producing pestilential diseases. He agrees with Diemerbroeck, that the cause
must be some unknown principle, "inquinamentum e coelo demissum," some cause of
corruption in the atmosphere, which is infused into it from the celestial
regions. This is cutting the gordian knot. These authors are doubtless right,
in rejecting the visible qualities of the air, exhalations and intemperate
seasons, as the primary causes of the plague; but they fly from earth into the
boundless regions of space, for a cause which is more probably beneath their
feet, or around their bodies.

Sennertus decides also most positively against putridity or corruption of the
humors, as the cause of pestilence; and maintains that it proceeds from an
occult malignity in the air.

Skenkius contends that persons do not receive the plague from ^umors in the
body, from extraordinary seasons, from intestine putridity, or corruption of
indigested substances, nor from bad food or drink, nor from stagnant waters,
nor from exhalations from dead bodies, cemeteries or sewers, or the fetid
waters of tan-yards; unless they inhale the noxious or infecting cause, e
sublimi. To produce the malady, requires no corruption of the manifest
qualities of the air.

Page 764. Prosper Alpinus, who lived some time in Egypt and had an opportunity
to make personal observations on the diseases of that country, maintains that
the plague rarely arises from corrupt air, and never, unless when the Nile has
exceeded its usual limits in its inundations. If, says this writer, the disease
proceeded from noxious exhalations from putrid stagnant waters and marshes, it
would occur every year, which is contrary to fact. Hence he concludes the
disease to be usually imported into Egypt from Greece, Syria and Barbary. In
this opinion, he has been followed by a whole tribe of unobserving travelers;
who stupidly forget that by tracing the distemper from Egypt to Syria or
Barbary, they never come nearer to its source. The question still occurs, what
is its cause? where is its source? If putrid exhalations in Egypt will not
produce the plague, will such exhalations in Syria or Barbary produce it? Why
trace it to these countries? Does any cause exist in Syria, Greece or Barbary
to generate that disease, which does not exist in Egypt?

To avoid this dilemma, some writers insist that its source is in
Constantinople, where the seeds of it are treasured up in old clothes, and
preserved from year to year, and from age to age. But why suppose this source
of the disease to exist in Constantinople only? Why not the same source forever
exist in Egypt, for there also infected clothes are never purified. In short,
from Prosper Alpinus to Mead and Cullen, all the reasonings and assertions of
authors on the origin of the plague, argue either impotence of mind, want of
observation or extreme prejudice.

So far as this, Alpinus is right, that exhalations alone from stagnant waters
and marshes will not ordinarily generate the plague; but aided by some general
primary cause in the elements, such exhalations do produce the plague, and in
no country more frequently than in Egypt.

Gibbon alleges this disease to proceed from hot, damp, stagnant air, drawing
this conclusion probably from the origination of the terrible plague of 542, in
the foul regions near Pelusium in Egypt, and in the vicinity of a large marsh.
But if this were the only cause necessary to produce the disorder, as Alpinus
justly observes, it would occur regularly every year, for every hot season
generates putrid exhalations in ample abundance, and in every hot climate, will
be found annual returns of hot, damp, stagnant air, The causes therefore
assigned by Gibbon are inadequate to the effect.

In America, beyond almost any other country, we have the most irresistible
arguments against this opinion. No country on earth, not excepting the rice
plantations on the river Bengal, presents such an immense region of stagnant
waters, and fetid marshes, as the eastern shore of the United States, from the
Delaware to Florida. The southern extremity of this region is in a climate
always warm; and the whole of it is exposed to burning heat, for four months in
the year. Yet the true, "pestis inguinaria," of the oriental countries has
never appeared in this country, as an epidemic; and the species of the plague
which occurs, and which I call bilious or American, appears as rarely amidst
the marshes of Carolina, as in the northern cities, which are expoposed to no
marsh exhalations.

Now if hot, damp, stagnant air, and putrid exhalations alone were adequate to
the production of this bilious plague, it must be produed every year, in a
multitude of places on the American coast; whereas in fact, that disease rarely
occurs, as an epidemic, even on the flat lands of Carolina and Georgia; and
never is very extensively mortal, except when the northern states, which are
situated on high, rocky, gravelly and dry lands, and whose air and water are of
the most pure and salubrious kind, are afflicted also with malignant epidemic
distempers.

This is a remarkable fact and one on which I will venture to rest the whole
argument. In no instance, has the city of Charleston, situated on an immense
flat, surrounded by the marshes of Ashley and Cooper rivers, been severely
troubled with a contagious bilious epidemic, except when the seasons have been
sickly in the northern states. Witness the years 1699, 1728, 1732, 1739, 1745,
1748, 1796. I speak not of sporadic cases among strangers that visit the
southern states, for these may occur every year.

The Europeans might, had they not been blinded by the false notions of
contagion, long ago have discovered the same important truth; for what is
called a great plague in Egypt or Syria, never occurs, except during the
prevalence of malignant epidemics all over Europe, even to the Baltic. Lighter
epidemics occur in Egypt and Constantinople, in any uncommon season; and so
does the ordinary autumnal bilious fever, in all our southern states. These are
disorders which may be excited, in any place and any season, by the action of
heat on vegetable substances in stagnant water, or by the local impurities
which always exist in populous cities. But these ordinary diseases do not put
on the malignant spmptoms which characterize the distempers of pestilential
periods -- they do not exhibit infection. On the other hand, when the diseases
of Egypt assume contagious and deadly symptoms and spread desolation over that
country, we shall always find the northern parts of Europe, more or less
afflicted with the same or other malignant disorders. The pestilential
principle, in greater or less degrees of violence, extends over the whole
European world, and not unfrequently over the American continent.

Thus, although the plague does not, in modern times, appear in the north of
Europe, at least not often, yet all the great plagues in the Levant are
visible, if I may indulge the expression, in the augmented bills of mortality
in London, Amsterdam, and the Baltic cities. Witness the pestilential periods
of 1720, of 1736 to 1740, of 1760 to 1763. Even the less violent pestilences of
1772 and 3, and of 1784 to 1786, have been marked by epidemics in England and
Scotland. And, in the last series of epidemics, the years 1792, 93 and 95,
which have been distinguished for the plague in the east, as well as anginas
and plague in America, exhibit a considerable increase of mortality in London.

All these facts serve as evidence of the truth of what the medical writers of
the fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth centuries have unanimously advanced,
that the primary cause of pestilence is some invisible quality in the elements,
altogether distinct from corrupt air, or marsh exhalations.

It is a remark of the Arabian physicians, that an indisposition of the air is
necessary, in the hottest climates, to enforce the action of putrid effluvia on
the human body to produce the plague.

Mead, 248. Dr. Mead himself, while he maintains that the putrefaction of
animal substances, with unseasonable moistures, heats and want of winds,
produces the plague, and while he contends that no kind of putrefaction in
European countries, is ever heightened to a degree capable of producing the
true plague, admits that a corrupted state of air is necessary to give the
contagious atoms their full force, otherwise the plague could never cease, but
with the extinction of mankind. That is, he holds the plague never to appear in
European northern countries, without contagion, but that the contagion would
remain inert, without a corrupt state of the atmosphere.

The absurd opinion, that northern climates will not generate the state of air
which occasions a pestilence, but that a pestilential germ, or leaven, must be
imported from Egypt or other southern latitude, has been adopted by most of the
British medical writers, and by a numerous part of the physicians in the United
States. It is hard to say whether the followers of Mead are the more servile,
or their opinion, the more unphilosophical. But for my present purpose, it is
sufficient that even the advocates for the propagation of the plague by a
specific contagion, admit that this cause is not adequate to the effect, and
that they are compelled to summon to their aid a general principle of
corruption in the air, to account for its propagation in northern climates.
This concession of the existence of such a principle, by whatever name it may
be called, is all I ask.

It is on this principle only, we can reconcile the differing accounts of
authors, in regard to the effect of putrefying bodies after battles, in
producing pestilential diseases; some alleging that such corrupting bodies will
produce the plague, and others denying the fact. Julius Alexandrinus, Diodorus
Siculus and other authors, relate that plagues have arisen from the
putrefaction of dead bodies after battles. Three or four instances occur in the
foregoing history, of plagues ascribed to the putrefaction of dead locusts.
Forestus relates that a dead whale, cast upon the shore of Holland, occasioned
an extensive pestilence in Egmont. See Hieronymus, Agustinus, Sabellicus,
Walfius, Angelus, Paraeus, and Agricola, who have recorded similar facts, as
cited by Diemerbroeck de peste.

Dr. Gottwald relates that the plague which spread over the north of Europe
from 1702 to 1711, originated near Pickzow, soon after the unfortunate battle
between the Saxons and Swedes; but he says nothing of putrefying bodies, nor
does he ascribe the disease to that cause.

Baddam's Mem. 6. 5. At the same time, it it equally true, that thousands of
dead bodies after battles have perished unburied, without producing any such
effect. In 1642, eight thousand dead soldiers and innumerable carcases of
horses, after a battle in the Duchy of Juliers, were left to putrefy on the
surface of the earth, causing an intolerable stench, but producing no
pestilential disease. The same fact happened often, says Diemerbroeck, p. 31,
in the cruel wars, between the Swedes and Imperialists, in his days; and we
know that other historians have related similar facts.

Whenever a malignant disease follows such an extensive putrefaction,
Diemerbroeck alleges, the disease to be only a pestilential fever, but not the
true plague. Or if, in any instance, the true plague follows, he maintains the
putrefaction to be only a secondary cause. This is probably a near approach to
the truth. The whole mystery is unfolded, on my principles, which teach the
existence of a disordered or pestilential state of the elements, at particular
times. If the putrefaction of dead bodies takes place during these periods,
when the animal functions are debilitated, or impaired, and the human body,
prone to disease, the corruption of flesh may so far vitiate the atmosphere as
to produce pestilence. But if thousands of dead bodies putrefy on the earth,
when the air is in its natural state, salubrious and adapted to the support of
health, and when the human body is in full vigor to resist the effects of the
foul effluvia, it is hardly possible for any quantity of dissolving flesh to
evolve a poison, adequate to the production of pestilential disorders, and
certainly not sufficient to occasion an extensive epidemic.

An attention to this distinction will also reconcile all the differences of
opinion, and all the contradictory phenomena which regard the effects of
vegetable effluvia, and the impure air of cities.

Why, it has been triumphantly asked by the advocates of imported fomites, did
not the filthy streets and putrefying vegetables of New York and Philadelphia,
produce the bilious pestilence, in former years? For many years, we recollect,
more foul streets and docks, much greater accumulations of filth, yet these
produced not the contagious fever which has lately desolated our cities.

Such are the facts, I admit; and the same will again take place, when the
period of pestilence shall be closed, and the latent disorders of the elements,
corrected. But there has existed, since 1789, a universal defect in the
healthful powers of the elements, clearly evidenced by a series of severe
epidemics, the influenza and scarlatina, the increased violence of the symptoms
of ordinary distempers; by the imperfection of fruits; by the sickness and
death of fish, fowls and cats, with many disorders among other animals. The
moment this state of the elements occurs, the local impurities which always
exist in cities, and which produce only ordinary diseases, in a healthful
disposition of the elements, give to those diseases new virulence and a
contagious quality. The whole secret to be unfolded, is, that the autumnal
diseases, under the debilitating operation of a general derangement of the
elements, acquire unusually severe symptoms, a wider extension, and the quality
of contagion or what I call infection. These phenomena excite the astonishment
of men, who have not attended to the history of pestilence, in which they might
have found the means of solving the difficulty; for similar facts have marked
the progress of pestilential diseases, from the days of Moses to this hour.

I would further observe that from universal observation, it appears, that
during that state of air, which produces contagious diseases in unusual
numbers, all kinds of flesh and vegetables are more apt to putrefy, than in a
healthy state of the atmosphere. This was observed by Diemerbroeck in the
Holland plague of 1636; and we have had many proofs of it in America, within a
few years past. And this is evidently true not only of fresh animal meat, but
also of salted meats of all kinds. The powers of salt appear to be insufficient
to preserve flesh and fish, against the strong tendency to dissolution, which
seems to attend them in certain years. Hence we so frequently hear of spoiled
beef and pork, and fish during sickly periods.

In some seasons, it appears to be almost impossible to keep provisions,
destined for a foreign market. This effect on flesh and fish may proceed either
from unusual heat and moisture in the air, or from an obvious imperfection or
sickly state of the animals; and perhaps, independent of these causes, it may
proceed sometimes from the same invisible principle in the properties of air,
which originates new and malignant symptoms of disease in the human body; a
mere excess of stimulus.

But whatever may be the cause, the effect is obvious; and the unexpected
putrefaction of salted meats, has often been among the causes which have
generated or augmented pestilential distempers in America. Such an instance is
mentioned at New Haven in 1794, where a quantity of putrid fish was thrown into
the dock, and was excessively offensive, just before the appearance of the
pestilential fever. In New York, the last summer, the pestilence evidently
received great force and malignancy from large quantities of beef and pork
which spoiled in stores and cellars. A similar cause is supposed to have
excited or increased the same disease in Boston and New London. The
putrefaction of remains of great multitudes of the fish called Menhaden, on the
wharves in Newburyport, in 1796, was obviously a powerful exciting cause of the
disorder in that town.

In such cases, putrefaction is more rapid, and its stench more poisonous, than
under a healthful constitution of the atmosphere. This accelerated dissolution
of flesh is the effect of the common principle of disease, and in its turn,
becomes the cause of disease.

Hence we may observe, that it is only during a sickly state of the elements,
that putrefaction is ever known to excite pestilential epidemics; for almost
every man has observed, many times, that the same quantities of putrefying
flesh, in periods of health, produce no such distempers. It is this
circumstance which has puzzled all superficial observers, and furnished the
advocates of imported infection, with strong ground to maintain their errors.
They allege, "the same causes have not always produced the same effects. As
putrefaction and filth have not, at other times and always, produced diseases
in our climate, therefore they do not produce the pestilential fever of the
present time, and it must be occasioned by imported fomites." These men have
not attended to similar facts in all other countries and in all ages. The same
argument would prove that no pestilential disease can be generated any where;
for it is as true of the West Indies, of Egypt and Constantinople, as it is of
the United States, that putrefaction does not, every year and at all times,
produce pestilence. In this fact agree all authors who have written on the
causes of the plague. And there is reason to believe, with Diemerbroeck, that
putrefaction alone never produces the plague; but that whenever it is the
apparent exciting cause, there concurs with it a general sickly state of the
air; which not being visible, mankind ascribe the whole effect to putrefaction.

In the United States, it is a very curious fact, that this sickly state of the
elements has been progressive, as I have particularly proved, in the preceding
pages, which progression was clearly marked by the increase of mortality by the
scarlatina, and other diseases of unusual malignity. In every instance, the
epidemic pestilential fever, tho said to arise from putrid flesh, has kept pace
with this insalubrious state of air. For example, while Philadelphia was
ravaged by the plague in 1793, the scarlatina was prevalent in New York; but
the eastern states were exempt, and felt no inconvenience from the pestilential
state of the air, unless in a few sporadic cases of autumnal fever, of
augmented violence, which indicated a commencement of the epidemic
constitution. In 1794, this constitution arrived to its crisis in Connecticut,
moving eastward in its progress; and at New Haven appeared the pestilential
fever, soon after its precursor, the scarlatina. Now whether we suppose the
pestilence to be from imported fomes, or from the putrid fish and clams in the
docks, it is remarkable that it did not occur till the state of air was
evidently sickly, and ill-fitted to support life, as appeared by the malignant
dysentery in the vicinity, and by the universal prevalence of scarlatina. This
is a curious and important fact.

Proceeding eastward we observe the same truth. The pestilential fever at
Newburyport was said to be excited by the putrid garbage of fish -- true, but
this effect did not take place in 1793, when the fever was laying waste
Philadelphia; nor in 1795, when the same fever prevailed in New York. Why?
evidently because the constitution of air in the eastern states, had not then
arrived to its crisis of malignancy. But moving eastward, the scarlatina began
to show itself there in 1795, and in 1796 was more general and fatal in all the
adjacent country. Then followed the pestilential fever, both in Boston and
Newburyport. So that if we admit the disease to be of imported origin, or
suppose it to arise from putrid exhalations, we are still compelled to admit
the concurrence of some general cause in the production of the disease, because
we never know this pestilence to appear, but when other diseases and phenomena
demonstrate the existence of such a cause. If it should be said, that putrid
fish might not have existed, in other years, in situations to expose the
inhabitants; I answer, that within my observation, in numberless instances,
immense quantities of the entrails of fish are left to putrefy on the shores of
our rivers, every year, with an intolerable stench, but without producing the
least appearance of disease.
In Philadelphia, in New Haven, and in almost every place, the pestilential
fever has followed close upon the heels of that malignant distemper, the
scarlet fever.

With respect to the duration of this general constitution of air, we can
determine nothing, but by the event. We observe in history, that such
pestilential periods are of various length, from three to fifteen years, or
perhaps for a longer time; during which, diseases are multiplied and augmented;
and all bearing some peculiar symptoms, that characterize that constitution or
state of the elements. On this subject the treatise of Sydenham is invaluable.

There remains one other view of this subject to be considered in this section
-- this is, the connection of pestilential diseases with famine.

Most authors have remarked that famine is a cause of pestilence, and have cited
the old Greek adage, o loimos meta limon, pestis post famem, the plague follows
famine.

It is a just remark that the true plague often follows a dearth of provisions;
it is more frequently true, that scarcity is followed by diseases of a less
malignant type But it is equally true that this order is often inverted, and
famine follows pestilence. It is more frequently true that pestilence is neither
preceded nor followed by any scarcity of provisions. Instances of all these
facts appear in the preceding history. The conclusion is inevitable, that the
plague proceeds from some other cause, than a deficient or superabundant
quantity of food, for it often occurs, independent of either of these
circumstances.

Thus Morellus, de feb. pest. lib. 3, relates an instance, where no
pestilential diseases succeeded a severe famine. Galen mentions an instance of a
severe famine which followed as severe a plague in Rome, yet the famine did not
again excite the plague.

De Pauw, in his Philosophical Dissertations on the Egyptians and Chinese, vol.
1. 87, answers and refutes the Abbe Fourmont who alleged famine to be the cause
of the plague.

"By exact annotations, says De Pauw, continued during twenty-eight years, we
find the plague has raged in Egypt five times, without being preceded by any
scarcity of food, and contrary to what I once suspected, unrestricted to a
periodical course." We know also in America, that scarcity of food can have had
no influence in producing the numerous epidemic and pestilential disorders of
the last nine years.

On this subject Diemerbroeck has a very just remark, and one that solves all
the difficulties that might seem to arise from the differing accounts of the
effects of famine. He says "Non omnem, sed illam tantum famem sequitur pestis,
quae fames et ipsa a pestilentiae causa originem sumit, (dum a^ ea causa primo
fruges terrae corrumpuntur, postea pestis inducitur,) ita ut fames illa non sit
causa pestis, sed ipsamet eandem cum peste causam habeat."

De peste, page 30. "For the plague does not follow every famine; but that only
which arises from the same cause as the plague; (for by that cause the fruits
of the earth are first vitiated and afterward the plague succeeds) so that the
famine is not the cause of the plague, but proceeds itself from the same cause."

Whenever there exists a general cause in the elements, unfriendly to the
health of the human race, and at the same time, to the growth and perfection of
grain, pestilence and famine may be companions of each other; or they may
reciprocally follow each other, according as the general cause operates first
on vegetables or on mankind. In such cases, superficial observers are apt to
suppose one to be the cause of the other, when in fact, they are both the
offspring of a common cause.

In long sieges, bad food is often a powerful cause of disease, as in the siege
of Marseilles by Julius Caesar, before Christ 48. Caesar, De bell. civ. lib. 2.
20. In such cases, the bad qualities of the corn or bread, are not natural
defects in the growth, but the effects of age, heat, moisture and decay.

Fortunately, the improved state of agriculture has rendered a dearth of grain,
a rare occurrence. In despotic governments, where industry of every kind
languishes, and men seldom make provision for subsistence beyond the passing
moment, famine is not unfrequent in modern times, as in Syria after the terribly
severe winter of 1756-7, when the crops failed, and parents devoured their
children, or offered them for sale in market to procure food. But such is the
state of agriculture, in free countries, that crops are less liable to fail,
than formerly; and when they fall short in a particular country, commerce may
usually supply the deficiency from some other climate. A universal failure of
grain, even under the most unfavorable disposition of the elements, must be a
rare phenomenon.

Yet with all our improvements in agriculture and commerce, we are not to
calculate with certainty that we are never to feel the scourge of famine. There
has been, within about a century, a succession of seasons when the earth failed
to yield her accustomed quantity of vegetable food. Such were the last years of
the last century, when corn was cut short by mildew and blast, not in one
country only, but in most countries. Multitudes perished in the north of
Europe, and our forefathers in America observed, that for a number of years,
the very course of nature seemed to be altered.

The beginning of the seventeenth century was distinguished by a still more
extensive and severe dearth, which afflicted all Europe, and cut off a large
portion of its inhabitants.

In the year 1783, the dearth in Scotland was so severe that commerce alone
saved thousands from perishing; and so late as the year 1790, our own country
experienced a scarcity that excited universal alarm. Both of these periods were
distinguished for severe famine in Egypt, Bengal and the Carnatic.

Such facts show us the all-powerful influence of the invisible energies of
nature, and how little avail human efforts, to avoid the fatal consequences of
a universal failure in their operation. That the principles of vegetation do
thus fail, at certain times, over large portions of the globe, is an
unquestionable truth; it is equally certain, that such events are intimately
connected with the cause of pestilence among men. Hence we observe that men and
cattle often perish with epidemic diseases, when vegetables fail to yield their
customary fruits.

It is not however the want of food which occasions diseases, so frequently as
the bad quality of it. Next to the corrupt state of air, says Riverius,
unwholesome aliments are the causes of pestilent diseases. Vegetables may
acquire unwholesome qualities from too much or too little moisture, or from
other unknown causes. Grain of a good quality may also degenerate and become
unwholesome, by heat and moisture, after it is gathered, as in magazines,
granaries, or holds of ships. Such corn may produce diseases in those who feed
upon it.

But it is doubtful whether mere want of food ever produced a contagious
disease. Seamen who suffer and even perish at sea, in a wholesome air, through
mere hunger, pine away and die without disease. Whenever contagious distempers
accompany dearth, there is usually a concurrence of other causes to produce the
effect.

We may therefore consider the proposition of Diemerbroeck as correct, that
famine does not produce the plague, but proceeds from the same cause; yet that
scarcity of food and still more certainly, food of a bad quality, may produce
diseases of a less malignant type, or very much augment, in violence and
extent, the current disorders of a particular season.

Yet here again our senses may deceive us. Corn of an apparently bad quality,
does not always generate disease. A striking instance of this is related in
Sinclair's Scotland, vol. 7. 605. Frost, rain and snow had turned the corn
black; it was disagreeable to the taste; the straw was equally affected; but
neither man nor beast suffered by feeding on them -- so little do we know of
the cause of diseases.

Intimately connected with the subject of vegetable nutriment, is the
consideration of diseases among cattle. Whenever grass is defective in
wholesome, nutritious qualities, horses, horn-cattle and sheep are sure to
suffer by mortal distempers.

It is often mentioned in the foregoing pages, and a fact that every man may
have observed, that when contagious diseases prevail among men, similar
disorders prevail more or less among cattle. Very few of the plagues in ancient
Rome, affected one species of animals, without showing the pestilential
principle in others. The same remark may be made, in all ages, and is true at
the present period. Sometimes the pestilence invades one species of animals
first -- sometimes another; sometimes the diseases will be more general and
severe among men, and sometimes among cattle; but seldom do we observe one
species of animals severely affected, and the other totally exempt.

So far as my reading and observations enable me to judge, diseases among
cattle usually succeed excessive or unseasonable humidity in the air. The years
1712 and 13, when a plague destroyed a vast proportion of the cattle in Italy,
and great numbers in Germany, are noted in England, to have been wet and cold.
What was the state of the air in the countries where the disease was most
fatal, I am not informed. The short account I have seen of it, abridged from
Ramazzini, in the 6th volume of Baddam's Memoirs, makes no mention of the
weather or seasons; and Lancisius, who has also left many particulars
respecting it, is not before me. The disease however was a true plague,
characterized with many of the symptoms of plague in the human body. Authors
all agree that the distemper was propagated solely by contagion from a single
cow, from Dalmatia; and they are so well contented with this idea, that they
tell us little or nothing from which we can collect the cause. Like the writers
on the cause of the plague in Egypt, who trace it to Barbary or Syria, and
there leave the subject; so Lancisius and Ramazzini, tell us the distemper,
which destroyed most of the cattle in Italy, came from one cow, in a drove from
Dalmatia; and there they stop short, without a syllable to explain why the cow
from Dalmatia was seized.

All these contagion-sticklers resemble the Indian, who, when asked what the
world stands on, replied, on an elephant -- the elephant, on a great turtle,
and the turtle, on the ocean. Here he stopped, and as to what supports the
ocean, he leaves us in the dark.

The general visible cause of pestilential diseases among cattle, as before
remarked, seems to be an excess of moisture, which renders their food watery
and unsubstantial. The summer of 1751, a year of remarkable mortality among the
cattle in England, was cold and rainy. Such was the season in 1348, which was
followed by a great loss of sheep, as well as by pestilence among men.

Yet all wet seasons do not produce the same effect; and we are constrained to
resort, for the cause, to unseen properties in the air or the food on which the
cattle subsist. -- That the same general cause affects cattle and the human
race, in times of pestilence, is obvious from the analogy of symptoms in their
diseases. During the present sickly period in America, horses and horned cattle
have died, in many parts of the country, with diseases which are characterized
with bilious appearances; in analogy with all the disorders which have affected
men, during the same period.

Lancisius and Ramazzini would have treated the subject of the disease among
horses and cattle in Italy, in 1712 and 13, much more like philosophers and men
of sound science, if, instead of telling how much mischief an infected cow had
done, and how the disease had been spread, by farriers, by dogs and by
shepherds, they had described to us the seasons, the state of vegetation and
the diseases which prevailed among mankind. They ought at least to have
connected, with the disease among cattle, an extensive plague among men which
was then raging in Vienna, Hungary, and other countries, as it had been, for
several years before, over all the Polish and Baltic territories.

The frequent prevalence of mortal epidemics among the brutes, is an obvious
and irresistible proof of some deleterious principle in the elements, which is
adequate to the production of the worst diseases, and the destruction of life,
independent of every artificial cause.

The brutes, if left to themselves, follow implicitly, a principle of their
nature, called instinct. They eat what nature intended for them, and never feed
on what is pernicious to their health; nor will they injure themselves by
eating too much or too little of their ordinary food. Governed by such a law,
they can be liable to no diseases, but such as must necessarily proceed from
the air they breathe, the water they drink, or the vegetables they eat, all of
which are ordinarily good, nutritious, and well fitted to support sound health.
Their diseases therefore must proceed from some imperfection in these elements
of life, which is occasioned by natural causes. This process of reasoning
appears to be strictly logical and correct. The conclusions from it are
inevitable. If a state of the elements does ever exist, which can produce
diseases that destroy the lives of the brutes, without contagion or any
artificial cause, we may safely allege that a state of the elements may exist
in any latitude which is adequate to the production of the most formidable
maladies, that ever affect mankind.

The analogies of the animal economy, and continual observations forbid us to
suppose the powers of life in the beasts of the field, less perfect, or more
easily dissolved, than those of the human race. On the contrary, from their
following their natural undepraved appetites, in the use of food and in all
their actions, their bodies may be supposed to be more firm and perfect than
those of men, who are usually debilitated by irregularities in living, and
other deviations from the laws of nature. If then irrational animals are
subject to the invasions of mortal epidemic diseases, which mow them down by
thousands, in defiance of the firm texture of their bodies, and their regular
living, a fortiori the human race must be liable to destruction by similar
means.

This reasoning is certainly just and substantial, whatever may be its fate in
convincing the reader; and it proves that the natural operation of some secret
principle in the elements, is sufficient to account for the most destructive
maladies, in every latitude on the globe, without resorting to the
transportation of fomites from some one heaven-scourged country to more favored
regions.

Dr. Mead and all his servile admirers who believe him, without investigating
his assertions, allege that putrefaction never rises, in England, to a degree
that is necessary to generate a pestilence. But if any man can believe that
putrefaction, as writers are pleased to call the principle of destruction, can
rise high enough in the grades of malignity, to produce a plague or contagious
mortal distemper among cattle in England, and at the same time, never affect
the human species, he must have more pride in the supereminent station of man
in the scale of being, than I possess. The argument from facts is evidently in
favor of the theory, which subjects all animals, in this respect, to the same
laws; and the analogies of creation will not authorize man to claim the high
privilege of exemption from the general laws of the animal economy. -- It is an
unquestionable truth, that men as well as brutes, in all latitudes, are often
invaded with contagious and deadly diseases, under the operation of the
elements, without the least accession of contagion from southern climates or
any foreign country. Multitudes of facts warrant this deduction; but the
progression in the violence of epidemic diseases, the imperfection of
vegetables, the sickness and death of fish in rivers and the ocean, and of
cattle on land, are proofs of the truth of my principle, which bid defiance to
opposition.

SECTION XVI. Of Contagion and Infection.
NO point on the subject of diseases has been more agitated among medical
writers, than that of the contagion of the plague, inguinal and bilious.

Hippocrates has left no decisive opinion on this question, but those who
maintain the plague not to be contagious, rely on this silence of the father of
medicin, as an argument in their favor.

Galen's opinion was clearly in favor of the contagiousness of certain
diseases. "Quodque periculosa sit conversatio cum laborantibus pestilenti
morboquum nimirum is non secus fit contagiosus, quam scabies aut lippitudo." In
another translation, the latter part of this passage stands thus; "periculum
enim est, ne concipiatur, ut scabies et lippitudo."
p. 379. The author doubtless speaks here of other pestilent diseases, besides
the inguinal plague, according to the practice of the ancients who gave the
name of pestilence to other malignant distempers, when epidemic. His opinion
however was that the plague originates in a putridity of the air, inhaled by
the breath. "Lues ipsa, ab aeris putredine exorta, per inspirationes insiliens,
haud unum aut alterum hominem, sed plures quoque civitates depascit, vastat, et
populatur." p. 627. In another passage, he remarks, that pestilent diseases
proceed from a state of the atmosphere. "Pestilentes morbi a coeli statu
prosiciscantur."

This author observed that pestilential epidemics must have some cause more
powerful and extensive, than contagion, or infection.

Aristotle was clearly of opinion that the plague is contagious, and the reason
he assigns why pestilence alone is communicated from person to person, is, that
this is the only disease which is common to all men. This is not very clear or
satisfactory; but he speaks of fomites proceeding from the sick, and infecting
others.

See Problem, sect. 1. Procopius was not a physician, but is esteemed as a
historian. He alleges that in 543, the mortal plague in Constantinople was not
contagious, and that physicians and attendants on the sick, did not contract
the disease.

On the other hand Thucydides, has declared unequivocally that the plague in
Athens was very contagious. Evagrius also has related that the disease, in his
time, was very contagious, to particular persons, while others escaped, even
against their inclination. Livy also was decidedly in favor of the doctrine of
contagion.

Petrus Salius Diversus, cited by Diemerbroeck, was of the opinion, that the
plague is sometimes contagious; at other times, not. Seneca held to the
contagious nature of pestilence. So says Ovid, Metamorph. 7.

Quo proprior quisque est, servitque fidelius aegro,
In partem lethi citius venit.
The nearer we approach, and the more faithfully we serve, the diseased, the
sooner we fall victims to the distemper.

Those who oppose the doctrine of contagion, not only produce as authority, the
silence of Hippocrates, with Avicenna, and other Arabian physicians, on the
subject; but they allege, that if the plague was a contagious disease, it would
always infect those who have communication with the diseased. But this they
aver to be contrary to fact; and they instance the escape of many physicians,
surgeons, grave-diggers, hearse-men, and others. They argue further, that as
the breath and effluvia of persons in health, will not expel the poison of the
plague from the diseased; so, ^n the other hand, the effluvia from the
infected, cannot infuse the seeds of the disorder into a healthy body.

Gregory Nyssen, a celebrated philosopher and theologian, concludes, that those
who are seized with the plague, after an intercourse with the diseased,
contract it from the same state of the air, which occasioned the distemper in
the sick, and not from the effluvia exhaled from the infected body. While I
cannot assent to this opinion, in the utmost latitude, I firmly believe it
contains a great deal of truth.

Diemerbroeck, de peste p. 44, suggests that the ancient physicians, who passed
over the subject of the contagion of the plague, called that quality only
contagion, which communicates disease by immediate contact, as in case of the
itch, leprosy, hydrophobia and the like; whereas the plague infects more
frequently through the medium of the air, vapors, garments and other objects.
Thus the sweat, exhalations, and excrementitious matter of the sick corrupt the
air, and this infected air becomes the means of disease to persons in health
who breathe it. This, says Diemerbroeck, the ancients did not call contagion,
proceeding from the diseased, but they considered healthy persons taking the
distemper through this medium, as infected by the malignity of the air.

Almost all modern physicians however agree in the opinion that the plague is a
contagious disease, as Forestus, Prosper Alpinus, Diemerbroeck, Sydenham, and a
multitude of others; and on this general opinion, have been instituted
quarantine laws and other regulations for preserving cities and countries from
the disease. Of the value of these regulations, we shall be the better able to
judge, after taking a careful survey of the question relative to the force and
effects of contagion.

Within a few years, one author has ventured again to call in question the
received opinions on this subject. Dr. Maclean, in a small treatise, has
attempted to prove that the plague, dysentery and epidemic fevers are never
propagated by contagion. Contagion he defines to be "a specific matter
generated in a person affected with disease, and capable of communicating that
particular disease, with or without contact, to another."

This author's general arguments are these, That specific contagion must
necessarily act and communicate a disease from a sick to a well person, within
a certain distance -- that in the plague, dysentery and epidemic fevers, a
small proportion of people, exposed to the action of effluvia from the
diseased, are ever affected by the distempers, and therefore such disorders are
not contagious. He considers those diseases only as contagious, which can be
received but once by the same person; as the smallpox and measles. He affirms
that the existence of contagion in plague, dysentery and fevers, has been
uniformly taken for granted, not only without proof, but even contrary to the
evidence of numerous and convincing facts. He lays it down as a truth, that all
epidemic and pestilential diseases, which may affect a person more than once in
his life, are caused by certain states or vicissitudes of the atmosphere,
producing indirect debility.

The variety of opinions on this subject argues either a want of accurate
observations among medical men, or of accurate distinctions in terms. The
various powers of diseases to communicate themselves, either have not been
understood, or they have been imperfectly defined. Let us then attend to facts,
the only genuin source of knowledge.

First. We observe that the contagion of the measles and smallpox, takes
effect with great certainty, whenever a person in health, who has never been
affected, approaches sufficiently near to a diseased person. I do not say it
always takes effect; for there are a few exceptions; but these are so rare, as
not to impeach the generality of the fact, or principle.

The contagion of the plague, dysentery and violent fevers, does not, under
circumstances equally favorable, take effect with the like certainty. On the
contrary, a great proportion of persons exposed to the effluvia of the sick,
entirely escape the distempers.

Secondly. The contagion of smallpox and measles, is not sensibly affected in
its operation by heat or cold, moisture or drouth. It acts with the same
certainty in winter as in summer, and in every variety of temperature.

The contagion of plague, dysentery and typhus fevers, on the other hand,
depends almost entirely on heat for its activity, and is subdued, rendered
inert, or totally extinguished by cold. Hence an essential difference in the
two species of contagion -- that of the smallpox and measles being an
essential quality of the diseases; while that of the other diseases is an
accidental circumstance.

Thirdly. The contagion of the plague often discriminates between the natives
of particular countries, or men of a particular blood, or family, seizing one
and passing by another, and this through the whole course of an epidemic; but
the smallpox and measles make no such distinctions.

Fourthly. The contagion of the smallpox and measles is not destroyed by the
purity of the atmosphere; it acts with the same certainty on the most
salubrious hills, as in the most impure recesses of poverty.

Not so the contagion of the plague, and dysentery; for as a general rule,
these diseases are not propagated in a pure atmosphere. With respect to the
plague, some e^ceptions exist; but it is the usual fact, that these last named
diseases will not spread by contagion in a wholesome state of the air. By
removing the sick, from a city into the country, or otherways placing him in an
airy room, and preserving it clean, with all the apparel and utensils, the
contagion is so dissipated or attenuated, as to be rendered harmless; the
attendants escape, and the disease is extinguished with the death or recovery
of the patient.

Fifthly. The contagion of the smallpox and measles can never act but once on
the same person. Its first operation destroys the capacity of receiving it a
second time. The exceptions to this rule are too few to deserve consideration.

Totally different is the effect of the plague and dysentery, for instead of
fortifying the body against a second attack, these diseases debilitate the
animal powers, and render the patient more susceptible of the contagion in a
subsequent year. It is admitted by all correct observers, that the plague may
be received by the same person, times without limits; a person in
Constantinople died of the twelfth attack; and many persons, in the late
plagues in America, have been affected two or three times. With respect to
dysentery and other contagious fevers, there is no controversy on this point.

Sixthly. The contagion of the smallpox and measles, if it takes the least
effect, produces the disease complete. The infected patient may be affected
more lightly than the infecting person, and the degrees of violence in the
symptoms may be very vatious; but the disease produced, will always be
completely formed, and of the same specific type, as that from which it is
communicated.

The contagion of the plague and dysentery, has not the same certainty in its
effect. The contagion of the plague very often produces only a nausea and
vomiting -- sometimes an inferior grade of fever, as an intermitting or
remitting fever, of which I have myself seen examples -- very often its effects
are limited to dizziness in the head, or severe pains in the glands -- and
sometimes it has produced external eruptions, without any other material
affection; as in the celebrated Diemerbroeck, who, in the grievous plague at
Nimeguen, was affected with a carbuncle on his left hand, while in good health.
In 1796, I saw an instance in New York, in which the infection of the
pestilential fever had occasioned a singular swelling and inflammation in the
face of a nurse, who escaped the disease.

Seventhly. We may perhaps add, what Diemerbroeck and other writers consider as
essential to give effect to the contagion of the plague, and dysentery, an apt
or suitable disposition in the sound body to receive the contagion. Some
peculiar state of a body in health is evidently necessary to the operation of
the infecting principle of the plague; this is agreed by all authors. But it
does not appear that any such state or disposition is requisite to give effect
to the contagion of smallpox or measles, which acts upon all bodies, within
the reach of their effluvia. This consideration may be the cause of the first
distinction before recited; and a few exceptions exist to the proposition in
regard to the smallpox and measles, which, tho rarely, fail of operating on
bodies in health.

These are important distinctions, which, had they been observed by medical
writers, would have prevented the enormous errors of Mead and others, who
maintain that the plague is propagated, in northern countries, by specific
contagion only. The truth is, the plague is a contagious disease, like
dysentery, and most typhus fevers, but the contagion is not specific.

Specific contagion I define to be, a quality of a disease, which, within a
suitable distance, communicates it from a body affected with it, to a sound
body, with great certainty, and under all circumstances of season, weather or
situation. Such is the contagion of the smallpox and measles. This contagion
is of two kinds; first, that which acts by contact only, as that of the itch,
leprosy, hydrophobia and siphilis; secondly, that which produces its effect,
with equal certainty, by near approach, as that of smallpox and measles. The
contagion of the angina maligna approaches to the specific kind; and if it is
true, as some modern physicians have asserted, that persons can never be
affected with it, more than once, it comes under the character of a specific
contagion, but I doubt the fact. Several persons in Bethlem, were affected with
the scarlatina anginosa twice, during the late epidemic; first in 1793 and
again in 1794.

Medical Repository, vol. 1. 525. That quality of a disease which may or may
not excite it in a sound body, within a suitable distance, or by contact; and
which depends on heat, foul air, an apt disposition in the receiving body, or
other contingent circumstances, and which may excite the disease in the same
person more than once, is certainly a very distinct species of contagion, from
that of the smallpox, and to this I give the denomination of infection.

With a distinction of this sort, which seems to have been first adopted by an
eminent physician in New York, Dr. Bailey, in his treatise on the fever of 1795
page 38, and which is unquestionably well founded, we have no difficulty in
explaining all the phenomena of contagion, which have given rise to disputes,
without number and to the most contradictory opinions. The plague, glandular
and bilious, the dysentery, typhus fevers, and the milder kinds of angina, are
not specifically contagious, but they are infectious. They will not and do not
propagate themselves in all situations, but the operation of the infecting
quality is controlled by a multitude of contingent circumstances.

First. It is admitted on all hands, that a suitable and particular
constitution of air, is necessary to render the plague epidemic in northern
latitudes. Thus Sydenham supposes this disease to be conveyed by pestilential
particles from one place to another, but not to become epidemic, unless favored
by the constitution of air. One ground of his opinion seems to have been a fact
related by Mead, that when the disease has raged violently in one town, in the
same climate, a neighboring town has totally escaped, by forbiding intercourse
with the infected place, as once happened in Tuscany. -- This fact will be
afterward considered.

Mead also, while he declares his opinion that the plague is spread by specific
contagion only, like smallpox and measles, and that all plagues are to be
traced to Egypt, very inconsistently admits that a certain corruption of the
air is necessary to give the contagious atoms their full force.

These opinions are utterly incongruous; for if the plague possesses specific
contagion, like the smallpox, then a corrupt state of air is not necessary to
give full force to the contagion; for no such state of air is requisite to give
force to the contagion of the smallpox. It spreads with as much certainty in
pure air, as in foul air. Mead's principles therefore overthrow his own theory.
But he was driven to admit some general constitution of air, to be necessary to
the propagation of the plague, because he had learnt from reading that the
plague will not spread in all places, at all times and under all circumstances.
In truth, Mead never had an idea of the difference between the species of
contagion; and the same may be said of most modern writers. It is a most
extraordinary circumstance that the British authors, in modern days, should all
agree that a favorable constitution of air is necessary to propagate the
plague, and yet that no plague is bred in northern climates. They must admit
and do admit, that such a favorable state of air has often existed in all parts
of Europe; this is a kind of half way business; allowing northern climates the
power of creating and preparing a condition of atmosphere that shall meet the
plague halfway.

But will it be denied that the petechial fever and angina maligna originate in
northern latitudes? I presume not. Then the condition of air is admitted to
produce most deadly infectious diseases, but not the most deadly of all. Kind
heaven, in mercy to the northern world, has permitted the elements to generate
diseases almost as bad as the plague, but not quite.

I then ask, does not the production of the angina maligna suppose as
deleterious a principle in the air, as that of the plague? Is not the disease
as fatal to youth, and more certainly infectious or contagious? This cannot be
denied. That disease sometimes destroys as great a proportion of patients
seized as the plague, and is more certainly contagious to youth? Besides this
distemper depends not on local causes, but wholly on a condition of the
elements; it therefore implies a most essential alteration in the atmosphere.

Further, if petechial fever is generated in northern climates, it demonstrates
the power of those climates to produce the plague; for it has been proved, that
this fever is the same species of disease, and oftens turns to the plague. It
has done this, very often in England and on the Baltic.

Infection spreads certain diseases, and ought to be avoided; but medical men
have ascribed ten times more effects to that cause, than it ever produced. The
same principle which generates the angina maligna or plague, in one instance,
must be competent to produce it in all other persons of like disposition and
habits.




Sanctorious, cited by Van Swieten, remarked that the rays of the plague may be
removed by the wind, yet he was surprised to observe that these rays from the
body of a diseased person, are never disturbed by the force of the air. I do
not perfectly reconcile these remarks; but it is an indubitable fact, that a
pestilential state of air, when clearly and distinctly formed in a city, is not
dissipated, nor very greatly affected by the most violent winds. It has
sometimes been remarked, that the pestilential fever in American cities, has
been spread by particular winds; but it has spread not only before, but against
the wind, tho perhaps with less rapidity. Certain it is, that no force of wind
whatever ever expels from a town, or lessens the pestilential virus without the
aid of other causes. Of this we have had repeated proofs in America.

Perhaps we may explain this fact, and reconcile the observations of
Sanctorius, on the principle I have unfolded; by supposing the effluvia of the
sick to be, in some degree, capable of dissipation by the wind, which is
undoubtedly true; but that the elemental cause of pestilence, which consists in
the essential properties of the atmosphere, is not subject to dispersion or
removal by the winds. This consideration would involve a curious question, viz.
whether, in the apparent motion of air, called wind, the whole mass of the
surrounding atmosphere is moved, or whether it is the vapor, or other component
parts of the air only, which are moved, while the fire or electric fluid
remains stationary. But whatever may be the cause, the fact is certain, that
the pestilential principle, during a plague in a city or town, is never
expelled by winds. A most violent, cool north-west wind swept the city of
New York, on the 19th and 20th of September 1795, without any considerable
abatement of the pestilential fever. This fact adds no small weight to my
opinion, that the primary cause of such diseases, is in the essential
combination of the component parts of the atmosphere. Warm southerly rains
however high the wind, usually increase the violence of the disease, by
inducing debility and giving activity to the local causes, as noxious effluvia
from vegetable substances. Cool northerly winds, accompanied with heavy rains,
lessen the morbid action of the pestilential principle; and if late in the
season, and not succeeded by very warm weather, may entirely remove it. A
violent tornado, with great rain, on the 8th of October 1797, was supposed to
put a step to the pestilential fever in Providence. Water decomposes the
poison, or incorporates it into its own mass -- but h^^t after moisture
occasions a more rapid decomposition of vegetables and increase the poison.


Sanctorius further observes that "things infected with the plague, communicate
the disease, as long as the proximate and remote causes subsist; one of which
ceasing, the infection ceases." This is an explicit acknowledgment that the
contagion is not specific, but dependent on some other cause, agreeable to the
doctrine of Sydenham.

This principle is verified most remarkably in Egypt, as appears by all the
authors who have written on the subject. They are all constrained to admit,
even when they allege the plague to be not native in that country, that, if
imported at certain seasons of the year, it will not spread. Prosper Alpinus
expressly declares that the plague is never imported in the months of June,
July and August; "nunquam visa est pestis illuc ex infectis locis profecta;"
although he maintains that the disease is almost always imported.

This is certainly a most extraordinary assertion, and unworthy of the
reputation of the writer. What in the name of sense and consistency, should
prevent the seeds of such a disease from being "imported" in a particular
season, when vessels are passing continually between that country and infected
places? The idea betrays extreme weakness or prejudice.

Savary in his letters on Egypt has detailed the true state of facts. He saw
vessels, which arrived in Egypt from Turkey, in the month of August, and landed
their infected goods and people, without communicating the disease. He informs
us, that it is an observation of ages, that infected merchandise brot into
Egypt, in the months of June, July and August, do not excite the plague, but
the disease expires of itself. If introduced at other seasons, and
communicated, it ceases; but if imported in winter, it spreads.

The author has here stated effects or phenomena, with a good degree of
accuracy; but has entirely mistaken the cause. It is wholly the state of air,
in different seasons, and not infection, which occasions these varieties.

Mackenzie, in an account of the plague in Constantinople, tho a firm believer
in its contagion, declares "that b^th in that city and in Smyrna, the plague
breaks out in some years, when it is not possible to trace whence it is
conveyed." This is doubtless true; yet neither this fact, nor the known fact
that contagion in Egypt will not operate in a certain season of the year, has
ever opened the eyes of European authors to the absurdity of the current
notions about the specific contagion of the disease.

A fact related by Patrick Russel, in his history of the plague at Aleppo in
1760, is full to the same point, that the contagion of the plague, will not
take effect, without the aid of other causes. In 1759, the disease was
introduced into Leinsol, a port on the south side of Cyprus, where it spread.
Larnica, a town forty miles distant, received part of the infected crew, which
brot the contagion to Leinsol. A constant communication was held between the
two cities; peasants and mule drivers entered Larnica, with their pestilential
sores upon them, and were daily in the streets and markets. Some died in the
houses of the inhabitants. Other vessels also arrived with infected crews from
Egypt, some of whom died on landing. Yet mark the issue -- all this contagion
did not excite the plague in Larnica! But in the beginning of the next year,
eight months after, the disease appeared in Larnica, without contagion, and
made great havoc. See Russel, page 4.

This fact and others compelled the author to admit that the disease is not
always contagious, and that it does not become epidemic, without a certain
state of air. See pages 4, 5, 7, 17, 19, 307. These facts are of infinite
consequence in directing the application of laws of quarantine; a subject to be
hereafter discussed.

Innumerable examples may be produced of plague, appearing in a few detached
cases, without becoming epidemic and without extending itself by contagion
beyond a single family. Often it appears in sporadic cases, without exhibiting
any contagion.

Pollinus relates an instance of a family, in which the father, mother, with
two children and a servant died of the plague, without glandular swellings, and
without spreading the disease beyond that family.

Joubert informs us of an instance in 1574, of a respectable family, which lost
half of its members, by the plague, which ceased without spreading the
infection. This was at the commencement of a most pestilential period.

Matthias Untzerus relates, that at Halle in Saxony, he was an eyewitness of
instances, in which here and there a family had been seized with the plague,
introduced from other places, without any ill effects in the rest of the city
-- the disease terminating in these families.

Diemerbroeck observed similar facts. In Oct. 1661, the daughter of a noble
widow, was seized with a violent disease resembling the plague, in the midst of
a town where no plague ^isted, and no foreign cause could be assigned for the
disease. The servant, who attended her, died, and the infection extended to
seven persons, in succession; the rest saved themselves by flight. These
persons died, without the glandular tumors, and of course some of the attending
physicians, denied the disease to be the plague. Diemerbroeck, on the contrary,
judging from all the symptoms, pronounced it the plague. It happened that one
of the maidservants, who left the family and was going to her brother's at
Amsterdam, was infected and seized with the plague, which soon put on the
genuin marks of the disease, in an inguinal tumor and two anthraces. She
recovered, but infected two of her brother's children, and there the disease
disappeared. No local cause could be assigned for the disease in that family.
The plague was not before in the city or country, the house was a splendid,
elegant one and kept remarkably clean, remote from any filthy place, and had
never been known to have an infected person in it. Hence our author concludes
very justly that a pestilent disease is not always epidemic, nor is an epidemic
always dangerous, nor is pestilence necessarily common to many people; but that
the spreading of a disease by contagion, is wholly an accidental circumstance.

See p. 13, 14, of Diemerbroeck de peste. On this last fact, I will only
observe, that the year it happened, was 1661, the beginning of the constitution
which produced the augmented violence of the diseases of London, as related by
Sydenham, and the constitution which occasioned the plague in Holland in 1663
and 4, and that in London in 1665.

It is to be regretted that those able physicians and accurate observers had
not extended their views of the subject to a prevalence of that pestilential
constitution, in various countries, at one and the same time, instead of
restricting their observations, each to his own country.

The author of the Traite de la peste, who was a warm stickier for the origin
of the plague at Marseilles in 1720 from importation, and wrote a treatise to
prove it, has however demonstrated the contrary. He has admitted that the air
of Marseilles was pestilential and produced diseases marked with buboes and
carbuncles, in the autumn preceding its supposed importation. But this is not
all; he has recorded facts which confirm all that has been cited from Alpinus,
Savary, Russel and others, that the contagion of the plague will not spread the
disease in an atmosphere not favorable to its propagation. He informs us, that
the disease spread from Marseilles, in spite of all precautions, and infected
more than fifty villages of Provence. This was ascribed to infected goods
conveyed from Marseilles. Yet the surrounding provinces of Languedoc, Velais,
Dauphine and others, which he acknowledges to have been inundated with goods
from the same city, escaped all infection. In Provence, the distemper reached
the inhabitants of mountains and was not even arrested by the rigors of winter;
while in the adjoining territories, no person was affected, tho equally exposed
to infection. The author remarks further, that the disease passed over some
villages, and infected others beyond them; for which no reason could be
assigned, while all were alike exposed.

These facts were very surprising and unaccountable (...) the author,
Chicoyneau; yet there is no difficulty in explaining them, on the principle for
^^ch I contend; that the propag^tion of the disease depends entirely on a
favorable state of the atmosphere, and not the least on contagion.

Almost all the supposed instances of infection from merchandise, related in
authors, when investigated, are found to be mere suppositions and conjectures,
raised and spread by vulgar credulity, without the least foundation, and
afterward recorded as facts, by medical writers, who are infinitely less
excusable, than other people. I have investigated many such instances in
America, where reports had become popular, and grown into such credit, as to be
generally believed and received as facts, and I have, in every case, found
evidence amounting to demonstration, that those reports were idle surmises,
very often puerile in their origin, and utterly unsupported by facts. Some of
the received opinions, in regard to the imported infection of plagues in
Europe, when subjected to careful scrutiny, prove to be equally destitute of
foundation. Among these, are the opinions, received and recorded by grave
writers, relative to the London plague of 1665, and that at Marseilles in 1720.

The supposition that the plague was conveyed from Marseilles into fifty
villages of Provence, by means of merchandise, appears to be no better founded.
Setting aside the errors of vulgar tales, in which such opinions usually
originate, it is utterly against all probability that goods sold from shops and
warehouses should contain infection. If they are ever infected, it must be by
being used by the sick; but the sick do not use the goods in shops and stores;
they are confined to their rooms; and rarely indeed are their bedding and
clothes, sent to market. Goods, the most susceptible of infection, as woollen
and cotton, may lie in store during the plague, without any taint that can
excite disease. In America we know this to be fact. In every town, where the
fever has prevailed, shops and warehouses filled with such sorts of goods, are
open long after the disease has appeared, and until the air of the streets has
become so pestilential, as to excite the disease in a few hours in healthy
strangers; nay, some of these shops are open, during the whole time, of the
rage o^ ^^r worst plagues; yet even cotton and woollen cloths have never, in
any instance, contracted infection so as to communicate the disease afterward
to those who handled or used them. I will venture to aver that all the reports
in Europe about the propagation of the plague from town to town, and country to
country, by merchandise, are the offspring of vulgar tales. It is possible that
garments worn by the sick and not cleansed, may excite the disease in a sound
body; but such garments, to retain the infection, must be closely packed in
bales, chests or boxes, or the action of the air will destroy the infection, in
a few days. And whenever an instance of this kind happens, the disease will die
with the patient first infected; it will rarely or never spread, unless the
constitution of air is so pestilential, as to produce the disease without
infection.

In these positions, I am warranted by a multitude of facts related of European
plagues, and many that have occurred in America.

Hence, goods transported from Marseilles, during the plague, did not
communicate the disease in Languedoc, Velais or Dauphine. The true reason of
the facts related by Chicoyneau, is, that the air of the whole country about
Marseilles was pestilential, and affected most of the villages in Provence,
although some escaped. Further removed from the sea shore, in the contiguous
provinces, the air was less pestilential, and the disease did not appear. Goods
were conveyed to all these provinces indiscriminately; but they had no concern
in the propagation of the plague. The plague appeared, where the pestilential
principle was competent to produce it, the seat of which was at Marseilles, a
large populous city; but which extended, as it always does, to some distance,
beyond which it produced no plague. Wherever the distemper appeared, vulgar
ignorance ascribed it to goods; and where it did not appear, after the
reception of goods from Marseilles, the vulgar and the learned all agree they
could not account for it; they wondered that goods would not infect people in
Languedoc, as well as in Provence -- and all the writers on the subject in
Europe, from that time to this, seemed to have been satisfied with wondering at
the phenomenon.

Of the truth of the doctrine, that the plague will not spread from infection,
in an atmosphere not proper for it, we have in America most indubitable
evidences.

In every pestilence that has affected our cities for six years past, great
numbers of persons, when ill, have been removed into the country, or have been
seized after removal, but not one instance occurred of the spreading of the
disease in the country to any extent, from such infected persons until the year
1798. There have been a few scattering instances, in which the nurses of such
persons have received the disorder. These have been very rare; probably not in
one instance of a hundred, has any person been affected by fomites from such
diseased persons. Most violent cases of the pestilence, when removed into a
pure air, exhibit no infection that is perceptible. This fact corresponds with
what has been related of the importation of infected persons and goods into
Egypt in June, July and August, which produces no ill effect; but for a very
good reason; the air of that country, during the inundation of the Nile, will
not generate the plague; and hence the vulgar idea, that it is not imported, or
will not spread from infection.

But not only do our country people escape infection, from diseased citizens
who sicken and die in their houses, but our cities also, when the constitution
of air does not favor the disease, are not affected by the introduction of the
worst cases from neighboring cities. Thus in 1793, many persons from
Philadelphia, entered New York, in spite of precautions, taken by the police,
sickened and died in boarding houses and other places, but without
communicating the disease in a single instance. In 1795, the case was reversed;
New York generated a contagious fever, but Philadelphia did not; and several
persons, who left New York, sickened and died in Philadelphia without infecting
any person whatever.

It is unnecessary to multiply examples; the same has happened between
Philadelphia and Baltimore; between Norfolk and the adjacent country; between
Boston and Providence; in short there is not an exception to the remark, that
infected persons, carried into towns and cities where the atmosphere has not
been disposed to generate an epidemic, have never propagated the disease. In
every case, and the instances have been very numerous, the disease has
disappeared with the recovery or death of the first or second patient. In 1798
the first cases of the fever in Chester and Wilmington originated from
Philadelphia; but the atmosphere also of the country in New Jersey and Delaware
actually generated the disease, in the neighboring districts, and so it did in
Connecticut.


But this is not all. In the same town or city, where the pestilence has been
general in a particular quarter, another part of the town or city, situated on
better ventilated or more elevated land, has not only been free from the
epidemic, but has possessed an air capable of resisting the infection of the
diseased. This, to a certain degree, was the fact in Philadelphia, where no
part of the city can be called elevated; yet in 1793 and 1797, few cases of the
fever occurred in the western part of the city. But in New York, New Haven,
Providence, New London, Boston, and Newburyport, the disease has had its
pestilential region, or quarter of the town, in which it became epidemic and
infectious; but other parts of the town have been free from it. And in all such
instances the most malignant cases, in persons seized in the pestilential
region, and conveyed to the healthy part of the town, have exhibited no
infection; or if a single nurse has taken the disease, of which I have heard of
two or three instances, the infection has there ceased and produced no further
effects.

These exempted parts of the towns are the more cleanly and airy situations. To
this however occur two exceptions. One in Philadelphia, in 1798, the disease of
which year was more virulent and more infectious, than in former years, and
extended to healthy positions. The other exception is in New London, the last
summer also; in which town, the disease had indeed its pestilential region,
marked distinctly, as before related; but this part of the town, where the
disease raged, is as airy and well built, as any other quarter.

Evagrius remarked of the plague in his time, that it sometimes attacked
certain parts of cities, and left others untouched. See the year 590.

Pestilential diseases then have an atmosphere in which they rage with
violence; but at a distance, they lose the power of infecting, at least to a
great degree. Van Swieten remarks this of the spotted fever in 1756 -- if
healthy persons descended into the valleys where it was prevalent, they took
the disease; but when removed into more airy situations, they infected no one.

Vol. 16. 59. These facts all concur to establish the principle, that some
other cause must act with infection, to render this pestilence epidemic, or to
give it effect. The consequence is unavoidable, that the infecting cause, is
not a specific contagion.

In the second place, the infecting power of the plague and other autumnal
diseases, is susceptible of gradation, from the lowest point of danger, up to
the highest; a circumstance that does not characterize the specific contagion
of smallpox and measles. In America, we have seen the disease in every stage
of virulence, except perhaps the very highest, like that in the days of Gallus
and Volusian, that in the time of Evagrius, or that in the reign of Edward III,
and a few others. The disease in Philadelphia in 1797 was more infectious than
that in 1793, and that in 1798 still more than either. The fever in New York in
1795 exhibited very little infection, not one case in twenty proceeding from
any communication with the sick; but in 1798, the disease put on a more
virulent aspect, and was more generally infectious. In Baltimore, the disease
in 1797 ran through all the grades of bilious fever, from an ordinary
remittent, which for weeks prevailed without infection, to a contagious yellow
fever.

But this is not all. During the same season, and in the same city, the disease
exists in all its grades from an intermittent to the contagious yellow fever.
It is a very frequent thing for persons seized with decided symptoms of the
pestilential fever, to have the disease reduced by early applications, to a
remittent or an intermittent. Of this I am an instance myself; having
contracted the malignant fever in New York in August 1798, from the air of the
city, for I was near no diseased persons, and returned home, I was seized with
the symptoms, tho not of the most violent kind. The fever was disturbed by
early remedies, and I became convalescent; but in a few days, I relapsed and
the fever took the form of a regular tertian. Dr. Rush relates similar examples
in the fever of 1793.

Lind, on diseases of hot climates, p. 179, remarks, that patients, with a mild
intermittent, sent to Greenwich hospital, near a marsh, in Jamaica, soon grew
worse, and their disease turned to a malignant yellow fever or mortal dysentery.

A multitude of such facts have been observed in America, which, with the
remarkable history of the disease in Baltimore in 1797, seem to amount to a
demonstration, that the plague and all autumnal bilious disorders, are of one
species, differing only in their grades. Indeed the writers on the Levant
plague, while they utterly deny such a sameness in kind between that disease
and any other, have recorded facts to prove the doctrine here maintained.

P. Russel admits that the plague in Aleppo was of very various degrees of
malignity, and was not always infectious. He has even arranged the cases in
several distinct classes, according to the various symptoms and degrees of
mortality.

Lady W. Montague, in letter 31, has the following observations. "Those
dreadful stories you have heard of the plague, have very little foundation in
truth. I own I have much ado to reconcile myself to the sound of a word which
has always given me such terrible ideas; tho I am convinced there is little
more in it than in a fever." She then proceeds to relate, how she passed
through several infected towns, that her cook was taken ill, and she was told,
with a great cold -- that she left her doctor to attend him, but the cook soon
recovered, and both cook and doctor in a few days, arrived in health at
Adrianople. She was then surprised to learn, that her cook had been ill with
the plague. She concludes, from her own experience, that the air is never
infected and that it is as easy to root the plague out of Turkey, as out of
Italy and France. Notwithstanding this disease was "rooted out of France," it
happened that, in two years after Lady Montague wrote her letter, Marseilles
was almost depopulated by the disease!
She remarks also that "many escape it" -- which is certainly wonderful!

Just so carelessly people reason and draw conclusions, from a single cursory
observation, or an isolated fact; a practice among travelers, as among men of
pretended science, which is the source of numberless errors. It is undoubtedly
true, that the plague is often "little more than a fever;" but if Lady Montague
had been in Cairo in 1580, or in 1736, or in Constantinople in 543, or in 1751,
or in London in 1665, or in Marseilles in 1720, she would have thought the
plague something more than an ordinary fever. The truth is, the disease
exhibits different grades of violence, at different times.

Savary remarks, that such as catch the plague in Egypt in June, July and
August are always cured.

So observes Mignot, in his history of the Turkish empire, vol. 2. p. 4, "the
plague at certain times, is incurable; at others, easy to be cured. The
contagion is more or less strong, according to the state of the air."

Similar remarks occcur in the Traite de la peste. The author is full of his
idea of contagion, but he says, the plague, tho always from one cause, appears
differently in different places, and a small distance between them makes it
appear like two different diseases, as at Montpelier and at Lions.

Chandler, in his travels, gives us wonderful discoveries on this subject. He
says, the disease proceeds from certain invisible animalcules, burrowing and
forming their nest in the human body. These are imported annually into Smyrna
-- they are least fatal at the beginning, and latter end of the season. If they
arrive early in the spring, they are weak, but gather strength, multiply and
then perish!!

Such silly opinions are gravely recorded in books, yet they prove that
infection is of very different degrees of strength, or that it is the state of
the air, and not infection, which produces the disease.

P. Alpinus, followed by Volney, Savary and others, speaks of this difference
in the malignity of the plague; but he ascribes it to the place where the
disease originates. He says, the contagion from Barbary is more putrid and
virulent, than from Greece and Syria, and instances that of 1580.

Vol. 3. p. 61 and 2. It is true that some of the most violent plagues have
first appeared in Ethiopia or Barbary, as in the time of Thucydides, in 252, in
1580, in 1736; but these writers ought to have recollected that others equally
violent have originated in Egypt, in China, in Italy and in Constantinople.
Witness that in 542 which began near Pelusium in Lower Egypt, those of 1347 and
of 1450 which began in China or other parts of Asia, and that of 745 which
commenced in Calabria, in the kingdom of Naples. They might have observed also,
that many plagues, of the most destructive kind, have appeared at once in
twenty or more of the cities of Europe. These considerations would have
detected the puerilty of the notion, that contagion from one country is more
"putrid and virulent" than from another, and led the observers of nature to the
true cause of these different grades of malignancy, different states of the
atmosphere in different periods.

Fernelius divides epidemics into three kinds: An epidemy from exhalations or
vapor from the earth; from great changes of seasons; and from an occult,
malignant quality in the air; the last, he maintains, is the only true cause of
the pestis; the others are preparatory to it; but these causes often unite, and
the plague then becomes most severe. Putrid exhalations do not alone produce
the plague, but prepare for it and aid its progress. Hence it does not affect
all places or all men alike -- but is most severe in maritime places; in those
exposed to the south; warm and humid, abounding with impure exhalations.

De Morb. Pest. 189. There is a great deal of truth in these observations, and
I cannot but remark how much more correct these authors are who often saw the
plague, than Mead and others who had no such advantages.

The violence of the pestilential principle, aided by seasons remarkably
debilitating, has sometimes dispatched the human race, with terrible rapidity.
The more usual course of the plague is from five to seven days, when death or a
favorable crisis takes place. But to this there have been some dismal
exceptions. The disease described by Evagrius in 590, generally put an end to
life in three days. This also was the period of the crisis in the dreadful
plague, in the days of Vortigern, in 448, and the subsequent years. In the
similar calamity of 1348, few patients lived beyond the third day.

In many instances, during these more general plagues, persons have died
suddenly, as in an apoplexy; as in the pestilence at Narbonne in 1534, where
men frequently fell dead as they were walking or conversing; of which Skenkius
himself was often an eyewitness. He cites as authorities for the same fact,
Valleriola, Gemma, Salius and Cardanus. See page 765. The same happened in the
pestilence described by Evagrius; and authors relate that no less than eighty
persons, fell dead in a procession instituted by St. Gregory, about the year
590. This disease sometimes attacks in the ^^rm of an apoplexy; in other cases,
persons are indisposed, for some days, but able to walk, while the disease is
secretly undermining the animal powers. Such persons suddenly pass from
apparent health to their graves.


Dion Cassius mentions an expedition of a Roman army into Arabia Felix; in
which most of the soldiers perished by unusual distempers. Many of them were
seized in the head; the brain dissolved, and the disease falling upon the
throat, suffocation speedily ended life. This was evidently the effect of
extreme heat, producing excessive excitement and soon followed by a total
debility of the nervous system.

Terrible indeed must be that virulence of the pestilential principle, which
bids defiance to cold. Yet such has been the case in a number of plagues. In
the pestilence of 543, says Procopius, the diseas^ invaded some places in
summer; others in winter. Evagrius makes the same remark of the plague in 590.
The black pestilence of 1348 attacked countries, in northern latitudes, in
winter or summer, without discrimination. The disease in Provence in 1720, was
not controlled by the rigors of winter. The pestilence in 1591, raged through a
cold wint^^ in Revel and Narva, in the 59th degree of north latitude.
"Sometimes, says Fernelius, the most intolerable heat of summer produces no
pestilential disorder, at othe^s, the plague breaks out in winter, and ceases
in the midst of summer (...) in autumn." p. 189.

Diemerbroeck remarks that a plague which begins in winter or autumn, is more
violent and of longer duration, than one which begins in other seasons. So says
Peter Paschal, an author cited by Diemerbroeck; the plague which begins in
spring or summer ends in winter; that which begins in autumn or winter, is of
longer continuance.

The reason of this diversity is very obvious. The pestilence which appears in
winter, in northern latitudes, can proceed only from a disposition of the
atmosphere; for cold totally destroys all infection of that disease, and all
the influence of putrid exhalations. Whenever therefore the plague invades man
in cold weather, it demonstrates a more malignant state of the air, and one
that is not controlled by cold weather or frost. Such a state of the air must
of course produce more fatal effects, than an inferior force in the
pestilential principle, which perhaps requires the aid of heat, humidity and
noxious exhalations to produce a very violent plague. Thanks to heaven, most of
the pestilences that afflict mankind are of this latter, or subordinate degree;
in which the real plague is limited to places highly charged with morbid
substances, which it is in the power of man to dissipate or remove. A vast
proportion of all pestilential diseases are found to rage only in cities,
jails, camps, and crowded ships, and may be avoided or mitigated by human means.

At the same time, historical facts warrant me in believing, that the
pestilential principle does, at times, acquire a virulence, that proves fatal
to life, in every season and every situation; assailing indiscriminately the
city and the cottage; the cleanly dwellings of the rich and the filthy cells of
the poor; the highest hills, as well as the valleys, the borders of morasses,
and the nauseous alleys of a populous town. During this melancholy state of the
elements of life, and such was their condition during the ravages of the black
pestilence in the reign of Edward III. men are however not to despair of
preserving life; but the means consist in applications to the human body,
calculated to guard, not against infection so much, as against debility, the
deciding proximate cause of the malady.

Historians mention a remarkable difference in the operation of the two very
furious plagues, in 1348 and 1361. That of 1348 was most fatal to the poor; but
that of 1361 was most mortal among the nobility and gentry, and on hills and
mountains, which usually escape. In the first case then, morbid exhalations
constituted an influential cause in producing the malady -- in the latter case,
they operated as a shield or antisceptic -- and the facts demonstrate the
various force of the elemental causes.

In the third place, to give effect to the infection of the plague, and at
times, to other autumnal diseases, there must be an apt or (...) disposition in
the human body. This is admitted by Hippocrates, who observes that body differs
from body, the nature of one man, from that of another, the nutriment of one,
from that of another, and the same things are not alike pernicious to one
species of animals, as to another. Hence he accounts for diseases invading one
kind of animals at one time, another species at a different time, and different
species having their various distempers.

Lib. de flatibus. Thus Galen remarks, that the same causes do not affect all
persons alike; if they did, violent heat, excessive fatigue or drinking or
anger, or grief, would produce fever in every person; and for the same reason,
all persons alike would be seized with pestilence, during the reign of the
dog star.

De dif. seb. cap. 4. In conformity to these ideas, Diemerbroeck, p. 50, lays
it down as a principle, that no person will receive infection, unless his body
has an aptitudinem, a fitness, or disposition to receive it, arising from some
secret quality or bad state of the system.

On this point, we reason without knowing causes; all we can do is to collect
and arrange facts, which decide in favor of this hypothesis. We are compelled
to admit the principle, not only as it respects the operation of infection, but
also of the elemental or primary atmospheric cause of pestilence, which makes
an evident distinction, at times, between persons of different habits,
families, and nations. Medical men are not agreed, as to the nature of what is
called predisposition. Brown, in Elements of Medicin, defines it to be a less
degree of the disease; that is, the commencement of the disease. I suspect this
definition, properly limited, to be nearly just. It is probable that all fevers
are the effects of debility, and that when this debility commences, a person
may be said to be predisposed to disease; although the disease may not be formed
in many days or weeks after, or may be prevented by early applications.


These facts came under the observation of Procopius and Evagrius. In 543, says
the former, no physician or attendant caught the distemper -- while many were
seized they knew not from what cause and suddenly died. Many, says Evagrius,
who fled from infected places, remained safe themselves, while they
communicated the disease to others. Many who remained with the sick and freely
handled them, wholly escaped. Others, in despair for the loss of friends, threw
themselves in the way of infection, but were not able to contract the disease;
while others received the disease by the slightest connection with infected
houses, or in open market.

We have many memorable examples of a similar nature in America -- they are too
numerous to be specified. I suspect however that four fifths of such cases are
improperly ascribed to infection.

Diemerbroeck relates that in the height of the plague at Nimeguen, the air was
so bad, that all places were nearly alike, as to the danger of infection;
persons received the disease with or without intercourse with the sick.

Sometimes the plague discriminates between natives of different countries. The
French fugitives from the West Indies, who have resided in our cities during
pestilence have generally escaped. This is not however very remarkable; as they
are accustomed to a climate which is, like our summers, peculiarly fitted to
produce a similar disease; at the same time, their manner of living is better
suited to the warm season, than that of our own citizens.

But a similar discrimination has been often observed, among natives of the
same latitudes, or nearly the same. Thus Cardanus, lib. 8, relates that in a
pestilence at Basle, the Swiss only were affected; the French, Italians and
Germans escaped. John Utenhovius relates that in a plague in Denmark, all
strangers, as English, Germans and Hollanders escaped, although they resided in
families and associated freely with the infected. The Sudor Anglicus, when it
first appeared in England, attacked none but the English; but in subsequent
pestilential constitutions, it invaded almost all Europe.

We have in America most illustrious examples of the distinction above
mentioned. In the sweeping pestilence of 1618, when almost all the Indians
perished, on a tract of three hundred miles in extent, some white men wintered
in the country and associated freely with the sick, without injury. In a
similar pestilence among the Indians on Nantucket, in 1763, not a white man was
affected, tho never so much exposed to infection. Two or three other instances
have come to my knowledge. A like discrimination took place in Egypt in the
time of Moses.

Sometimes the plague singles out particular families. Thus Diemerbroeck
observed in the plague at Nimeguen, whole families, by a secret sympathy, were
seized all at one time; and in some instances, where the members of the same
family lived, at a distance from each other, in different parts of the city,
they were all attacked nearly at the same time. What is more remarkable, the
same fact was repeatedly observed, where the members of the same family lived
in different towns. Of this there were many exemples. One man by the name of
Van Dans, to preserve his children from infection, sent two of them to Gorcum
in Holland, to reside with his friends, and kept the third at home. There was
no pestilential disease in Gorcum, at that time, and the two children remained
in health for two or three months; but at last both were seized with the plague
and died, at the same time that the father and another child died with it in
Nimeguen. The mother was seized, but recovered. About the same time, a sister,
and two or three other children, residing with another sister, at a distance,
and several more remote relations of the family, all perished with the same
disease.

So it is related by Evagrius, who was surprised at the fact, that particular
families, sometimes only one or two, were arrested by the plague, while all the
other inhabitants of the city remained in health. But he remarks further, that
those who escaped, the first year, experienced the like calamity in the next.
This fact, by the way, is common, and should have led Evagrius and others to
observe the progressiveness of the pestilential cause.

Pliny, lib. 7. ca. 50, remarks that old people are usually exempt from attacks
of the plague; but that all nations are subject to pestilential diseases, which
invade them by kinds or classes, sometimes falling on servants, sometimes on
nobles, and on others by grades or ranks. Nature, says this author, has even
prescribed certain laws to diseases. The last remark should have excited the
minds of physicians to discover these laws. Such laws certainly exist, and
epidemics of all kinds are connected in principle.

I have met with other instances of discrimination, perhaps more remarkable.
One is related from John Helwigius, in Bonetus' Collection of Northern
Medicine, page 228. In 1621, when the smallpox raged with great mortality, it
was remarked that persons of the same blood, as brothers, cousins and other
relatives, living at a great distance from each other, and as far as from
Nuremberg to Lions in France, were seized with the disease at one and the same
time. I draw no important consequences from this fact, because this disease is
not limited to particular families, although it may seize one family before it
does another.

Another instance is related by Van Swieten, Vol. 16, from Heister, an author
of undoubted credit. At Altdorf, in Franconia, broke out in 1711, a malignant
fever, approaching to the plague in violence, but not with the glandular
tumors. This disease attacked none, but the students or others of the
university; but it seized them wherever they were dispersed in private
families, in all parts of the town. It seized the professors also and their
families, but went no farther by infection. It attacked also the printer to the
university and his workmen, tho at a distance from the college; while another
printer, contiguous to the college, escaped. Students also belonging to the
university, tho at home, as at Nuremburg, were seized. It was thus restricted
in its attacks, and exhibited no infection, beyond these descriptions of
persons.

It must not be omitted, that this was a very sickly period in all the north of
Europe. In this same year, the plague raged in Copenhagen, and it had in the
preceding years, spread over Poland and along the Baltic.

This fact at Altdorf is by far the most singular, that I have found in
history; but that a violent disease should attack persons of one blood, and not
of another, is less surprising. We have recent proofs of this discrimination in
America. In 1796, three persons of one name in Hartford, two brothers and a
cousin, were suddenly seized with a violent fever, of a putrid tendency, tho in
winter, and carried off within a few days of each other. At the same time, two
or three others of the family were seized less violently in the same town and
recovered; and what is more singular, two other brothers, one in Litchfield, 30
miles from Hartford, and another in New York, 130 miles distant, were attacked
nearly at the same time, and were very ill, but survived. No infection could
have existed in most of these cases, as the persons did not see each other. A
curious fact is related to me by Dr. Dutton of Oxford, in Derby. In the year
1795, almost every male child, born in the beginning of the year, in that and
the adjacent towns, died within a fortnight by convulsions, but no female child
was affected. This was observed to be more frequent in families that had been
affected by the scarlatina, in the preceding year.

It will be remarked that this was near the district of country which had
suffered by a pestilential fever and dysentery.




Another instance occurred in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and is stated to me by
the attending physician.

In October 1791, a young woman, belonging to a family in that town, but who
had, for two years, lived at a distance of three miles from her father's house,
was seized with a putrid bilious fever. Her mother repaired to the place and
nursed her, till she was convalescent. None of the family visited her while
sick, except the father occasionally, and her eldest sister. The latter took
the place of the mother, for a few days, who was called home to attend two
other children who were seized with the same disease, and who had never been
exposed to infection. Before these recovered, three others were taken with the
fever in the same family. The three last had doubtless assisted in nursing the
sick or been into their rooms, and therefore might have been infected.

In April following, another of the children, who had lived at a distance from
the family and had not been permitted to see any of the sick, was seized with
the same fever, at the house where she lived. In the same month, the father and
another child, were taken with it at home. Not one of the family, at home or
abroad, escaped, except the mother, who had nursed all the sick, except one,
and was most exposed to infection. The diseased were very offensive, but all
recovered, except one; and neither my informant, the attending physician, nor
any nurse or visitor, out of the family, was in the least injured by infection.

M. S. letter from Dr. Wm. Gamage. This disease was a family pestilence, which
began in autumn, was suspended by the cold of winter, and revived in spring. It
resembles, on a small scale, the great plagues in London and Marseilles, and
many others, in which a few cases occurred, in the preceding autumn, clearly
marking a pestilential state of air, in that particular city, which state was
arrested in its operation by cold in winter, but again exhibited its effects in
spring.

The limitation of the disease to a particular family, of the same blood, or
disposition to be affected by a certain morbid state of air, is a mysterious
phenomenon, but the fact is so well ascertained, as to leave no room to
question its existence. We can ascribe it only to a general state of air,
fitted to produce injurious or fatal effects on bodies of a particular
temperament, which temperament or disposition consists in the invisible
structure or organization. It is demonstrated that infection cannot be the only
cause of the diseases in these families; and of course we are compelled to
admit the existence of another cause, which can only be the atmosphere, for no
other cause extends its operation to the distance at which the effects were
produced.

It is on this principle alone that particular persons or families escape the
worst plagues that have afflicted mankind, as related by Evagrius, and all
authors on the subject, and of which we have numerous instances in America. But,

"Why drew Marseilles' good bishop purer breath,
When nature sickened and each gale was death?"
is the interrogatory of an inimitable poet, which has never been answered; for
on this subject, as on every other, we are baffled and confounded, when we
attempt to reach primary natural causes. The interior organization of animals
and vegetables, is far beyond the limits of human investigation.

Lord Veruclam has left a passage confirmatory of the foregoing principles.
"The plague, says this great observer of facts, is not easily received by those
that continually attend the sick, as physicians; nor again by old people, and
such as are of a dry, cold complexion. On the other hand, the plague soonest
seizes those that come out of fresh air, those that are fasting and children.
It is also noted to go in a blood, more than from stranger to stranger."

Works, Vol. 3. It is in analogy with the foregoing facts, that animals of
different species are affected with epidemic diseases, which bear a similitude
in their predominant symptoms, at different stages of a pestilential
constitution of air. Sometimes, horses, cattle and sheep feel the operation of
the destructive principle, at the same time with man. At other times, this
principle will affect cattle a year before it reaches mankind. Sometimes, it
first assails the human race, and afterward the irrational parts of creation.
In some years one species of animals is affected; the next year, another. Thus
horses experienced the epidemic of 1793, in the vicinity of Philadelphia, in
the winter following the plague in that city. The cats perished in 1797. The
fish in James' river died in 1797, the oysters on the shores of Connecticut
sickened in 1794, and the fowls in Connecticut in 1796.

Not unfrequently, the force of the pestilential principle, in one country,
seems to expend itself principally on the brute creation; while, in the same
year, or succession of years, its principal operation, in a neighboring
country, is experienced by mankind. Thus in 1712 and 13, a very pestilential
period, the cattle in Italy, Germany and other places received the full force
of the pestilence, in a desolating epidemic, while in Austria, Hungary and the
east, the pestilence fell on men. Thus also in 1770, while a dreadful plague
was raging in Turkey and Poland, a mortal distemper swept away the cattle in
Holland, Flanders and some parts of England, and malignant fevers prevailed in
some parts of America.

That the great general cause of the diseases, among the different species of
animals, is the same, is obvious from this consideration, that during the same
constitution of air, or pestilential period, the diseases of man and beast have
a number of similar symptoms; such was the fact in Austria, Italy and Germany
in 1712 and 13; and such has been the case in the United States.

In conformity with the general principle above mentioned, we observe that
however analogous may be the symptoms of diseases in man and beast, the
distempers of one rarely infect the other. Infection is limited usually to that
species of animals, which have an aptness to receive the operation of the
primary atmospheric cause of the disease. Thus diseased horses do not infect
men, nor diseased men, horses. So when a plague attacks the natives of a
particular country only, the infection, like the primary cause of the disease,
is restricted in its operation to those particular people. But this is rarely
or never the case with the specific contagion of the smallpox and measles, in
regard to mankind.

Authors indeed relate that hogs, dogs and poultry, feeding on highly infected
articles, or wallowing in the filth thrown from houses, during the plague, have
died with a similar disease. A few instances are mentioned by Diemerbroeck,
Boccace and others. Hodges mentions a disease taken from a horse, which ceased
without becoming epidemic.

But these isolated facts form no exception to the general rule; for such
distempers never spread and become epidemic. They only prove my general
doctrine, that the contagious quality of plague, is not a specific principle,
but a quality capable of every possible degree of force -- that in its lower or
more attenuated forms, it affects few or no persons whatever; but it may be so
concentrated or condensed, as to destroy life, not only in bodies of an
aptitude to receive the poison, but also in other species of animals, which
have no such aptitude. Hence, the poison generated in the clothes of the sick,
when put into chests or packages, uncleansed, in hot weather, may be so
concentrated or increased by fermentation, as to kill almost instantly, the
person who opens them. But an infectious disease thus produced, will never
spread far, without the aid of a state of air which is pestilential. On the
other hand, from thousands of instances in books, and within the knowledge of
Americans, who are annually, monthly and weekly receiving infection from the
West Indies, we know that the infection soon disappears in a healthy
constitution of air. It may be so virulent as to give disease to the persons
who first approach it; but in these the disease is extinguished.

It should be further remarked, as a useful hint, that persons removing
suddenly from fresh ai^ to an infected place, are doubly exposed. The increase
of the pestilential causes is usually gradual; therefore persons who live
within their operation, are insensibly fitted, by the flexible texture of the
system, to sustain their effects. But sudden changes are very dangerous. The
body will hardly ever sustain great changes in the powers of excitement, when
suddenly made. Hence the extreme danger of removing from fresh to infected air;
and sometimes, of removing from infected to fresh air. The sudden alteration in
the stimu^us operating on the system, may be as fatal in one case as the other.

Another distinguishing circumstance, in pestilential diseases, and one that
decisively marks different grades of violence in the causes, is, the manner in
which the disease invades neighboring cities. It is always observed, that
during the prevalence of the plague, it attacks cities or towns at some
distance, in one year, leaving other towns in the intervals between them,
untouched; the next year perhaps, or the second year after, it invades those
intermediate towns which had escaped. This is always the fact, and it has
puzzled all authors who have related it; yet the fact has never been accounted
for, as its causes have never been understood. Mead, who was not personally
acquainted with this disease and whose theory led him to explain all its
phenomena by contagion, was greatly embarrassed with this fact. He instances
the escape of Vicenza, in Italy, 1575, when Verona and Padua, one on each side
of Vicenza, were severely afflicted; and in the next year, Vicenza was
desolated, when Verona and Padua were exempt. He could not explain how the
infection, which came from Trent, where the disease first appeared, should pass
over Vicenza and reach a more distant city.

Erroneous theories are the source of innumerable mischiefs in science. The
fact is a common one, and on a just view of the causes of pestilence, is very
easily explained. And what is surprising, Procopius and Evagrius have recorded
facts which afford a clue to the secret, although medical writers, from their days
to the present time, have suffered them to pass without notice. Procopius
mentions that the pestilence which began in 542, spread over the earth, but "if
it passed by a particular country at first, or slightly affected it, it soon
returned upon it with the same desolating rage, which other places had
experienced." Evagrius also remarks, that "some places were more slightly
affected;" and in another passage he says, that in some cities a few families
were seized the first year, and the rest of the city, the year following.

Here we have a clue to the mystery. The plague seizes first the cities and
towns where the general, or local causes are the most powerful. Thus, the
plague of 1575, which puzzled Mead so much, commenced in Trent on the Adige,
which, all geographers agree, is a most unhealthy place. It next attacked
Verona and Padua for a similar reason, and afterward Vicenza, the intermediate
town. The general cause, in the elements, had been four or five years in
operation, producing a fatal spotted fever, in most parts of Europe,
continually increasing in malignancy, until it arose to the plague, and its
crisis must naturally be in places where it was most aided by local causes, or
where the general cause first increased to its full force.

The slight pestilences mentioned by Procopius and Evagrius, were the
precursors of the severe plagues to follow; precisely as in London and
Marseilles, a terrible plague was preceded, in a former year, with malignant
fevers and a few cases of plague. All history affords a tissue of proof, that
the plague is never an isolated disease, starting up suddenly from infection;
but the crisis of a series of violent diseases. To this I challenge the
partisans of specific contagion to name an exception.

In America, we are able to solve the phenomenon of the escape of places
intervening between infected towns. We find, without an exception, that when
two cities are infested with pestilence, and an intervening place is not, if
that intervening town is to be attacked the following year, the precursors of
the disease appear there, during the pestilence in the towns on each side of
it. Thus the late series of plagues began in New York in 1791, in Water and
Front streets, where the local causes were most powerful. At this time,
appeared sporadic cases of bilious fever, more malignant than usual, in various
parts of the country, every where, indicating the commencement of a
pestilential state of air.

In 1792, these indications continued, and in a few cases appeared the
scarlatina, a new evidence of the reigning constitution.

In 1793, the crisis arrived in Philadelphia, with serious mortality; and the
indications of pestilence appeared in a great increase of mortality, in many
parts of the country.

At the close of this year, New Haven, which was to be next attacked, began to
show the forerunners of the disease, in the scarlatina, and in an increase of
mortality of about one fifth. In the next summer 1794 appeared the bilious
plague. In the same season appeared the disease in Baltimore, distant from
New Haven about 290 miles, while Philadelphia and New York, intervening cities,
escaped. But let it be observed, that a number of cases of the disease occurred
in Philadelphia; and New York which was to be assailed in the next season,
produced its precursors, in about thirty cases of violent bilious fever, ending
in black vomit. Thus while on the extremes, New Haven and Baltimore were
severely visited, the approaching pestilence was announced in New York, by a
pestilential atmosphere, of a less degree of malignancy.

In 1795 appeared the epidemic in New York and in Norfolk, Virginia; while
Philadelphia and Baltimore, intermediate cities, escaped, although the heat and
humidity of the season every where rendered the country unhealthy. In this year
the pestilential principle showed itself in New London and Providence, in
distinctly marked cases of the bilious plague.

In 1796, scattering cases occurred in the northern parts of America. In
Newburyport, pestilence prevailed, but preceded by an increase of mortality,
its precursor. The same disease prevailed in Boston, New York, and Charleston,
while intermediate towns escaped.

In 1797, it appeared in Providence, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Norfolk, while
New York escaped an epidemic, but a few very malignant cases occurred, showing
the existence of the general cause.

So far as I can discover, not a spot on the globe has ever been visited with
pestilence, without its precursors, sometimes one, two or three years, but
always for some months, before its invasion. Thucydides relates that the year
of the plague at Athens was remarkably free from other diseases preceding, and
that the plague fell suddenly on the citizens. This may seem an exception to my
remark; but is not; for all the neighboring people were collected into the
city; which was besieged; a circumstance alone sufficient to account for the
sudden attack of the disease.


If we had bills of mortality for Vicenza, in the years 1570 to 1576, or a
history of the diseases in the town, during that period, I pledge myself that
we should find, that during the plague in Verona and Padua, on each side in
1575, some malignant disease prevailed in Vicenza, which greatly swelled the
bill of mortality for that year, and which announced, with almost infallible
certainty, the approach of the plague. Instead therefore of saying Vicenza
escaped the pestilence, the first year, when Verona and Padua were afflicted,
we should say, the pestilence had commenced in less malignant distempers, but
its crisis in Vicenza was to be a year later. This is the whole mystery, and
the uniformity of this series of facts from the days of Procopius to this hour,
renders it a matter of astonishment, that medical and other scientific men,
should have overlooked this great law of epidemic pestilence.

Diemerbroeck remarks the fact, as well as Procopius and Evagrius, that
pestilence does not invade all places at once, but now this place, now that,
and thus, in a series of years, extending over the earth. See p. 50 of
Diemerbroeck, and the foregoing history of the plagues in Justinian's reign.
But no author seems to have observed the progression of a general pestilential
principle, which, if it does not occasion plague in two contiguous towns, the
same year, occasions plague in one, and other malignant diseases in the other,
which certainly indicate its approach.

To prove that infection has no concern in this last mentioned phenomenon,
according to the theory of Mead and others, it may be observed that the
invasion of the disease in cities, is perfectly analogous to its invasion of a
whole country. The disease rarely begins at one point and spreads from that,
like the radii from the center of a circle, nor does it follow the nurses and
attendants of the persons first seized. On the other hand it starts up in
various distant parts of the town, among people who have no intercourse with
the infected. To this, it may be alleged, the fevers of Philadelphia in 1793
and 7 are exceptions; but on critical examination, I find they are not. That in
New Haven may be an exception. Thus Evagrius relates, that at the beginning,
the plague seized particular families, sometimes only one or two, and the rest
of the town escaped, till the next year.

Baronius from Gregory of Tours has well described the first progress of the
plague, in 590, in the southern cities of France. He says the disease was
introduced by a vessel from Spain; the first record I can find of supposed
importation by water. But when introduced, it did not seize every house at one
time but left intervals. "Nec statim hoc incendium luis per domos spargitur
totas, sed interrupto certi temporis spatio, ac velut in segetem flamma
accensa, urbem totam morbi incendio conflagravit." Vol. 8. 15. The metaphor
here employed will appear striking to those who have seen a field of stubble or
the woods on fire, in a windy day. The fact also corresponds exactly with what
has been observed in London, Marseilles and other places, that the disease at
first starts up here and there, in remote situations; then subsides for weeks
perhaps, before it spreads and becomes popular.

Thus in Nimeguen, a few cases occurred in November; then there was an interval
of suspension; in January, more cases, and in March, the disease began to
assume the shape of an epidemic.

Diem. p. 6. In London, says Hodge, two or three persons died, in one family,
with symptoms of the plague in 1664. -- In the holidays, occurred another case
-- but a hard frost suspended the action of the infection. The diseased were at
first shut up and guarded; but to no purpose. An order was issued and enforced,
that a red cross should be set on infected houses, with these words inscribed,
"Lord have mercy on us." --

In May and June the disease to use the author's own words, "reigned
doubtfully;" sometimes in one part and sometimes in another; and to use Hodges
quaint expression, "it kept up a running fight," alternately inspiring hope and
fear. This description is less elegant than that of Baronius, but it expresses
the same ideas of the first progress of the plague.

It is strange however that the writers should not have seen that their facts
totally overthrow their own ideas of infection; it being impossible, that the
operation of infection should be thus suspended, and afterward revived. Frost
totally annihilates infection, although it does not destroy the atmospheric cause
of diseases. Similar, in all respects, was the commencement of the plague at
Marseilles in 1720. At first a few persons died suddenly, then the disease
disappeared, and the citizens supposed it to be ended. Repeated hopes and fears
were revived by the alternate appearance and disappearance of the malady, for
some weeks in May and June. Yet the author who has related these facts made a
book to prove its origin from Levant infection! so absurd are men when they
attempt to support preconceived systems! --

In America, the pestilential fever has first made its appearance, in a similar
manner. It has every where been preceded by an increase of mortality, and in
most places, has appeared in the scattering, interrupted manner of the plagues
before mentioned. In Philadelphia in 1797, and still more in 1798, scattering
cases occurred in June and July, several weeks before the arrival of the
supposed fomites, from the West Indies. The same fact occurred in New York in
1795; some cases appeared two weeks before the arrival of the Zephyr, the
supposed source of infection. In Providence occurred the same fact.

The whole secret of these phenomena, is, that infection has usually nothing to
do with the origin of the disease, according to the decided opinion of the
learned Diemerbroeck, who saw the progress of the disease in Holland, and found
it impossible to ascribe it, in many places, to that cause.

The reason why persons are seized, in remote and scattered situations and
after different intervals of time, is, that the malignant principle is
progressive. In its state of increase, it first produces diseases of a less
violent type, and especially all kinds of eruptive diseases and catarrhous
affections; as influenza, measles, smallpox, every species of angina,
petechial fever, and lastly plague. In winter, the same cause often occasions
epidemic pleurisy, or peripneumony of a most mortal kind, and always bearing
some likeness to the epidemics of summer and autumn.

In this progression or increase of the pestilential principle, those persons
are first seized, who have the least power of resisting its operation. This
inability may proceed from various causes. It may be occasioned by the natural
organization of the body; some bodies being naturally more susceptible of
disease, than others. This indisposition of bodies to repel the morbid action
of air or other causes, is hidden from the eyes of man; but that it exists, we
have proofs in every days experience.

Other persons are predisposed to certain diseases by artificial means. Thus
every excessive stimulus, induces indirect debility, a fruitful cause of
diseases. Hence the liability of robust people to all violent fevers.

Others may be exposed to pestilential diseases from living in situations,
where the pestilential principle is assisted in its operation by the
debilitating qualities of morbid exhalations. Hence the early appearance and
furious ^avages of the plague in the narrow streets of cities, and the filthy
apartments of poverty.

From these and other causes, i^ happens that some persons are seized with
pestilence, long before the bodies of others yield to the action of the
destructive cause. This will rationally account for all the variety of
phenomena, which accompany this ferocious malady.

The same reasoning applies to the angina maligna, which is only another form
of pestilence. Fothergill relates, that this disease appeared in London in a
few cases in 1739, and then disappeared for a period of two or three years. It
did not become epidemic, tho very infectious.

Works, p. 198. To confirm this hypothesis, I may remark that the plague is
less infectious on its first appearance. This is admitted by Russel, on the
plague of Aleppo, p. 19. 300, 297 and 315. At the same time, it is agreed on
all hands, to be more mortal, than in its later stages. If infection were the
cause, the reverse would be true, and the disease would be more mortal, in
proportion to its extension, and the accumulation of infectious matter. The
first cases also would be equally infectious, within the reach of their
effluvia.

Skenkius observes that many persons lived in infected houses, where others
were diseased, for three or four weeks, without any ill effects; but they
afterward sickened and died. This he ascribes to an increase of infection, and
recommends, as the means of prevention, changes of clothes, and liberal use of
water in the apartments. The fact may be explained on this principle; or it may
be, and most probably is, the effect of the slow operation of the morbid air in
inducing debility on particular systems. But it goes to prove that the
infection of the disease is not specific contagion, but a vapor or acid,
unfriendly to health, that is capable of every imaginable degree of force;
slighter degrees of which require a long time to undermine the energies of life.

Another consideration, which decides against the origination of the plague
from infection, is, that almost all other diseases, whether infectious or not,
exhibit the phenomena just described. It is not the plague alone that appears,
this year in one town, and the next in a contiguous one; or this week in one
family, and the next in another; or at the same moment, in two families or
towns, at some miles distance. The same phenomena characterize dysentery,
measles, anginas and other maladies which are infectious; and even
intermittents, remittents, and some others, which are not spread by infection.

Such was the manner in which the fatal dysentery of the period about the year
1751, leaping from place to place, in different years, ravaged Connecticut, for
three or four years. The same took place, with that disease, from 1773 to 1777.
It was scattering from place to place, during a series of years, and then
almost totally disappeared, for many years. Sometimes it spread over a whole
town; at others, it was limited to a particular street. In some instances, it
swept away a large part of a family; in other instances, families entirely
escaped. The same has been its progress, during the last five or six years. In
1794, it ravaged Derby; in 1795, New Haven. In 1798, it invaded a particular
street in the country, two miles from Stamford, was infectious and mortal,
while the town generally escaped.

The scarlatina from 1793 to 1796, exhibited the same facts. Its general
progress was eastward, but it often passed by a town and first seized one
beyond it.

The angina maligna in 1735 and 6 was remarked for the same manner of
appearance. It began in Kingston, in New Hampshire, but instead of a regular
progress, step by step, it seized Boston, fifty miles distant, before it did
Chester, only six miles distant; yet its general progress was westward, and
hardly any place escaped. Both this disease and the scarlatina of the last
period, resembled the plague in these other respects -- they were most mortal
at first; and they affected families with very different degrees of violence,
slightly troubling some, and extinguishing the lives of all the children in
others.

The invasion of the influenza exhibits similar facts. It seizes at first only
here and there a person; afterward it becomes general, as at Edinburgh in
1762. See Essays and Obs. Edin. vol. 3. At other times, it has seized whole
towns in a night; nor does it proceed from town to town, according to their
order on a map. Yet its general course is in one direction.

I could produce a multitude of similar instances of pleurisy, and common
autumnal fevers not infectious, which appear one year, in one part of the
country, and another, in another, without any visible cause for this variety.
The instances related by Dr. Buel of the town of Sheffield, are very
distinguished. See my Collection on the Yellow Fever, p. 53 and 60. That town
contains two large ponds, which make considerable marshes, that are sources of
remittents. In 1794, remittents of unusual violence appeared within the
miasmata arising from the south pond -- in 1795, a similar fever raged in the
vicinity of the north pond.

This appeared at first an unaccountable phenomenon; but afterward the fever
about the south pond in 1794 was ascribed to the drawing off the water, and
exposing great quantities of putrescible substances to the action of heat. But
still the difficulty is not removed. The north pond is admitted to be the most
usual and fruitful source of diseases; but these did not appear, in any extent,
in 1794. The question then is, not why the diseases occurred, in that year,
about the south pond, but why they did not appear about the north pond, the
principal focus of sickness in other years, and about which they raged with
melancholy effects in the two following years? No alteration is suggested to
have been made in the circumstances of the north pond; yet in one year, its
exhalations were almost harmless, and in the next, they spread desolation over
the neighborhood.

See Medical Repository, vol. 1. p. 458. In such cases, just reasoning leads us
to suppose the general state of the air or the local exhalations or both,
differ materially in the degrees of their force and activity, in different
years; but to human eyes, the cause of this difference is not often visible.

Sometimes a severe epidemic will rage in one town and a milder epidemic of a
similar type in the vicinity. Thus Zimmerman observes, that he has known a
violent diarrhea follow a suppressed perspiration in September, in one town,
when a dysentery was epidemic in the neighboring country. To what shall we
impute this difference of diseases, within a few miles, of each other, but to
the different force of local causes? A general cause, as a hot season, may
predispose the body to a disease of a particular type, but this principle may
be modified by innumerable circumstances on the surface of the earth.

In analogy with these facts, is the manner in which pestilential diseases
invade different species of animals. In one place, horses are seized; in
another, cows; in a third, sheep. In one year cats fall victims to pestilence;
and the next, hens and geese; but infection has no concern in these phenomena;
and we are to ascribe them to the various force of the pestilential principle
in different seasons and places.

The phenomenon now under consideration has not escaped the observation of
other physicians in Europe. Stapfer, cited by Zimmerman on Physic, relates that
the village of Oberwyl, in the Canton of Berne, was attacked with a violent
dysentery in 1749, while the neighboring villages were free from the disease.
In the next year, Oberwyl was healthy, while the neighboring villages were
ravaged with the same disorder, tho not separated from the other by any
mountain or forest. I have occasion, says Zimmerman, to observe something like
this, almost every year.

The English Editor remarks on these facts, that "the dysentery, like other
contagious diseases, is spread by communication with the infected persons and
clothes, and therefore it is not strange that one village should escape, if its
inhabitants were careful to avoid communication with their infected neighbors."

Just so important are all the reasonings of the infection-sticklers! The
remarks are commonplace and do not reach the point of difficulty. The
question, is, to know why several villages escaped the disease, in the year
when infection was near them, and were seized, the next year, when no infection
existed. The winter's cold totally extinguishes the infection of that disease;
so that the learned Editor is left without a resource. If any infection had
survived the frost of winter, it must have been in the village first infected,
and in that place common sense and observation would teach us to look for a
revival of the disease, the succeeding spring. But no; that village is in
perfect health, and others, where there had been no fomites, are laid waste by
its ravages. -- Such are the facts, and no theory of contagion is able to
explain the cause of their existence, in regard to this or any other disease.

The dysentery also has, in some places, made the discrimination, observed in
the plague; seizing persons of a certain nation or blood, and not affecting
others who are equally exposed. In an epidemic dysentery in Nimeguen, the
French and Jews all escaped.

Van Swieten, vol. 16. page 57. There is a fact related by Hodges and
Diemerbroeck respecting the plague which must not be omitted. Many persons who
had breathed the pestilential air of London and Nimeguen, went into the
country, where they had the benefit of good air. Here they lived in health a
month or two, then sickened and died of the plague. This is attributed to the
latent poison, which lies long inactive in the system, then operates to the
destruction of life. This may be the cause; but is it not more natural to
ascribe the fact to higher excitement from a pure air, on a debilitated system,
inducing indirect debility? Or shall we suppose that a pestilential atmosphere
is most stimulant, and that a removal into a pure air, induces direct debility?
Perhaps the following facts will throw some light on the subject.

In 1789, I left Hartford in October, when the influenza was spreading in that
town, and was seized with the disease just after I arrived at Boston. A
fortnight after, I returned, with two ladies who had lived in Boston. In a week
after my arriving at Hartford, the town of Boston was attacked with the
influenza, and the two ladies at Hartford were seized at the same time. The
conclusion I draw from the fact, is, that the constitution of air, producing
the epidemic, is some time in operation, before its effects are visible,
gradually inducing a disposition in the system to that disease; and as it is
progressive, it requires about the same time to run through its course in one
place as in another, and is not always interrupted by local causes.

But the most incontrovertible evidence, that infection is not the primary,
controlling cause of the plague, arises from the manner in which that epidemic
ceases.

If infection were the principal and specific cause of its propagation, it must
rage forever, or as long as any of the human race should survive to receive it;
for the longer the disease exists, the more extensive must it be. This
conclusion is inevitable; for if infection spreads the disease so rapidly, that
one or two diseased persons diffuse it in a few weeks over a city, the same
principle must, in a given time, extend it over the whole earth, unless its
operation should be arrested by a superior cause. And as one diseased person is
supposed to infect more than one healthy person, its progress must be
accelerated, in a duplicate, triplicate and quadruplicate ratio to its distance
from its source. Its velocity also must be increased, not only by numbers in a
crowded city, but by an augmented virulence, until all the inhabitants should
be destroyed. But all this is contrary to fact.

Most plagues are modified and regulated by the seasons; but the cessation of
pestilence in different countries, is in different seasons, and seems to depend
on opposite principles. In Egypt, a warm country, never reached by what may be
called cold, the plague begins in winter, as in December, January or February;
after the Nile has subsided within its banks, leaving extensive plains and
numerous canals, exposed to a hot sun; with a slimy surface and stagnant water
in abundance, on the face of the country. During this period also blow the
southerly and suffocating winds, hot and dusty, from sandy deserts, which may
augment the causes of disease.

On the other hand, the disease ceases in June, when the Nile overflows its
banks, spreading fresh water over the face of the country; at which time also
begin to blow the cool refreshing elysian breezes from the north or
Mediterranean sea.

Hence it is obvious that the existence of the disease depends on the general
state of the atmosphere; for the inundation of the Nile certainly does not wash
away the infection from the houses and clothes of the sick. On the other hand,
the plague ceases, when the infection is most general, and this is true in
every instance.

It may be said, that the plague arises from putrid exhalations in Egypt, and
the reason why it ceases, on the rising of the Nile, is, that the expansion of
fresh water over the country and a pure northerly air, destroy these
exhalations.

In this observation there is truth; and it would account for the origin and
the cessation of the plague, if it was an annual disease, regularly influenced
and entirely governed by the seasons. But here again we are overthrown; for in
most years, putrid exhalations, which always exist at a certain season, do not
produce the disease. Thus we are driven to seek another cause, which is not
influenced by seasons; and to suppose its cooperation with hot winds and
stagnant waters in the generation of the disease. This is most indubitably the
fact.

Again, the plague in Syria, farther north, where some winter's cold is
experienced, begins in spring, as in February or March, and ends in June and
July, during the most excessive heat of the summer. This is the fact, from
Aleppo to Jerusalem, and has been, from the earliest records extant.

Here then different causes, extreme heat and drouth, seem to control the rage
of the plague. But does heat destroy infection? Never, unless by combustion. No
degree of heat that is ever felt in the tropical regions, or in America, has
ever mitigated the force of infection, but always has increased it. Now we
know, that the heat of Syria, never exceeds in degree what is annually
experienced in the West Indies and the United States, to the 42d degree of
latitude certainly, and probably to the 44th. In one respect Syria differs from
this country; the summers are longer than in the northern states of America,
and the climate subject to drouth. But it cannot be the duration of the heat
which destroys the plague; for that disease ceases at the very beginning of
summer. It abates in June, and rarely appears, to any extent, as late as
August. Nor can we concieve why drouth in Syria should put an end to the
epidemic for in most other countries, it has not that effect. In Europe and
America, extreme drouth has very often inflamed its violence.

In this instance then we find no cause for the cessation of the plague, in the
weather or seasons, which we are able to comprehend. We know the uniformity of
the fact; and all beyond this, is conjecture. Infection can have no concern in
the effect; unless on some principle hitherto unknown, cool weather generates
it and heat destroys it, contrary to facts in all other countries.

Certain it is, that the plague at Aleppo, Damascus, Said, Jerusalem, Latakia,
and on all the Syrian coast, ceases in extreme hot weather, and when the
infection is in its utmost extent and violence.

In Italy, Constantinople, in all Europe and the temperate latitudes of
America, ordinary plagues yield to cold; that is, they cease as epidemics of
that form; but the general cause never fails to show its influence, in giving
to the disorders of winter, some of the general symptoms which characterize the
epidemic of the summer. This proves that, in common pestilence, morbid
exhalations aid the atmospheric cause in producing the epidemic; and that it is
not specific contagion which contributes to spread the disease, for this is not
influenced by cold; but it is morbid exhalations, that yield to cold. Hence, in
northern climates, cold suspends the action of the two subordinate causes of
pestilence, morbid exhalations and infection; and this is usually sufficient to
check the epidemic.

But that the great primary cause, is not affected or rather subdued by cold,
is apparent from these facts; that although the plague, in its peculiar autumnal
form, is suspended, yet the diseases of winter, as pleurisy and peripneumony,
wear the same character; which can be occasioned only by the continued action
of the same cause. Further, some plagues have not yielded to cold, as I have
before observed. Several instances have occurred, in which the disease has run
through all the seasons without interruption or abatement. This fact
demonstrates that the primary cause, existing in the essential properties of
the elements, may be of various degrees of force, and at times does actually
arise to a degree, capable of producing and continuing that disorder, not only
without the aid of morbid exhalations and infection, but in defiance of cold.

In conformity with this idea, is the fact that a pestilence which begins the
earliest in the season, is the most mortal. This is agreed by P. Alpinus, Van
Swieten and Sydenham, "Minus saeva est, quo tardius illuc accessit, viderique
incepit; ita ut quo tardius venerit, eo mitior ac brevior sit judicanda," says
Alpinus, Rerum Egypt, Vol. 3. 70. The reason of which is, that in proportion to
the strength of the elemental cause, it begins to exhibit its effects early in
the season; that is, with the least aid from heat, noxious effluvia or other
local causes. -- If the general contagion of the atmosphere is very powerful,
its effects may appear even in winter, in opposition to cold; hence the
justness of Diemerbroeck's remark, that pestilence beginning in winter, is the
most fatal. If, on the contrary, the general constitution of the air is less
hostile to life and health, it will not produce an epidemic pestilence, till it
is assisted by great heat and local vitiation of the air; therefore the disease
will not appear, till late in the season.

Something like this, on a small scale, has characterized the different
epidemics in Philadelphia. In 1793, the precursors of the epidemic were light,
and the first cases did not appear, till the last of July or beginning of
August. In 1797 and 98, the first cases occurred in June, and the disease in
the latter years, was marked with by far the most malignant symptoms, although the
timely evacuation of the city prevented bills of mortality equal to that of
1793.

In New York, this circumstance, it is believed, has been less noticeable; but
it may be remarked, that in the years of the epidemic, the first cases occurred
in the last week in July, and in years, when a few sporadic cases The advocates
of the specific contagion of the plague do not admit that the true plague ever
appears in sporadic cases. They think, if it once appears, its contagion must
of necessity, spread it. This is all a whim. I believe, with Dr. Mitchell, that
any disease of the worst type, may be generated in the body, solely by a
derangement of the functions of the stomach and intestines, and the poisonous
air extricated from food. But that sporadic cases of plague may occur and do
occur very often, I have not the least doubt. During the late war, in 1776 or
1777, two brothers by the name of -- arrived from the army at Greenwich in
Connecticut -- one had a malignant fever, with glandular tumors; the other was
his nurse and in good health. The sick man died soon after he arrived, and in
less than 24 hours, his brother was also in his grave. This was true plague;
but no other attendant was infected. --
only have appeared, they have not occurred till many weeks later. Besides, it
is very obvious that the diseases of 1795 and 6, if not of 1797, were
powerfully influenced, in their commencement, by local causes; as great masses
of putrid matter, in the parts of the city, where the first cases occurred, and
where the epidemic exhausted its principal force. --

In general, it may be observed in our climate, that if a malignant fever does
not appear, in a city, till late in August, the citizens need not apprehend
very general desolation. If cases occur early, as in June, there is serious
ground for apprehensions of danger. The only exception to these remarks, is,
when the seasons suffer some great, unusual and sudden vicissitudes, which,
during a pestilential period, may overwhelm a city with almost instantaneous
calamity. -- Such may be a sudden invasion of heat in August, after preceding
cool weather.

In general it is a just remark, that as the force of the pestilential
principle, is of various degrees, in different periods, so when it is most
powerful, it attacks men the earliest in the proper season, and is destined to
be the most destructive.

The preceding facts and conclusions seem sufficient to establish the great
point, that neither contagion nor infection has ever had much influence in
originating or propagating ^estilential epidemic diseases of the autumnal kind.

But objections remain to be answered. It is alleged that the plague begins in
maratime places and thence spreads into the country adjacent. Thus it is
asserted by the college of physicians in Philadelphia, that the pestilential
fever in America "commences invariably in our seaports, while inland towns,
equally exposed to the ordinary causes of fever, escape." Memorial, dated Dec.
5, 1797.

Pliny, a great observer of facts in the natural world, goes farther and
asserts, "That pestilence is observed always to proceed from southern regions
toward the sitting sun; nor does it scarcely ever happen otherwise, except in
winter."

Lib. 7. Cap. 50. Mead and the author of Traite de la peste have cited this
opinion with approbation. By the words of Pliny "a meridionis partibus, ad
occasum solis," must mean from Egypt and the Barbary coast, toward Italy, Gaul
and the other western parts of Europe.

From these facts, is inferred a strong argument in favor of the propagation of
that disease by contagion.

With deference to these great authorities, not one of these assertions is
accurate. That the plague generally appears first in seaports, is a just
remark, and according to the laws of nature, it must be so, without infection.
But to this rule there are many exceptions. The general plague in the days of
Thucydides originated in Ethiopia, near the borders of upper Egypt, not a
seaport.

The violent plague in 252 began in the same region; as did that of 1736.

The plague of 542 began in Lower Egypt, between Pelusium and a morass, called
the Serbonian bog, at a distance from the port of Pelusium. It should have been
mentioned that the mortal plague in the reign of the Antonines began in
Seleucia, on the Tigris, far from the sea. The black pestilence of 1348
originated in China. That of 1450 in some parts of Asia. The pestilence of 1348
began, when it first appeared in France, in Avignon, not a seaport; as did
that of 1482. The plague of 1575 in Italy, began at the northward, in Trent,
and proceeded southward, contrary to the assertion of Pliny; and every one
sknow Trent is not a maritime place. The plague in Holland in 1663, began in
Heusden, not a seaport, but on a river and near a morass. In 1702, a plague
broke out in Poland, far from the sea.

With respect to the United States, the assertion of the College of Physicians
must stand or fall, according to the definition of the fevers which have
appeared in the country. If no pestilence has ever appeared, except in
seaports, we must affix some other name to the mortal epidemics that visit the
interior of our country. Certain it is, contrary to the statement of the
College of Physicians, that the true yellow fever, and so called at the time,
prevailed in Albany in 1746.

About the marshes in the interior of our country, an epidemic bilious fever
has times without number, raged as fatally, as ever it did in Philadelphia,
destroying life in three or four days, attended with all the characteristic
symptoms of yellow fever and carrying off almost every person, within the
region of its atmosphere. This has happened, about some of the lakes in the
state of New York, every year since the present pestilential period commenced,
and whole villages have been depopulated. If the College of Physicians choose
not to call this disease yellow fever, I cannot help it; but sure I am, if it
is not that specific disorder, it is one equally desolating, and as little
entitled to be fathered on the country, as any species of plague whatever. It
is a fact also that the bodies of those who perish by that fever near rivers
and lakes, are, if possible, more yellow than in cities.

But what utterly disproves the assertion of the College of Physicians, is,
that the same pestilential distemper which has lately afflicted our cities,
appeared among the aborigines of this country, before it was settled by the
English, before the West Indies were settled by the English or French, and
before a single vessel from the islands had ever reached our shores. To confirm
this fact, it is well known that the same disease has often visited them, since
the English settlements, and in situations and under circumstances, when it was
not possible for them to receive it from infection, as at Nantucket and
Martha's Vineyard in 1763, and several times, in the limits of the present
state of Rhode Island. The Onandagoes in the state of New York, three or four
hundred miles from a seaport, about eighty years ago, were attacked with
pestilence, which wasted the tribe; and the place where their village was then
built, has, on the account of that mortality, been ever since abandoned, and is
now overgrown with trees. The same happened among the Senecas at a later period.

What the disease among the Onondagoes was, I am not informed; it might have
been the smallpox; but the country where it happened, is now subject to mortal
bilious epidemics, which kill in three days, and turn the body as yellow as
saffron. Besides the great plague of 1618 is known to have been the true
infectious yellow fever, and so was the fever of Nantucket in 1763, neither of
which could possibly have been imported.

About sixty years ago, a great mortality happened among the Indians, on the
north east of a small stream, a little south of East-Greenwich, in the state of
Rhode Island. The disease was fatal to almost all who were affected; but it was
local, and infectious, for a law was passed that no person should go from one
side of the river to the other, and the Indians on the opposite side remained
in health. This place was no seaport, but an Indian hamlet; and no pretense of
importation is suggested, nor does it appear, that any whites were affected.

About twenty-six years ago, a malignant bilious fever attacked the Indians, at
Quidnesit neck, in North-Kingston, in the same state, and most who were seized,
perished. It attacked also a few families of whites, but with less mortality.
North-Kingston is a seaport, but there is no suggestion of foreign origin.

M. S. of Moses Brown of Providence. From these facts let the public judge how
little reliance can be placed on general assertions even of learned and
respectable societies, when made without a critical examination of the subject.

It is proper that I should here take notice of an assertion, found in a number
of authors. "That Thucydides relates the plague, in his days, to have spread
from Ethiopia by means of contagion, infection or fomites." The learned
Diemerbroeck has fallen into this mistake. p. 48.

Galen is more correct, when he says, that pestilence spread by the corruption
or infection of the air. This idea, tho not the expession, is accurate. The
truth is, Thucydides does not say, the distemper spread by infection or
contagion. A literal translation from the Greek is as follows. "It began as it
is reported, first from Ethiopia, above Egypt; then it fell on Egypt and Lybia,
and a great part of the King's dominions (Persia.) It then suddenly invaded the
city of Athens and first the Pieraeus." In the paragraph preceding he says, the
disease had prevailed in many regions first and especially at Lemnos; but does
not hint at infection or contagion as the cause.

The observation of Pliny, that pestilence originates in southern climates and
proceeds northward and westward, is generally, but not always true. Alexander
Russel tells us, the pestilence in Aleppo in 1719 came from the northward; and
many authors relate that it appears in Constantinople or Smyrna, before it does
in Egypt. This may be partly owing to alterations in the Turkish cities, since
Pliny's time.

But on just principles, the fact is rationally explained. If a particular
state of air, favorable to the propagation of that distemper, must exist,
before it can become epidemic, which is admitted by the friends and foes of
contagion, then supposing this general pestilential principle to exist, at a
given time, in equal force, all over the earth, or any portion of it; it must
follow inevitably, that this general cause will produce the worst diseases
first in climates and situations, where the most powerful local causes exist,
as heat, moisture, and all kinds of deleterious exhalations. And for a most
obvious reason; the debility of the human body must be first induced in those
situations.

This is a complete solution of the fact mentioned by Pliny; and he himself
justifies this explanation of it, for he excepts from his own general rule, the
pestilence that appears in winter, a circumstance passed over by Mead. Now the
reason why a plague beginning in winter does not follow the course of one
beginning in summer, but appears sometimes in northern climates first, is, that
such a pestilence does not require the aid of contingent causes, as noxious
exhalations. It is independent of local causes, and induced solely by the
essential qualities of the atmosphere; it may therefore appear first in any
place or climate whatever, according to that state of air. This happens only in
great plagues which seldom occur.

These observations apply also to the objection that pestilence first appears
in maritime places, as mentioned by Procopius, and others.

It is a fact known to every medical man that humidity is a cause of debility.
Hear what the learned Zimmerman says on this point.

On Physic, vol. 2. p. 100. "The humidity of air weakens a man suddenly; it
relaxes the solids, and of course weakens the circulation, so that the
secretions are carried on with difficulty. The insensible perspiration is
checked, the moisture passes in through the absorbing pores of the skin, and
the patient feels a lassitude and heaviness, which deprive him of all his
gaiety, and render the mind as oppressed as the body" -- "Damp situations are,
in every country, unhealthy."

p. 102. There is not a person living who cannot testify to the truth of these
remarks. Hence the languor which depresses man, in a hot sultry day, with a
southerly light air, loaded with vapor. Hence this state of the air, when of
long continuance, never fails to generate epidemic disorders; and if it occurs,
during a pestilential constitution, mankind seldom escape the ravages of the
plague.

It may be said that the inhabitants of maritime towns, are less exposed to
this source of debility, than seamen, who are in general remarkably healthy. To
which I answer, that the ordinary moisture from sea air never of itself
produces diseases; and at sea, there exists no exciting cause, as morbid
exhalations, unless in ships of war and crowded transports, in which diseases
often proc^ed from human effluvia. But I question whether the bodies of seamen
possess the same firm texture as those of laboring farmers in the country.
Certain it is, that seamen are in general not so long-lived men, as farmers.
This is ascribed to their irregular and severe fatigue; but I suspect it more
owing to the incessant operation of the debilitating powers of moisture.

Whatev^r may be in this, it is certain that moisture of itself induces
debility, in a greater or less degree, tho not disease; but when its action on
the system is combined with the operation of morbid exhalations, which abound
in cities, especially near navigable water, together with the frequent
alternations of heat and cold, occasioned by the contiguity of land and water;
we are not to be surprised that cities on the borders of the ocean, and the
banks of rivers, are the first to be attacked with pestilence. We might,
without the aid of facts, prove a priori, that this must generally be the case.

Hodges mentions that the London plague of 1665 spread into the adjacent
country, especially along the Thames; but he takes care to ascribe this to
infected goods, and not to humidity -- another proof of the mischiefs of theory.

Indeed the circumstance that next to large maritime cities, the towns situated
on the borders of rivers or lakes, are the most severely harrassed with
epidemics of a fatal kind, especially autumnal diseases, is an evidence of the
truth of the same principle. Wherever we turn our eyes, we see autumnal
diseases, from simple tertians to the plague, most frequent and most deadly, in
low situations, under the combined operation of heat, moisture and different
species of noxious exhalations. It is therefore as unphilosophical to deduce,
from this fact, arguments in favor of the foreign origin of the plague, as in
favor of the importation of many other malignant diseases; for the same
phenomena attend them all -- they all appear first, and are most epidemic and
fatal, in the vicinity of water. This is their general rule, to which exist
some exceptions, as well in regard to the plague, as to other bilious
complaints.

But the discovery of a general pestilential principle, extending over a whole
hemisphere, or the whole globe nearly at the same time, or with a rapid
progression, solves all the difficulties on this subject. Had Pliny known, that
at the moment a severe plague appears in Egypt, the diseases of all Europe, or
all the world, assume unusual malignancy, or other contagious and infectious
epidemics appear, in every quarter, to the distance of a thousand leagues, his
remark would have been equally just, as to the origin and progress of the
plague, but it would have opened to him new causes of its origin, and a more
just and philosophical view of the phenomenon. This is a discovery which
prostrates all theories of specific contagion, and reduces the influence of
infection to its just measure.

Another fact. Forestus has declared that in pestilence, three times the number
died in wet weather, as in fair and dry weather; the infection being less
easily dispersed, in wet weather, which is evident from the smoke of chimnies.

Van Swieten, vol. 16. 26. It is well known in America, that while the weather
is hot, rains and moist air greatly multiply cases of pestilential fever.

In 1720 a storm of thunder and lightning at Marseilles, late in July, was
followed by a great increase of the plague.

Traite de la peste. Every one knows that the air, along the borders of the
ocean, corrodes iron and other metallic substances. Is it not then questionable
whether the saline acid, which impregnates the maritime air, has not some
deleterious effect on the human body, when combined with other vapors from the
earth? Are we yet acquainted with the essential properties of all the possible
combinations of aerial substances?

Again; Mead has remarked, that countries and cities which have had most
commerce with Africa, as Marseilles, have been most frequently afflicted with
the plague. A French author, he says, reckons 20 plagues that have infested
Marseilles, notwithstanding its healthy situation.

In opposition to this, it may be proved by facts, that the cities, in the
interior of Germany, that never had any trade or connection with Egypt, used
formerly to be harrassed with that disease, nearly, if not quite as often as
the maritime ports of England, France, Spain or Italy. Any man will learn this,
who reads the whole history of that calamity, instead of that of a few detached
instances.

As to the twenty plagues of Marseilles, ascribed to the trade with Egypt, I
would observe, that I can produce the history of near double that number of
violent plagues in London, before that city had any trade or connection with
Egypt.

Equally ill founded is the idea of medical writers that the yellow fever of
the West Indies was brought first from Siam. "Malady de Siam," is the name
given to it by French physicians; and this improper name, will serve to
perpetuate the error, while it shall exist as a monument of ignorance and false
philosophy. This pretended Siam fever was the pestilence of the Indians, on
this continent, before the West India Islands were settled by the French or
English.

Another extraordinary assertion of Mead, is, that "the northern nations of
Europe, before their connection with Africa in trade, grew populous more
rapidly, than in modern times."

I will not contest the assertion, as it regards the degree of population of
those countries, in different periods. Authors differ in opinion on the subject
of the ancient population of Europe, and no certain documents or facts exist by
which the point can be ascertained.

But the implication necessarily deduced from Mead's assertion, is, that the
plague is more frequent and destructive in the north of Europe, since a trade
has been opened with Egypt, than before; for on this principle only would he
account for the reduced population of modern times. If this is what he meant to
insinuate, the assertion is not simply inaccurate, but absolutely false. From
the first accounts we have of Russia, Poland and the Baltic regions, to the
first opening of a trade with Egypt, in modern days, plagues were much more
frequent and fatal in those countries than they have been, within the last
century, since a constant trade has been carried on with Egypt and every part
of the Levant. For the truth of this assertion, I appeal to facts. -- In the
year 1485, the English first opened a trade to the Mediterranean, especially
with Italy, and a consul was appointed, resident at Pisa. The act of
appointment by Richard 3d. contains this passage "whereas certain merchants and
others, from England, intend to frequent foreign parts, and chiefly Italy, with
their ships and merchandise" -- Before this, England had little or no trade,
directly with foreign countries. All her trade was conducted by Lombards,
Genoese, Venetians and the Hansem^rchants. There was no direct trade to Egypt
and the Levant.

About the year 1511, English ships began to frequent Sicily, Candia, Chios and
the Syrian coast; but this was accounted a very hazardous voyage, and ships
seldom made it in less than a year.

In 1535 English factors first settled in those countries.

See Anderson's Commerce, vol. 1. 683. vol. 2. 79. Rymer's Federa, vol. 12.
261, and Hackluite Voyages, vol. 2. 96. Now, the fact is, that the plague was
as frequent and severe in England, Denmark, Sweden and Germany, in the tenth,
eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries, before any foreign trade existed,
as in any later period. Not to mention the universal plague in the days of
Vortigern, about 448, which never has been exceeded in extent and violence,
unless by the black pestilence of 1348.

The Levant Company was first established by Queen Elizabeth in 1581, and the
act of incorporation expressly states that "Sir Edward Osborn and his
associates, the persons incorporated, had at their own great costs and charges,
found out and opened a trade to Turkey." Before that time the commodities of
Egypt, Syria and Turkey were all imported from Italy, so Venetian or Genoese
ships.

The commerce of the North of Europe from the year 1200 to 1500, was almost
wholly in the hands of the Hansea^ic Confederacy; but on careful investigation,
I cannot find the least trace of a direct trade to the Levant, by the towns in
that league. Indeed before the discovery of the mariner's compass, in the 14th
century, all trade was carried on by coasting. History records more than one
hundred general plagues before that discovery. So totally false is the
assertion of Mead.

But say the College of Physicians, in the memorial before cited, "proper
health laws, strictly enforced, have latterly protected the commercial parts of
Europe from its ravages." This is a point of importance, and while the
assertion stands unsupported by proofs, I am at liberty to deny the truth of
it, and there leave the question, as fair on one side as the other; for I
cannot prove a negative. If however health laws have produced the effect
alleged, it is very strange that the plague did not disappear at a much earlier
period.

The institution of health laws was as early as 1484, and it appears they were
first introduced at Venice. If these laws have ever prevented an epidemic
plague, it is very strange, that they were ineffectual in Venice and other
parts of Italy, for near two hundred years, as they certainly were. It is
indeed wonderful that, during the 16th century when all Europe was almost
continually ravaged by that disease, and down to the close of the last century,
no man could be found to devise a law, and no police, to enforce it, so as to
arrest the progress of the plague in Italy. Yet such was the fact.

The first statute, I believe, in England to restrain the progress of
infection, was in 1604, in the first session of James I. 31. The regulations
attempted by the proclamation of Queen Elizabeth in 1580, before recited,
prohibiting the enlargement of London, and the residence of more families than
one in the same house, could not, from the tenor of them, be carried into
effect. The statute of James limits its provisions to the confinement of the
sick to their houses, a breach of which was made felony. An enforcement was
attempted in the subsequent plagues, and especially in 1665, but without the
least good effect, as to the city at large, and with a very ill effect upon the
diseased and their families. It is certain however that a strict execution of
such a law, would arrest the progress of infection, for the infection of the
plague is found and admitted on all hands to be confined to contact or very
near approach, so as to be received by the breath of the diseased. If therefore
the disease were propagated by infection only, such confinement of the sick
would check its progress, if not annihilate it. We know by repeated experience
in America, that there is not the least difficulty in putting an end to a
disease arising solely from specific contagion; and it has often been done in
cases of the smallpox. Hence the inefficacy of the law of James I. after
repeated trials in the plague, is a strong evidence that its propagation
depends on some other cause than infection.

From 1604, to the reign of Queen Anne, no general laws were enacted on this
subject, as far as I can discover from the printed statutes. In the 9th year of
Queen Anne, 1709, passed the first statute enjoining vessels to perform
quarantine; at least I can find none earlier. This was repeated by 26th. George
2, 1752, a new statute on the subject, which was afterward amended by the 29th
of the same reign. Now it so happens, that the plague ceased in London in 1666,
forty-three years before a general quarantine was instituted. Particular laws
had been passed before, on emergencies, as in 1664, when all importation of
goods from Holland, was prohibited, on account of the plague, then in Holland;
but without effect. The truth then, is, so far as regards Great Britain, now
the most commercial country on earth, and at the time in question, the most
commercial, next to Holland, the plague entirely ceased and disappeared, 43
years before the existence of quarantine laws. If any mistake occurs in this
statement, it must proceed from want of materials -- my enquiries are limited
to Blackstone and the printed statutes at large, the only documents I possess
on that subject.

In the course of my reading, I have found but two or three instances, in which
it has ever been supposed that health laws have preserved a city from
pestilence. Mead mentions two instances; one at Ferrara in 1630, where every
person, seized with the disorder, was immediately removed to a Lazaretto; which
being done in seven or eight instances, the disease was checked and disappeared.

Another instance he mentions was at Rome in 1657, where the persons first
seized were removed to Lazarettos and their families to hospitals without the
city, and the city was soon freed from the disorder. He supposes further that
the disease was suspended a whole fortnight in Marseilles, in 1720, by the same
means.

I have no account before me of the origin and progress of the plague, in
Italy, 1630 and 1657, except the sketches found in Mead's works, but wherever I
can obtain a correct account of this disease, mentioned also by Mead, I find
his statements are imperfect and erroneous; I therefore place very little
dependence on them. That the plague in Marseilles was stopped a fortnight by
regulations of policy, is not true. The disease appeared in the preceding
autumn, and was suspended five or six months by the winter. When it appeared in
the month of May 1720, writers say, the first cases were among those who had
intercourse with the ship and goods from Said; but all those goods were
prohibited to be carried into the city, and subjected to fifteen days retreat
and purification. The porters who had concern with them were confined. Some
weeks after, in the month of June, cases of the disease appeared in the city;
all precautions had proved fruitless; as the hot weather came on, the disease
started up here and there in the city, among persons who never had any concern
with the ship or the goods, or the infected; it then subsided; then again
appeared, in the manner before related.

Whether the persons seized in May contracted the disease from the goods or
foul air of the ship, or not, is not material; for the goods were cleansed, and
all the diseased confined to the hospital, and all the porters shut out from
the city. Yet when the disease appeared in the city, no person could tell how
it came there; many were seized who had never been near infection; and hence
the populace resort to supposition to account for its origin -- they suppose
the disease had come from the goods after they were cleansed, tho they had no
evidence of it. Besides I have before remarked under the year 1720, that the
goods could not be infected, for it is admitted on all hands that they were
shipped at Said, when the disease was not in that port. The ship's hold might
have generated foul air on her passage, and the first persons connected with
her might have contracted a pestilence from that air, which is not an uncommon
thing, in such a very sickly period, as that was, when mortality was increased
all over Europe and America. But the truth is, had that air been the cause of
the plague in the city, the disease would not have been suspended for six
weeks, but would have made a regular progress from one patient to another. But
no; it disappears for six weeks, and then breaks out in parts of the city
remote from the supposed source of infection, and among people who had not been
near that source. So inaccurate and inconsistent appear all accounts of the
contraction of epidemic diseases from fomites, which I have been able to
investigate by full and authentic documents. This shows how little reliance we
can place on partial state^ents, made to support favorite systems. I therefore
am persuaded that the cases mentioned by Mead of the effectual restraint of the
plague in Italy by removing the sick, are not fully stated, and that an
accurate enquiry would prove the supposed effect to result from other causes.

The following facts will furnish a more rational solution of the phenomenon.

In the United States, ever since the commencement of the present constitution
of air, that is, from 1790, sporadic cases of our pestilential fever have
occurred, not only in cities, but in various parts of the country, more or
less, every summer and autumn. In 1792 occurred a number in New York; also in
1794 when one case exhibited infection; and in 1797. Of about thirty cases
perhaps, in each year, some of them were excessively violent, highly marked,
and in a degree, infectious. In 1791 and in 1796, several hundred cases
appeared, yet the disease was not epidemic, but local, and the business of the
city was not suspended. Now had every person, the moment of his seizure, been
conveyed out of the city to a hospital, the escape of the city, in each of
these years, would vulgarly have been ascribed to that circumstance. This was
doubtless the case in Ferrara and Rome, and this is unquestionably the solution
of the fact, that the cases in the Italian cities, were sporadic cases, which
always occur in the neighborhood of the plague. This disease, in the years
mentioned, raged in other parts of Italy; the cases mentioned by Mead were
sporadic cases, indicating a pestilential constitution of air, extending to
those cities, but of a less malignancy, and too mild to produce a general
pestilence in those places; it affected only a few persons of habits most
susceptible of it; and to these it probably would have been limited, had none
of them been removed.

A similar fact occurred in Philadelphia in 1794. Eighty or a hundred persons
died that year of the true yellow fever; none of them were removed; but to
these was limited the operation of the pestilential principles, local and
general; and no epidemic ensued.

In New London a case occurred in 1795; and in 1796 several cases of the same
disease; but no epidemic, although no removal of the sick took place.

In Providence, sporadic cases have occurred almost every year, with symptoms
of the infectious yellow fever. In 1791, in June, died two daughters of a
widow, in the center of the town. They vomited bilious matter, and their bodies
were yellow, with livid and purple spots. Other cases occurred the same year;
one case in 1792, and a number in 1793, 4 and 5; cases which could not possibly
have originated from foreign sources. Some of them appeared to be infectious,
as that of the young women first mentioned, the first being taken on the 4th of
June and dying on the 7th; the second being seized on the 9th, and dying on the
twelfth. Yet no epidemic followed; and had these patients been removed to a
distant hospital, the safety of the town would have been ascribed to that
removal, and the salutary effect of health laws would, by Mead's followers,
have been trumpeted over the country, and what is worse, would have been
recorded as an important fact, which would hereafter mislead posterity.

Nothing is more dangerous than to build a theory, or to establish a general
principle on a few detached facts, inaccurately stated, and ill-understood.

With regard to the case of Rome stated by Mead, it must be observed, that the
disease had, in the preceding year, killed 10,000 of its inhabitants, and in
the kingdom of Naples 400,000. The disease had probably finished its course in
that region, and the few cases in Rome in 1657, were only detached instances,
the remains of the pestilential cause; such as occurred in London in 1666,
after the fatal plague of the preceding year. It is by no means probable that
the disease, if neglected, would have become epidemic.

But we have stronger ground to oppose the idea of the College of Physicians,
relative to the effect of health laws. Numerous examples are on record, in
which the full force of the best regulations to prevent pestilence, has been
applied in vain; and since the publication of the memorial of the College, from
which this idea is taken, Philadelphia has witnessed the futility of such
regulations, in two melancholy instances.

In 1636, the law to prevent infection was rigorously executed in Lo^^ (...)
sick were confined, suspected families were sequestered; but all to no purpose;
the disease spread, the legal restrictions were then taken off, and no ill
effect followed; the distemper spread no faster than before.

In 1665, the same regulations were tried in vain; and so was the law,
prohibiting the importation of goods from Holland.

The approach of pestilence toward Dantzick in 1708, in which year it appeared
at Thorn, alarmed the magistrates of the former city, and every possible
precaution was used to prevent its reaching Dantzick. Commerce and
communication with infected and suspected places were forbidden; no sorts of
merchandise, especially those which are most apt to retain infection, were
permitted to enter the city from such infected places; all strangers and
travelers were strictly examined, and none suffered to enter the city, without
sufficient proof of coming from healthy places; all the inhabitants were
cautioned not to hold correspondence with infected places, nor to harbor those
who came from them. These and other regulations were enjoined by an edict in
July 1708. Yet all to no purpose; the plague appeared at Dantzick, the next
spring.

Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 6. p. 6. This is a remarkable instance of the futility
of human regulations, when opposed to the laws of the physical world. The
people of Dantzick, had they been acquainted with the principles of pestilence,
might have foreseen in 1708, the probability of the inefficacy of their
regulations. The state of the air in the production of millions of spiders, and
the increasing mortality in the city, indicated the existence of a state of the
air, unfriendly to health, which was increasing and only required a little more
virulence to generate the evil, which they ignorantly supposed must come in
sick bodies, goods or old clothes; and which they were idly combatting on that
mistaken principle.

It has already been stated that the rigorous execution of health laws at
Marseilles in 1720, proved utterly fruitless.

The plague which desolated Naples in 1656 was said to be introduced into that
city by soldiers from Sardinia, where it raged the preceding year. Yet the
Viceroy, Count Castrillo had prohibited all intercourse with Sardinia. After
the disease appeared which was first in the form of a malignant fever, without
glandular tumors, all possible means were used to prevent its spreading, but to
no purpose.

The confidence in modern health laws, is like the respect which the ancient
Egyptians paid to the bird, Ibis, which, they supposed, averted the plague by
destroying the flying serpents that the hot Lybian winds brought into the
country.

Cicero de Not. Deor. lib. 1. 36. The Egyptians were like all modern nations --
unwilling to believe the plague generated at home -- they ascribed it to
infection brought by flying serpents, as the moderns ascribe it to old clothes,
bales of goods and infected ships. They mistook the cause, adored Ibis, as the
moderns do, quarantine, and with the same ill success.

But we need not step off of our own territories to find evidence of the
inefficacy of health laws, when opposed to the operation of the laws of nature.
No expedient has been left untried to ward off the calamity of pestilence, but
without any visible effect. The severity of the affliction in Philadelphia, in
former years, had rendered the magistracy of the city extremely careful to
guard against importation in 1798. The most rigid qua^antine was exacted --
ventilators of the best construction employed -- the vessels were washed,
fumigated, white-washed with lime, and every practicable mode of purification
adopted. Not a vessel was suffered to approach the city, without satisfactory
evidence of the healthy state of the people, and the salubrity of the vessel
and cargo. See the letter from Hillary Baker, Esquire. mayor of the city, to the
mayor of Baltimore, dated August 13th, 1798. Alas! all to no purpose! The
ravages of the disease are well known.

If, says the late worthy mayor, the disease has eluded the health officers, I
shall despair of future success, unless the West India commerce shall be
prohibited in the summer months, and magazines established below for receiving
the cargoes.

Similar provisions in other ports have been established with no better
success. The health laws at New York, so far as appears, were as well executed
in 1795, 96 and 98, when the fever was epidemic, as in 1794 and 97 when it was
not. No visible good effects are to be discovered in guarding against an
epidemic; the utility of cleansing vessels therefore is limited to guarding
against the operation of infection, upon a few persons who may enter them, with
foul air on board. Public health, so far as can be discovered, has never been
secured by those regulations. What seems to place this point beyond question
is, that for thi^ years preceding 1792, no pestilential fever ever spread in
America, from the ten thousand infected seamen and passengers, which arrived in
the country from the West Indies, and during which time, in most places, not
the least precaution was ever used to guard against it; yet since 1792, that
is, under a state of air, generating various epidemics, the pestilential fever
has appeared in sporadic cases, every year and in almost every town in America,
and has raged as an epidemic in most of our large towns, in opposition to the
utmost efforts of human skill. I am persuaded, the conclusions from these facts
amount to demonstrative evidence, that infection is not the principal, or cause
sine qua non, of this terrible calamity.

The application of quarantine laws to our epidemic pestilential fever, is just
as useless, as the order of the Sultan, Achmet I. in the wasting plague of
1613, for transporting all the cats in Constantinople to the island of Scutari.
The Jewish physicians told the Emperor, that the plague was occasioned by the
cats, and the poor cats were dispatched into exile. Yet this did not restrain
the plague.

People have been forever mistaking the cause of the plague. In the first
centuries of the christian era, when disputes ran high between Christians and
Pagans, these sects mutually charged the plague each to the other. In 1349, the
Germans ascribed the plague to the Jews, and massacred great numbers of that
race. In Paris, during a plague, many protestant heretics were sacrificed, for
bringing the calamity upon that city. And a proposition has been made in
America to stop all intercourse with the West Indies and the Mediterranean,
during the summer months! Astonishing blindness!

But, it will be asked, shall we have no health laws? I answer, by all means.
Their utility is obvious on many occasions. Thus when an infected fleet arrives
in a port, the town is in eminent danger, of what may be called a jail fever on
a great scale. The quantity and virulence of infection thus imported, have
produced destructive consequences, as at Breast in 1757, where were landed in
November and placed in hospitals, ^^out five thousand dise^sed seamen and
troops from ships, mostly out of De la Motte's fleet, from Louisburg, with a
malignant fever on board. The effect was that ten thousand men died, in the
hospitals, the succeeding winter, and many of the inhabitants of Breast. But it
will be remarked, that this infectious disease did not become an epidemic in
Breast; it spread only by infection; and as soon as that was dissipated, the
disease disappeared. It raged in winter and subsided in spring. This is an
important distinction, always to be observed by those who guard the public
health -- an epidemic pestilence begins when the season or the state of air
favors it, and rages without control, against all human efforts; the common air
becomes tainted, so as to produce the disease, without the infecting principle
from bodies or clothes, and the diseases subside only at the command of the
seasons and the elements. Against such, no legal provisions are or can be of
any avail, and such is usually the yellow fever of our country.

But diseases propagated only by infection, like the jail and ship fever, never
put on the form of an epidemic. They rage in crowded prisons and ships, where
they are generated; and when multitudes are crowded into hospitals, they carry
the evil with them; and all persons, coming within reach of the infection, are
liable to suffer. In this manner, Breast lost many of her inhabitants; a town in
America is said to have done the same, from the yellow fever, imported in Sir
Francis Wheeler's fleet, as already related. But in such cases, the infecting
disease requires contact or near approach to aid its propagation; and does not
assume the complexion of an epidemic. The two species of disease are as
distinguishable as light from darkness.

Thus, at the Black assizes in Oxford, in 1577, a malignant or jail fever of a
singular kind, was produced suddenly -- almost all the court and spectators
were seized -- many died -- but no epidemic followed in Oxford; and in this
instance, the effect was so sudden, that the human body did not generate
infection.

So also at the Old Bailey, not many years past, a few prisoners, entering the
court from a dirty jail, without changing their dress, infected a large number
of persons who died; but no epidemic followed -- the infection was soon
dissipated, and there was an end of the disease.

With our pestilential fever, this is not the case, nor with any epidemic
plague that ever existed. Remove the sick, cleanse the houses and clothes, do
whatever human art and labor is competent to effect, all will not avail --
cases spring up in every quarter, and the disease takes its course.

So it was in Candia in 1592, as related from Thuanus, under that year. As soon
as the plague appeared, all the sick and all the suspected were removed from
the city; but to no purpose; it raged till July -- then abated without any
human means and revived again in October.

Thus says the author of Traite de la peste, "Universal cleansings have proved
useless; the plague has ravaged places after every precaution; and after
negligence it has entirely ceased, as in Naples."

Such are the facts; and hence the necessity of distinguishing carefully
between epidemic pestilence, proceeding principally from general causes in the
elements, and marked by other epidemic diseases, by the failure of vegetable
productions and by the sickness, or death of cattle, fish and other animals --
and diseases merely infectious, generated by artificial means, which may be
communicated, which may happen in jails, ships and camps, in the healthiest
state of the elements, and which cease, as soon as the infection can be
dissipated by purifications and fresh air. Without this distinction, the merit
of legislative and police-regulations, can never be duly appreciated. Such
regulations, applied to epidemics, as they continually are, prove totally
futile -- applied to diseases of mere infection and of specific contagion, as
jail fever and small pox, they may be and often are the means of preserving
multitudes of lives.

It is important therefore that health laws should be judiciously framed and
strictly executed, because there may be cases in which public health will be
preserved by them; although they never can reach the cause or prevent the ravages
of epidemics, which originate where they exist.

With respect to merchantmen, health-laws may also be of some use, in
preserving the lives of seamen, and of persons concerned in the vessels. Sick
men may generate a small degree of infection; but on board of merchantmen, the
number of seamen is too small to infect a ship, so as to endanger public
health, unless shamefully neglected.

The most danger from merchantmen is from the foul air generated, on long
voyages and in hot seasons, from perishable and fermenting substances. From
such vitiated air, deprived of its vital principle, great danger may arise to
the persons who first open and enter the holds; and perhaps to a neighborhood.
It is of great consequence therefore to use ventilators freely on board of
vessels, freighted with perishable articles; and to have them effectually
cleansed, before they are suffered to approach our wharves.

But I am not convinced that the air of such vessels ever yet originated an
epidemic fever. It appears to me, that the Academy of Medicine in Philadelphia,
lay more stress on this cause, than it deserves. The sphere of the operation of
such a small morbid cause, cannot be extensive; and all the foul air of the
largest vessel must be so attenuated by diffusion, as not to produce
deleterious effects, at any great distance. It may be injurious to a small
neighborhood; but I do not conceive it possible, that the noxious air of a few
square yards, can impregnate the whole atmosphere of a city; and as to
infection from the sick, I have repeatedly proved, that this can never produce
an epidemic. I will admit the bare possibility, that imported infection may
enkindle the flame of pestilence, in a place fitted for it by local causes,
where no pestilence would appear without a spark from infection. This is as
much as I can admit to be possible, and more than I believe; after a more
minute and ^areful investigation of facts probably, than was ever before made
in America. Most of the cases I can find, where accurate accounts are
preserved, of supposed importation or communication of autumnal diseases, fail
utterly of proofs to support common opinion; and many of them are
incontrovertibly proved to have had their origin in the places where they have
existed.

It is easy, I aver, to distinguish, in every case, the nature of pestilence;
that is, whether it is an epidemic, proceeding from a state of the elements, or
a disease generated solely by foul air, artificially collected. In a few weeks,
if not a few days, a disease will show whether it proceeds from infection only
or from a general elemental source; and when it appears to proceed from the
elements, men may just as well attempt to save the cats, the wild animals or
the fish in the ocean from the effects of that principle, as their own species,
by laws enjoining quarantine and purification of ships. The same cause that
destroys the cats or the fish in one case, destroys human life in the other;
and that cause exists in the elements; it is at home; quarantine laws do not
reach it.

An epidemic disease may be distinguished from a disease proceeding from
infection or specific contagion, by the following circumstances.

1st. An epidemic pestilence is preceded by influenza, affections of the
throat, or acute and malignant fevers.

2d. An epidemic predominates over other diseases; totally absorbing them or
compelling them to assume its characteristic symptoms. This last circumstance
is decisive of the character of the disease.

A disease propagated by contagion or infection only is not thus distinguished.
It has no precursors, it extends and spreads only by contact or near approach;
and has no effect on the diseases in its vicinity. The small pox or jail fever,
depending on mere infection, never expel a dysentery or intermitting fever.

In every possible case, a plague that banishes other diseases, as I believe it
always does, is an epidemic generated in the place where it exists; for it is
not possible that this expulsion of other diseases, could take place, unless
the epidemic depended solely on the elements. Simple infection would not change
the symptoms of another disease, even in the next house, much less in all parts
of a city.

To show how little an epidemic depends on infection, let us advert to facts.
In all the eastern countries, the plague is suffered to take its own course
without restraint. There are no regulations to control its progress, or prevent
its return. Its beginning is usually gradual; a few die the first year; the
proper season suspends its progress; the next year it is more general, and
often, the third year is the most fatal.

It is remarkable, that after its most extensive effects, it abates and
suddenly disappears. In London, the malignant precursors of the plague of 1665,
appeared as early as 1661; but no sooner had its crisis passed, than in a few
months, i^ was totally extinguished. The same happened at Aleppo in 1, 62, and
such is usually the fact.

Let any man suppose the disease to be propagated wholly or mostly by
infection, and attend to the consequences. In Aleppo, says Russel, died 500, in
1760; in 1761, died 7000, and in 1762, 11,000. On the principle of infection
then, some sick man or a bundle of old clothes, first spreads the disease, so
as to destroy 500 lives -- the infection of 500, destroys 7000 lives, the
infection of 7000, destroys 11,000 lives; and the next year, the infection of
11,000 destroys -- none at all!

In London, a few bales of cotton, smuggled into the city from Holland, in
1664, communicated infection that destroyed 68,000 lives; the infection from
this immense number proves fatal, the next year, to 1900 only; and these, the
year following, infect only 35! If infection has much concern in propagating
that disease, its operation certainly defeats all arithmetical calculation of
its physical powers!

The whole theory of infection, to which Mead has given so much celebrity, and
which is maintained by many physicians in this country, is absurd and
ridiculous from first to last; leading legislators, magistrates and citizens
astray from the truth, producing most serious inconveniences to commerce, and
preventing the adoption of the only means of mitigating the pestilence to which
our cities are exposed.

In Turkey and Egypt no pains are taken to cleanse houses or clothes after a
plague. No sooner has a great plague ceased, which has cut off 300,000 people
in Constantinople or Cairo, than the infected houses are filled by other
people, who replace the dead, use the furniture and the bedding on which the
infected had died; or the old clothes are sent to auction and purchased by
Jews, who retail them out for use, uncleansed; and yet amidst all this mass of
concentrated infection, no person has the plague, or if a sporadic case occurs
here and there, no epidemic ensues, for two, three or four years, perhaps
longer; then all at once, when the infection must necessarily be destroyed, by
the action of air and water, the disease breaks out again, and becomes
epidemic. Then some arrival from an infected place is hunted out, and the
calamity is charged to the account of some poor sick seaman, or his clothes!
The infection of half a million of people, produces no plague in one year; but
in another, the invisible fomes of a piece of cloth, or the breath of a single
man is sufficient to spread desolation over a great city, or a kingdom! Hodges
informs us, that after the plague in London, in 1665, people returned into
houses not cleansed, and even slept in beds on which the infected had died,
without fear or injury. This is not at all strange. Unless the effluvia from
the sick have been closely confined and are greatly condensed, they will not
affect a well person; and indeed it is a difficult thing to preserve the morbid
matter, in sufficient quantity to communicate disease in cold weather.


Such are the absurdities of the modern notions about the plague, which adorn
this splendid era of philosophy and science! --

Of the nature of the infecting principle in diseases, we know very little; and
even its effects are not always comprehensible. We observe differences also in
the operation of the principle, which we cannot explain. Why the smallpox
should be communicated, under all circumstances; the plague only under certain
circumstances, is a mystery not yet unfolded. It is supposed, that the diseased
body discharges certain fine poisonous particles, which are suspended and
diffused in the air, and being imbibed by the pores of the skin, and with the
breath, excite the same spe^ies of distemper in a healthy body. These effluvia
generally escape our sight and very often our other senses; but they may be
concentrated in such quantities, as to be very obnoxious to the olfactory
organs, and even to excite sudden nausea in the stomach.

But why the effluvia from the smallpox, anginas and the measles should be
independent of heat and cold; and those of dysentery, plague, and other typhus
fevers, subject to be excited into action by the one, and to be destroyed by
the other, is a phenomenon never yet explained. We may say the particles
issuing from the former class, are more subtle, volatile, and penetrating; but
this is all conjecture. Certain it is, that the poison of small pox, angina and
measles, is of a more distinct, specific kind, than that of the plague, less
connected, in its operation, with putrid exhalations from other bodies, and
less susceptible of grades in its powers.

So far as I am able to comprehend the nature of the infection of plague and
other autumnal diseases, passing under the popular name of putrid, it appears
to consist of a species of air, which is one of the elementary parts of all
vegetable and animal substances. It may be what Dr. Mitchell denominates, the
septic acid; that fluid which is discharged from flesh in the process of
putrefaction. It may be some other species; but it is very evident, from all
its effects, that it operates, in producing disease, no otherwise than all the
morbid exhalations extricated from every species of vegetable and animal
substances in the putrefactive process. In all or most of such substances,
there is, it is well known, a species of air or acid matter, which, when in a
form detached from other substances, is highly noxious to health. To this
fluid, or septic acid, evolved from vegetables in a state of natural
putrefaction, and floating in an aerial form, is ascribed the whole class of
bilious fevers, which prevail near marshes.

Hence, the effluvia from a person laboring under the plague, are susceptible
of all degrees of concentration, and in proportion to their concentration, will
be their violence, and certainty of effect, when they attach themselves to a
healthy body. In this respect the infe^^on of the plague differs most
essentially from that of the small pox. The matter of contagion in the small
pox, however small, is sufficient to communicate the disease; and it is
customary for physicians to wipe clean the point of a lancet, dipped in
variolous matter, before it is inserted in the skin, for the purpose of
inoculation. It is also proved by experiments that the quantity of infection
introduced by inoculation, whether more or less, makes no material difference
in the number of pustles, or violence of the disease.

But in the plague, the operation of infection is very different. This disease,
if light, produces no infection, or very little -- more violent cases appear to
be more apt to be communicated -- and in great plagues, the infection is
visibly augmented. Yet in most pestilences, an instantaneous exposure to the
effluvia from the sick will rarely produce any effect, as in the case of small
pox and measles. It usually requires a person to be a considerable time in the
room with the sick, in the plague, to receive poisonous air sufficient to
excite disease; and more generally, it is not communicated, without handling
the sick or imbibing his breath. In many cases, all this exposure for weeks and
months together, will excite no disease. Hence Russel represents the plague, as
of different degrees of malignity and not always infectious. Hence the
propriety of close and indefatigable attention, in pestilence, to every article
of cleanliness; for by this means, the quantity of infection is reduced, and
the danger diminished, from a high degree down to nothing. Not so, in smallpox
and measles, the contagion of which regards no filth or cleanliness.

The infection of the plague, dysentery and the like seems therefore, to be
nothing more than an access of noxious matter, to the local causes, morbid
exhalations. The noxious air of filthy streets, docks and tenements, are
secondary and augmenting causes of the plague; when the disease appears, the
effluvia from the diseased still augment these other lo^al causes. Thus when a
certain state of air, in a city generally, will produce a malignant fever, and
persons are exposed to it by walking in the streets, a sick person, confined in
a close room, will soon fill that room with exhalations from his lungs and
pores, which will render that room more dangerous to a person in health, than
the open street. This seems to be the amount of the infection of plague and
other autumnal diseases.

Thus also in a violent plague, the common air of the streets becomes so highly
infected, that persons attending the sick cannot possibly determine whether they
take the disease from the common atmosphere, or from their intercourse with
infected persons. The only cases which afford certainty in this resp^^t, are,
when the diseased are removed into the pure air of the country, and nurses and
visitors, who have breathed no pestilential air in the city, are taken ill, in
a few days after such intercourse with the sick. These would be clearly the
produce of infection. But these cases rarely occur. It has already been
observed that the worst cases of pestilence removed into the country, seldom
infect the attendants. This shows how little apprehension ought to be excited
by mere infection, and how ill-founded are the alarms in the country, about the
spreading of the yellow fever; alarms that often occasion a neglect of diseased
fugitives from the city. People in the country have little to fear from
infection, if the sick are kept in airy rooms and cleanly; they ought not to
abandon the sick; for the duties of humanity are not incompatible with their
safety. It is the infected ground, if I may so call it, the local atmosphere of
pestilence which is to be dreaded, and especially by strangers. During its
prevalence, in a city or town, the air of the place is rank poison to persons,
accustomed to good air.

The preceding facts and distinctions enable us to form a just estimate of the
importance of health laws. In nine cases of ten, in which quarantine is
enjoined, human efforts are opposed to the great laws of nature, and are
therefore useless. In all cases, where the air of a country exhibits evidences
of a pestilential constitution, in an increase of the number and violence of
the symptoms of common diseases; in the production of certain epidemics, as
catarrh, anginas, measles, petechial fevers and the like; in the death of fish
or the unusual diseases of cattle and other animals; in the production of
insects, uncommon in size, in kind or numbers; and other remarkable phenomena,
before mentioned; in all such cases, the pestilence which invades man will be
found to arise solely from the uncontrollable laws of the elements; and
quarantine will be utterly unavailing to guard cities against its introduction
and ravages. The remedy is not applied to the source of the disease. Hence the
efforts of the police in London in the last century, and of Dantzick and
Marseilles in this, were entirely useless; and hence the failure of all health
laws to save our cities from the late epidemics.

Satisfied as I am of this truth, I would not lay aside the application of
these laws. The bare possibility of saving the lives of a few individuals, and
especially of diseased seamen, is a good reason for cleansing ships after long
voyages, and of purifying their cargoes, when in a bad state. But what I
contend for, is, that we must not expect the best health laws, most rigorously
executed, will ever be successful in g^^ding cities against epidemic
pestilence. In our reliance on such ^^ions, we expose ourselves to perpetual
disappointment; we expose the lives of citizens; we overlook the true causes of
the evil, and neglect the only means of preventing or mitigating its effects.

Further, the opinion of the specific contagion of the plague has originated
many, not only useless, but barbarous regulations. Such is the practice of
confining the sick to close houses; and still more, of confining the citizens
of an infected town within its limits, by an armed force -- which I am informed
has been done in Europe. In Marseilles, the first persons seized were confined
to their houses by the point of the bayonet.

An ignorance of the nature of a disease and its degree of danger, may be
pardonable in a prince or the legislators of a free state. But there is a
point, beyond which ignorance in medical professors, becomes a crime. No
science is necessary however to convince any man, that most pestilences,
proceed only from the deranged state of the elements, aided by the morbid
exhalations of cities. This is a fact that may be known to a certainty by very
little reading and observation. It was well known in past ages, when men were
more governed by observation, than by theories and erroneous reasoning. Mead's
attempts to prove the specific contagion of plague, aided by his popularity,
had a most surprising success; his treatise was received as a standard of
truth; it every where suspended enquiries and checked a spirit of
investigation, which might have dissipated error; it was the basis of the
present laws of quarantine, which are applied, in thousands of cases, where
they are as improper and as little wanted, as if applied to prevent an epidemic
pleurisy, or headache, embarrassing commerce, without the shadow of necessity.
But these are not the worst effects. The erroneous system of specific
contagion, has mislead mankind into a fatal security, on the subject of the
local causes of diseases. Supposing the laws competent to guard public health,
men have not attended to the best modes of constructing houses and cities, and
to the means of watering and cleansing them -- means by which all the slighter
pestilences might be avoided, and the more severe ones, greatly mitigated.
Hence I am persuaded, that the received theory of specific contagion is the
direct cause of most of the fatal plagues that now scourge civilized Europe and
America. For it will be observed, that pestilence has always been the peculiar
curse of populous cities. Of about two hundred general plagues, recorded in
history, a few only have been so violent as to spread over countries into
villages and farm houses; almost all have been limited to large towns,
evidently demonstrating that they would never have affected mankind, without
the influence of the impure air generated in those places. This is a truth, as
unquestionable as it is important; and on a conviction of this hangs the safety
of men from that dreadful calamity. Had Mead, and other eminent physicians
taken the same pains to lead mankind into truth, as into error, we should long
ago have introduced improvements into the arrangement and structure of our
cities, which would have secured our citizens from nine tenths of the
infectious diseases, by which they have been alarmed and distressed.

At the same time, had men understood the common operation of infection, which
may be made obvious to the most ordinary minds, merchants would not, at this
day, have been harrassed with the necessity of performing quarantine, to guard
against epidemic diseases. We should not have seen a ship from the West Indies
condemned to the flames, in a British port, because she had lost her crew by
the yellow fever; nor merchantmen from an American port obliged to ride
quarantine in the British channel, because that disease prevailed in this
country. Physicians, had they not been blinded by system, and taken opinions
for granted, without enquiry into the grounds on which they rest, would have
known before this, that the yellow fever will not spread in England, Scotland
or Ireland. It never shows itself in America, without a much greater degree of
heat, than the ordinary summer temperature of those countries. The heat in
those latitudes rarely exceeds, for a few hours, in a single day, 75 or at most
78 degrees by Farenheit. But no epidemic yellow fever is ever generated, in our
climate, with that degree of heat. In general, we never see cases of that
disease in America, until we have had a period of heat rising, for a
considerable time, to 85 degrees. or higher. In any season of ordinary temperature,
the yellow fever, in the British kingdoms, and other parallels of latitude,
introduced from abroad by seamen or others from warmer climates, would
immediately subside and be extinguished, without any human efforts. The cases
of malignant fever in England, which turn the body yellow, and which sometimes
occur, as mentioned by Lind, are generated about marshes, in hospitals, camps,
ships and prisons. An epidemic yellow fever, like that which prevails in
America, was never known in England, and probably cannot exist in the climate.
The quarantine enjoined on vessels from the West Indies and United States, is
utterly useless in guarding that country from this pestilence in the form of an
epidemic.

It may be said, in answer to these remarks, that the yellow fever and plague
are essentially the same disease; the plague has often raged in Great Britain,
and therefore the climate may not resist the prevalence of the yellow fever.

But if the plague has raged in Great Britain, which is admitted, it must have
arisen from the unhealthy state of the elements, which may exist in any
latitude, or from very singular seasons, aided by most powerful local causes,
as in London before it was burnt. I say the yellow fever will not spread in
England, in the ordinary state of the elements, and the ordinary temperature of
the summer. If pestilence ever invades cool northerly countries, it must always
proceed principally from disorders in the elements and seasons. The ordinary
causes, in temperate or cool climates, have but little influence in generating
pestilence. Hence in common seasons, in England, no plague, bilious or
inguinal, could be spread, unless in a crowded jail, camp, or dirty, confined
alley in a city. If the physicians in England observe the general state of
health to be good; no epidemics, with unusual symptoms, prevailing: no uncommon
numbers of insects; or diseases among cattle, or other symptoms of a morbid
state of the elements, it is no more in the power of man to render the plague
epidemic in that country, than it is the pleurisy or quinsey. I challenge all
the faculty in Europe, to mention an instance, in which plague has ever
prevailed, without such phenomena.

Besides, it seems to be probable, that more heat is necessary to generate and
to propagate the bilious, than the glandular plague. My reasons for this
opinion, are, that the glandular plague appears in spring much earlier than the
bilious. It often appears in the northern parts of Europe, as early as March
and often in May, when the weather is yet cool. But the bilious plague of our
climate has not showed itself, in sporadic cases, till June, and then very
rarely, and only in a few scattered cases of a less malignant type, than at a
later season. To this remark, I have heard of only one exception. Generally,
the disease does not appear till we have experienced some days of our hottest
weather, and not till the last week in July, except in a few cases as before
mentioned. It does not become formidable, as an epidemic, till the tenth or
twentieth of August.

This difference seems to depend on the following circumstances. The glandular
plague of Europe, Asia and Africa, when it breaks out in the northern
latitudes, as on the Baltic or in Great Britain, seems to be more essentially
and principally the product of a defective state of the elements, joined to
human exhalations in large cities; both which causes are less dependent on
heat, than the morbid exhalations of the vegetable world, which seem to give to
our American plague its peculiar character, and to be a powerful cause of the
distemper. I am further confirmed in this opinion, by this circumstance. A
distinction between the bili^^ fevers of our cities, and of our marshy grounds
on rivers, is observed to exist, in perfect analogy with the foregoing
distinction between our bilious plague and the glandular plague. The mortal
fevers, about marshes in the interior of our country, are less infectious, than
the pestilential fevers of our cities, although they are at times as fatal, and
are characterized by a yellow skin. These seem then to proceed wholly from
vegetable exhalations. The fevers of our cities approach nearer to the plague
of the east, because they proceed both from animal and vegetable exhalations,
but the vegetable effluvia have a more predominating influence here, than in
countries which are dry or better cultivated. Hence the mortal bilious fevers
of our interior country evidently form a link in the series of gradation,
between the common remittents, and the yellow fever of our cities; just as the
yellow fever constitutes a grade between our river or lake fevers, and the
Levant plague.

The order of bilious fevers then stands thus in connection with their causes:
--

In healthy periods
Common intermittents, remittents -- ^o^tly from marsh effluvia, and ordinary
causes.
In pestilential periods, under the operation of elemental causes.
Intermittents, remittents -- of a worse type, from marsh effluvia, aided by a
general cause. Bilious plague of the country, near lakes and rivers -- solely
from marsh exhalations, with the general cause. Bilious plague of American
cities -- from the joint operation of vegetable and animal effluvia, with the
elemental cause. Inguinal plague of the east -- principally from animal
exhalations, with the elemental cause.
In this gradation of diseases, there is a regular progression of symptoms.
Intermittents and remittents exhibit a yellow skin, more or less, but no
infection worth naming -- the river or lake plague, a very yellow skin, with
morbid symptoms, but little infection -- the bilious plague of cities,
sometimes a yellow skin, sometimes not; and some cases of glandular tumors,
carbuncle and petechiae; with more infection -- the Levant plague, less
yellowness of the skin, and usually infection and glandular swellings. Thus, in
proportion as the vegetable exhalations predominate, in the scale of exciting
causes, there is more yellowness of the skin, less infection, and less frequent
affections of the glands -- in proportion, as the animal exhalations abound, as
the cause, the yellowness declines, and the affections of the glands multiply,
with augmented infection.

It is the remark of the celebrated Zimmerman, that "exhalations from marshes
do not seem to be so noxious in cold, as in hot countries; yet malignant fevers
occur even in Finland. In Germany these exhalations produce tertians; in
Hungary, petechial fevers; in Italy, hemitritaea; in Egypt and Ethiopia,
pestilential fevers." On Physic, p. 131.

It is therefore probable that a greater degree of heat, than the ordinary
temperature of Great Britain, is necessary to generate the pestilential fever
of our cities. And as no degree of infection ever yet accumulated on board of a
merchantman, can create a pestilential atmosphere, sufficient to generate an
epidemic, the fears of the English respecting such vessels from the United
States or the West Indies, are utterly groundless. The marsh fevers of England,
Scotland and of other cool climates, are of an inferior grade. Such are the
autumnal fevers near the Fenn's of Lincoln, Ely and Cambridge. In Torbat, in
Scotland, a putrid fever sometimes prevails, and after death, the body turns
yellow; this may be ascribed to certain natural locks or ponds which sometimes
dry up in summer.

Sinclair's Scot. vol. 6. 418, 428. But these diseases, tho doubtless the same
in species, fall greatly short of the violence of our pestilential yellow
fever, which never did and probably never will prevail in that climate.

SECTION XVII. Of the means of preventing or mitigating pestilential diseases.
THE first step toward an effectual remedy for an evil, is to ascertain its
nature and cause, so far as they can be understood by effects. Primary causes
are above the reach of man; proximate causes, may be so far investigated, in
most things, as to answer all the purposes of mankind.

It has been proved, in the preceding pages, and every day's observation
confirms the fact, that one influential cause of epidemic diseases, must exist
in the elements, independent of all human control. In the production of
epidemic catarrh or influenza, for instance, no human or artificial means
appear to have any share of influence. In the measles, artificial causes
sometimes modify the symptoms, but have no great share in its production or
propagation. A similar remark will apply to every species of angina. The
smallpox is also modified in its force and symptoms by many local
circumstances; and its propagation is chiefly by means of contagion; but this
disease also is sometimes, tho rarely, generated in particular bodies without
contagion. The appearance of those diseases in the form of epidemics, excepting
the smallpox which may arise from contagion, always indicates a pestilential
constitution of air; and during this constitution, ordinary or annual diseases,
which depend on season or local causes, assume more violent symptoms.

Autumnal diseases of the annual or ordinary kind, tho rendered more violent,
fatal and extensive, by a pestilential state of air, are however generated by
subordinate causes, most of which are within the power of man. The dysentery
depends partly on season, partly on situation, as to pure air, and partly
perhaps on the imperfection of autumnal fruits* Sometimes it arises in camps
from bad diet, or want of shelter from the weather; and when it once exists, is
more or less propagated by infection. But this disease is rendered more
malignant, by elemental causes.

Ordinary bilious fevers of all grades are produced usually by miasmata or
morbid exhalations from low, damp, marshy grounds; where vegetables, in the hot
season, are in a state of rapid putrefaction. These fevers occur annually, and
with a violence of symptoms proportioned to the extent and force of the morbid
cause. The origin and phenomena of all this description of diseases are so well
known, as to render any observations of mine, unnecessary.

The plague, glandular and bilious, seems to be nearly allied in its symptoms,
to the ordinary bilious remittent. The point seems not altogether settled,
whether the contagious yellow fever, as it is usually called, and the common
sporadic yellow fever of the West Indies, and the bilious remittent, are
different grades of one species of disease; or whether they are of distinct
species.

On this point however, the late epidemics have furnished our scientific men
with proofs that appear to me to decide the question, in favor of the identity
of the species. The evidence arising from the disease in Baltimore is alone
sufficient to decide it, as far as it regards the yellow fever and the
remitting; and the Academy of Medicine in Philadelphia is a most respectable
authority in favor of the same doctrine.

That the glandular plague of the Levant, and the bilious, infectious yellow
fever of our country, are specifically the same disease, I have no doubt; but
they take some different symptoms, either from climate, or other causes
^^known. The glandular tumors are held, by most writers on the plague, to be
the characteristics of the disease, which alone decide its nature, and
distinguish it from other malignant fevers. But Diemerbroeck and all the best
authors agree that these external swellings are not essential to the disease,
and that many have the true plague without them. They are however the usual
marks of the disease.

In our bilious pestilence, these swellings are less common. But, tho rare,
they sometimes appear, in the most unequivocal form of the true pesti^. I saw
an instance in 179^; and they were more common in the last epidemic. An
instance occurred, within my knowledge, in which two auxiliary tumors appeared,
and the person was never confined by fever.

The yellowness of the skin has given name to the pestilence of our country;
yet this is a misfortune, for it may deceive a common observer. A yellow skin
often accompanies lower grades of bilious fevers, not pestilential; and is, by
no m^ans, essential to the infectious yellow fever. In all our late epidemics,
persons have died without exhibiting this color of the skin; and it has been
less common the last year, than in former years. It appears then, that the
lighter the epidemic disease, the more common the yellowness of the skin; and
vice versa. This is no inconsiderable proof of the identity of the bilious and
inguinal plague; that in proportion as the bilious plague of our climate
becomes violent and approaches the true plague, it loses that yellow color of
the skin, and assumes the glandular swellings. This I am informed is the fact,
as observed by the physicians in New York, the summer past. There are however
some differences in the symptoms of the two species of plague, which it belongs
to the faculty to observe and define. It may be that the moisture of our
country, not yet cleared of its woods, and abounding with swamps and marshes,
may occasion the differences in the symptoms. The parts of Europe, Asia and
Africa where the plague most usually prevails, are clear of woods, and
cultivated. Perhaps an increase of population, and human effluvia, with a
decrease of vegetable exhalations in America from cultivation, may in time
change the form of our pestilential fever into the true inguinal plague. I have
reasons for believing such a change actually took place in Rome. Some of the
plagues, described by Livy were obviously of the bilious kind, similar to our
epidemic fever; but in later periods, the plagues in Rome are expressly
described to be, "pestis inguinaria."

However this may be, the causes of pestilence I suppose to be, first some
essential alteration in the primary qualities of air and water, owing to
seasons, or to the action of the principle of fire, the main operative agent in
the earth and atmosphere; which alteration is demonstrated by various epidemics
and especially by catarrh -- secondly, the subordinate causes of plague, are,
noxious exhalations of every kind, which diminish the proportion of vital air
imbibed into the lungs. Both causes appear to produce disease, either by
excessive excitement, inducing indirect debility; or by reducing excitement,
and inducing direct debility. The aerial or elemental cause seems to produce
excessive excitement; for its first effect appears in catarrh, a disease of
stenic or inflammatory diathesis. Thus the present epidemic constitution was
preceded by influenza, of universal prevalence and of severe symptoms.

Measles, another disease that rarely fails to characterize the early stages of
a pestilential constitution, is also of an inflammatory diathesis. The same is
true of the common distinct smallpox -- another disease, which, before the art
of inoculation, seldom failed to rage in cities, during such a constitution.

Anginas are of different types; some of the milder kinds are ranged by Brown
amomg stenic diseases; but the angina maligna he considers as astenic. Diseases
of this class however form a part of the effects of a pestilential constitution.

Next to this species of diseases, may be arranged the petechial fevers, which
under the names of purple, or spotted, have often overspread Europe, and rarely
fail to precede the plague. These are the product of the last stages of a
pestilential constitution, next to the true plague, which marks the crisis.
These forms of malignant fever have never occurred in America, as epidemics;
but purple and livid spots, vibices and all the variety of eruptions, which
belong to that class of diseases, occur occasionally during pestilence.

It is a remarkable fact, and one that seems to have escaped observation, that
a pestilential constitution of air in all ages and countries, produces epidemic
disorders of the eruptive kind. I question whether in a single instance, since
the days of Moses, the real plague, ever became epidemic, without one, two or
all of that kind of diseases for its precursors. We cannot look into an author,
who has described the diseases which prevail in such a constitution, from
Hippocrates down to our time, but we see ignes sacri, variolae, morbilli or
other eruptive disorders, constituting a part of the description. These
diseases seem evidently to be classed by the laws of nature, and always to
appear, in close connection.

Hence the propriety of Sydenham's observation, p. 120 that "the erysipelas,
ignis sacer, is a good deal like the plague, and sometimes accompanied with
pains in the glands -- that it begins much in the same manner as the plague,
but the plague is much more violent than an erysipelas."

Hence also we observe that Hippocrates, in describing a pestilential
constitution, mentions that before spring appeared "erusipelata polla," many
cases of the erysipelas, of a bad type, and mortal.

De morb. Vulgar. Sec. 2. This is a curious phenomenon and worthy of
investigation, that a particular constitution of the atmosphere, should, in its
different stages or in different seasons of the year, tend to generate all
those diseases, which throw out upon the surface of the body, petechiae,
vibices, a general efflorescence and tumors, with various other appearances. It
belongs to medical men to explain the general proximate cause, which, while its
effects are various, still gives to diseases some common similitude.

In America, a pestilential constitution exhibits the same phenomena, as
measles, and anginas, but without the purple or spotted fever, as the precursor
of our pestilence. The immediate precursors of the bilious plague in America,
are catarrhous affections, disorders of the throat, and especially bilious
fevers of a bad type, ending often in black vomit. Detached cases of this
latter disease rarely or never fail to introduce or p^^cede the infectious
epidemic.

But no disease whatever seems more closely connected with pestilence than
catarrh. An epidemic influenza, is almost invariably the signal of the approach
of a pestilential constitution; and during the whole existence of the
constitution, catarrhous affections are frequent in particular seasons, and
especially just before or after the prevalence of a pestilential fever. This
circumstance affords no inconsiderable evidence, that what we call an epidemic
constitution acts upon the human body as a violent stimulus. The first diseases
excited by it are usually of the inflammatory diathesis as catarrh and measles.
Hence perhaps we derive a clue to explain the mystery of the pestilential
diseases which succeed.

The continued effect of excessive stimulus, must be debility. The epidemic
constitution, when it first commences, is mild, and produces stenic diseases,
not very mortal, as catarrh and measles; for a very obvious reason, the force
of the stimulus is not at first sufficient to hasten on the indirect debility
of the system, or to produce the astenic diathesis in a fatal degree. But as
this state of air advances in strength, the stimulus is greater; and when aided
by the heat of summer, produces a degree of excitement, that speedily induces
universal debility. Hence the pestilential fevers of summer and autumn seem to
be the effect of excessive stimulus, acting upon the system with such violence,
as to produce speedy debility, in consequence of which, all the functions of
the system are weakened and deranged -- the stomach does not digest food -- the
peristaltic motion is imperfect and feeble -- the liver and the gallbladder do
not perform their secretions -- the energy of the brain is diminished -- the
extreme vessels are relaxed. The consequence is, that part of aliment which
ought to be separated and carried off by the intestines, as the hepatic fluid,
is retained, and forced out of its proper ducts, into other parts of the
system, where it excites external eruptions, efflorescence, or yellowness; in
every part of the body, becoming rank poison, and speedily inducing fever,
morbid affections, and dissolution.

This process is infinitely modified by subordinate causes; as seasons, which
are extremely various; local exhalations and stagnant air, which are
deleterious according to their force; the various modes of living, which
strengthen or weaken the human body; and accidental circumstances, as fatigue,
grief, fear, exposure to excessive heat, or sudden cold; and innumerable
similar causes.

This idea of the proximate cause of the bilious plague of our climate was
imbibed from observation and conversation with physicians, before I had read
Brown's Elements of Medicin. I am happy enough to find, on reading that work, a
confirmation of the opinion. That author observes, paragraph 137. "Sometimes
the secretory vessels seemed crammed with a colluvies of fluids, capable of
producing indirect debility, as in that overflowing of bile, which
distinguishes the yellow fever of the torrid zone."

This "colluvies of fluids," lodged in the secretory vessels, seems to act like
poison, in disorganizing the system. And the reason why the plague is so often
incurable, seems to be the rapidity and the imperceptibility of the action of
that poison, which appears totally to undermine the vital powers, before it
exhibits much pain or fever. This is not its common mode of operation; but it
is not unfrequent. Cases of this kind are soon characterized by a total
prostration of strength, a cadaverous look, and a dull, glassy, languid eye, so
often described by medical writers. In such cases, debilitating remedies
precipitate death; and stimulants are ineffectual to revive the languid
functions.

In most cases however the approaches of the disease are accompanied with
pains, uneasiness, and febrile symptoms, while the system yet retains its
stenic diathesis; in some such cases, debilitating remedies are useful; but the
rapidity of the progress of the poison soon changes the diathesis to astenic.

Boil remarks vol. 1. 672, "that a day or two before the plague has manifested
itself, in some persons, their vision has been affected; objects appearing
diversified with beautiful colors. A vomit administered to such, usually gave
relief." Every observation of such eminent men deserves consideration; but I do
not remember to have found the same in any other author. If just, is it not an
evidence that the state of air, inducing the disease, operates first as a
stimulus?

Procopius has recorded of the plague of 543, a phenomenon somewhat similar to
that noticed by Boil. He says, persons imagined they saw phantoms or ghosts,
which made them suppose they were smitten by some person. Such as had this
imagination, soon perished with the plague.

In 746 also persons were troubled with fantastical images which filled them
with terror. See also the plague in Carthage before Christ 404.

General appearances favor the idea, that what is usually called an epidemic
state of air, produces, in the human system, unusual excitement by excessive
stimulus. But then how shall we account for the angina maligna, a disease of
extreme astenic diathesis, which often forms one of the series of epidemics,
belonging to the same constitution? Is this also the effect of excessive
excitement, inducing great debility? Is not its prevalence principally among
children of sound health, a proof that it is the consequence of indirect
debility?

However these questions may be decided, certain it is that under the same
constitution, and during the same pestilence, the fatal diseases assume very
different symptoms, and exhibit, indifferent bodies, a different diathesis. In
all epidemics of this sort, a principal object of the physician is to ascertain
the general diathesis produced by the constitution of air, and the various
effects of it in different bodies. "Hic labor, hoc opus est." Is not the
doctrine of indirect and direct debility, as the source of all diseases fully
implied in the first paragraph of Aristotle's first problem? It may be thus
rendered. "Why have great excesses a ^^cy to produce disease, but because they
occasion too much or to^ ^ittle excitement, in which all diseases consist." If
this is not the precise (...) of the author; his doctrine leads to the same
results, as those which form the ingenious brunonian system. Many things appear
to us now, which are 2000 years old; and solely because we neglect ancient
authors.


The secondary or auxiliary causes of plague, coming under the denomination of
impure air, are supposed to act upon the system, by directly debilitating
powers. "It cannot be doubted, says Brown, 145, that the application of air, to
the whole surface of the body is a necessary stimulus. The air is seldom
applied in a pure state; it is commonly blended with foreign matters, that
diminish its stimulating power, and tho its salutary stimulus depends upon its
purity, it is uncertain whether ever its purity goes so far as to stimulate in
excess and thereby produce stenic diathesis." I know not what this author would
call "purity of air," but I am very certain that an epidemic influenza procee^
from some qualities in the atmosphere, and this author agrees the disease to be
of stenic diathesis. If the disease is the effect of "foreign matter," infused
into the air, then this foreign matter is of a stimulating quality.

I suspect however that the atmosphere should be considered as composed of two
principal substances, air and fire, or electricity. Morbid matter floats in the
air, but the principal stimulating power probably consists in the electricity
of the atmosphere.

The influence of morbid exhalations from putrefying substances, is, probably
to diminish the stimulant power of the atmosphere, inducing direct debility.
The lungs receive, at every breath, a certain quantity of air; that is, about
the same cubic quantity. A certain portion of this, is vital air, oxygen, which
serves as food for the lungs and blood, and which is separated from the rest
and absorbed. Whenever therefore common air is impregnated with an undue
proportion of hydrogene, or with any species of acid, which is hostile to the
lungs, these viscera want their proportion of food, or stimulus; the
consequence is, their action is weakened, and the heart and arteries want their
due force; the effect of which is a more feeble circulation of blood. Perhaps
also the septic acid, conveyed to the blood with common air, at every
inspiration, gradually destroys its texture.

Sorbait mentions that a lighted candle being placed near persons dying with
the plague, a livid vapor has been seen, issuing from their mouths. Extremely
vitiated must be the air from the lungs, before it can be rendered inflammable.

But whatever may be the process, we know the effects of respiration in air
vitiated by morbid exhalations, to be fevers of various kinds, as intermitting,
remitting, dysenteric, and putrid or pestilential. That state of the atmosphere
which I call pestilential, has a singular effect in increasing the irritability
of the nervous system, by which means slighter causes than usual occasion
dangerous inflammation.

Having then arrived at the probable causes of the pestilential fevers which
afflict the earth, we are prepared to consider the means of prevention.

The first article under this head, is, the removal of all local causes of
disease; such as every species of putrescible substances, which, in the process
of putrefaction, emit a species of air highly unfriendly to health. It will be
observed that I speak of putrescible substances; for flesh or vegetables, which
have undergone the process of putrefaction, or of digestion in a healthy
stomach, discharge little or none of the pernicious acid.

Hence we observe that people in cities rely too much on cleansing streets to
preserve public health. Experience proves that the utmost care in cleansing
streets will not always prevent pestilence. The reason is obvious; most of the
filth of streets consists of excrementitious matter from horses or oxen, which
has undergone the process mentioned, and contains no septic acid, or very
little. Hence the accumulation of dung in the farmer's yard, is not known to
generate diseases.

Various other substances, thrown into the streets of cities, are more
pernicious; as green vegetables, the garbage of fish, lees of fermenting
liquors, and many others, which, in hot weather, soon putrefy and discharge
noxious air. Such substances however never ought to be thrown into the street
in hot weather; they should be thrown into the ocean, into rivers of running
water, or what is better still, buried, and that before putrefaction begins. If
putrefaction is began, they should be removed in covered vessels.

The vaults of cloacina, although they contain mostly substances, which have
passed through digestion, and in their unmixed state, are not very pernicious,
yet they are always mixed with other substances, which, in hot weather, bring
on fermentation. These should be either cleansed annually in spring, or the
matter in them neutralized by quicklime.

All filthy substances should be removed from streets, both for the sake of
decency and of health. If the pavements of streets could be covered with pure
earth, it would greatly lessen the heat; but this is not practicable. The only
effectual remedy, is fresh running water -- the only article that unites
cleanliness with coolness. Nothing, in a city, can be an adequate substitute;
for while it removes the causes of noxious vapors, and by cooling the sultry
air of a city, prevents debility, it extricates a considerable quantity of new
and wholesome air, from its own substance, and absorbs pernicious vapors.

Streets should also be so constructed as to give the water a considerable
velocity. The practice of levelling the surface of a city, is most pernicious.
If possible, every street in a city should have a descent of fifteen or twenty
degrees. Instead of levelling the earth, the police of a city should counteract
even a natural level, by throwing the whole into artificial elevations; which
give a brisker currency both to water and air.

Cellars should be so constructed, as to retain no water; and often cleansed by
scraping. If the surface of the cellar can be conveniently changed, by removing
a few inches of the old carth and introducing that which is fresh, it would be
a very salutary labor. Nothing imbibes and neutralizes infectious matter, more
readily than fresh earth.

The liberal use of water, in and about a house, cannot be too seriously
recommended. Water absorbs all noxious matter that comes in contact with it in
substance. Applied to floors, wooden, stone or brick walls, to clothes, to
furniture, to back-yards and streets; it is every where salutary in the summer
months. Dr. Priestly observes, that water purifies vitiated air, by absorbing
the septic part. Hence its great utility as a preservative against pestilential
diseases.

All dead animals in a city or its vicinity, should be buried or burnt; as
cats, dogs and horses. The indecency alone of suffering their carcases to
putrefy before the eyes of mankind, ought to make it a strict article of
police, to remove them. But they should be buried; not one should be permitted
to offend the eyes or nostrils of a citizen. From two years observations, made
as I passed daily from New York to my residence in the country, I judge from
twenty to thirty worn-out cart-horses die and putrefy in the suburbs of that
city, every year.
They are offensive to decency, to moral sentiments and to health. The ancient
method of burning dead bodies was well calculated to destroy the poison; but in
Atlantic America, burial is cheaper and equally effectual.

Common sewers are often common nuisances. In cities, all filthy substances
should be conveyed off, on the visible surface of the earth, unless sewers can
be so constructed as to deposit, with certainty, all their contents in running
water. Serious evils arise from putrid substances lodged in sewers, that are
too level, and which serve as reservoirs instead of canals, accumulating
putrescible matters, in places where their exhalations, by the influence of
moisture, are doubled, instead of being removed.

In cities, where all filth is naturally cast by rains into the docks, it would
be well that all wharves should be so constructed, as to present a smooth
uniform front to the stream, and be extended into deep water. Mud, washed by
the salt tides, and not mixed with putrescible matters, produces no
inconvenience to health; but such matters, thrown into docks, bare at low
water, and exposed to a hot sun, dissolve most rapidly, and generate morbid
vapors. Many improvements are yet to be made in our seaports, which will
lessen the accumulation of pernicious air.

A great and most desirable article in a system for the preservation of health,
is, the purifying of rooms from air which has been respired for a length of
time. By experiment it is found that the air of rooms that have been slept in,
is very insalubrious; and probably more so, than the air of privies, which is
found to contain less noxious air than was formerly supposed. See Encyclopedia,
art. Atmosphere. Indeed, it is questionable whether there is any necessary
connection between offensive smells and insalubrity. Nature has kindly provided
that dead feces should not be very pernicious to health; but the effluvia of
living and fermenting bodies are to be avoided as rank poison. In this respect
cleanliness is made essential to health.

It is impossible in a work of this kind to enter upon the details of cleansing
a great commercial city. The magistrates, aided by medical men, in every city,
will attend to the minute regulations for preserving a pure air.

But there are other causes of autumnal diseases, which must not be overlooked.

It is remarked by writers that the diseases from marshes and stagnant waters
are most violent near their sources; and gradually abate in their violence and
become less common, as they recede from those sources. See Buel on the marsh
fevers at Sheffield. Medical Repos. vol. 1. 457. Hence, in a country generally
mountainous or hilly, dry and salubrious, but containing here and there a pond
of dead water or marsh, the bilious fevers generated by the effluvia, will be
local, rarely extending beyond one mile and a half from their source.

But there are some extensive marshes, which may produce effects to a much
greater distance. Such are the low grounds in Hungary, a sickly region; the
pontine marshes near Naples, which may affect the health of people in Rome; the
flat lands and rice plantations in Bengal on the Ganges -- the coast of Terra
Firma in South-America, and the marshes from E. Florida to the Delaware in
North America. The fevers of Cambridge, Ely and Lincolnshire in England, may be
classed with those above mentioned; but are of smaller extent.

It is an opinion in Constantinople that the frequency of the plague in that
city, is to be attributed to the northerly winds, which come from the marshes
of Tartary and Russia, bordering on the Euxine, sweeping that sea, and
conveying moisture and noxious exhalations.

The position of that city is otherwise a very healthy one -- the climate is
temperate -- the site of the city, high, dry and rising into hills and
mountains on the west. No cause of unusual diseases can be found in the
neighborhood. The causes within the city, are powerful. Many of the streets are
narrow, filthy, crowded, and almost obstructed by pent-houses. But in this
respect, Constantinople is not worse than one half the cities of Europe. Shall
we then admit that winds will convey morbid exhalations, several hundred miles,
without dissipating them, so as to render them innoxious? Let us attend to
other facts.

No city in Europe, except Constantinople, has been more frequently desolated
by plagues, than Rome, from the time of Romulus to the close of the last
century. Shall we ascribe this, to the vast marshes which border the shore from
the mouths of the Tiber to Naples? Certain it is, that Rome has ever been
considered, as a very unhealthy city; and the terrible plagues which ravaged
it, when in the utmost prosperity, as well as in modern times, justify this
opinion. So sensible have the inhabitants been of the prevalence of this
opinion abroad, and the ill-effects of it in preventing strangers from
resorting to the city, that Lancisius, an eminent physician of the present
century, wrote a considerable treatise, evidently with a view to remove this
opinion.

This author observes, that south winds at Rome, if violent, humid, with clouds
and heat, produce inconvenience, and if they pass over marsh, they may bring
"particulas lethiferas," very pernicious vapors, which produce pestilential
diseases.

The Romans very early took measures to correct the evils to which the city was
exposed. The enormous cloacae, or sewers were raised at a vast expense, to
carry off all stagnant water, and dry the soil, and while kept clean, were very
useful. Hence cloacina was deified as the goddess of health. These sewers were
under the care of certain officers, called "Curatores Cloacarum Urbis." In one
instance, these drains had been a long time neglected, and were cleansed at the
expense of a thousand talents. Severe laws were enacted, prohibiting
individuals, under penalty of a fine, to suffer water to stagnate.

Lancisius ascribes the severe diseases which afflicted Rome, in the decline of
the Empire, to the destruction of the aqueducts and neglect of the sewers. In
1695, when the ditch of Adrian's tower, and the great sewer of the city
Leoninae, were filled with filth, immediately on the blowing of the south wind,
began pestilential diseases. By order of the Pope, at this author's suggestion,
the streets, vaults, ditches and all similar places, were thoroughly cleansed,
and ten years after, no epidemic malignant disease had appeared. He however
observes that when a south wind blows for a long time, acute fevers, tertians,
pains in the head, and vertigo become epidemic. This must be occasioned by the
debilitating effects of that wind, or by miasmata conveyed from a distance,
probably from the pontine marshes.

See Lancisius, passim. Egypt is a flat country, containing not much marsh, but
annually overflowed, and subject to most of the inconveniences of marshy
countries, from the drying of its moist surface, in very hot weather. Here
again we have a nursery of pestilence.

The banks of the Euphrates and Tigris are nearly in the same predicament, and
Bassora, is in Persia, what Cairo, is in Egypt.

Most of the coast of South America, from Carthagena to the Oronoke, is
bordered with marsh, and is every where sickly.

But what shall we say to the marsh on our own shore? The low swampy lands that
border all the rivers, in the flat country of Maryland, Virginia and the
Carolinas, and the immense tract of bog in Virginia called the dismal? The
effects of them on the neighboring inhabitants are well known -- annual and
almost universal intermittents, and often, remittents.

Is it not possible and probable, that the noxious exhalations from these vast
hot-beds of putrefaction, are borne on the south-westerly winds, which prevail
almost constantly in June, July and August, and which run parallel with the
general trending of the coast, from Florida to New York? Do they not impregnate
the whole atmosphere for a considerable breadth, and sweep the country, from
the eastern shore of the Chesapeek to Philadelphia, New Jersey, and in a
slighter degree, to New York? I do not give a positive opinion on this subject;
but the annual prevalence of flight intermittents on York-Island, and in the
city, tho far removed from any marsh, and continually ventilated by sea
breezes, as well as washed by rapid tides, affords some ground to believe this
suggestion.

It is confirmatory of this idea, that soon after leaving York-Island toward
the east, all intermittents disappear; unless in a very few places, where they
proceed from obvious local causes: Now it must be observed, that the coast of
the United States, runs generally from south-west to north-east; but at
New York, it takes a different course, and runs about east by north, for two
hundred miles. This course soon carries the people on the shore, beyond the
reach of the supposed stream of morbid vapor, from the southern marshes, whose
course is with the south westerly winds.

I am not attached to this idea; but it is in conformity with the opinion of
the insalubrity of the Euxine winds at Constantinople; and with the effects of
the southerly Calabrian wind, blowing over the pontine marshes, toward Rome.
Lancisius relates a remarkable fact. Thirty gentlemen and ladies went on a
party of pleasure, toward the mouth of the Tiber. The wind shifted suddenly,
and blew from the marshes, "paludes ostienses," and twenty-nine of them were
immediately seized with a tertian. If such was the effect of the vapors from
those marshes, we may suppose the vast pontine marsh would poison the air to a
much greater distance.

That the extensive morasses, along our southern shore, are pregnant with
mischief to that country is certain; that the people of Philadelphia and
New York are affected by them, may be possible. It would therefore deserve
consideration, whether the evil will admit of a remedy. There are two modes of
rendering marshy lands and stagnating water salub^^s -- one, by draining the
lands and cultivating them; the other by turning into them streams of running
water. It is probable that most of the marsh at the southward, being within
reach of tides, and below high water, is incapable of being drained. It is the
pontine region of North America. How far the second plan can be applied with
success, I have not the local knowledge of the land and rivers to determine. The
classic reader will recollect the instance, related in history of Empedocles,
the Sicilian philosopher and poet, who put an end to pestilential diseases,
among the Saliuntii, by turning two streams of good water into the marshes,
from which they originated.

If there is a possibility of drying any of the lands, now covered with poison,
or of putting the dead water into motion, the United States have a vast
interest in effecting that object; and expenses are not to be put in
competition with the health and lives of our citizens.

The same remark is applicable to all the marshes in other parts of the
country, as about some of the lakes; and to all smaller sources of disease,
swamps and ponds. In every possible situation, where stagnant water contains
vegetable substances in abundance, diseases must prevail. Running water, on the
other hand, is salubrious. It not only does not exhale morbid air, but it
generates fresh and pure air; at the same time, it creates a gentle breeze by
its current, which helps to dissipate any noxious particles in its neighborhood
which may arise from other sources.

People in the country cannot be too careful in selecting a spot for their
habitation. The question, of continued health or disease, of long life or
premature death, hangs very often upon the choice of a salubrious situation for
a house.

A farmer should never plant his dwelling by the side of a marsh. Whatever may
be the situation of his lands, he is inexcuseable, if he builds his mansion
within a mile of the sources of disease and death. Better for him to go a mile
and a half to his daily labor, enjoying robust health, than to live within the
circulation of poisonous vapors, afflicted by diseases for three months in the
year. And when a farmer has the misfortune to be obliged to labor occasionally
in the vicinity of stagnant water, he should be careful not to enter upon the
ground early in the morning, before the noxious vapors have been raised and
attenuated by the heat of the sun, nor should he continue there, till late in
the evening.

People in the country should select hilly or elevated positions for their
houses; where the surface of the earth is dry, and there is a free circulation
of pure air. There is another reason -- the water on high grounds is always
better than in low, swampy places. Water in flat lands stagnates beneath the
surface, as well as above; but on hills, it is in constant motion. Hence if men
expect good water they must seek for it on mountains, hills and rising grounds.
The Arabians advise that houses should be set on high, airy places, near fresh
water.

When a choice of difficulties occurs, and men are compelled to live near
marsh, they should endeavor to place their dwelling on the windward side of the
marsh, which, in America, is the south and west; the summer winds being from
these points. This will often make a prodigious difference in the state of
health.

The fables of antiquity are mostly obscure and not well understood by the
moderns; but some of them are easily explained, and contain most excellent
lessons. The story of Python, the huge serpent, which alarmed and infested the
world, until he was slain by Apollo, is of this kind. Python was generated by
the action of heat on the mud and slime, which covered the earth, after the
recess of the water of Ducalion's flood. That is, Python was disease,
proceeding from noxious exhalations, in hot seasons, which was destroyed by
Apollo, the sun, which dried and purified the earth. See Ovid, Metam. lib. 1.
This fable had its origin in Egypt, where Python was killed by Isis and Orus.

Of what consequence is it that we read books, if we neither understand nor
practice the lessons they contain?

But after ^^tending to every circumstance that can assist in guarding health
from the annoyances that are local and visible, we have a further task to
perform, to lessen the effects of that elemental principle of disease, which
has been proved to exist, in every clime, at certain unequal periods. If, it
will be said, such a cause of epidemic diseases, does in fact exist, and
operate on every species of life, vegetable and animal, this cause is above
human control; all our efforts to avoid its effects, are useless; and we are
doomed by the decrees of heaven, to be the victims of pestilence, without hope
or remedy.

To this I answer; that if all history is not a forgery, the state of the
elements, has, in few instances, been so ill-adapted to support health and
life, or so positively pernicious, that men have perished by millions, in the
most healthy regions, exposed to no local causes of disease whate^er, except
such as exist in the most healthy periods. This I must believe; but the fact
affords no ground of complaint against providence; for the same fate has
attended all other species of animals. The horse, the ox, the sheep, the dog,
the cat, the fowls, and the fish, are subject to the same universal law of the
physical world; and on what principle will man arraign this disposition of all
created life, or claim an exemption from the laws, to which all other species
of animals are subjected?

But we are not altogether without hope, even in the desperate circumstances
mentioned. If we attend to the causes of plagues, we shall find they all tend
to destroy life by one general effect, which is, debility. Either directly or
indirectly, all the exciting causes close their operation on the system, by
inducing debility, leaving the nerves, muscles, and intestines in a relaxed,
languid state.

If this principle is just, and it is agreeable to the medical idea that
debility is the cause of all fevers, we have a clue that will lead us to the
means of escaping the evils of pestilence.

In the morbid state of air, producing the uncontrollable pestilences, which
have assailed man in the healthiest situations on the globe, we observe that
the most terrible effects have been produced, in seasons, when the air has been
warm, humid, unelastic, with light southerly breezes; as in the reign of M.
Aurelius, of Gallienus, and of Edward III. This state of the air served very
much to aid the pestilential principle, in debilitating the human body. All
local causes probably tend to the same effect.

The great desideratum then is, how to counteract the debiliitating operation
of these causes, and preserve the tone of the system. I am persuaded that all
the means of prevention are comprised in that idea. No man is taken ill with
this furious disease, until his nervous system and his intestines cease to
perform their usual functions, and secretions are suspended or diminished.
Hence persons, as long as their evacuations are regular, may walk with safety
in the most infected places, until their eyes and their color exhibit the
poison that is imbibed; yet they will not suffer by the disease, while the
vessels have strength to discharge the morbid matter by regular secretions and
evacuations. This is a known and a common fact.

Hence some persons and even physicians have resorted, during the plague, to
small doses of calomel, or other purgative, to keep open bowels. A most
pernicious practice to those in health, for it induces the very evil meant to
be avoided, debility; and ultimately, the intestines becoming unable to perform
their functions, disease and death ensue. I am well informed of a number of
cases of this kind, in New York, the last summer, which ended in death.

The true means to preserve the natural tone of the body, are the most natural
means.

First. Food is the natural stimulus of the system. During pestilence therefore
this article demands the first notice. It is agreed by all writers, and
observation justifies the opinion, that temperance is essential to health,
during a sickly season. Some persons, mistaking temperance for abstinence, have
run into an extreme of abstinence, which has been fatal to them. The true point
to be observed, is, to take as much food and drink, as will sustain the body in
its usual degree of strength; without overcharging it with stimulus. Too much
food produces unusual excitement, which is followed by indirect debility, a
state of body which invites an attack of pestilence. Too little nourishment, on
the other hand, induces direct debility, a state equally favorable to disease.
I have good grounds for believing some very valuable citizens of New York, of
my acquaintance, fell sacrifices to their excess of caution in the use of food,
during the last epidemic.

It is not improbable that different constitutions of air, as they produce
various symptoms in the same diseases, may require or admit of very different
degrees of stimulus, applied to the human body. The epidemic in New York in
1795, like that in Philadelphia in 1793, was characterized with inflammatory
diathesis, more frequently than in 1798. Hence venesection, which had acquired
great celebrity in 1793, lost part of its credit, in 1798, and was used with
more discrimination and caution.

I suspect the same circumstance has changed or modified the opinion of the
great utility of abstaining from generous diet and liquors. This opinion was
general and well received in 1795; nor have any cases come to my knowledge, in
which the practice was supposed to be injurious. But in 1798, many instances
occurred where persons of the most slender habits, of strict abstinence from
stimulating diet, and who weakened the system by purges, were seized with
uncommon violence by the pestilence, and perished. On the contrary, I am
acquainted with several physicians, who took their usual quantity of food, with
some wine and more than their customary quantity of porter, who attended the
sick, through the season, visiting the most infected places, without suffering the
least inconvenience to their health.

If the point is admitted that debility is the great proximate cause of this
disease, which I think cannot be contested, the consequence is plain, that
whatever tends to reduce the vigor of the system below its usual standard, must
be prejudicial, during its prevalence. Hence the propriety of rather increasing
than lessening the usual quantity of food, or natural stimulus; carefully
avoiding, at the same time, all excess in eating or drinking, which is equally
dangerous.

Another thing to be observed, in summer, and especially in time of pestilence,
is, the guarding the body, but by all means, the head, from the direct rays of
the sun. Nothing is more dangerous than the burning heat of a clear sun, in
sultry weather. It often produces sudden death, by means of an apoplexy,
instances of which are related under the year 1752, to have happened at
Charleston; and the same is said to have taken place there, the summer past. In
other cases, the effect is, what is called a stroke of the sun, "coup du
soleil," which is not always fatal, but very dangerous.

But the most general ill-effect of exposure to a hot sun, is, great debility,
in consequence of the violent and unnatuaral excitement; and this effect is
most to be found in the nervous system, when the heat has fallen directly on
the head. Convalescents from bilious fevers have occasion to be particularly
cautious, not to to expose themselves to a hot sun; a relapse is the most
certain consequence.

The umbrella is an excellent invention; it would be still more excellent, if
it could be improved, so as to render the shade more general, and completely
interrupt the rays of the sun, without being rendered too heavy.

In walking the streets of a city, in a clear hot day, the passenger will
naturally seek the shady side. Of so much importance is it thought, in some hot
countries, to shield the body from the rays of the sun, that very discerning
men contend that narrow streets and high houses, in cities, contribute to the
health of the citizens, by mitigating the heat. They suppose the obstruction of
air a less evil, than a hot sun. Of this opinion was Lancisius.

But this is to embrace one evil, in shunning another. It is to be regretted
that the best mode of shielding man from a hot sun, is not adopted in cities.
Wide streets, bordered with rows of trees, would be infinitely preferable to
all the artificial shades that can be invented. Trees are the coolers given to
us by nature. They make a pleasant shade -- they imbibe the septic fluids,
which impregnate the atmosphere of cities, and poison their inhabitants -- they
exhale pure air -- they fan the earth, by creating or augmenting currents of
air, with the vibratory movement of their leaves -- they invite the feathered
tribe to light on their branches, and with the music of their notes, to relieve
the ear from the grating of rough, unnatural sounds, which stun the citizen.

It has been objected to trees, that they increase the danger of fire, by
obstructing the free use of engines. This objection is imaginary. Few cases
would occur, where trees, properly placed, could interfere with the operations
of extinguishing fire; and in such cases, they might be levelled in a moment.

It has also been objected, that trees obstruct the free circulation of air.
This is not true. In calm summer weather, they very much increase a light
breeze, by partly obstructing the upper current with their branches, and
throwing more air below, thus augmenting the under current on the surface of
the earth, where it is wanted. The leaves and branches also, by their gentle
motion, agitate the air, preventing the ill effects of stagnation; and give
velocity to the air that finds its way through their interstices.

"The streets and public squares of a city, says St. Pierre, should be planted
with great trees of various sorts. A city, built of marble, would to me have a
melancholy appearance, unless I could see in it trees and verdure."

Studies of Nature, 13. Trees and all green vegetables diminish greatly the
heat near the earth; and little do men in general think, how prejudicial to
health is the operation of the extreme heat of cities.

It is not an uncommon thing in the country, where no miasmata exist, for
laboring men to over heat themselves in the field, and die in six days, with a
bilious fever; their bodies as yellow as saffron. This is yellow fever of a
mild kind, generated in the system, by the debility occasioned by excessive
heat and fatigue, without any external cause. Thus the extreme heat of August
and September 1798 will alone account for the unusual violence and extent of
the pestilential fever of that year.

In the warm season, and especially in time of epidemic fevers, people should
be doubly cautious not to expose their health by excessive fatigue. Labor
should not be violent, and walking, moderate. In extreme heat, the natural
excitement of the system, is usually too great; and a small addition to it
throws the body into a state of debility which invites disease. Not only
health, but life, is often suspended on the point of half an hour's exercise.
Temperance in labor, bodily or mental, is as essential to good health, as in
eating or drinking. The muscles and the nerves, those moving powers of the
human body, if stimulated beyond a certain point, lose their excitability
beyond the possibility of recovery.

The danger incurred by sedentary and studious men, during pestilence, from the
debilitating effects of their occupations, is greatly increased. Want of due
exercise is directly relaxing to the solids; while application of the mind is
apt to over-excite the nerves and induce indirect debility. The extreme
irritability of the nervous system, is obvious in a pestilential state of air.
-- I experienced it most sensibly in the summer of 1795, during the fever in
New York; and it is evidenced in the vertigo, so frequent at such times; in the
seizure of many persons in the plague with apoplectic symptoms; and in the
palsies and apoplexies which are greatly multiplied before or after the
prevalence of a pestilence, and which in some places, have become almost
epidemic.

During the rage of epidemic pestilence, also the animal appetite should be
indulged with moderation -- excessive indulgence, which might have been
sustained at other times, has often hurried the young and sprightly, to a
premature grave. Nothing can be more dangerous, according to all medical
writers on this subject.

Celsus directs that in pestilence, persons should seek fresh air, travel,
sail; or if these are not convenient, they should avoid fatigue, indigestion,
cold, heat, excessive indulgence of the animal desires; especially says the
author, in a pestilence which is occasioned by southerly winds. Vol. 1. 40, 41.

These observations are not new; they are common and well known to medical men,
and to all others of discernment. They are here inserted, because they may be,
in this work, more generally read, than in medical books, which are opened only
by professional men.

But all these rules, if strictly observed, will not, in a more violent plague,
be sufficient to secure the body from attack. Such are the extremely
debilitating qualities of the air, in some periods, that it will be necessary
to counteract them by artificial powers positively tonic.

The application for this purpose, which is most easy and effectual, is water;
an article which nature has furnished in the greatest abundance, because it is
far the most useful. On this subject perhaps some of the following ideas may
not be very common.

My attention to water, as a preventative of pestilence, was first excited by a
passage in Volney's Travels in Egypt and Syria, chap. 17. where he informs us
in a note that "at Cairo, it is observed, the water-carriers, continually wet
with the fresh water they carry in skins upon their backs, are never subject to
the plague." -- The author is there speaking of the pernicious effects of
humidity on health; but the escape of the water-carriers, he ascribes to
lotion, whose effects are different from those of moisture by vapor.

If this fact is accurately stated, it is worth an empire. I am inclined to
believe it and to ascribe the escape of those men to the constant application
of water to their bodies, during the labors of the day. Yet if true, why have
not authors propagated the knowledge of so important a truth, to every part of
the world? Is this neglect also the fruit of the pernicious errors respecting
the exclusive origin of the plague from infection? The calamities sustained by
mankind, in consequence of those errors, exceed all calculation.

How is it possible, that, if a remedy for the calamity of pestilence, is so
obvious and so near at hand, the Egyptians should not have applied it
universally? Can this be ascribed to the doctrine of predestination, which makes
them careless of the means of prevention?

It is very certain that the laws of Moses, respecting the prohibition of
blood, fat, swine's flesh, and certain other animals; as also the whole system
of ablutions, purifications, and use of perfumes, were intended to correct the
evils of the climate; and many of his directions became totally useless, when
the Israelites left that country and its vicinity. Heaven never could intend
some of the provisions of the Mosaic code, for more temperate and healthy
climates.

The ancient Egyptians had similar practices, and probably long before the days
of Moses. Their laws and customs to ensure cleanliness were very strict, and
they involved a most liberal use of water. Herodotus expressly declares that
"they scour their cups, wash their linen, and circumcise for the sake of
cleanliness. The priests bathe twice by day and twice by night, and are obliged
to wear linen." Swine's flesh was also considered to be unclean and prohibited
as an article of food.

See Book 2. Euterpe. These regulations doubtless proceeded from the experience
of their good effects. It is not improbable that the introduction of the
Mohammedan religion, may have been accompanied with the abolition or disuse of
ancient practices, which were friendly to health. Certain it is, that the
oriental nations make great use of baths; the original design of which was
probably to guard against diseases, but which have been abused and converted to
the purposes of luxury.

Let us then pursue the idea of applying water as a panoply against the attacks
of pestilence. By what means does water guard the body from that disease?

I have already quoted the observation of Dr. Priestley, to prove that water
absorbs the septic acid. If this opinion is well founded, and I have no doubt
of it, we have obtained a most essential item of knowledge. Fresh water
frequently applied to the body receives and carries off all the matter of
infection, thus removing one copious source of the disease.

Savary remarks, that pestiferous matter, passed through water, will not
communicate the distemper. This is a confirmation of Dr. Priestley's principles.

The cessation of the plague in Egypt, on the inundation of the Nile, is no
small evidence of the same principle. The water changes the state of the air,
both by absorption, that is, imbibing and carrying off the pestiferous sources
of vapor from the earth; and by extricating a quantity of fresh air. And this
important fact directs to the mode by which all gre^ cities are to prevent or
lessen the force of this disease. What the Nile does once a year for Egypt,
fresh streams of water should do every day, in the hot season, for all large
towns -- they should inundate the streets. Nature has given, in Egypt, the most
ancient and the most common nursery of the plague, the model of the best remedy
for the severest calamity incident to man; a model which few cities have been
wise enough to copy.

But it will not be sufficient to trust wholly to the effect of a diffusion of
water over a city. In the hot season, it should be applied to the body very
frequently in the way of lotion or bathing. By this I do not mean to recommend
the practice of leaping into river or seawater, and continuing in it for half
an hour -- a practice which proves fatal to many lives every summer. Cold water
is the most powerfully debilitating application, that can be made to the body.
No persons can bear it, even in summer, but the healthy and robust; and to save
such from injury, it must not be applied when the body is overheated, or
continued too long. Many -- many instances occur every year, in which a fatal
yellow fever is speedily induced by injudicious plunging. An instantaneous
application of cool water to the body, by a single plunge, or by a shower bath,
sometimes acts as a stimulant, by a sudden increase of excitability in the
system; but this should be used as a remedy, under the direction of a
physician. Few persons can sustain the shock, unless in good health; and I am
persuaded it would be as well for mankind, if the use of cold water by
plunging, were wholly proscribed. Judiciously applied, it is sometimes useful;
but my own observations lead me to believe, the utility is more than
overbalanced by its fatal or mischievous effects.

The most safe, easy, pleasant and beneficial mode of using water, is, to bathe
or wash the body in a private apartment at home. This may be done in several
ways -- either in a large vessel immersing the whole body at once; or, what is
less troublesome, with a single pail or bowl of water, in a bed chamber. The
washing may be done with the hand, or a sponge, in a few minutes, as the person
rises in the morning or retires, at night.

The temperature of the wate^ should b^ near that of the blood; a little cooler
or a little warmer, and in such a temperature, it is a pleasant application,
occasioning no violence to the system.

It may not be obvious to every common reader, that the application of warm
water to the surface of the body, in a hot day, should cool it. But such is the
fact, and nature points out this mode of reducing the heat of the body, by the
process of perspiration. In this process, the insensible vapor, which escapes
by the perspiratory ducts, takes with it a portion of heat -- and the more
freely a person perspires, the more temperate, the heat of his body. Hence the
human body is enabled to sustain heat, several degrees above that of the blood
-- and hence the flesh of a child, in full health perspiring freely, feels
cooler than the air, in a summer's day. This phenomenon may be illustrated by a
thermometer, with the utmost ease. Immerse the bulb into warm water, in a hot
day. Let the water be of 75 degrees of heat and the air, of 80 degrees. The
thermometer, standing at 75 degrees. in the water, and taken out into a warmer
medium, the air, ought to rise to 80 degrees. but being wet, the evaporation will
sink the mercury four or five degrees; that is to about 70 degrees. until the
instrument is dry, when it will rise to 80 degrees. the temperature of the air.

On this principle warm water, as well as cool, will lessen the heat of the
system; for no sooner does a person cease to apply the water, than evaporation
commences and cools the body by several degrees. This effect however is
temporary, in consequence of the stimulus of the heat.

In very hot weather it is better, especially for persons in the vigor of
health, to use water a little cooler, than the blood; for the effect of warm
water, applied in the manner proposed, is to stimulate -- and this is not what
the body requires. On the contrary, when highly excited by the heat of the air,
the body requires a reduction of heat, to prevent over-excitement, and its
effect, indirect debility. In general then the body in summer is to be cooled
by the use of water, while in a healthy state; but if debility or disease has
invaded it, it requires heat and excitement.

Persons of a slender habit, who require additional stimulus, should use water
a little warmer than the blood. The effect of cool water applied to persons in
full health, and of warm water, to feeble habits, is the same; to prevent
debility; indirect in the former case, and direct, in the latter.

Bathing a long time in very warm water, to produce profuse perspiration, is a
powerful laxative; and perhaps it would be better, if it was never used, except
as a remedy for disease, under the direction of physicians.

The beneficial effects of the use of water, in pestilence, therefore, are
these. -- The poisonous particles composing infection, and exhalations of all
kinds, are washed from the body, and their ill effects prevented -- the morbid
matter exhaled from the body by the perspiratory vessels, is also removed -- an
effect that may be aided by frequent changes of clean linen -- The extreme
vessels are stimulated and cleansed, by which means they are enabled to carry
on more perfectly the excretions; perspiration being one of the principal
resources of nature to expel the poison which enkindles the flame of
pestilence. -- The whole system is kept in equilibrio, by a diminution of
excitement, in the robust, and an increase of it, in the debilitated; the
consequence is, the system is daily renewing its tone and vigor, the energy of
the brain is preserved, the muscular fibers retain their powers, and all the
functions of the body, the digestion, circulation, secretions, and evacuations,
are regularly performed.

Medical gentlemen will excuse me for these ideas, which belong more properly
to their province. They are not new to that description of citizens; but, if
just, they ought to be universally known; for they lay the best foundation for
a regular plan of economy, in domestic life, which will greatly alleviate the
distresses of autumnal epidemics. I cannot help thinking that mankind are yet
in their infancy, in this respect; and that in general they understand the true
art of living, which shall secure health and happiness, as little as they
understood agriculture or naval architecture, in the days of Henry the first.

I am persuaded that the whole art of securing ourselves from pestilence, as I
have before remarked, consists in this simple maxim -- "preserve the natural
energy of the system." That water, fresh and pure, is the instrument most
efficacious for this purpose, I must believe, from reason and experiment. The
fact related by Volney of the escape of the water-carriers, is of infinite
weight, if fairly stated; and demands immediate application to our own case. At
any rate, it demands investigation.

I have other proof of the success of water, used as I have prescribed. A
friend of mine, who has lived many years in the West Indies, who has seen the
yellow fever in all its forms, who has tended the sick in that climate and in
New York, exposed himself to their breath and effluvia for days and nights
successively and slept with his own son, when on his deathbed, with that
disease, has hitherto escaped the infection. He ascribes this impunity to a
daily use of water in the manner abovementioned.

We are not to calculate on the universal and invariable success of any remedy
for this terrible calamity. Multitudes of men will not take the pains to use
the means necessary to resist the effects of the numerous causes of disease
which surround them. They will neither regulate their diet, nor cleanse their
persons and habitations; and when to the influence of their own intemperance,
and the poison generated in their houses and on their bodies, is added the
debilitating operation of peculiar seasons and other causes which are above
human control, great numbers of them must sink and perish.

Nor is it to be supposed that any human means can, in every case, guard life,
in a pestilential state of air. If we admit debility to be the universal
proximate cause of the plague, we are not sure that our best efforts to obviate
its effects will always succeed. We may not be able to find or to apply, in all
cases and under all circumstances, the precise degree of stimulus, necessary to
preserve the corporeal functions; and the variety of constitutions, and diverse
operations of the same remedies on different bodies, will defeat, in some
cases, the most exact application of the best possible system.

Of one thing I am confident, that, in our cities as now constructed, no rigors
of police can so effectually cleanse away the sources of poison, as to prevent
a return of pestilence, without the universal introduction of a new domestic
economy, and new modes of living. I am firmly persuaded that fruitful sources
of the evil lie in these two articles -- the excessive use of stimulant food
and liquors, and the neglect of personal washing. The diet of the Americans,
like that of the English, is of the most nourishing kind -- a large portion of
the best flesh meats, and high-seasoned fish and vegetables. Our drink is of
the same character -- the best high wines, spirits and brandy.

In winter, our bodies sustain this stimulant mode of living; the extreme cold
continually resisting its effects by its debilitating powers. But when summer
arrives, and the violent stimulus of heat, is added to the high stimulus of the
best diet, two classes of men fall a sacrifice to violent fevers. First, men
who push their stimulus beyond the powers of nature, by excessive exertion, and
imtemperance in eating and drinking -- hence a robust man riots in debauch to
day, and four days after is in his grave. Secondly, men who live freely in
winter, and reduce their diet too low in summer, to avoid diseases, inducing a
weak, languid state of the system.

It must be obvious to any person in America, that the French mode of living,
in regard to diet, drink, and the liberal use of water, protects them from the
epidemic diseases which prey upon the Americans, and British natives. Nor have
I the least doubt, that a suitable regimen, pursued rigorously by the
Europeans, would have saved one half the people, who perished in the black
pestilence in 1348.

Unfortunate souls! They believed the plague to be communicated by infection
only; they sought safety by flight; they embarked on board of vessels, and
launched out upon the ocean, to escape infection; but all in vain; the disease
attacked them in every situation, and the world was almost dispeopled. Had they
known that the distemper was induced solely by the debilitating qualities of
the elements and the season, what multitudes would have applied the true
remedy, and survived! Thanks to a kind providence, such a singularly depressing
state of the air, rarely occurs, but when it does, there is no flight from the
sources of disease, as in ordinary plagues, which arise in the impure
atmosphere of cities only; but men must have recourse to the applications which
resist the effects of debility, and maintain the energy of the system by
supplying the defective powers of the elements, with artificial stimuli.

I cannot close this section, without a few remarks on the general plan of
building large towns.

The ancient mode of constructing cities bears some characteristics of the age
and taste of the nations, in which they were respectively founded. Most of the
old cities were evidently built with reference to a state of war and robbery;
being intended for safety, rather than for convenience; as appears by their
narrow streets and the projections of the upper stories of the houses. The more
people could be crowded into a small space, the less military force was
necessary to defend the town.

However this may be, those cities were very ill-constructed for the purposes
of health. Savary asserts that 200 persons in Grand Cairo occupy less space
than 30 in Paris. The streets are so narrow and full of people, that they
jostle against each other, and sometimes a man is obliged to wait some minutes,
before he can make his way. Letter 3. Yet this same author alleges the plague
to be not native in Egypt! Surely a man of science need not go out of Cairo to
look for causes of pestilence.

Many streets in Constantinople are narrow and crowded like those in Cairo.

The old city of London, before the fortunate conflagration of 1666, was in a
like predicament; its streets narrow and almost closed above by the jutting of
the upper stories of the houses. In the old streets, which escaped the fire,
notwithstanding all the improvements of modern days, which have mitigated the
violence of pestilential diseases, I am informed people are still infested with
nervous and typhus fevers. London is however greatly indebted to the
conflagration. In the present construction of the buildings, one person, it is
said, occupies as much ground as two did before the fire. The size and
arrangement of houses and apartments are also improved; and better adapted to a
free circulation of air. The introduction of fresh water may also be numbered
among the best preservatives from disease. These are among the causes of the
nonappearance of the plague in modern London, and the diminution of the annual
bills of mortality, within the last half century.

The plague however has disappeared in other cities of Europe, where no such
improvements have been made -- a curious fact, that will be hereafter
considered.

But the disease continues to prevail occasionally in the eastern parts of
Europe, in Hungary, Poland and Russia, which were severely ravaged in 1770, and
1771. The disease also raged at Oczakow, on the north border of the Euxine as
late as the year 1739.

That part of Europe abounds with marshes and stagnant water, and consists
mostly of level land. This may account for the continuance of the plague, in
that quarter.

The United States unfortunately contain similar sources of disease, in number
and extent scarcely equalied. Yet instead of profiting by the severe distresses
which all great cities have suffered once in fifteen or twenty years, from
pestilence, and guarding against the artificial causes of it, our ancestors
began and we are continuing to build cities, on t^ Gothic plan, without more
regard to the lives and happiness of our citizens, than that which was
manifested by the barbarians of antiquity. The moderns however proceed on the
same plan from a different motive, which is, avarice. It is now the interest of
the proprietors of lots in a city, to which all the pleasure of living, and the
health of citizens, are sacrificed.

We are precisely in the latitudes most favorable to the production of
pestilence. In the tropical climates, constant heat soon fits the human body to
sustain it, and the natives of those climates are seldom affected by the
furious rage of epidemic pestilential diseases. Within the tropics strangers
alone are sufferers by the climate. Savary remarks "that the plague seldom
reaches the polar circle and never passes the tropics. The caravans of Cairo,
Damascus and Ispahan, which are sometimes infected, never propagate it at
Mecea, and Yemen is safe from the plague." With few exceptions these
observations are just. If the natives of cool regions pass suddenly into
tropical climates, they are subject to violent fevers; but the reason assigned
in the text is sufficient to account for the perpetual exemption of natives of
hot climates from the worst form of pestilence. Their bodies mould themselves
to the climate -- their excitement or debility is always uniform. it is the
great changes, in these respects, which expose people in the middle latitudes
to the attacks of pestilential diseases.


But in the temperate latitudes, men are continually subject to the
alternations of extreme heat and cold -- changes hostile to the system. In
winter, we may be said to be inhabitants of Lapland; in summer, of Mexico or
the West Indies. If we do not remove to the polar circles or to the tropics,
yet the revolutions of the seasons bring their climates to us; and we annually
run a similar risk with the Europeans, who pass from the northern to the
southern latitudes of perishing in multitudes.

It is a most unquestionable fact that the northern states of America from
New York to Maine, are in a position on the globe, as exposed to the plague as
the cities of Marseilles, Naples, Rome and Constantinople; and the southern
states have a position corresponding with the latitude of Syria, the Barbary
coast and Egypt; that portion of the earth which is most frequently ravaged
with pestilential diseases.

If then we live in a climate in which the human body, from alternate heat and
cold, is most irritable, and most subject to malignant autumnal distempers; and
if a part of our country is peculiarly adapted to the production of such
diseases; the most serious of all questions arises; what shall we do to prevent
a frequent return of such calamities?

To me, the path is extremely plain. Our climate we cannot change -- much of
our country cannot be raised into hills, nor drained of its stagnant waters --
the laws of nature we are unable to control in the operation. -- But our duty
is plain. Men must not plant their habitations near marshy grounds -- the mode
of building cities must be totally changed -- and so must the usual habits of
our citizens.

Throughout the whole Atlantic territory, on the low lands, it is more
essential that large towns should be purposely constructed for health. -- Great
cities are usually founded on commerce, and commerce requires the access of
navigable water. Hence such towns are commonly near the sea shore or on the
borders of rivers. -- But if they are near low marshy grounds they cannot be
healthful. High and dry positions, with rocky or gravelly earth, are the proper
places for populous cities, on account of fresh air and good water.

But in any sitation, our cities are too crowded for health or comfort. Lots
are too small -- too many people are crowded on to a little space of ground. A
family to every lot of 25 or 30 feet by 80 or 100, connot fail to generate too
much filth, and to vitiate the air in too great a degree, for the health of the
citizens. In every large town in the United States, however remote from marsh,
and however healthy its position, the effects of crowded population are
obvious, every autumn, in the sickness and death of children. Multitudes and
multitudes of lives are anually sacrificed, in all cities, to the avarice of
the original proprietors of lots. The little narrow dirty houses, kitchens and
yards surrounded with high fences, excluding air and vegetation; all that can
dissipate or absorb the noxious exhalations; all that can purify the atmosphere
and refresh the exhausted frame of a human being, panting beneath a sultry sun
-- every thing in our cities is contrived to waste the powers of life, and
shorten its duration.

Men, in this respect, are infinitely less sagacious than irrational animals.
Instinct guides the beasts of the field to the most proper habitations -- and
they never reside where they are annoyed. But man, with all his boasted reason,
sees the effects of his folly, and hundreds and thousands of his fellow
citizens falling victims to his own neglect, his mistakes or his sordid
principles; he heaves a sigh in August and September, as he views the sable
hearse, conveying his friends in scores to their graves; in November he shrugs
his shoulders and says, it is all over; runs to the circus, the theater and the
card room; laughs away the winter's evening with his jovial companions, some of
whom are destined, the next season, to fall a sacrifice to the same folly and
neglect, and to fill new ranges of graves by the side of the victims of the
preceding year.

In the United States, every thing that has been done hitherto in the
construction of cities, is in imitation of the old European and African mode,
and of course is wrong.

The ancient construction of London cost that city nearly two hundred thousand
lives in one century; and Cairo and Constantinople probably lose more than that
number, every half century. I firmly believe, and my belief is founded on the
uniform operation of established laws of nature, that a perseverence in our
present mode of building cities, will doom them all to the same fate. I believe
it, because I see no possible reason why pestilential diseases should not be as
frequent and as fatal in America as in the old world, under the operation of
similar local causes.

If a rigid police can be uniformly observed; and every possible nuisance be
removed by shovels, brooms and water, cities in healthy positions, will escape
the regular and constant return of malignant epidemics. -- Multitudes of lives
may be saved, and the loss of business prevented, by these means; and in cities
already built, cleansing, washing and purifying, are the guardian angels of
public health.

But I maintain that this is not exterminating the root of the evil. Cities may
be built so as to unite all the utility of a town, with the salubrity and
pleasures of the country, and in this new world, where men are as free to act
as to think, it will be dishonorable not to invent and execute a plan for these
purposes.

Were I called upon for a plan of a city, which should combine in it the
advantages of town and country, I should suggest the following as the outline:

1. The position to be on the shore of the sea or the bank of a river, gently
ascending with an angle of at least fifteen or twenty degrees; which would form
a declivity for a rapid descent of water to wash the city; at the same time,
would not prevent the draft of heavy loads from the river or ocean.

2. The wharves on the water should be extended beyond low water mark, that no
part of the docks should be left bare by the recess of the tide. All the solid
front of the wharves should be on a line; that no eddies might be formed; and
the water might flow in a passing current. This would carry off substances
thrown into the water, and contribute to keep the air pure by motion and
change. Should it be necessary to extend wharfing in one place further than in
another, it should be in the form of a bridge on piers.

3. The warehouses on the wharves should not be jumbled together in a chaos;
one projecting in front of another; but built in a strait range, at a suitable
distance from the water; and an alley should pass between them for the
admission of fresh air on every side. No wet cellars should be permitted.

4. The streets should be strait, intersecting each other at right angles, and
forming the city into squares of at least 500 feet on a side.

5. The lots should be at least 60 feet wide, and 250 feet long. No more than
35 or at most 40 feet of the breadth of the lot to be ever covered with
buildings, so that a space of 20 or 25 feet should intervene between the
houses. This space would leave a cartway, give free admission to air, and
reduce the risk of fire 75 per cent.

6. In the rear of the front building, out houses might cover 100 feet of the
length of the lot. The remaining 150 feet should be laid out to the fancy of
the owner in a garden -- the police interfering no farther than to require by
law that some kind of trees or vegetables should occupy the space -- vegetation
being the natural purifier of the air.

7. Directly through the center of each square, should run a narrow street of
about 25 feet taken out of the rear of the lots, which street or alley should
never be built on, but would admit a passage for citizens through the squares; and
what would be still more necessary and useful, would admit dust-carts to take
up all the filth of the houses, from the rear, and prevent that intolerable
nuisance, the depositing of offensive materials in the streets. The little
flower gardens and shady lawns in these squares, would preserve the air pure,
fresh and cool in summer -- they would occupy many persons of delicate health,
thus contributing to their comfort, diverting their minds, and in many cases,
restoring them to health. Here also children would find room to gambol, without
endangering their lives or annoying passengers in the streets; and here the
young of both sexes would acquire a taste for gardening, for botany, and the
delightful amusement of studying the works of nature.

8. The streets should be one hundred feet in breadth, and planted with three
rows of trees. One row on each side next the foot walks, and a row in the
center. The foot walks to be 15 feet wide. The trees next the walks would then
be 15 feet from the houses; and a space between the center row and each side
row, of 35 feet. The trees might be so pruned, as to prevent their injuring the
buildings, and their distance would prevent their interfering with fire
engines. These trees would be leafless in winter, when the sun is acceptable;
and in summer would sweeten, purify and cool the air. The citizens at all times
in the day, would walk in a refreshing shade -- the center row of trees would
furnish shade for horses.

9. No city should be raised on level earth. If a natural position cannot be
found, with a general declivity to the water, the streets should be thrown into
artificial elevations of at least 3 feet in every hundred -- five feet in the
hundred would be better. This would give celerity to the water falling in
showers, and wonderfully assist in removing filthy substances from the streets;
for after all human efforts in sweeping, much offensive matter will remain,
which water alone will reach and carry off.

10. No pains should be spared to supply a city with fresh running water.

It is a point of infinite importance that citizens should not depend on water
from pumps in the city. In a few years, the subterranean water becomes
impregnated with the noxious particles from vaults -- and this evil continues
to increase with the age of the city. One of two remedies are to be provided --
either the city must be supplied with fresh water by pipes from a distant
source; or the vaults must be so formed as to be capable of being opened in
winter and cleansed. But the last method, tho useful and practiced in some
European cities, would be ineffectual.

The back houses in a city are, in many respects, a terrible nuisance. If a
sewer could be carried four or five feet under ground, and every such house be
set over it, a stream of water passing through it from a distant source, would be
an excellent means of cleansing a city from this source of disease. But such
streams of water are rarely to be obtained.

Another expedient suggests itself for the same purpose. Let a sewer of three
feet wide and well paved, be run in a strait line under the rear of the lots,
and all back houses set over it. In suitable places, let channels be made to
turn the water from the streets into the sewers, in long or violent showers,
when the water is not wanted to wash the streets. In this manner, the sewers
might be washed perfectly clean, a number of times every summer, and the
citizens preserved from their poisonous exhalations.

On a model of this kind, I conceive cities should be constructed in the most
healthy situations; for a crowded population, in any place on earth, will
lessen the salubrity of the air. Close compact cities, in any quarter of the
globe, are the graves of men. All the great cities of Europe require annually
some thousands of strangers to supply their waste of population. Yet there is
no necessity for men to crowd together in such a compact form. There is land
enough on earth to suffer any extension of cities, and it makes little
difference, in the first instance, whether a lot contains one hundred feet of
land or half an acre. Nor would a less dense population be any inconvenience to
men, in business. They might be obliged to walk further on some occasions; but
in the cool shade of my proposed city, this would be a pleasure rather than a
toil.

It is wrong, it is criminal, for legislatures to permit such crowded
population. It is a nuisance, not only to cities, but to the public. It is a
truth, that numbers of lives are sacrificed almost every year, among worthy
country gentlemen, who have business in our large cities.

They come to town in the hot season, when no uncommon disease prevails among
the citizens who are innured to the air -- they come without suspicion -- they
are seized with fever and die. The air of the low grounds in our cities, even
in healthy seasons, is often poison to people from the country, and gives them
a fever, when no epidemic is visible among citizens. I know the fact, and it is
a serious calamity, especially to seamen. The low grounds in Providence,
New York, Baltimore, etc. are great nuisances. The building of Water-street and
Front-street in New York, it is believed by good judges, has cost this city a
thousand lives in five or six years. I say nothing of Philadelphia; for its
position and the alterations in the original plan of the city have doomed it to
calamity. The citizens will not believe the evil to arise among themselves and
therefore must be left to their fate. If remitting fevers every year, and
yellow fever often, will not convince men that something is wrong in their
city, it is in vain to reason with them. Of one thing I am confident, that if
all the earth in New York on which Water and Front-streets are built, could be
sunk 30 feet under water without loss of lives, and the proprietors indemnified
by the citizens, it would be the greatest blessing which heaven could in mercy
bestow on the city and the state. I believe also, that if all the cross streets
and the back houses in Philadelphia could be levelled with the earth, and the
ground converted into flower gardens and grass plats, the citizens would, in
twenty years, celebrate the anniversary of their destruction, with as much
fervor as the republicans in France celebrate the demolition of the Bastile.

It is not possible, I speak it with zeal and confidence; it is not possible,
under the operation of the present laws of nature, for men to be healthy in
many of our cities, during the heat of summer. That open champaign country,
which regularly produces intermitting and remitting fevers, will, when planted
with populous cities, often produce the plague. Of that country, there is an
extent in the United States, of more than one thousand miles in length, and
from 40 to 60 in breadth.

All the shore of the Atlantic from the Hudson north-eastward will admit of
healthy cities. If the commercial towns on that portion of America were
constructed on the foregoing plan, I would answer for it, that they would never
be ravaged with yellow fever. Individual cases might occur; but the disease
could not, without a miracle, become epidemic. But as our towns are now built
they will at times be partially affected. In ordinary seasons and with a
vigilant police they will escape, with the yearly loss of only ten, fifteen or
perhaps fifty citizens, the unfortunate victims of the negligence, the folly,
and the crowded population of cities. In very unfavorable seasons, the number
of victims will be increased. Such is the fate of our northern cities.

But the destiny of cities on the southern Atlantic shore, is to be more severe.

The period of general contagion may subside, and intervals of more general
public health, may be expected. The most unhealthy parts of the earth enjoy
such intervals, when the rage of malignant complaints is suspended. But the
melancholy periods of epidemics will often recur -- and as the plague, in all
its shapes, is the offspring of causes, mankind, wherever those causes exist,
are destined to be afflicted.

Away then with crowded cities -- the 30 feet lots and alleys -- the artificial
reservoirs of filth -- the hot beds of atmospheric poison. Such are our cities
-- they are great prisons, built with immense labor to breed infection and
hurry mankind prematurely to the grave.

There is no necessity for this destruction of human life. Cities laid out on
my plan would unite all the pleasures of country villages, rural seats, and
commercial towns. The merchant, in his ordinary business, would enjoy the
grateful shade of oaks and elms, with the luxuriant perfumes of odoriferous
flowers. At the same time, this verdant city would supersede the use of
solitary country-seats in summer; and thus save the expense now incurred of
possessing a town and country house. The country seat of a merchant, is a tax
of ten, fifteen or twenty thousand dollars, paid to maintain the poison and
pestilence of our present cities.

It is remarked by Boil and other authors that China is rarely affected with
the plague. The pestilence of 1347 is said to have commenced in that country;
but it seems to be agreed that China and some other Asiatic countries are not
often affected. This fact, if just, deserves investigation; in particular ought
philosophers to examine the nature and properties of the soil and the mineral
productions.

China is a very populous country, filled with canals, and well cultivated. It
is probable that the water in the canals is never stagnant, nor filled with
vegetables -- it is probable that the face of the country has been completely
dried by cultivation, all swamps and moist grounds drained and covered with
corn, rice and grass. How much these improvements have contributed to preserve
its inhabitants from pestilence, I need not inform my readers.

The cities also in China are vastly large and populou^ and an enquiry will
arise, how those cities escape the plague, if great population contributes so
much to the calamity.

I answer, they do not escape all plagues -- some of the most violent have
ravaged China; but they probably escape the slighter plagues, which are the
most frequent; and this is all that mankind can expect.

We are not sufficiently acquainted with the soil, climate, police and manners
of China, to speak with certainty on this subject; but one fact ought to be
mentioned. The Chinese houses have no windows in front, on the street, but in
the rear, are spacious gardens filled with trees, vegetables, flowers, and
fresh streams of water. Here the family is regaled and amused; the air is
rendered pure by cultivation, cleanliness, and the particles exhaled from
growing plants, and water-falls. This arrangement alone will account for their
exemption from the usual diseases of hot climates. -- When the Americans, with
their boasted light and science, shall become as wise as the Chinese, they may
expect to share in the exemption.

It is a fact related by Russel and others, that in the midst of the Turkish
cities, during a desolating plague, the spacious mansions of the wealthy Turks,
which are kept clean, and well aired, often escape the disease.

I cannot leave this deeply interesting subject, without relating an anecdote
from antiquity, which shows in what light wise men formerly viewed it.

In Greece, the countries of Attica and Lacedemon, consist of dry, gravelly or
rocky land; and I can find but one instance, in which those countries were
affected by pestilence, in the early ages. It is evident from Thucydides, that
the plague had never been known in Athens before his time, since the date of
the earliest traditions; and then it was probably induced principally by the
crowd of people collected in the siege, to escape the ravages of the
Lacedaemonians.

Boeotia, on the contrary, was more frequently visited by pestilence. To
account for this, let us know what was the situation of this country. It is
thus described.

Boeotia may be considered as a large basin, surrounded by mountains, the
different chains of which are connected by high grounds. Most of the rivers
from these hills unite in Lake Copais, of fourteen leagues circumference, which
has no apparent outlet; but, it was alleged by the ancients, to have
subterranean passages into the sea. The country is not without hills, but is
mostly level, and very fruitful. The air in Attica is rema^^ably pure; but in
Boeotia, very dense; hence the ancients derived the heavy, phlegmatic character
of its inhabitants from the air. This country seems to have been to Attica,
what Holland now is to France.

See Travels of Anacharsis, Chapter 34 and the authorities there cited. From
several passages of history, it appears that Boeotia was more frequently
visited by pestilence than Attica. This we should expect from the difference of
their situations.

Justin, lib. 16. ca. 3. informs us, that the Boeotians once consulted the
Delphic Oracle, how to remedy the plague that troubled them. The Oracle
replied, "That they must plant a colony in the country of Pontus, sacred to
Hercules." But they were so much attached to their own country, that they
disobeyed the injunction; until another calamity, war, drove them to consult
the Oracle a second time, when, receiving a similar answer, a part of the
people removed to the borders of the Euxine, and founded the famous city of
Heraclea.

This Oracle certainly understood the cause of the evil, and directed to a
suitable remedy. The answer implies, "you must thin your population," or "you
must seek a more salubrious climate," or it might comprehend both these ideas.
The direction is full of wisdom, and is strictly applicable to many of our
American cities. Translated into the language of our circumstances, it runs
thus "thin your population, by spreading your citizens over a larger extent of
ground, or you will often be driven from your cities, into the country."

We have Moses and the prophets, in books and experience, and if we will not
listen to them, neither the Delphic Oracle, nor a messenger from the thousands
of dead who have perished by the plagues of our cities, would induce belief or
effect a reformation.

SECTION XVIII. Of the disappearance of the plague in some parts of Europe, and
of new diseases.
IT is a common remark that no plague has appeared in England, since the year
1665, and that the disorder has ceased in the west of Europe, for near a
century past. This happy exemption from that horrible calamity has been
ascribed to various causes. Many people ascribe it to health laws -- a subject
that has been already discussed. Some allege that the use of fossil coal has
banished the plague from London; and Hoffman relates that Halle in Germany,
which used to be afflicted with malignant fevers, has been free from them since
coal has been used as fuel. Others suppose that the great improvements in
building and in the modes of living, in modern times, have been the means of
preventing the return of pestilence.

On the first cause, I have already given my opinion, and the reasons on which
it is founded. I find no sufficient evidence that health laws ever saved a
country or city from pestilence, in a single instance; but abundant positive
proof of their utter inefficacy, in a great number of cases.

With respect to the use of coal, we ought not to indulge very sanguine
expectations. It may be true, that violent diseases became more rare or wholly
disappeared, in some places, about the time that coal became of general use as
fuel. But let us examine facts, and not trust to general cursory observations.

The digging of coal at New Castle for fuel commence^ early as the year 1234,
as appears by a charter of Henry III. and how much earlier, is not known. It
was used in London as early as 1379, in considerable quantities; but when first
introduced, does not appear. In 1550, coal was in common use in London -- its
price "twelve shillings a load." The price in 1590 was raised to "nine
shillings a chaldron," which was deemed exorbitant. Thus far we have little
light on the subject; but in 1615, the coal trade occupied four hundred ships;
two hundred of which were employed between London and New Castle. The present
number is five hundred, and London contains more than double the inhabitants it
did at that time.

See Anderson's Com. vol. 1. and Fleetwood's Chron. In 1615 then the use of
coal must have been general in London, and for some time before, for the growth
of the trade must have been gradual. But for fifty years after this general use
of coal, London was afflicted by the plague; the city indeed was rarely free
from it, as appears by the bills of mortality, and three times, after that
period, the city was ravaged by that distemper as an epidemic, viz. in 1625,
1636 and 1665.

So far we have no encouragement to hope for a prevention of the plague by the
use of coal. With respect to the city of Halle, I can say nothing. The
observation of Hoffman may be just, and yet coal may have had no influence in
checking the prevalence of pestilence.

It belongs to physicians to ascertain the effect of the vapor from this fossil
substance on human health. Certain it is, that it occasions inconveniences to
those who are not accustomed to it. So general was the prejudice against it,
when first used in London, that in the year 1^00, the nobility and citizens
petitioned the king "to prohibit the further use of so noxious and unhealthy a
kind of fuel." And. Com. vol. 6. Ap. 935. There is reason to believe it is not
very unhealthy, but I see no ground to suppose it has had the least influence
in arresting the progress, or preventing the return of the plague.

To confirm this opinion, I would mention that the plague disappeared in France
and other parts of Europe, about the time it did in England; in Paris, for
instance, where no coal is used. In a great part of Europe therefore the same
effect has taken place, without the supposed cause; which leaves us at liberty
to reject that cause.

The third reason assigned for the cessation of the plague, viz. improvements
in building houses and cities, and in clothing, diet, the use of fresh water
and the like, is a just one; and there can be no rational doubt that these
alterations have contributed to mitigate the violence and restrain the
progress, of many acute diseases. Pestilential epidemics are probably less
frequent within the last century, at least in the more civilized and commercial
parts of Europe, and also in America, than they had been in former periods.

The poverty, (...), the dirty, crowded mud cottages, and the scanty supply of
wholesome food, which was the common fare of the peasantry, in Europe, must
have given origin or currency to many diseases; and greatly aggravated their
severity. A sample of this may be seen in the early appearance of mortal
diseases in the low narrow streets and small crowded apartments now occupied by
the poorer people in our cities, and the difficulty of expelling a pestilential
disease from such places. The following extracts will show the state of cities
and of manners, at the periods mentioned.

"Westminster and London were once above a mile asunder. The union with
Scotland in 1603, did not a little conduce to make a union of London and
Westminster; for the Scots greatly multiplying here, nested themselves about
the court; so that the strand from the mud walls and thatched houses, acquired
that perfection of buildings it now possesses."

And. Com. vol. 2. 285. from Howel. Voltaire says, about the year 1500,
"Industry had not yet changed those huts of wood and plaster, of which Paris
was composed, into sumptuous palaces. London was still worse built, and peers
of the realm carried their wives behind them on horseback."

In 1504, when James IV. of Scotland was married to Margaret, daughter of Henry
VII. of England, the princess made her public entry into Edinburgh, riding
behind King James on a pillion.

Henry's Hist. Britain, vol. 6. 597. This princely custom is still preserved in
New England; where the common farmers live in better houses than many of the
nobles, at the period above named.




As a general remark it may be alleged with great probability that Europe has
derived no small benefit, in regard to public health, from the following
circumstances.

First. From the modern improvements in agriculture, by which means many places
are dried and sweetened, which used to be cold, damp and fetid.

Agriculture not only removes, from the earth, substances positively noxious to
health; but covers its surface with growing vegetables positively salubrious.
This is one instance of multitudes, in the economy of the world, in which the
happiness, comfort and interest of man are made to depend on his industry.

See Dr. Rush's Works, vol. 1. p. 25. Secondly. Improvements in building houses
may have contributed to the same salutaray end. The materials are of a kind
less susceptible of accumulating and retaining infectious exhalations, than
formerly -- the apartments are more spacious, elevated and airy.

Thirdly. Houses are less crowded than in ancient times, as appears by the
proclamation of Queen Elizabeth, recited in the foregoing history. In London,
one person, since the fire of 1666, is supposed to occupy as much space as two
in the old city. This remark applies especially to the poor, who were formerly
more numerous than at present. Some of the nobles, in the old city, had
spacious gardens, but the mass of people were miserably poor and crowded into
narrow filthy lodgings.

Fourthly. There is probably an immense difference in regard to general
cleanliness, between the people even of the sixteenth century, and the present
age. For this we are partly indebted to commerce, the source of wealth and
refinement. A more general use of linen and cotton in clothing, articles which
require washing frequently, may have contributed to the same object.

Fifthly. The introduction of pure water into cities from distant sources, and
a liberal use of it, in houses, and the streets, have aided in the same
salutary work of diminishing the calamities of disease.

Sixthly. It is believed that the modern diet is more friendly to health than
that of former times. It is evident that to this change Europe is much indebted
for the disappearance of scorbutic complaints, which formerly were epidemic in
Holland and other parts, and which still prevail in Iceland and Canada, where
the poor live mostly on dried or salted fish, poor flesh meats, with a small
portion of vegetables. The cultivation of the vine and the orchard has
doubtless had a considerable effect. Cider and wine have assisted in preserving
the body from debility in certain pestilential periods; and when temperately
used, are of excellent use.

But I apprehend that the moderns have ascribed too much to these causes. Any
man who will read history with care, will observe that there has been, within
about a century, a considerable abatement of pestilence in all parts of the
world. The plague is far less destructive in the Levant, and Egypt, within 150
years, than it was in former ages. This mitigation has been cotemporary in all
parts of the earth, of which we have any correct knowledge. The cause of this
change, I pretend not to assign; but a similar abatement has been observed in
the violence of earthquakes.

While I admit however that the true plague has disappeared as an epidemic in
many parts of Europe, I do not admit that pestilence, in the general sense of
the word, has wholly disappeared. If the true plague, technically so called,
should never again occur in London or Paris, I should then say, that
improvements in modern times may have mitigated the pestilence, but not that
they have wholly banished it. Under this word pestilence, I include smallpox,
anginas and p^techial fever, with other malignant disorders, which evidently
depend on the same general cause as the real plague, operating with less force.
These diseases still appear in all parts of Europe, and exhibit the existence
of the pestilential principle, although improvements may have lessened and
circumsc^ibed its effects.

I do not however consider it as certain that the true plague will not revisit
all the western parts of Europe. A concurrence of causes, like that in 1348,
might again produce that disease in France, England and Ireland, with all its
horrors. But the probability is, that the modern improvements have removed so
many of the local causes of disease, that no constitution of air will ever
again produce the same mortality, as that under Vortigern or that under Edward
III; nor will the plague ever again be so frequent, as in former ages.

On this point however there is not sufficient ground to build any certain
calculations, for the following reasons. Every physician and historian well
knows that there have been frequent revolutions or changes in the form of
certain diseases -- ordinary diseases with new symptoms, and diseases before
unknown, have appeared in various countries and in all periods.

The most remarkable of these are the smallpox, venereal disease, sweating
sickness, Hungarian fever, petechial fever and angina maligna, with some of
less note.

I am not about to enter on the great question, when or how particular diseases
have been introduced or modified in their symptoms. I suspect however there is
a fallacy in the common theory about new diseases. What are usually called new
are more probably nothing more than the changes that are made in former
diseases, by alterations in the atmosphere, climate, habits of living and a
multitude of inferior causes. The smallpox and the venereal disease seem to
have the best claim to the appellation of new; yet the fact of their being
unknown before the periods assigned for their appearance, has been justly
called in question. See note at the end of this Section.

Certain diseases however appear in particular countries, where they had not
before been known, since the date of the earliest histories. Possibly some have
been propagated by infection; others have evidently arisen from some general
cause. Thus Pliny relates that the eliphantiasis was brought from Egypt into
Italy, by Pompey's troops, but soon disappeared. It is said also that the same
disease was propagated in the west of Europe by the Crusaders. Epidemic scurvy
appeared in the maritime parts of Holland in 1556. The petechial fever which
desolated Spain in 1557, and afterward all Europe, was called a new disease,
different from the usual purple fever, and said to be spread from the islands
of the Levant through Italy to the west of Europe. The angina maligna, in Spain
in 1610, was called there a new disease; and in England, where it appeared
about fifty years ago, it has been called a new disease in that country.

But the real state of the question seems to be, that epidemic diseases, most
or all of which proceed from qualities of the atmosphere, suffer general
changes, in conformity with the revolutions and alterations which take place in
the physical world. A remarkable instance of this, was the sudor anglicus,
which was, in its general symptoms, the plague; but some general cause in
England first and afterward on the continent, superadded a peculiar symptom,
that of profuse discharges by the pores. This character of the disease, as has
been well observed by the author of Traite de la peste, was the effect of a
species of revolution in the form of pestilence. Infection or contagion can
have had no concern in producing this phenomenon. The disease maintained this
peculiar character from 1483 to 1551, a period of almost 70 years, raging
occasionally in most parts of Europe and then disappeared; at least it has
never made considerable ravages since that time.

This, in medical language, was a new disease, as demanding new modes of
treatment; but in the language of philosophy, it was only a varied form of the
same malady, and proceeding from a common cause, with the inguinal plague, but
that cause in particular times and places, was modified in its operation. What
confirms this idea is, that this sweating disease never appeared as an isolated
epidemic, but was always cotemporary with the common plague in other countries
-- that is, it formed a part of the general effects of the pestilential
principle. Thus in 1483, about the time of its first occurrence in England, all
Europe was desolated by the common plague. Denmark lost half its inhabitants,
and many other countries fared very little better. The same may be observed of
its subsequent returns, and of its prevalence in Ireland, Holland, France and
Germany.

This is what I call a revolution in pestilence, and it will apply to many
other changes in the predominant diseases of the human race. It astonishes me
to read in modern books the positive assertions, "that the plague is never
generated in Great Britain, or other northern latitudes." See Mead, James'
Medical Dictionary, Cullen, Encyclopedia and other original works and
compilations without number. Lord Verulam, Sir Thomas Moore, Boil, Erasmus,
Diemerbroeck and other luminaries of former centuries, who saw the plague
frequently in all its varieties, never pretended that the disease was not
produced in their respective countries. The sudor anglicus, not only appeared
first in England, but for the first time of its prevalence was confined to
Englishmen. Yet this was the most violent and destructive form of the plague
that ever has been known.

"Nuper novum pestilentiae genus immisit Deus, letiferum sudorem, quod a
Britannis exortum, incredibili celeritate, per orbem long lateque divagatum
est -- plurium exitio, summo terrore omnium."

Life of Erasmus, 347. How respectable writers can overlook such authorities is
to me inexplicable.




Thus the petechial fever, which ravaged Europe in the sixteenth century was
called a new disease; but I conceive it to have been no more than a varied form
of the common purple fever, induced by some general variation in the elemental
cause of epidemics, or by the seasons. It formed a part of the pestilential
series, and was the precursor of the plague, as it is to this day, although it has
rarely been so general or fatal as about the year 1556 and from 1570 to 1576.

It is remarkable also that the general cause extended over the Atlantic, and
gave the same character to the fevers of the West Indies. The disease which
reduced the forces of Sir Francis Drake at Carthagena, in 1586, was called
calenture; a species of malignant spotted fever.

Purchase, vol. 4. 1182. A similar fever infected the people under Sir Thomas
Gates, bound to Virginia, in the beginning of the last century. And if Ulloa is
correct in stating that the infectious yellow fever never appeared at
Carthagena, till about the year 1730, we have a remarkable proof of a
revolution in the diseases of that climate. We are to conclude from the facts,
that the calenture was a distinct form of the pestilence incident to the
country, till the beginning of the present century; since which, it has assumed
the character of our bilious plague. I am however inclined to question the
fact. The true yellow fever has been known in the English islands from their
first settlement. It reduced Cromwell's forces when they took Jamaica in 1655.

It is further to be observed that the true form of plague is never known in
Spanish America. But at Quito, and other places, malignant distempers under the
^^me of spotted fevers, and pleurisies, sweep away prodigious numbers of people
and fall but little short of the inguinal plague.

Ulloa, vol. 1. 279 -- 281. Such then is the pestilence of South-America; but
in other periods, it may take a different form.

These observations also lead to an explanation of the phenomena of the angina
maligna. It was called a new disease in Spain and England, when it first
appeared in 1610; but this is a mistake. It is evidently described as epidemic
a century or two before those periods. But the truth is, that form of
pestilence had disappeared for a long period and given way to some other
disease. After a time, it re-appeared, perhaps with some new symptoms.

The same remarks apply to the Hungarian fever, the peculiar symptoms of which
first occurred in the sixteenth century; and to a multitude of local and
temporary epidemics, which have been called, on account of some singular
symptoms, new diseases.

These facts serve to explain my idea of the disappearance of the plague in
certain parts of Europe. I consider the angina maligna as pestilence of the
worst kind; and its occurrence in modern times, since the glandular plague is
less frequent, may be only one of the revolutions in diseases of a malignant
type, which have marked other periods. The destructive force of the
pestilential principle, falls principally upon the throat, instead of the brain
or the glands, and mostly upon youth. This may be the principal form of
pestilence for a century or two, when it may disappear and give way to the
common plague, or to some new combination of symptoms, which shall p^ss for a
new disease. A conjecture of this kind is authorized by several changes in the
general characters of diseases, at particular periods of the world. I do not
therefore consider it to be certain, that the parts of Europe, which have
escaped the plague for a century, are secure of permanent exemption from that
calamity.

This conjecture seems to be authorized by the evident mitigation of the plague
in the Levant, within a century. Plagues, it has been before observed, are
obviously less frequent and less severe, in Egypt and Turkey, than they were in
former ages. This remark I believe to be new, but it is a fact; and this
mitigation corresponds in time with the disappearance of the disease in the
healthy parts of Europe. From this circumstance, I conclude that this change is
the effect of some general cause, in the state of the elements.

This opinion may derive great strength, from revolutions or changes in the
natural world, analagous to that in the character of epidemic diseases.

It is generally supposed by philosophers, that earthquakes are less frequent
and violent, in modern days, that in the first centuries after the Christian
era, and the imperfect survey I have taken of their history, gives me reason to
believe the opinion well founded.

The eruption of volcanoes is very often suspended for a long period. Etna was
quiet about forty-five years, at the beginning of the present century. The
volcanic mountain in Teneriffe, which had been quiet ever since the year 1704,
again discharged its fires in August last -- after a suspension of ninety-four
years. There are other volcanic mountains that have slumbered for many
centuries, as Lipari, near Sicily.

The aurora borealis has its revolutions. Sometimes it disappears for half a
century or more; then returns, and frequently illuminates the heavens.

The seasons, on a smaller scale, manifest analagous revolutions. At certain
periods, we have mild winters; very little frost and snow, with southerly
winds, for a series of years. Then we have a number of long, severely cold
winters in succession, with violent tempests, deep snow, and perpetual north
westerly winds. No less various are our summers, as to heat and moisture.

The vegetable kingdom exhibits similar changes, for which no visible cause can
be assigned. When our ancestors first settled Massachusetts, they raised wheat
on the eastern coast, in the countries of Plymouth, Middlesex and Essex; but in
the year 1664 mildew appeared for the first time to injure that useful article,
and since that time, it has not been possible to raise wheat, within a
considerable distance from the sea shore.

It is related by the French that wheat had not been known to mildew in France,
until the year 1550.

Van Helmont, p. 1093. In 1770, the potatoe plant, in a particular part of
Scotland, was attacked by a disease which was new; and it has since been
spreading. A similar fact is related of the oats in some parts of the same
country, in 1775. These diseases, for they are really such among vegetables,
are new, and as far as they extend, they are a serious calamity. They are the
pestilences incident to vegetable life; which, like diseases among men, spring
up and disappear, without any certain causes which are within our
comprehension. It is customary to ascribe such phenomena to the seasons; but it
would be difficult to find any visible or comprehensible qualities in the
particular seasons, producing such diseases among vegetables, which had not
characterized innumerable seasons in former years, which produced no such
effects.

The death of prim and black thorn in our country, is a similar phenomenon.

Sometimes a new species of tree will spring up spontaneously and gradually
spread, where none ever grew before. The pine has thus introduced itself into
Duxborough in Massachusetts, within the present century. Not twenty years ago,
a man was living there who remembered the first white pine that ever grew in
that town: but now one eighth part of the woodland is covered with it.

Hist. Col. vol. 2. 5. The animal world displays similar changes and
revolutions. We observe, not only uncommon numbers of common insects or small
animals, in particular years, for which we can assign no specific cause; but we
actually see certain new species of insects, and at times, known insects grow
to an uncommon size. Instances of the latter phenomenon have occurred in the
locusts, in the frog-kind, and in flies. The flies about Plymouth in 1633, and
about New London, the last summer, are described, as being not only
distinguishable for their numbers, but for their size. Ancient authors have
remarked the same phenomenon.

The millions of worms which spread over many hundred miles of territory in
America in 1770, can no more be accounted for, than the sudor Anglicus, or any
other new form of disease.

The insect, which about twenty years ago, first appeared among the wheat, on
Staten-Island, and which has continued to multiply, and essentially injure the
crops, over a great extent of country, is unquestionably a non-descript as to
America; a new form of animal life. Men are ever fond of propagating
conjectures and vulgar tales for truth. The idle story which imported this
insect from Germany, and gave it the name of Hessian fly, has been proved, by
careful enquiries, to be mere conjecture; no such animal being known in
Germany. Yet it has laid the foundation of a durable error in natural history.
So ^^nd are mankind of this vulgar prejudice, of imputing all their evils to
others, that even insects must, like plague, be imported!

This insect is doubtless a new species of animal; it is one of those varieties
which nature is continually exhibiting, in the immensity of her operations; it
is a distemper incident to that particular plant, and others perhaps in a less
degree, which, like the sudor anglicus may endure for half a century, and then
disappear; or it may be derived, from permanent causes, and destined, for a
longer time, to annoy that species of vegetable life, like the mildew on the
same plant, on the maritime borders of Massachusetts and New Hampshire. The
mammoth of Siberia and America, whose enormous bones are seen in our museums,
and whose race is supposed to be extinct, may be another instance of perpetual
revolution in the works of nature.

The lofty pine, the glory of the forest, covers immense tracts of our native
wilderness; but when cut down, is not propagated from the roots or stump, like
most other trees. Yet I am told that in Carolina, whenever the lands are
cleared of the native woods the young growth consists mostly of pines, tho far
from any of that species of tree. Similar changes in the species of trees, are
observed on the clearing of lands in other parts of America.

So also, on clearing our lands, in every part of America, the soil is soon
covered with a full crop of white clover, of spontaneous origin.

These productions are usually ascribed to the seeds of the plant, scattered by
birds, which lie inert, while covered with shade and leaves, and germinate on
the access of the solar rays. This solution is conjectural; it is, like the
importation of the fomes of epidemic diseases, founded on mere supposition; it
is the resort of careless, superficial observers, who will not take the pains
to extend their views over the works of nature. Do birds convey the seeds of
pine and of clover and spread them over hundreds of miles of the wilderness?
Have these seeds been all scattered within a few years? Or will the seeds
endure the frost, the rain and the heat of ages, without perishing or
germinating? Besides, birds feed on the seeds of other grasses and plants, as
well as those of white clover. Why are these not spead over our woods in the
same manner?

The phenomena of the forests in America preclude the probability, or rather
the possibility of such events. The new plants that spring up, are generated by
new powers in the elements, occasioned by different combinations of heat,
moisture and air, introduced by the labors of man; combinations which could not
exist while the ground was clothed with trees of other species.

Plants are furnished with seeds for the purpose of propagation. This wise
provision of a beneficent providence, is highly useful to man, and to animals
which subsist on the seeds. But seeds are not necessary to the production of
plants, in all climates. Every vegetable has some spot on the globe, where it
is indigenous, where it was originally produced without seed; and where it will
best thrive, and grow to the highest state of perfection. Such was the origin
of most of the plants now known to man. The principles of animal and vegetable
life were cotemporary with the formation of the earth. New species are
generated only by those gradual alterations visible in the operations of
nature, or by accidental changes, induced by extrinsic and artificial causes.

Animals are also produced very often without any parent, but the elements.
Hear what is recorded by that accurate observer, Dr. Lind, on the diseases of
hot climates, p. 208. "It is a phenomenon incontestibly true, that in
stagnating pools of water at Bombay, produced solely by the rains, and which
have no communication with any river or the sea, living fish are generated;
many persons have eaten of them. Upon the drying up of the pools, they die and
frequently are very offensive."

I have not the least doubt of this fact; and it is on this principle only that
we can account for the existence of fish of various kinds, eels, etc. in brooks
and ponds, on the tops of hills, above impassible falls; and in lakes which
have no outlet. And we prove the generation of such animals in the places where
they exist, not only by the impracticability of their finding a passage to such
situations; but by the fact, that many species of them are never found in salt
water, and probably could not exist in it. Any person may be convinced of the
utter impossibility of fish's making their way to the heads of many small
streams, where they are found, by examining innumerable such streams on our
mountains, which are full of trout and other small fish, above perpendicular
falls among solid rocks, of 50 or 100 feet in height.

The truth is, the elements of air and water are fitted to produce animals of
the kinds proper to subsist in them; and so are plants. Not a vegetable in the
field is found without its worm, its fly or other insect, which it generates or
feeds; and the animal when peculiar to a plant, has the color and the
properties of that plant. Not a species of vegetable or animal matter, exposed
to a suitable degree of heat and moisture, which does not produce its insect.
Even living animals are not an exception. Are not the large worms, formed in
the human stomach, possessed of animal life? And are they produced by a germ
deposited by an animal of the same kind? Not at all; the supposition is
ridiculous. They are a disease, caused by the operation of heat and moisture,
on substances in debilitated stomachs, which fail to perform the usual
digestive functions. This is the common theory; some persons suppose them not a
disease, but a part of the animal economy, necessary to full health. This
however makes no difference, as to the manner of their production.
All animals and plants have their diseases; and the mildew on wheat, and the
scar on vines, are probably the effect of the defective energies of the
elements, and a consequent defective process in the vegetable functions; or of
infects which are the produce of the irregular operations of the elements.

In the year 1788 a horse was publicly exhibited in Philadelphia, with a living
animal, of the worm species, in his eye. See Museum, vol. 3. 500. A worm of
three inches in circumference and 20 inches in length was found in the liver of
Mrs. Holt of Philadelphia. Ibm. When these facts are known and acknowledged,
will men still be found to deny the doctrine of equivocal generation? Worms are
often generated in the small ulcers on ^he surface of the body produced by
pestilence. Such is the power of excitement.

All creation is full of these varieties. Even the stellary regions exhibit new
stars, either stationary or revolving, which are visible for a longer or
shorter time, and then recede from human view. Other luminous appearances,
resembling a lamp, a spear, a beam, are often observed, for which we can assign
no cause. The new stars may be revolving bodies, which appear to us only in a
particular part of their orbits; but other singular celestial appearances are
doubtless mere variations in the forms of the element of fire.

The fish in the ocean are subject to the same revolutionary laws. They often
abandon the banks where they have appeared for centuries, and appear in places
where they were never before known. They are subject to epidemic maladies, as
much as men or cattle; they often sicken and die, and sometimes it appears that
the whole species, frequenting a particular bank, is suddenly extinguished.

The changes in the diseases of men; all the phenomena of epidemics, in their
origin and disappearance, their increased violence and novelty of symptoms, are
the effects of similar alterations in the elements which compose the system. We
are but one species of animals, whose bodies are composed of the same
materials, and subject to the same laws, as the bodies of all other animals.
Animal and vegetable substances are also composed of the same elements,
variously combined; they are simply varieties in the forms of matter endowed
with life. And the intellectual endowments of man, with all his boasted
pre-eminence, cannot exempt him from the operation of the general laws which
govern every other form or combination of the elements.

NOTE, On the Venereal Disease.
I AM really surprised to observe with what pertinacious obstinacy, men
persist, in face of the most incontestible evidence, upon fathering great evils
and calamities on others. The description of Adam's casting the blame of his
sin on Eve, and Eve's charging the whole to Satan, had it been intended to
illustrate the practice of tracing diseases to a foreign country, could not
have been a more exact representation of the fact, and of the disposition of
men to shift off, not only crimes, but even moral and political evils, and cast
them on their neighbors. Every nation and every man conjures up a devil, to
which all that is evil and dishonorable is to be imputed. Pope has well
described this disposition: --

"No creature owns it in the first degree,
But thinks his neighbor farther gone than he;
Even those who dwell beneath its very zone,
Or never feel the rage or never own."
The people in the north of Europe maintain most strenuously that the plague
never originates in their countries. Mead even affirms that the measles, as
well as smallpox, had its origin in Egypt.

The inhabitants of Egypt declare that the plague does not originate in their
country, but is always imported from the north, as Constantinople, Sm^^na,
Greece or Syria; or from the Barbary coast; and this silly notion is actually
believed and circulated by most reputable travelers. The inhabitants of
Constantinople, I believe, admit that the plague may originate in that city;
but it is believed by many persons that this disease does not originate there;
and they trace it to Egypt. Many Europeans have adopted this opinion.

In Smyrna, Syria, Cyprus, and all parts of Europe, the plague is ascribed to
foreign countries. In Algiers, Fez and all along the Barbary coast, the plague
is held to be imported from Egypt or Constantinople: It is immaterial which;
the great point being to shift off the origin upon neighbors.

Just so in America; it is not admitted by a great portion of people, that the
climate can generate a pestilence. The yellow fever which is the plague of the
country, is, in popular opinion, always imported from the West Indies. When we
go to the West Indies and enquire for the origin of this disease, we are told
very gravely, that it does not originate there; it comes from Siam and Bulam;
and books are written by able physicians to prove the disease imported.

If then we believe the opinion of the inhabitants of any given country, and
their own story to be just, we shall prove that the plague and yellow fever are
generated in no country on earth. "But where the extreme of vice was never
agreed;
Ask where is the north? at York, it is on the Tweed;
In Scotland, at the Orcades; and there,
At Greenland, Zembla, or the Lord knows where."
Essay on Man, II. 221.
There is something extremely laughable in these facts; but to philosophy, to
medical science and national candor, they are as disgraceful as they are
prejudicial. My enquiry into the histories of these diseases, has demonstrated
to my mind, that most pestilential diseases have originated, where they
existed; and no one of them will spread or exist long, in an atmosphere in
which it will not originate.

The smallpox does not usually spread without infection; but I can prove, by
many instances, that it does originate, in sporadic cases, without infection.
In South-America, it spreads and becomes epidemic, in certain periods, then
totally disappears.

Ulloa, book 6. The venereal disease appears to be propagated solely by
infection. It must however have originated at first without infection; and may
still, for aught we know, originate in the same manner.

But the attempt of physicians to palm this disease on the natives of America,
is a most gross and abominable attack on truth, persevered in against the
plainest and most indubitable evidence. In the annals of England, there is the
clearest proof of the existence of that disease, in the twelfth century; and it
was the subject of legal provisions as early as the year 1162, which laws are
still extant, and were then only a renewal of those which were still more
ancient.

In the reco^ds of the Lordship of Winchester, there are many regulations (...)
the stews which were authorized to be kept in Southwa^^; one of which expressly
prohibits any "stew-holder to keep any woman, that has the perilous infirmity
of (Brenning) burning. Burning is a modern orthography; the ancient was brent,
brenning. So Chaucer wrote it. Canterbury Tales, 2427, and in other passages.

"The fires brent upon the auter bright,
That it began all the temple for to light."



In a book written from a manuscript about 1430, in possession of the bishop of
Winchester, one article begins thus; "de his qui custodiunt mulieres habentes
nephandam infirmitatem;" it goes on "item, That no stew-holder keep no woman
within his house that has any sickness of brenning, but that she be put out,
upon the pain of make it a fine into the Lord of a hundred shylings."

That this was a common disease appears from the frequent mention of it in
those records; and that it was the same disease, now called venereal, appears
from the description of it given by Arden, physician to Richard II. and Henry
IV. between 1377 and 1413; who speaks of it as a "certain inward heat and
excoriation of the urethra."

This disease was called a burning and went by that name, till the middle of
the 16th century.

See Philosophical Transactions, No. 357. Baddam's Memoirs, vol. 6. 390. It is
asserted by European authors that this disease was prevalent among the natives
of America, when the Spaniards first visited the country. I cannot controvert
the assertion, for I do not possess the original Spanish histories of their
first voyages. But it is possible this may have been true. It is somewhat
strange however, if that disease was formerly very prevalent among the natives,
that in modern times, it should hardly be known among them. Ulloa, in his
voyage to South-America, book 6, declares that the "venereal distemper is
seldom known among the natives," although so common among the Spaniards as to have
lost the infamy attached to it in other countries. These remarks on the origin
of diseases proceed solely from my love of truth and sound philosophy. I am no
more anxious to exonerate the savages of America from the charge of
communicating the lues venerea to Europeans; than I am to vindicate Egypt from
the charge of originating all the plagues that have desolated Europe. It is my
wish to prostrate that system of error respecting the origin of pestilential
diseases, which disgraces modern days.

The following remark is of less consequence. The British Dictionaries define
the word Buccaniers by "Pirates of America or American Pirates." But names lead
to error. The buccaniers were all originally Europeans, French and English, who
committed piracies in the West Indies and Spanish America. Encyclopedia art.
Buccanier. Thus the name "Hessian fly" given in this country to a mischievous
insect, is the offspring of ignorance and the parent of a material error in
common opinion.




See also book 5. chapter 6. The smallpox has been supposed to have originated in
Egypt or Arabia, and to have been propagated over the world by specific
contagion. But the smallpox, although we know not the time or place of its first
appearance, is only a new form of that class of diseases called, exanthemata,
or eruptive. It is the produce of a revolution in disease, and now originates
any where and every where, without contagion.

With respect to the origin of the lues venerea, we are left in the dark, as we
are with respect to the smallpox. It is agreed on all hands that none of the
Greek and Roman writers on medicin, have described the disease. But there is
not a shadow of doubt that a species of this disease existed in England as
early as the Norman conquest; and probably in the other countries of Europe.
Not a medical work of that period, if any was written in the west of Europe,
has survived the ravages of time; and we are indebted to the legal
establishment of stews in Southwark, for the evidence of the existence of that
disease.

It is however not at all improbable that about the year 1496, this disease
might have acquired some new and malignant symptoms, and spread with a fatal
rapidity, that might alarm mankind and render the distemper more an object of
notice. Antecedent to that period, it might have been much more mild and less
destructive. This idea is greatly strengthened by the known fact that other
diseases had, about the same time undergone similar changes. It was but about
ten years before, that the plague took the sweating form -- an event as novel,
as the generation of a new disease. What is more remarkable; in the very year
assigned for the appearance of the lues venerea, an epidemic leprosy overran
Germany; an event equally novel. These facts confirm my ideas of certain
revolutions in the symptoms of diseases, corresponding with material changes in
climate or modes of life.

CONCLUSION, Addressed to the learned Societies, in America, Europe and Asia.
THE preceding history of Epidemic diseases was undertaken solely from a desire
of investigating the truth, respecting the origin and phenomena of these
terrible scourges of the human race. When the pestilence appeared in the United
States in 1791 and 93, I had not a suspicion that the popular doctrins
respecting contagion, are not well founded. The frequent recurrence of the
disease in subsequent years, in opposition to all the best efforts of health
officers, in executing rigid laws of quarantine, had, in 1795, shaken my
confidence in those doctrins. My investigations in that and the next year,
convinced me that the pestilential fever which has visited so many parts of
America, is generated in the country; but still I had not the least suspicion
of a connection between epidemic diseases. The investigations of the year past,
have resulted in unfolding p^^nciples and facts to me altogether new and
surprising; they cannot therefore be ascribed to a wish to establish a
preconceived theory.

These results not only confirm my suspicions that the pestilence of America is
of domestic origin, but they overthrow the preconceived system of the origin of
pestilence, in temperate latitudes, from fomes conveyed to those climates from
southern regions; and demonstrate that it originates occasionally in all
latitudes from the 25th to the 65th.

It is demonstrated that pestilence, in temperate latitudes, is never an
isolated epidemic, but the crisis of a series of epidemics; and we are
furnished with the means of determining unequivocally the character of
pestilence in every case, on the following simple principles.

"If, on the appearance of pestilence in a particular place, all other diseases
cease, or take some of its predominant symptoms, that pestilence is generated
in that place, and dependent on the state of the elements."

It is impossible, on physical laws, that this criterion should ever fail.

Another criterion, almost infallible, is the prevalence of certain diseases
before and after the pestilence. If pestilence is immediately preceded by
measles, affections of the throat, inflammatory or typhus fevers with anomalous
symptoms, and especially by catarrh, that pestilence is an epidemic, produced
on the spot, and only the autumnal form of disease -- the other diseases,
preceding and following, being the vernal and hybernal forms, produced by the
same general principle.

Of the pestilences which afflict mankind, in all climates, an immense
proportion, probably nineteen twentieths, belong to this species -- they are
epidemics, beginning and ending at the command of the elements, under the
cooperating influence of seasons and local causes.

These epidemic pestilences are more or less infectious, according to their
violence, or the places where they exist. In close rooms and narrow alleys they
are dangerous; hence their mortality in fleets, camps, jails, and particular
parts of cities. But the infection of such diseases extends to the distance of
a few feet only, and is capable of dissipation in a free air, so as to reduce
the danger of attending the sick almost to nothing. The same is true of
diseases of mere infection, not epidemic.

Diseases, dependent on infection only, are sometimes introduced into cities
and hospitals, and occasion considerable mortality. But they are propagated by
contact or near approach only, and do not affect the character of other
diseases current in the place.

The consequence resulting from these principles is, that epidemic pestilence
is not under human control -- but diseases propagated by mere infection may be
arrested and subdued.

The only means of avoiding or mitigating epidemic pestilence are first to
withdraw the aid of local causes; secondly to fit the body, by modes of living,
to resist its causes -- and thirdly, on failure of these, to remove from the
place where its exists.

The infection of all diseases, even those of specific contagion, as smallpox
and measles, may be avoided by keeping at a distance from the diseased. The
infection of diseases not specifically contagious, as plague, yellow-fever,
dysentery and jail fever, may be nearly destroyed by free air, and cleanliness.

With respect to the primary causes of epidemic diseases, we are in the dark;
but we are certain, from all history and modern observations, that the causes
of epidemic diseases among the human race, affect every species of animal and
vegetable life.

The opinions which I have suggested concerning the general cause, seem to have
a foundation in the coincidence of epidemic diseases with numerous electrical
phenomena. At the same time, the reader will consider these opinions rather as
conjectural, than positive. No certain conclusions can be drawn from an
interrupted and imperfect series of facts. More materials are necessary to
enable us to erect a theory of epidemics which shall deserve full confidence.

The common doctrine of contagion is utterly insufficient and unphilosophical;
for if admitted, it never leads us nearer to the cause. If we trace the yellow
fever to the West Indies, and the plague to Egypt or Constantinople, we are not
an inch nearer to the source; for these diseases are not always to be found in
those countries; and the people there are as much puzzled to find the source of
them, as the people of Great Britain or America.

If we trace these diseases to the coast of Africa, or to Siam, we are as
distant as ever from the source; for many times, the diseases are not to be
found in those countries, and seldom indeed are they ever found within the
tropics, except among foreigners.

Indeed nothing is more common than for the yellow fever to be imported into
the West Indies in vessels from the United States. When vessels from northern
latitudes have long passages, it often happens that seamen are seized with the
disease, before they arrive at the islands; and the West-Indians may often
allege the disease to be imported in such vessels, when it does not exist in
the United States.

In short, the doctrine of deriving all pestilential diseases from contagion or
infection, were it not for the immense mischief it does to society, would not
deserve a serious refutation. Infection is a subordinate cause of the
propagating of malignant distempers; but is itself an effect of some more
general cause, whose force is a hundred fold more powerful and formidable than
that of infection. I have, in condescension to popular opinion, stated the
evidence of the domestic origin of the bilious plague, as it stands on the
arrival or non-arrival of vessels, and other facts of that kind. But I really
consider all this evidence as trifling, when compared with the phenomena of the
disease itself and its precursors and attendants. The uniform appearance of
other epidemics, as introductory to pestilence, and manifesting an essential
change in the atmosphere, with the numerous accompaniments of the plague and
yellow fever, amounts to evidence of domestic origin, which leaves no room for
cavil or controversy.

For the purpose of collecting facts, the only safe foundation of principles,
and comparing the phenomena of diseases and the elements, which occur nearly at
the same time, in different countries, I sincerely wish and request that all
medical and philosophical societies would undertake to register facts and
reciprocally to communicate them, by means of a general correspondence. The
facts to be registered might be comprised under the following heads.

The time of the appearance and disappearance of any epidemic disease, with its
general history.

The places where it first occurs to be described, in regard to land and water,
height of the land, construction of the city or streets, position as to points
of compass, woods, morasses, etc. The classes of people most generally affected.

The general state of the seasons, as to heat, and cold, drouth and moisture.

The time of earthquakes, meteors, lumen boreale, and all singular celestial
appearances -- with unusual tempests, especially when accompanied with hail --
all compared with the lunar phenomena.

The appearance of unusual insects of all kinds, and any circumstance attending
them.

Diseases among cattle, sheep and other animals.

Sickness and death of fish of all kinds.

Volcanic eruptions, with the phenomena preceding, attending and following them.

For the purpose of ascertaining the lunar influence on the human body, or any
diurnal influence, it would be desirable that medical gentlemen should note the
days and the hours of the day when persons are seized with particular diseases
-- especially epidemics -- the hours of exacerbation and of paroxisms in fever
-- the hours which are most fatal to the diseased -- and the time when
convalescents are most apt to relapse. -- These facts should be compared with
the position of the moon, in her orbit, and especially in regard to her perigee
and apogee; conjunction and opposition; as also with the tides in the main
ocean. The time of high and low water in rivers and bays may not be the true
time, in the open sea -- or of the greatest and least influence of the moon.


Should the principles unfolded in the preceding work prove to be well founded,
they will lead to many important practical inferences.

I. If pestilential fevers never appear in the temperate latitudes, without
certain precursors, men will, with careful observations, be enabled to foresee
the danger and prepare for it; or to use uncommon diligence in removing the
subordinate local causes.

II. If in certain years pestilential fevers are more predominant, than in
others; and the condition of the elements fitted to produce them, is universal
over sea and land, the fact is of no small moment in maritime affairs. Double
precautions will be taken in fleets, and in merchantmen bound on long voyages.

III. If pestilence is progressive and first manifested in certain malignant
fevers, the fact may be of great utility to large cities. The approach may be
perceived in time to save the inhabitants by flight, if not by other
precautions.

IV. If no plague or yellow fever ever appeared in temperate climates, unless
announced by other distempers, the magistracy may be enabled to distinguish
when there is danger, and when not; and may avoid innumerable vexations to
commerce, arising from the rigid execution of health laws, when there is not
the least occasion.

V. But a most important use to be made of the facts here collected, will be,
to guard public health from the ill effects of bad provisions. If, in
pestilential periods, salt is less efficacious in preserving flesh, and by
means of a greater fermentation of the juices, fish and flesh are more readily
dissolved by a putrefactive process, more caution will be found necessary in
packing and repacking them, and more care to avoid using it in a bad state.

If the effluvia of dissolving flesh and vegetables are more poisonous and
prejudicial to health at some times, than at others, it is of importance that,
on every such occasion, early notice should be given of the danger.

If animals, which constitute a part of the food of men, are subject to
epidemic distempers, they cannot be eaten with safety, while affected by
disease. When fish or fowls are sickly and many of them die, or become lean,
the fact should be ascertained by the faculty or a board of health, and public
notice should be given, that people might avoid using them as food. In some
instances, fish are so sickly as to excite nausea; in which case the use of
them should be forbidden.

I will close this treatise with the following reflections.

In the construction of the universe, we observe every part of the system to be
governed by uniform laws, adapted, with infinite skill, to preserve harmony and
order. Limited as our understandings are, we can discover many of these laws,
which are calculated to impress on our minds the most sublime ideas of the
universal intelligence and wisdom of their Great Author.

The existence of natural and moral evils has led skeptics to question the
perfections of the author of nature. But doubts on this subject argue want of
knowledge or want of candor. It is extremely evident that all the necessary
evils of the system are calculated to produce good. The operation of that
universal principle of light, heat and fire, which pervades our system, and
which is incessantly compounding and decompounding the other more sluggish
materials of the earth and atmosphere, are essential to the vicissitudes of the
seasons, rain, snow, hail and dew, which are necessary to preserve the
principles of animal and vegetable life. Storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions, however inconvenient to men at particular times and places,
are among the means of giving to the principles of life, more equal
distribution, and of renewing their energies.

Epidemic diseases are some of the necessary effects of the general laws that
govern the universe. But they have also a final cause of immense value to the
human race. They are destined and calculated to answer most important moral and
religious purposes.

Men, with their present nature, under a constant course of prosperity, would
degenerate into devils or brutes. Uninterrupted ease and quiet contract the
heart and steel it against emotions of sensibility -- the man rushes into vices
and crimes, or sinks into sloth. So often have I seen the hearts of men
depraved and their moral character debased, by sudden prosperity, that I am
persuaded the world, without frequent inflictions of pain and distress, would
not be habitable. The natural evils that surround us, intermingled with
innumerable blessings, preserve the mind in perpetual vigor, in seeking the
means of protection; they lay the foundation for the exercise of the finest
feelings of the human heart, compassion and benevolence, which are the sources
of social virtue; they humble the pride and arrogance of man, by creating in
his mind a perpetual dependence on divine power; in short, they create and
preserve that sense of obligation and accountability to God which is the germ
of piety, and moral excellence.

ADDENDA.
Of the Lunar Influence.
IT is a well known fact that the moon has a great influence on the elements of
this globe, the effects of which are very visible in the vicissitudes of
weather. This influence is supposed to be the principal regulator of the tides,
and the efficient cause of the changes in the atmosphere, which produce rain,
hail, snow and wind. It is believed also to affect the growth of plants, and
Pliny, followed by St. Pierre, alleges that the lunar rays dissolve snow and
ice. Popular opinion considers the moon as exerting a powerful influence on
animal substances, and it is an incontrovertible fact that its beams accelerate
the putrefaction of flesh and fish. Fishermen and sailors can all attest this
fact, and it coincides with what Pliny asserts. Not. Hist. lib. 2. 101. "Id
manifestum esse, quod ferarum occisa corpora in tabem viso suo resolvat." St.
Pierre affirms that the moon melts ice, and relies on the passage of Pliny in
the chapter cited, "glaciem refundat" -- but it is questionable whether the
passage will bear that construction; and if it will, the assertion of Pliny is
not supported by modern observations. See Studies of Nature, Vol. 1. Expl. of
the plates, p. 69. Ice is diminished by evaporation in moon light, without
forming water.
Moon light dissolves or corrupts the flesh of animals that are killed; it
renders sound fish soft in a few hours, and fishermen are careful to cover from
its rays the fish they have caught. It probably acts upon flesh by stimilus,
exciting a fermentation in the juices.

The Newtonian theory of tides, which explains the phenomena by lunar
attraction, has been recently called in question and warmly opposed by the
ingenious St. Pierre, in his studies of nature, who substitutes a scheme of his
own, which ascribes the tides to the diurnal effusions of the polar ices. I am
charmed with the writings of St. Pierre, which have opened a new and
entertaining volume of the works of nature. But his theory of tides seems to
manifest none of that ingenuity, which is conspicuous in other parts of his
writings, and is utterly unsatisfactory.

In the first place, during six months or more, in each polar region, no snow
or ice is melted, unless by the moon. The sun is below the horizon, and the
moon's influence, if it dissolves snow and ice according to Pliny, evaporates
all the water produced. This is a fact that accords with modern experiments,
that ice in the night, however cold, loses a part of its weight, but it is by
insensible evaporation.

To remove this difficulty, St. Pierre supposes the tides in one polar region
to be the effect of the melting of snow and ice, in the opposite polar regions.
But to this hypothesis we may oppose an insuperable objection, derived from the
great and universal laws of equilibrium, observed by water. A diurnal wave or
elevation would inevitably subside into a level, before it could reach the
equator, or even the temperate latitudes. Besides the Atlantic is of very
various breadth, in different latitudes. Between the coast of Brazil and Terra
Firma on one side and Africa on the other, the breadth is scarcely half as
great, as in the latitude of 25 degrees. north. A diurnal wave compressed and
dilated, in these different situations, must exhibit the tides in one place,
twice as high as in another; but in the regions mentioned, this is not the fact.

There are many of the phenomena of the tides which cannot be explained on St.
Pierre's hypothesis; but the foregoing remarks are sufficient for my present
purpose. The tides doubtless depend on lunar and solar influence; but the
phenomena cannot be solved on the common theory of attraction. In this respect,
I am confident the Newtonian theory, as explained by Kepler and others is as
inadequate, as that of St. Pierre. The latter author has enumerated some
insuperable objections to that theory, to which the reader is referred. But I
have other observations to make on this subject, which are probably new.

The manner in which astronomers have attempted to explain the opposite tides,
is as follows. "The power of gravity diminishes as the square of the distance
increases -- therefore the waters on the side of the earth next to the moon,
are more attracted than the central parts of the earth; and the central parts
are more attracted by the moon than the waters on the opposite side of the
earth -- therefore the distance between the earth's center and the waters on
its surface, under and opposite to the moon, will be increased. The earth by
its gravity falls toward the moon -- the water directly below the moon rises
and swells toward her -- the water on the opposite side recedes from the
center and rises -- or strictly speaking, the center recedes from the water. On
the sides of the earth between the points under and opposite to the moon, the
water is depressed and falls below the former level."

See Fergusons's Astronony, on the Tides, and Encyclopedia, Art. Astronomy,
363. As I am not about engaging in astronomical or mathematical calculations, I
shall content myself with stating these general principles of Newton, Kepler,
and later astronomers, with a few objections.

I. This theory does not explain, in a satisfactory manner, the reason why
there are no tides in lakes and Mediterranean seas.

If the principle is just, that the earth recedes from the water opposite to
the moon, leaving the surface of it at a greater distance from the center, why,
when the Euxine or Mediterranean is opposite to the moon, does not the earth
beneath these seas, recede from their waters, as well as from the waters of the
ocean, in the same longitude? The earth consists of solid substances, and by
the laws of attraction, must, in all its parts, be moved equally, under the
same circumstances of distance from the attracting body and density, or solid
contents. To suppose the earth, when covered by an ocean, to be attracted by
the moon, and not when covered by a lake or arm of the ocean, is, in my view,
neither logic nor philosophy.

Nor is the reason assigned for the defect of tides in lakes and seas, on the
side next to the moon, in the least satisfactory. It is found in the
Encyclopedia in these words. "There are no tides in lakes because they are
generally so small, that when the moon is vertical she attracts every part of
them alike, and therefore by rendering all the water equally light, no part of
it can be raised higher than another."

But this explanation does not meet the difficulty. The Newtonian theory stands
on the hypothesis that the waters on the side of the earth next to the moon,
are more strongly attracted than the adjacent land; therefore they rise above
several feet of the earth. But the solution above recited does not reach this
point; for the waters of the ocean rise higher than the contiguous earth; but
the waters of lakes always observe the same relative altitude on their shores.
If then the moon attracts the waters of lakes at all, or occasions them to
rise, it attracts the adjoining earth and raises it in the same degree as the
waters; but in regard to the ocean, it attracts the water and leaves the
contiguous earth behind. In short, if attraction and gravity have uniform laws,
as we must believe they have, the attraction of the moon will not account for
tides in the ocean, while there are none in lakes and inland seas.

II. If the moon's attraction is the cause of tides, why is its force much less
in the equatorial regions, than in the distant parts of the globe? It is a well
known fact, that the tides within the tropics are very small, and that they are
more considerable as we recede from the equator toward the poles. This is
contrary to what ought to be the case, on the principles of attraction; for on
the Newtonian theory of gravity, the highest tides should be on the parts of
the earth nearest to the moon. The reverse of this is the case, and the
circumpolar regions of the earth have the highest tides. The tides within the
tropics are from 12 to 24 inches -- in the latitude of Greenland, almost as
many feet.

III. The theory of Newton is not reconcilable with his own principles of
gravity, which suppose the force of it to be equal to the quantity of matter
contained in bodies. Now the theory implies that on the side of the earth next
to the moon, the water is attracted more than the earth; but on the opposite
side, less. This cannot be solved on the principle of distance; for this is too
small to account for a hundredth part of the effect. Indeed the water and the
land on the shore, may be considered as at the same distance.

Nor can it be solved on the principle of a difference in the quantity of
matter, in earth and water. If the earth, having more density and matter, is
most attracted, the principle must act uniformly on both sides of the earth --
on both sides, the earth must move toward the moon further than the water,
which is contrary to fact.

If the water has most matter, the same principle must govern it on both sides
of the earth, and move it farthest toward the moon.

But here the principles of cohesion interfere with all these deductions. These
principles are so powerful, as to overcome the attraction of a distant body,
nor is it to be supposed that the power of the moon overcomes the force of
cohesion, and by attracting the parts of the earth next to it more than the
parts on the opposite side, changes the form of the earth from a sphere to a
spheroid. It is not supposed that the whole solid mass of the earth is
continually changing its figure by means of lunar attraction. If so, this
figure must be rotatory.

The theory then supposes that on the side next to the moon, the water is most
strongly attracted and rises above the earth -- but on the side opposite, it is
attracted less than the earth. The solid globe is moved toward the moon, and
the water left lagging behind! What is more singular, the earth near the
equator, on the side opposite, is drawn only two feet further toward the moon
than the water, or perhaps but one foot; while in the temperate latitudes, it
is drawn six or eight feet, and in the latitudes of 60 and 70 degrees, fifteen,
eighteen, and twenty-five feet further than the water. This may be philosophy,
but to me it is utterly unintelligible!

Nothing is a more serious misfortune to science, than the errors of a great
man. Most of mankind take principles and facts upon trust, and defend them with
a zeal proportioned to their confidence in the man who has published them. I
revere the character of Newton, of Kepler and of Haller; but this veneration
does not in the least incline me to receive their doctrins without being
convinced that they are well founded. After most careful investigation, I am
satisfied, that the principles of attraction, will not account for the tides
opposite to the moon, nor for the difference between the height of the tides in
different latitudes. Yet I have not the least doubt, that most of the phenomena
of tides are regulated by the moon.

If I was asked, on what principles the tides depend, my answer would be, I do
not know. But numerous facts, all concurring to the same point, lead me to
suspect the vibrations of the ocean to depend on electricity, influenced by the
moon, the sun, or other distant orbs, and acting by repulsion as well as
attraction; or by increasing and diminishing the elasticity of the water.

In the first place, it is agreed among philosophers, that the air, when free
from vapor, is an electric; that when cold, it is most electric, and when
heated, it becomes a conductor; and consequently that the atmosphere in the
torrid zone is always in a conducting state, while the air of the northern
regions, if clear, is an electric. In short, it is agreed that the atmosphere
of the temperate and frigid zones contains more electricity, than that of the
torrid zone.

These facts correspond with the phenomena of tides. In the regions, where
there is the least electricity, there is the least intumescence of the ocean --
those are the equatorial regions. There, the temperature of the air also
sustains very small variations; so does the height of the ocean. As we recede
from the equator cold and electricity increase; so does the elevation of the
tides.

Again, the same train of phenomena attend the barometer. Within the tropics,
the variations of the mercury in this instrument, are very small; but in the
temperate and cold regions, they are more considerable, and increase as we
recede from a warm to a cold and electric atmosphere.

Similar phenomena attend the twilight. Within the tropics, the twilight is of
much less duration, than in cold regions. "Heat, say philosophers, diminishes
the air's refractive power and density, and cold increases both. The horizontal
refractions are near one third less at the equator, than at Paris."

Ferguson's Astron. 97. The density of the atmosphere, within the tropics, may
be less than at the polar circle; but the weight is nearly the same, the
barometer being in general as high at the equator, as in northern latitudes.
But the air, in hot climates, has less powers of refraction; that is, there is
more power of refraction in an atmosphere that is most perfectly electric, or
that contains most electricity.

It is remarkable also that, in equatorial climates, the atmosphere exhibits no
visible streams of electricity; as it does in the polar circles.

I know not how far this parallel may be extended; but there is a surprising
resemblance between all these phenomena. In general then we observe that in the
equatorial regions, the density, weight, elasticity and temperature of the
atmosphere, are more nearly uniform, than in northern climates; and the
elevation of the ocean in tides corresponds with this uniformity. As we recede
from the equator, the variations of the atmosphere increase, and so do the
variations in the height and depression of the water.

From these phenomena a suspicion arises, that the medium by which the moon and
sun act upon the ocean, is the electrical fluid; as their influence appears to
be in proportion to the electricity of the atmosphere. Hence the highest tides
at a distance from the equator, where the heat and cold and elasticity of the
air are subject to great variations.

By what law, it will be asked, is this effect produced? I readily confess my
ignorance. But the phenomena of opposite tides seem to bear a great affinity to
the well known laws of electricity, attraction and repulsion, and a positive
and negative state. I pretend not to account for the phenomena, for I am
persuaded that the experiments on electricity which man is capable of making,
will never unfold all its properties, nor explain all the laws by which this
energy of nature is exerted in the government of the material system.

But the influence of the planets on the elements of this globe has, in all
ages, been a subject of belief or of derision; and surely it is a subject in
physics much more interesting to man, than many speculative questions which
cannot affect his health and happiness, but which occupy the labors of
investigating minds. I will therefore throw together a few observations which
may afford light on the subject; or at least may excite a spirit of enquiry.

In the first place, it is generally known and admitted that the influence of
the sun and moon upon this globe are in proportion to their proximity. The
highest tides are when the moon is in her perigee, and in conjunction with the
sun, and especially when the earth is in her perihelion, or nearest to the sun.
But the moon exerts more than usual influence on the atmosphere, in other
positions. Her power is greatest in her perigee and apogee, and in her
conjunction and opposition to the sun. Her influence on the tides, under the
combined and separate operations of these circumstances, has been fully
illustrated. But her influence on vegetation, on the vicissitudes of weather,
on health, and the phenomena of the electrical fluid in earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions, seems to have passed unobserved, or at least, to have never
been reduced to any thing like system.

One of the most striking effects of lunar influence, is observable in
earthquakes, which usually happen near the time of the moon's perigee or
apogee, conjunction or opposition. As this fact seems to have escaped
observation, I will here insert proof of it.

The great earthquake which demolished Lima on the 28th day of October 1746,
happened six hours before the full moon, and the day before her apogee.

That which destroyed Lisbon Nov. 1, 1755, was three days before the change and
four before her perigee.

The great shock in America on the 18th of the same month was a few hours after
the full moon, on the day of her apogee.

The great earthquake in America on the 2d of June O. S. 1638 was on the day
after the new moon and near her perigee. [Some accounts place this on the first
of the month, in which case it was the same day with the change.]

The shock which convulsed America, and demolished mountains in Canada January
26th O. S. 1663, was on the day preceding the new moon.

The great earthquake in South-America, June 3d O. S. 1744 was four days after
the new moon.

The memorable earthquake in North America on the 29th of October O. S. 1727,
was about three days before the new moon, but on the day of her perigee.

The shock in America on the 29th of November 1^83, was on the day after the
moon's perigee.

That on the 16th of May 1791, was on the day of her perigee and one day before
the full moon.

The shock on the 1st of November 1761, was the day before her apogee.

The great earthquake in Iceland on the 10th of July 1789, was on the day of
her apogee, and three days after the full.

That in Tuscany on the 30th of September in the same year, was two days before
her apogee, approaching the full.

A shock at Lisbon on the 27th of November 1791, was two days after her perigee
and change.

A shock on the 15th of January 1791 in Virginia, was two days after her
apogee, and approaching the full. A severe earthquake in the west and north of
France on the 25th of January of the present year, 1799, was a few hours after
the moon's perigee.


These two last instances, according to another almanac, happened one day after
the perigee and apogee. I have not taken pains to enter into exact calculations
of the moon's place, as I do not deem it material. It is sufficient for my
purpose that almost all earthquakes happen near the time of the moon's
conjunction and opposition, or her perigee and apogee. Of these positions, it
is obvious that her perigee and apogee have much the most influence; and the
instances I have examined are almost equally divided between these two
positions. Of all the earthquakes which I have compared with the moon's place,
one or two only fall in her quadratures, and at her mean distance from the
earth. An instance happened on the 11th of April 1799 in Carolina. I have
compared several other instances, which happened near the perigee and apogee,
but it is unnecessary to specify them. The examples mentioned will establish
the generality of the fact, and the soundness of the principle.

On the principles of attraction, it will readily be admitted that the
proximity of the moon to the earth, at certain periods of her revolution, must
draw, or excite into action and discharge, the electricity, of the earth. This
accounts for earthquakes during the moon's perigee. But on enquiry we find a
great proportion of the shocks take place during her apogee, when her distance
is greatest and her supposed power the least; and not only so, but during her
opposition to the sun, when her diminished influence is supposed to be
counteracted and still further diminished by the attraction of the sun. This is
an important fact and deserves investigation. That the influence of the moon is
the direct exciting cause of earthquakes, can hardly be questioned, after
establishing the fact, that four out of five, or a much larger proportion,
happen when she is in particular parts of her orbit; but why her greatest
distance and her least, should produce exactly the same effects, a fact equally
well established, is a question which can perhaps be solved only on electrical
principles.

That the electricity of the atmosphere and earth, is the medium by which the
moon acts upon the elements of the globe, is rendered probable by another fact.
I possess the exact dates of very few volcanic eruptions; but by comparing such
as I have, with the moon's place in her orbit, I find these eruptions begin or
suffer violent exacerbations, at the time the moon is in her perigee or apogee;
or in her conjunction or opposition.

The great eruption of Vesuvius in 1779 was augmented on the 8th and 9th of
August, when the moon was in her perigee.

The tremendous eruption of Heckla in 1783, began on the first of June, when
the moon was in her apogee, and increased till the 8th, after which it
continued to be violent for a long time.

An eruption of Vesuvius on the 10th of May 1784 was during the moon's perigee

An eruption of fire near Palermo in Sicily on the 13th of March 1785 was two
days after her perigee.

An eruption of Etna on the 19th of May 1780, the dark day in America, was the
day after the full moon.

A dark day on the 9th of August 1732 was about the time of the new moon, and
her apogee. The dark day at Detroit October 16, 1762 was the day after her
perigee, and one day before the change.

The eruption of Vesuvius March 8th, 1730 was on the day after the new moon,
and a great exacerbation happened on the 14th, the day before her apogee.

The great eruption of the same volcano in 1794 was announced on the night of
the 12th of June, nine hours before the full moon, by a violent earthquake. The
eruption took place on the 15th.

The darkness in Canada, on the 15th and 16th of October 1785 was on the days
next preceding the full moon and her perigee. The obscurity on the 9th of that
month was near the quadrature.

The eruption of Heckla in 1766 began on the 15th of April, the day before the
moon's apogee.

The great eruption of Vesuvius and the earthquake, which buried Herculaneum,
on the 1st of November A. D. 79, were the second day after her perigee.

The influence of the moon in producing storms of rain, snow and wind, is
universally admitted; and that these happen near the positions of the moon
already described, no man will undertake to deny. The West-Indians expect
hurricanes only near the time of the full and new moon; or her perigee and
apogee. This is further evidence that the electrical fluid is the instrument of
these commotions in the atmosphere. Electricity is known to be the ca^se of
winds, and its agency is visible in producing hurricanes; for experienced
seamen foretell a hurricane by the unusual transparency of the water. Now it is
a well known fact that electricity possesses the singular property of giving
transparency to opaque bodies.

A little before a hurricane in the West Indies, seamen can see the lead, at an
unusual depth; the sea also swells and rolls upon the shore in a singular
manner, tho the air is perfectly tranquil. An effervescence also or bubbling is
observed in the water. Dark clouds are formed, and the atmosphere, before the
tempest, is observed by vapors sensibly mephitic. See a letter from Gov. Ellis,
dated March 6, 1789, in the 9th vol. of Museum, 215. Hence we observe the
correctness of the common saying among seamen, that "hurricanes come out of the
sea." They are evidently generated by extraordinary discharges of electricity.
Hence they are most frequent in the windward islands, which are all volcanic;
some of them still discharging fire and smoke at times, and all of them
evidently resting on a volcanic base.

Further, that electricity is the great agent in these agitations of the
elements is rendered probable by the coincidences in time, between the more
violent hurricanes, and great volcanic discharges from Etna, Vesuvius and
Iceland. Witness the terrible hurricanes of 1747, 1766, 1772, 1780, 1784 and 5,
all of which happened near the time of great eruptions from the volcanoes
mentioned; all of which are distinguished in the annals of the Antilles, and
still recollected with horror by the inhabitants. And this circumstance is no
inconsiderable evidence, that the agent in volcanic eruptions, as well as in
hurricanes, is electricity, and that this element is often disturbed or ejected
from the whole globe, nearly at the same time.

Most of the great tempests, in all latitudes, happen near the moon's perigee
and apogee; and in these positions, ^e observe essential changes in the
temperature of the atmosphere. I have taken some pains to compare the changes
in heat and cold, with these positions of the moon, with a view to learn,
whether the effects are uniform. On examining the state of the thermometer for
two years, I find that, in almost every instance of the moon's perigee and
apogee, especially in winter, there was a considerable change of temperature.
Usually the weather grew colder, as the moon approached her perigee. But the
effects were not uniform; sometimes the weather became more temperate, at the
perigee. But one general remark will be found true; that in regard to heat and
cold, the moon's apogee and perigee produce, at different times, precisely the
same effects. This remark accords with what has before been observed in regard
to earthquakes.

It is a general remark that the weather becomes cooler as the moon approaches
the change. Should this remark prove to be well founded, the result would be
this principle, that the cold is increased, or rather the heat lessened, by the
combined influence of the sun and moon. This principle would accord with
another observation just made, that the weather is cooler, during the moon's
perigee, which is generally true in winter. That is, the greater power is
exerted by distant orbs on our atmosphere, the more the heat is diminished. But
this observation is not universally true. It is true that our winter occurs
during the earth's perihelion; but this is usually explained on the principle
of the obliquity of the sun's rays -- a solution that perhaps is not completely
satisfactory, although, to a certain degree, it is doubtless just.

It is a popular opinion that vegetation is less rapid, and the flesh of
animals less firm and substantial, and new shooting plants less vigorous,
during the wane of the moon, than during her increment. This opinion is too
general and too respectable, to be considered the fruit of ignorance and
credulity.

Aristotle alleges that the close of the lunar month is cooler than the other
parts of it; and that during the decrease of the moon, the bodies of living
animals possess less heat than at other times. De gener. animal. lib. 2. 4.
These remarks, whether true or not, coincide with the modern popular opinion
just recited.

We are apt to neglect the opinions and practices of barbarous nations, and to
hold in contempt the knowledge of ancient nations. This often happens, I
suspect, because we are less wise, than those whom we affect to despise. Caesar
in his first book of the Gallic war, chapter 40, relates, that the ancient
Germans, who were great observers of the phases of the moon, declined engaging
in battle, during the wane of that planet. He had offered battle to Ariovistus,
but this commander declined a general action, and permitted only skirmishes.
Caesar enquired of his prisoners the reason of this conduct, and was told that
it was customary with the Germans to consult their venerable matrons, who, by
means of lots and divination, pronounced on the propriety of giving battle; and
these had declared that it was not possible for the Germans to conquer, if they
engaged in action before the new moon. "Non esse fas Germanos superare, ^i ante
novam lunam praelio contendissent." See Cesar's Commentaries, in the passage
cited, and Henry's History of Britain, vol. 1. chapter 4.

We have this custom of the Germans presented to us, disguised with
superstition; but I strongly suspect it had its origin in the observation of
the fact, mentioned by Aristotle, that in the decrease of the moon, animal
bodies have less heat and vigor.

I am the more inclined to believe this, because the doctrine accords with
modern observations concerning the invasion of fevers, and especially of
epidemic diseases. Many medical authors concur in the fact, that diseases more
generally attack the human body on the second or third day before the new or
full moon. On examining the accounts of several writers, I find the times of
invasion to be two or three days before or after the new and full moon, or
about the time of its conjunction with the sun. See Jackson, Grainger, Lind and
many other authors.

Diemerbroeck is explicit on this point. He relates that in the plague of 1636,
"two or three days before and after the new and full moon, the disease was more
violent; more persons were seized at those times, than at others; and those who
were then seized, almost all died, in a very short time. Many patients who
appeared before to be slightly affected, nescio qua virium labefactione
oppressi, says the author, by an unaccountable decline of strength, sunk and
died in a few hours."

De peste, page 9. From the observations of physicians it then appears, that
this debility of the animal powers takes place near the time of the conjunction
and opposition of the sun and moon; near the moon's perigee and apogee; and in
the same positions in which earthquakes and storms more generally occur.

Of the reality of this effect of the elements on the body, there can be no
rational doubts. About the time of the change of the atmosphere, which
indicates an approaching rain or storm, persons of debilitated habits of body,
perceive the change, by a loss of vivacity, dullness or heaviness; parts of the
body that have lost their natural energy by means of wounds and tumors
experience painful or uneasy sensations, by which storms are often predicted.

Fowls perceive this change in the atmosphere, and manifest their sensations.
Candles sparkle and snap; the tallow melts more freely, and the flame is less
steady. These things were observed by Aristotle and Pliny.

This change in the atmosphere is not only perceptible by the sense of feeling,
but becomes visible. Distant objects seen over water, and some writers say,
over land also, loo^, th^^ is, ^^se, or appear elevated, several degrees, above
their usual altit^^. The ear also will aid us in foretelling rain and wind; for
sounds become audible at an unusual distance.

Persons in full health are not sensible of these changes in the elements; at
least, they are not so much affected, as to observe them. But from many years
observation, I am convinced, that the catarrhal affections, which pass under
the popular name of colds, are occasioned by the alterations in the atmosphere
which precede changes of weather, and few of them from the application of cold.
I know this to be the case with myself; those phases of the moon, which have
been mentioned as producing great effects on the earth and atmosphere, rarely
pass, without affecting me with slight catarrh. This has been remarkably the
case, since the fever of 1798, which left me in a state of debility. But many
persons can attest the truth of the principle; nothing being more common than
for persons to remark, that they cannot tell how they took cold; and it being
well known that catarrhs are more general and severe, on the transitions from
cold to heat, than from heat to cold. The obstruction of the glands is
evidently the effect of an insensible change in the atmosphere, probably by
means of the decomposition of the electricity and the vapor or other elementary
substances of the atmosphere. And the winds to which we ascribe the changes of
weather are unquestionably an effect, rather than a cause of those changes.

These alterations in the atmosphere appear to have some connection with the
tides; or rather with the cause of tides. It is said by seamen and other
observers of the seasons, that full tides are apt to produce rain; that rain
which begins at high water will cease, with the recess of the tide; but rain
beginning at low water, will be of considerable duration. These and other
observations, if just, manifest an influence of the tides over the state of the
atmosphere, or a dependence of both on one common cause -- the same invisible
energy of electricity producing both effects.

It is a known fact that the flowing tide often brings with it a breeze of
wind. This is ascribed to the friction of the water on the air, and the cause
assigned may be sufficient to account for the phenomenon. But it may be
suggested whether the electricity of the atmosphere, may not produce both the
tide and the wind. The intumescence of the ocean, previous to earthquakes and
hurricanes, which are evidently occasioned by electricity, seems to bear a
great analogy to the tides and to authorize my suspicions. The swell of the
ocean during earthquakes, has usually been ascribed to the raising of the land
beneath it; but this cannot be the cause, for such a swelling of the land never
takes place over whole continents. The swell of the water is probably the
effect of the elastic powers of the electricity discharged, operating on the
water itself.

There are many diurnal and periodical phenomena, which are evidently connected
with the lunar and solar influence, and deserve t^^e mentioned in this place.

It is a well ascertained fact, that in the tropics, where the weight of the
atmosphere is subject to very small variations, the barometer uniformly rises
and falls with the tides, about two thirds of a line. Encyclop. art. wind. This
is a small variation. But,

It is also asserted that, in those regions, "the variations in the gravity of
the atmosphere seem to depend on the heat of the sun, as the barometer
constantly sinks near half an inch every day, and rises again to its former
station in the night." Encyclop. art. atmosphere. [I suspect the words "half an
inch" to be an error.]

Now, if the barometer depends, for its fluctuations, on heat, we should
suppose the same cause would operate in northern latitudes, and occasion a
diurnal rise and fall, in an exact ratio to heat and cold. In this case, a
barometer would be a thermometer reversed; rising with augmented cold and
sinking with an increase of heat. But this is not the fact. The barometer often
rises with the increase of heat, between sunrise and twelve o'clock. Heat
therefore cannot be the direct cause of the diurnal depression of the barometer
in the equatorial climates; unless it has different laws, in different
latitudes, which philosophy will not admit.

Let us compare the facts stated with the known phenomenon of the different
forces of water, during the day and the night. The water-wheel of any mill, the
altitude of the water and the resistance being precisely the same, makes more
revolutions, in a minute, during the night, than in the day time. I have long
been acquainted with the fact, and it is known to every miller; but as I have
never seen a statement of it in any philosophical work, I have had the
curiosity to make an accurate experiment to ascertain the difference. This was
done on the night after the 28th of May 1799; the weather being perfectly
serene, the air free from vapor, not a breath of wind stirring to ruffle the
water, and the barometer, on the evening preceding, at half past eight,
standing at 30 and one tenth.

The first observation was made at a quarter before 7 P. M. sometime before sun
set, the thermometer standing at 65 degrees. when the wheel of the mill made
exactly 16 revolutions in a minute. The altitude of the water was marked with
precision; but the delivery of the water not having been exactly adjusted to
the current entering the pond, the water rose, and at 9 o'clock had half an
inch of altitude beyond the mark. By this means, my observation at that hour
was lost. By raising another gate, the water was reduced to its former
altitude, and by twelve o'clock the discharge of the water was exactly equal to
the current, and from that time to sunrise, the altitude continued the same.

At twelve o'clock and from that hour to three, the wheel made 17 revolutions
in a minute; the observations being often repeated, without a sensible
variation of results. Soon after three o'clock, a small acceleration was
perceptible, but it did not amount to half a revolution, until about half past
three, when the wheel made 18 revolutions in a minute, which accelerated
movement continued till half past four, when, being near sun rise, the
observations were discontinued. During the last observations, I perceived a
very small retardation of movement, but it did not amount to half a revolution.
To prevent any difference of resistance in the mill, not the slightest
alteration was made in the elevation of the stone, or the quantity of wheat
delivered from the hopper, from the beginning to the end of the observations.

I had not a barometer with me at the mill, but about eight o'clock, on the
following day, the barometer stood about one twentieth of an inch higher, than
on the preceding evening. The thermometer fell, during the night, to 54 degrees.

From this experiment, it is obvious that the weight of the atmosphere could
not be the sole cause of the acceleration of the wheel. The acceleration at
twelve o'clock was almost an eleventh -- at a later hour, a ninth of the whole
movement. The increased gravity of the atmosphere will not account for a tenth
of the difference.

We must then resort to other principles for a solution of the phenomenon. It
is commonly supposed that water is a noncompressible substance; but this
opinion has been justly questioned. However this may be, I have little
hesitation in resolving the phenomenon of the water-wheel into its increased
elasticity during the night. How or why the subduction of light and heat should
produce or increase this property in water, I leave for electricians to
determine. The effect cannot be ascribed to the increased gravity of water,
during the night, for no such increase is observed.

It is an observation of seamen that ships make more way in the water, by night
than by day, with the same force of wind. I should suspect that the moisture on
the sails might, in a degree, contribute to this effect; but it must be
recollected that in rainy days there is no difference in the moisture of the
air by night and by day. Can the effect then be ascribed to the cause that
accelerates the movement of water-wheels by night -- an increased elasticity?
If the gravity and density of water were augmented during the night, these
would render the water more buoyant, but retard the motion of a ship, by
increasing the resistance. We are therefore driven to the same hypothesis, an
increase of elasticity, which renders water more buoyant when at rest, and more
impressive when in motion, without an augmented density and weight. But I am
not sure that the moisture of the air will not account for the whole effect.

If the elastic power of water is increased by the abstraction of heat, does it
not follow that this power must be greater as we recede from the equator; and
of course, any given force applied to the water in different latitudes, will
occasion a vibration of that fluid, proportioned to its elasticity. Hence the
small tides within the tropics, where the heat is nearly uniform; and the high
tides in the northern regions, where the vibrations in the temperature of the
atmosphere, are more considerable. Yet facts do not permit us to ascribe this
elasticity to cold. It is more probably owing to the quantity of electricity,
or to its peculiar combination with aerial substances, of which cold is the
effect. Perhaps the following observations will throw some light on this
subject. Aristotle and after him, Pliny asserted that no animal dies, except
during the ebb tide. "Nullum animal nisi aestu recedente expirare. Observatum
id multum in Gallico Oceano, et duntaxat in homine compertum." Pliny, Not.
Hist. lib. 2. 98. "No animal dies, except during the recess of the tide. This
is particularly observed on the coast of Gaul; and is at least true with
respect to man."

The first part of this observation is probably too general; but modern facts
confirm the assertion, within certain limitations. A late minister at Barrie in
Scotland, contiguous to the German sea, made a similar remark, after fifty
years observation.

Sinclair, vol. 4. 240. The reason why Pliny has specified the coast of France,
as remarkable for the fact stated, is very obvious. France lies on the main
ocean, and the time of high and low water is the true time. On the coast of
Italy, where there are no tides, the observation could not be made; and if made
by the time of ebb tide in rivers and bays, it would not be just.

Another remark made by physicians, is, that caeteris paribus, more persons die
during the latter part of the night, than at any other time in the solar day.
This remark has not come to me from a sufficient number of observations to
command full belief; but it accords with a few observations of my own. If
universally true, it would contradict in part the remark of Aristotle and
Pliny; but it is possible, both remarks may be true with certain limitations.
The fact may be more obvious, when ebb tide happens between midnight and
sunrise; and less so, when flood tide happens at that period; that is, under
the combined or separate operation of the two causes.

Other facts lend their aid to support the observation that some essential
change in the properties of the atmosphere takes place, in the latter part of
the night. This is the time when all fevers remit or intermit. The
exacerbations and paroxisms of fever invade the patient, during some part of
the day, and subside in the latter part of the following night.

Again. The chills that precede fevers usually come on in the same part of the
day, that is, between midnight and sunrise. This is remarkably the case with
epidemic diseases, as all physicians agree. The fact has been ascribed to the
debility induced by sleep; but I suspect it is owing to the debility induced by
the same change in the stimulant powers of the atmosphere, which occasions the
other phenomena before mentioned.

It is observable also that sleep, in the latter part of the night, is more
sound, than at other times; an effect perhaps of the same cause.

Lind observes that in the East Indies, patients generally expire at low water
-- the same fact is observable at the full moon -- and convalescents usually
relapse at these periods. See his Treatise on the diseases of hot climates. p.
86.

From experience I can testify that relapses usually occur, at those periods of
the lunar month, when changes of weather take place.

Ulloa was careful to note the time of the tide when earthquakes occurred in
South-America, and he found them invariably to happen at half ebb or half flood
-- never at high or low water.

Voyage, vol. 2. B. 7. Chapter 7. There are other periodical changes in the
atmosphere which deserve notice. Great storms of wind, snow and rain, usually
begin, abate and cease at certain hours, viz. at six, nine, twelve and three
o'clock; especially at six and twelve. To this remark there are very few
exceptions.

Experienced accoucheurs inform me that in lingering cases of childbed
illness, paroxisms of pains recur at the same hours.

What is still more extraordinary, we are assured by unquestionable authority,
that in volcanic eruptions, the discharges are more violent at these hours,
than during the rest of the day. Sir William Hamilton, in his excellent account
of the great eruption of Vesuvius, in June 1794, has the following passage.
"The fever of the mountain, as had been remarked in former eruptions, showed
itself to be, in some measure, periodical, and was generally most violent, at
the break of day, at noon and at midnight."

Univ. Magazine for August, 1795. These are the hours when we observe great
changes in the atmosphere, and sudden effects on the human body in diseases.
The break of day is precisely the time when the water-wheel is most accelerated
-- when fevers remit or intermit, and when the patient, lingering under
disease, suddenly yields, and sinks into his grave.

To what cause shall these effects be ascribed? Not to lunar or solar
attraction, in the usual sense of the word. Attraction is considered as a
steady principle operating uniformly under the same circumstances; and
therefore the attraction of the moon, whose position in regard to the earth is
every day changed, cannot account for periodical phenomena, at certain hours in
the day. The influence of the sun will better solve the phenomena; but how can
the same principle, attraction, operating by uniform laws, produce the same
effects at two opposite hours, for instance at noon and at midnight, which
certainly is the case in regard to the exacerbations of volcanic eruptions, as
well as in regard to the commencement, abatement, and termination of storms?

I do not know that any principle yet discovered will solve the difficulty. But
the phenomena bear a greater analogy to the operations of electricity, than to
any other principle in nature hitherto discovered. It seems necessary to invite
to our aid repulsion as well as attraction, producing in opposite points, the
same effects. The nature and operations of electricity are little understood,
and probably will never be brought wholly within human comprehension.

It is to be wished that experiments on the revolutions of water-wheels, in
different latitudes, may be made, with care and precision, to ascertain whether
any acceleration at night takes place within the tropics, and if so, whether it
equals the acceleration, in northern latitudes. And also whether the
acceleration is greater in the latitude of 60 degrees. than in the latitude of 40
degrees. Our millers say that water has more force in winter, than in summer. This
may be easily ascertained by experiment

We are enveloped in a mass of fluids, whose combinations are in a continual
process of change. The energy of action seems to depend on electricity -- or
the principle of light, heat and fire; but I am persuaded that the manner in
which changes are produced, is very little understood.

I will close this lengthy article by observing that the phenomena of lunar and
solar influence are so well understood and clearly proved, as to justify in our
minds, the great attention which the ancients paid to the influence of the
planets on this globe. If they went into one extreme, by ascribing too much to
that influence, the moderns have erred, on the other extreme, by holding their
doctrins in contempt.

The sun is the great source of light, and his rays excite the heat which
exists in and around the globe. It moves this universal principle, which
constitutes the energy of the material system, under the control of infinite
intelligence.

The moon is placed in the vicinity of the earth, to give variety to the
seasons, and by acting on the elementary principle of heat, she occasions the
vicissitudes of rain, snow, fair, calm and tempestuous weather. The changes
which precede and produce these vicissitudes appear to be variations in the
combinations of heat or electricity, with the other elemental principles of the
atmosphere. These modifications of the atmosphere, without any access of new
matter or diminution of its mass, produce differences in its density and
elasticity, with all their various effects on the animal and vegetable systems.
Hence a mere modification or new combination of electricity, with vapor or
other aerial substance, may increase or diminish its stimulus -- during the
day, it may excite fever in the human body; during the night, a subduction of
excitement in the atmosphere, may induce debility, and favor the invasion of
disease and the approach of death. These are mere hints and conjectures,
intended to excite investigation.

With respect to the supposed influence of comets on the elements of this
globe, I would remark, that on the principles here suggested, that influence is
very clearly proved and may be easily understood. The facts stated demonstrate
that the sun and moon exert great powers on the globe; and the fact that
earthquakes mostly happen in certain positions of the moon, prove that the
medium of her influence is the electric principle.

Now comets are known to be of various magnitudes. Some of them are as large as
Venus; much larger than the moon; with highly electrified atmospheres; and
sometimes approaching near to the earth. The comet of 1577 came within less
than a million of miles distance.

Those comets which pass the system at an immense distance from the earth can
have no great influence; but others approaching near, produce tremendous
effects. Hence during their proximity to the earth, the number and violence of
earthquakes and volcanic discharges; tempests, inundations from rains and
extraordinary tides; and most sensible changes in the powers of animal and
vegetable life. That such are the effects, is proved not only by the concurring
opinions of all the ancient philosophers, who were accurate observers of
nature, but by one uniform series of historical evidence, for more than two
thousand years. On the principles of electricity, which is disturbed,
attracted, repelled and modified in its combinations with other substances, by
the approach of distant bodies, the solution of the phenomena is easy and
philosophical.

Of Electricity.
SOME modern philosophers suppose that the earth contains vast quantities of
fire, which is the source of the principal part of the heat on the earth, the
cause of vegetation, of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and of hot springs.

See Buffon, and Darwin's Botanic Garden. Additional Notes, p. 145. New York
edition. There are some reasons to believe that particular parts of the earth
abound with fire, or masses of burning lava. This opinion is supported by the
issuing of smoke from the craters of certain volcanoes, for years in
succession, without any eruption of fire.

But the theory which ascribes earthquakes to steam or vapor, appears to be
very unsatisfactory. How can steam be collected within the bowels of the earth,
sufficient to shake a continent of 3000 lengths in extent? If a great quantity
of water should by accident fall on a mass of burning lava, the effect would
not be a general equable shake or concussion, over a whole quarter of the
globe, which sometimes happens in earthquakes; but a violent shake at the place
of contact, and a disrupture of the earth, by which the force of the steam
would be suddenly discharged into the atmosphere. This however is not the fact.
Almost all earthquakes in North America are progressive; beginning in the
interior of the country and proceeding toward the ocean, in a direction
perpendicular to the line of shore, that is, from north-west to south-east.
Perhaps we can find a satisfactory solution of this phenomenon, upon electrical
principles; but no cause can be found in the known properties and effects of
steam.

One of the arguments used to maintain the theory of steam, is derived from the
known fact that springs and streams are usually exhausted by extreme drouth,
some time antecedent to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. But the fact,
instead of supporting the theory, operates to destroy it.

The hypothesis supposes that, at certain times, the springs in the vicinity of
burning lava descend and fall upon it; and the water being raised into steam
and extremely rarefied, expels the burning materials in volcanoes with great
violence; and in earthquakes, the force of the steam alone ascends and shakes
the earth.

But why should the water of the springs find passages to the lava, at some
times and not at others? If the passages were always open, the water would
always descend. If they are open at particular times only, there must be some
subterraneous force exerted to open them, before the water comes in contact
with the fire; the effect then or disrupture, must take place, in a certain
degree, before the supposed cause can operate. Consequently the force exists
anterior to the disrupture which brings the water in contact with the fire.
This conclusion supersedes the use of vapor.

But by what magic does it happen that all the springs and rivers in the
neighborhood of a volcano for instance, disappear about the same time? By what
mutual consent, can this remarkable phenomenon be produced? And why, after the
eruption, do all the springs and rivers resume their former channels? Is it
possible to suppose thousands of passages, scattered over many leagues of
earth, to be all opened at once, to convey subterranean springs to a particular
place, a few months anterior to an eruption of fire; and after the eruption, to
be all closed at on; and the water compelled to run its former channels? Yet
all this must be admitted on the theory of steam.

That large volumes of water are sometimes thrown into the basins of volcanic
mountains and ejected, it true; but, in such cases, the disrupture is
occasioned by a previous earthquake or force of fire, and the water is
discharged in mass; not in the form of vapor.

It is a fact authorized by all history and observation, that great earthquakes
and volcanic eruptions are often, if not usually, preceded by severe and
universal drouth. This drouth often extends over whole continents; and I find
that the defects of water which occasion the terrible famins in Egypt, India
and China, of which we have many accounts, happen generally, (and I suspect
always,) a few months before and during some great discharges from volcanic
mountains. I have certain evidence that this failure of rain and springs
sometimes occurs ten months before the eruption. This was the fact in Bengal in
1769 -- and in America in 1762 and 1782. At other times, the drouth happens
during the eruption, and in some cases, it is continued for two or three years,
in which eruptions take place in different parts of the work.

The drouth, on such occasioned is not occasioned solely by a failure of rain,
but by the concurring influence of excessive evaporation. This fact is capable
of demonstration. Sir William Hamilton, Univ. Mag. Aug. 1795, in his account of
the eruption of Vesuvius in 1794, informs us that some days previous to the
discharge, the great ^ountain at Torre del Greco began to decrease, so that the
corn-mill worked by it moved slowly. In the wells of the town, the water f^ll
and it was necessary to lengthen the ropes daily. Some wells became quite dry.
In a vineyard, near the town, some persons were alarmed, eight days before the
eruption, by a sudden puff of smoke and explosion from the earth.

It is recorded that P^^tycides foretold an earthquake in Greece, from a sudden
failure of water in a well. These facts indicate unusual evaporation.

It is observable also that the exhaustion of water extends, in such cases, to
a greater depth than usual. The earth, below the usual influence of the sun's
heat and of rains, loses its natural moisture. Such probably was the case in
1782, when the cedar swamp in New Jersey took fire and burnt to the depth of
many feet. And this is probably what Livy meant, when, in speaking of the
terrible drouth in Rome, before the great eruption of Etna, B. C. 426, he uses
the words "ingenito humore egens" -- a failure of native moisture.

In the vicinity of volcanoes, this evaporation may be accounted for on the
principle of subterranean heat, which is sensibly increased, some time before
an eruption. But this solution cannot apply to countries a thousand leagues
distant, which suffer extreme evaporation, at the same time.

There appears (...) no way to account for the phenomenon but by the great
principle of action, electricity. Indeed the discovery of the fact, that most
earthquakes happen under particular phases of the moon, and that volcanic
eruptions are obviously affected by her position in her orbit, seems to place
this point beyond question.

It seems then to be very certain that the electricity which exists in and
about the earth is ess^ ^fluenced by the sun, moon and planets, but especially
by the larger comets; which pass near the earth. The influence of these bodies,
or the essential laws of the universe, disturb this fluid and vary its
distributions and its combinations with other substances.

Previous to earthquakes, volcanic discharges and hurricanes, it is evident
from many phenomena already enumerated, the electricity of the earth passes out
of it in unusual quantities; and as the air is often a bad conductor, the fluid
acce^ to it and carries along, the water upon the surface and within the bowels
of the earth. This process continued for some weeks and months, exhausts all
the rivers and springs. The atmosphere, in the mean time, becomes more and more
dry, and a worse conductor, until both air and earth become perfectly electric,
or non-conductors. In this situation, either a great demand for the fluid in
some distant region, or a great accumulation of it in the bowels of the earth,
has prepared the way for a sudden explosion, but no conducting medium exists,
sufficient to convey it. A fall of rain, at this time, may create that medium;
and hence the common fact that earthquakes happen soon after rain, succeeding
severe drouth. If no rain falls, the fluid accumulates, till it forces a
passage through the great apertures, formed for the purpose, the volcanic
mountains, setting fire, on its way, to the hydrogene, and other inflammable
substances, which the ocean generates or deposits in their bosoms.

I know not that these conclusions are just, but the facts from which I reason,
are indisputable. The uncommon discharges of electricity, previous to these
great concussions, are indicated not only by the exhaustion of streams and
springs but by many phenomena in the atmosphere, showing it to be highly
electrified. Meteors, huge globes of fire, shoot through the air, not only
after, but before the eruption. Witness the meteors of 1758, 1762, and one in
May 1783, mentioned in the preceding history. And Sir William Hamilton informs
us that the air was unusually charged with electricity, some days before the
eruption of 1794. May not the appearances of certain epidemic diseases of
inflammatory diathesis be ascribed to this too highly electrified, and of
course, stimulant state of the atmosphere? The influenza of 1708 was preceded
by a meteor or fiery globe. In 1758 was a meteor and the measles began in
America. In 1771 a meteor, and then commenced influenza and measles. In 1775 a
meteor, and the cynanche maligna prevailed. In America, and in Europe,
influenza.
In 1783 two meteors, and then commenced measles and scarlatina anginosa. In
1788 a meteor, and immediately began the measles. If these coincidences are all
the work of chance, they are certainly a very singular kind of accidents. More
facts and observations than I possess are necessary to settle this question.
Unusual halos and mock suns, fiery and luminous appearances in the heavens,
with extraordinary tempests, and hail, are evidences of the same fact.

The idea that the heat which we experience exists in and about the globe, is
undoubtedly well founded. The sun is probably the great electric of the system,
which excites into action the heat of the atmosphere and the earth; but there
is no reason to believe that heat is principally derived from that body. The
solar rays constitute a very small part of the heat of the earth; but they
excite it by the rapidity of their motions, or by decomposing that which exists
in the air and earth.

Hence there appears to be little foundation (...) the opinion, that the
inferior planets which are nearest to the sun, have more heat, than Saturn and
Jupiter. If heat is diminished in the ratio of the squares of the distances
from the sun, it is on the principle that heat consists in solar rays; but this
is a very questionable doctrine. Light is a substance, but does not necessarily
contain heat; at least not any that is perceptible.

It is probable, that if the solar rays falling on Saturn are diminished in
number, according to the doctrine of diverging lines, that this defect is
supplied by an increase of density or susceptibility of excitement, in the
atmosphere of that planet. The density and capacity of being excited may be in
a direct proportion to the solid contents of the planet, or in a duplicate
ratio to the di^^e. Hence the larger planets are placed at the greater
distance, And on this principle there is no ground to calculate, as Newton has
done, the extreme heat which comets acquit in their perihelion. No substance
of which we have any knowledge, could sustain the intensity of heat which, he
has calculated, the comet of 1660 must have received. It is more consonant to
the general arrangement of the universe, as far as our limited understandings
can comprehend it, to suppose none of the great orbs that roll in infinite
space, are either over heated or over cooled. Every orb has probably its own
fund of heat, and the capacity of being excited, suited to its place and
destination. The planets, the comets in the parts of their trajectories most
remote from the sun, and even the sun itself, may be inhabited. I take this
opportunity, in discussing the question concerning the origin of heat, to
notice what philosophers have said on the subject of the internal heat of the
earth. Darwin, in his Botanic Garden, note 6, alleges the earth below the depth
of about ten feet, to be always of the same temperature, which is 48 degrees. by
Farenheit. He cites Dr. Franklin's observation, that spring water at
Philadelphia is of 52 degrees, which, he supposes, a proof of internal heat
from central fires. For as the climate of North America is colder, than that of
England, he could not account for the excess of heat in the water at
Philadelphia, beyond that of England ^t by presuming it to be occasioned by
internal fires. Yet in another passage, in note 7, the author intimates that he
had an idea of a difference of heat in different latitudes, derived from the
action of the solar rays. Yet I cannot find any European author who appears to
have had a correct idea of this subject; and Mr. Jefferson, in his Notes on
Virginia, query 5, has manifested his ignorance of it, by a most egregious
mistake. Speaking of a cave in Frederick county, he informs, that the
thermometer, which stood at 50 degrees. in the open air, rose to 57 degrees. in the
cave. He then adds the following remark, "The uniform temperature of the
cellars of the Observatory of Paris, which are 90 feet deep, and of all
subterranean cavities of any depth, where no chemical agents may be supposed to
produce a factitious heat, has been found to be 10 degrees. of Reaumer, equal to 54
of Farenheit. The temperature of the cave above mentioned so nearly corresponds
with this, that the difference may be ascribed to a difference of instruments."

It seems a little strange that so gross an error should have passed
uncorrected, till this late age, on a point of fact so easy to be ascertained.

The truth is, the temperature of the earth, below the diurnal and annual
influence of the solar rays, which may be perhaps ten feet in solid earth and
30 feet in open wells, is regulated by the proximity of place to the equator,
subject to small variations, from the position of the place in regard to the
ocean and the height of the land.

But what is remarkable, this temperature of the earth and water in the
anterior of the globe, is precisely the mean temperature of the climate, in the
place where the observation is made. Thus, let the highest and lowest points be
taken daily by any good instrument, and divide the sum of all the observations
by the number of days in the year, the quotient will be the mean temperature of
the climate, and precisely the temperature of the water, below the variations
of heat and cold. If any difference should be found, it must be owing to
inaccuracy in the observations. It is more usual to take three observations
daily; at 2 o'clock P. M. the warmest time in the day, at sunrise the coldest
time, and at sunset, which is found to be the mean temperature. By
observations made in the city of New York for one year, I found the mean
temperature to be 53; but this is 1 degree too high; owing to an excess of heat
within the city, beyond the general temperature of the climate. The air in a
city cools less at night, than in the country, and hence the morning
observations were found to be too high. In many instances, ice as thick as
glass was formed a mile from New York, when an accurate thermometer in the city
fell no lower than 40 degrees. Hence the great error of determining the temperature
of a climate, by observations made in a large city; which is often done in
Europe.

The mean temperature of the climate in England, is 48 degrees. That of Paris, 54.
This difference is owing to the insular situation of England; the atmosphere in
the vicinity of large tracts of water being always more temperate, than on
continents at a distance from the sea or great lakes.

The following is the mean temperature of the climate of the respective places,
ascertained by observations.

London, north latitude, 51 30 temperature, 48 Paris, 48 50 54 Quebec, 46 48 42
Rutland, (Vermont,) 43 34 43 Salem, (Massachusetts,) 42 30 47 Hartford,
(Connecticut,) 41 44 49 New York, 40 42 52 Philadelphia, 39 56 52 Virginia,
(Frederick,) 39 nearly 57 Charleston, (S. C.) 32 44 66

Allowing a trisle for differences of instruments, this table presents to view
the various mean temperatures of the climates mentioned.

From this table naturally arise two observations. First the great difference
between the climate in Europe and America, under the same parallels of
latitude. Thus London in 51 degrees north, has a mean temperature, almost as
mild as Hartford in 41, Paris in the 49th degree has a climate, nearly as mild
as the northern parts of Virginia in the 39th, and warmer than New York and
Philadelphia in the 40th.

Again we observe the great effect of the ocean upon the climate. Salem in
Massachusetts is upon the sea shore, and Rutland, in Vermont, fifty or sixty
leagues distant; and one degree of latitude difference in the position of the
places; yet the climate at Rutland it 3 degrees colder than at Salem. On the
other hand, Quebec, remote from the sea, tho on a river, with three degrees
difference of northern latitude, has a difference of only 1 degree in climate.

To ascertain the mean temperature of any given place, it is only necessary to
plunge a good thermometer into water, taken from a depth, in which the
temperature it uniform, at all seasons of the year.

The mean temperature of water within the tropics it not exactly known, but it
must be very near 80 degrees. by Farenheit. Water drawn from a depth of 200 feet in
the West Indies, it cooled by filtration in the air, above the earth in those
hot regions.

The difference in the temperature of Europe and America under the same
parallels, is nearly that of ten degrees of latitude.

See Holyoke's Register of the weather, Mem. Am. Acad. vol. 2. part 1.
Williams' Hist. of Vermont.


In a knowledge of mathematics and the application of mathematical principles to
the material system, Newton i^, and probably will forever be unrivalled. But
modern philosophers enjoy the benefit of many discoveries made by experiments
and by collections of facts, which give them an eminent advantage over the
great astronomers of the last century. The ideas of Newton in regard to the
tails of comets seem to have no just foundation, and to be utterly repugnant to
his own principles of the powers of gravity and resistance. He supposed them to
consist of vapor or smoke repelled from the nucleus by the force of the sun's
heat. He seem to have been aware of the objection to this theory from the
resistance that must be made to the assent of the vapor, by the celestial
either; and therefore supposes an extreme rarefaction to take place, which
removes that resistance.

But whatever rarefaction may be supposed, still it will remain an
incontrovertible principle in physics, that no substance that has gravity can
be supported, but in a medium which has more gravity. The vapor supposed in the
present case could not be maintained in strait lines, without a medium of
greater density to support it. Now, any medium capable of supporting vapor must
furnish great resistance, and very much retard its velocity. I submit it to
mathematicians whether on Newton's own principles, an atmosphere of density
sufficient to support a cannon ball, would not retard its ve^, as much as the
present atmosphere does a feather put in motion (...) rarefaction does not in
the least aid the ascent of (...) from the body of a comet.


With these known principles in view, let any man calculate the velocity of
vapor, driven from the nucleus of a commit, necessary to preserve a direction
nearly opposite to the sun, in its perihelion passage.

Comets enter the solar system in various directions; the planes of their
orbits making various angles with that of the ecliptic. Their orbits are nearly
elliptical, and the sun is in one of the foci of the ellipsis.

By the universal law of planetary motion, according to which all revolving
bodies describe equal areas in equal times, the motion of comets must be very
rapid in their perihelion. The comet of 1770 was calculated to describe an arch
of 50 degrees in 24 hours. This seems hardly credible; but many comets describe
an arch of 180 degrees, a semicircle, in 30, 40, or 50 days.

The perihelion distances also of the various comets are very different, and so
are the lengths of their tails; some of them extending a small distance, and
others to 60 and 80 millions of miles.

Suppose the perihelion distance to be 30 millions of miles, and the length of
the coma to be 70 millions. In this case the extremity of the tail must be 100
millions of miles from the sun. Now, either the vapor which is supposed to
constitute the tail, must be shot from the nucleus with such rapidity, as to
reach the extreme point of the coma, in a few hours; that is, it must pass
through 70 millions of miles, in a very short time, to preserve a direction
nearly opposite to the sun; or the whole coma must move forward with the
nucleus. In the latter case, the extremity of the coma must pass along the
periphery of a circle, The figure would not be a circle, but it is not material
to the argument.
whose radius is a line from that point to the sun, or 100 millions of miles.
Of course while the comet describes an arch equal to a semicircle, the
extremity of the coma must pass through the space of 150 millions of miles. I
believe no kind of vapor of which we have any knowledge, could perform either of
these journeys in the time given.

On the other hand that gravitating substance would not have passed through the
distance supposed, from the creation of the world to this time.

On subjects of this kind, we cannot arrive at certainty. All we can do is, to
reason from analogy and from probable conjectures. We know of no substance in
creation, capable of producing the phenomena of the comas of blazing stars,
except electricity or light. No other species of matter passes with a rapidity
that will solve the phenomenon of the length of the coma preserved in a
direction opposite to the sun. The theories of Kepler and Hamilton are more
rational, than that of Newton. The tails must consist of electricity repelled
from the nucleus by the force of the sun; or must be merely the rays of light
colored by their passage through the comet's atmosphere. These hypotheses may not
solve all the phenomena; but they will account for the principal; and are
repugnant to no philosophical principles.

The curvature of the coma has been alleged as an objection to this hypothesis.
But in fact this is a confirmatory argument in favor of it; for it is analagous
to the curvatures formed by ascending streams of electricity in the lumen
boreale; indeed it seems to be a law of electricity to move in bending lines;
and for any thing we know, this phenomenon may result from the nature of that
species of matter, and be independent of resistance.

In regard to the transparency of the tail, it resembles also the lumen
boreale. Through both of these luminous appearances, the stars shine with
undiminished luster; but vapor, however rare, would refract their light, and in
a certain degree, interrupt our vision.

An Essay on Comets by Andrew Oliver, published 1772, ascribes the tails of
comets to air extremely dilated and repelled from the nucleus by the power of
the sun; but this hypothesis is liable to all the objections stated against the
theory of Newton.

My own opinion respecting the material system, is this; that an atmosphere,
the basis of which is electricity, fills infinite space and involves in its
bosom all the solid orbs which shine in the celestial regions. This may be
denominated the mundane atmosphere. My hypothesis rests on the following
reasons.

First. The large meteors or globes of fire are formed in regions far beyond
the limit assigned to the earth's atmosphere. Their altitudes vary from 40 to
80 miles. At the height of 80 miles, then, there must be the matter of an
atmosphere, capable, of generating globes of fire of half a mile in diameter;
and of communicating sounds, as full and distinct, as the air near the earth;
for the explosion of one of those globes resembles thunder.

Secondly. The lumen boreale has been often calculated to be visible at an
elevation of 7 or 800 miles. I do not rely on the accuracy of these
calculations, on account of the difficulties attending them. In some instances
we are very certain that this light exists in the regions of the higher clouds.

Thirdly. The tails of comets must be matter, or depend on matter for their
coloring by which they become visible. In either case we have evidences nearly
amounting to demonstration that a material atmosphere fills the boundless
regions of space.

Fourthly. But an argument of still more weight in my mind, is one drawn from
the necessity of such an atmosphere, as the medium of attraction and repulsion
-- the principles that connect and bind together the vast orbs that roll in
etherial regions. I can have no idea of such an immense power exerted in an
immense void or vacuum.

It seems probable that the parts of our atmosphere which constitute weight,
and are supposed to influence the barometer, are limited to the distance of a
few miles from the earth. Water, for instance, is a substance destined to
answer certain purposes on the globe, and is probably confined to its
neighborhood.

But the principle of electricity may be, and undoubtedly is, a nongravitating
and permanently elastic substance. This may be diffused through infinite space,
and by its amazing elasticity, may be capable of communicating motion or force
from planet to planet, with the rapidity of light.

Newton supposed infinite space to be filled with a subtle substance which he
called either. Had this great man been acquainted with the laws of electricity
discovered since his days, he probably would have exchanged the term either, for
electricity.

By means of this powerful principle, the planets all influence each other; and
become the means of diversifying each other's seasons; sometimes by attracting,
sometimes by repelling, and sometimes disturbing the proportions of this
substance, or influencing its mechanical laws, by which it is combined or
decomposed with other atmospheric substances.

Hence we may account for the frequency of earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and
violent tempests, under particular phases of the moon, and especially during
the proximity of comets. The electrical matter accumulated in the earth by its
own laws, or by reason of an unusual demand a^ extra may, during the approach
of these orbs, be suddenly called into action, and occasion extraordinary
tumults in the atmosphere.

Perhaps also we may, in this hypothesis, find a solution of the phenomenon, so
interesting to man, and so mysterious, why the approach of comets never fails
to be attended with epidemic diseases. The fact in regard to comets which come
near the earth, it unquestionable; and it is equally certain that earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions, meteors and many other electrical phenomena, are, at such
(...) more numerous and violent, than at other times.

Now it is proved by experiments that the fibers of living animals are the most
perfect conductors of electricity, while the integuments which cover them are
non-conductors. A consequence of these principles must be, that in all the
motions or operations of electricity in the atmosphere, the nerves must be the
principal subjects of its influence. Hence if the atmosphere is, at times,
electrified beyond the degree which is usual, and necessary to preserve the
body in a due state of excitement, the nerves must be too highly excited, and
under a continued operation of undue stimulus, become extremely irritable, and
subject to debility. Shall we not find, in this hypothesis, a rational solution
of the phenomenon which has puzzled medical men, the excessive irritability of
the nervous system, in times of epidemic diseases, which facilitates the
invasion of fever? Shall we not account for the eruptive diseases which always
precede pestilential epidemics, on the principle of the great debility of the
extreme vessels, induced by the weakness of the nerves which spread over the
human body near the surface, by which means these vessels are rendered
incapable of performing their usual secretions? Shall we not be able to account
for the remarkable coincidences in time between the influenza, and unusual
electrical phenomena, as volcanic eruptions and earthquake? May we not account
for epidemic measles, in those years when the atmosphere shows evidences of
high electrification? And will not this principle explain the diseases among
animals, the defect of vegetation, and the extraordinary generation of insects,
during pestilence? It is well known that vegetation may be greatly accelerated
by artificial electricity. Is this effect produced by what is called
excitement? And if so, how do we know that a similar power, operating on the
elements, may not call into existence innumerible insects? To what other
principle shall we ascribe the unusual size of common insects, when they
precede and accompany pestilence, a fact well attested? There must be a cause
for these phenomena, and where shall we find it, but in the universal principle
of excitement?

It is now agreed among philosophers that electricity is the immediate agent in
the formation of rain, snow and hail. In confirmation of this theory, my
enquiries into the cause of epidemic diseases have led to a discovery, that
those years when volcanoes discharge great quantities of fire and lava,
including some months before and after the discharges, are by a great
difference, most productive of hail. Hence the immense damage done by
hail-storms in those seasons which are excessively dry and hot; these years
being closely attendant on volcanic eruptions. The theory which ascribes hail
to extreme cold is defective. We know that pieces of ice of three, six and even
nine inches in circumference sometimes fall in hail-storms. By the laws of
gravity, a hail-stone must begin to fall, as soon as it begins to be formed;
and as it requires but a few seconds to descend, it is easy to conceive that
mere cold cannot occasion a congelation rapid enough to form pieces of ice of
half a pound weight. The process is electrical, and almost instantaneous; and
we know that real snow may be artificially and instantly produced by means of
condensed air and electricity. Hence we are led to the causes which connect
severe winters with volcanic eruptions; we derive the extreme heat of summers
and cold of winters, which so generally accompany pestilence, from the same
cause, a super abundance of electricity.

Hence we are led also to the cause of the apoplexies, lethargies and eruptive
diseases, which almost uniformly follow great volcanic discharges and
earthquakes in Italy. The system, and especially the nerves, are excessively
excited, and lose their energy.

It is on the same principle also that we explain the phenomena of freezings
when the thermometer is above the usual point of frost. This has been observed
near volcanic mountains, where the atmosphere is highly charged with
electricity. In 1730, Dr. Cyrillas found by a thermometer made by Hauksbee,
that water, near Vesuvius, froze with the mercury 10 degrees above the freezing
point.

Phil. Trans. No. 424. Bad. Mem. vol. 9. 299. The nature of this element,
electricity, is little understood. It is the modern opinion that heat and light
are only modifications of the same element. This is analogous to what we know
of water, which exists in the form of water, of visible vapor and air.

It is supposed that electricity cannot be insulated in the human body. But if
it cannot be insolated in the form of electricity, may it not in the form of
heat, and thus be the direct cause or matter of inflammation? If it can be
accumulated and insulated in this form, may not conductors be formed to draw it
off in the form of electricity? Mr. Vinal relates that he speedily removed
local inflammation occasioned by a burn and scald, by the application of a
negatively charged electrical machine.

Mem. Amer. Acad. vol. 2. 144. Should this doctrine be well founded, the success
of metallic points in removing topical inflammation, will be explained and
established.

The proofs of the altitude of the atmosphere from the power of refracting
light, are now known to be fallacious. No man will suppose the atmosphere to be
less elevated, in the equatorial regions, than in the polar circles; yet the
duration of twilight, under the equator, being less than in places remote from
it, proves that the power of refraction will not determine the height of the
atmosphere. The power of refraction is in a ratio to the diminution of heat, or
increase of cold, in the atmosphere; or perhaps to the increase of electricity.

Nor will it be correct to say that the power of refraction depends on the
density of the atmosphere, unless density can exist independent of gravity. The
atmosphere in the polar and temperate regions raises the barometer no higher,
than under the equator; nor is the mercury in barometers generally higher in
winter, when the thermometer, by Farenheit's scale, is 20 degrees under cipher,
than in summer when it is at 98 degrees. the temperature of blood heat.

If density implies or involves in it gravity, then the atmosphere at the
equator is as dense as in any distant latitude, for the barometer is as high in
one as in the other. But if the atmosphere it as dense and as heavy, caeteris
paribus, in one latitude, as in another, then the powers of refraction, in
different latitudes, which are various, cannot depend on density.

It is indeed very questionable whether density and gravity are the principles
which wholly influence the barometer. The barometer falls, as it is elevated
above the surface of the earth; but the atmosphere retains all its powers of
sustaining respiration and circulation, at an altitude of 15,000 feet.

What are the aerial phenomena that attend a fall of the barometer? How can the
weight of the mass of air surrounding the globe, be suddenly taken off, over a
whole continent? What becomes of its gravity, and the principle of attraction
on which it is supposed to depend? Are they removed, expelled, or suspended?

I suspect the theory which assigns to the barometer the province of
determining the gravity of air, is fundamentally defective; and that instead of
variations in its weight, it indicates only variations in the combinations of
its parts, which diversify its elasticity, and its operation on the barometer,
as well as on the human body. When the atmosphere is full of vapor, the
barometer usually falls, and we feel a depression of spirits. It can handly be
true, that the pressure of the whole atmosphere is less, at such a time, than
when the air is clear and the barometer high; for this vapor circulates near
the earth and the higher regions of the air are as clear and as ponderous as
usual. If the density of the air near the earth should be lessened, the
consequence must be the air from higher regions which retains its gravity, must
instantly rush in to supply the defect.

The only way to account for the variations of the barometer, appears to be on
the principle before mentioned. The air appears to be less elastic, when the
heat is combined with vapor, and the mercury falls. It seems necessary to take
into view these considerations in order to solve the phenomena. The general
pressure of the atmosphere or gravity, is probably uniform, and it is the
various changes in its elastic powers, which occasion the vibrations in the
barometer.

Every dairy woman knows that thunder and lightning will almost instantly
coagulate milk; that is, when electricity is united with vapor, and passes, in
a visible form, from cloud to cloud, or between the clouds and the earth, milk
turns, or coagulates -- so it does, during a rainy day, in summer, without
thunder, with the thermometer at 64 degrees. as I know by observation. This
condition of the atmosphere, may be called its decomposed state. The barometer
falls, vapor becomes visible, the functions of the body are languid, milk
coagulates, objects contract mould, in short the atmosphere is unelastic, and
ill-fitted to maintain vigor in animal or vegetable bodies.

Thus also the fermentation of beer is checked and destroyed by thunder, and no
human art has been found to restore it. By what process of electricity is this
sudden change effected?

I have remarked in the preceding pages, that a pestilential atmosphere is not
corrected or moved by the force of wind -- no tempest expelling an epidemic
fever from a city, unless at the close of the season, and accompanied with
heavy rains. How can we solve this difficulty, but upon the hypothesis of an
electrical atmosphere which it stationary?

Dr. Franklin proved that "an electrified cork ball at the end of a silk
thread, whirled never so rapidly through the air, for a length of time, lost
none of its electricity. He found also by an experiment that an electrical
atmosphere raised round a thick wire, inserted in a phial of air, drives out
none of the air; nor on withdrawing that atmosphere, would any air rush in." On
Electricity, Land. ed. 97. It is also proved that a most violent blast of wind,
thrown across a stream of electrical matter, has not the least effect upon it.

These experiments prove that air furnishes no sensible resistance to the
motion of electricity, and that it exists in air without expanding or
compressing it. In short it proves that electricity acts entirely by its own
laws, and is not controlled by the agitations of the air.

Will not these observations throw light on the fact of a stationary atmosphere
in cases of pestilential epidemics? Is not electricity the basis of the common
atmosphere, and immovable by wind? And does not a pestilential air consist
partly in some combinations of this element, with other aerial substances,
which are not moved by wind? This is suggested merely for consideration; for it
appears to me improbable. Frost destroys the pestilential condition of the
atmosphere, and this is supposed to act upon the deleterious substances arising
from the earth, or human body. Besides, a pestilential atmosphere rises but a
few feet above the earth, which indicates that its pernicious qualities are
dense and gravitating substances.

Indeed two causes seem to concur in the origin of pestilential fevers -- an
electrical condition of the atmosphere which renders the nervous system
extremely irritable, and the body of course prone to fever; and a collection of
morbid matters arising from living I mention the morbid matters from living
bodies, among the causes of pestilence. I am persuaded that perspiration in
cities furnishes more poison than streets and alleys. It fills all close rooms,
especially bed rooms; in close-built streets, it infects the very atmosphere;
and a more virulent poison does not exist, than perspirable matter in a
condensed and fermenting state. This can only be destroyed by a liberal use of
water.
and dead animals, and putrefying vegetables. Wind may remove the latter cause,
if accessible, which however is never the case in large cities; but cannot
affect the influence of the former. Frost has access to all morbid causes, and
renders them inert. It also reduces the stimulus acting on the human body, and
renders it less irritable. But the electrical stimulus remains. Hence although the
progress of the fever is arrested by cold, the type of it is visible in the
diseases of the winter. The irritability of the system, from electrical causes,
still remains; and gives to the fevers of winter the peculiar symptoms of
pestilential or typhus pleurisy, and peripneumony.

A remarkable property of electricity is to give polarity to the needle of a
compass. A violent stroke of electricity, destroyed the virtue of the
loadstone, and reversed the ends of the needle of the compass on board of Capt.
Waddell's ship in 1751; and a suitable discharge of that element will give
polarity, like the magnet. Hence it is concluded that magnetism depends on
electricity, but in what manner, seems to be mysterious.

It is well known that the needle is subject to variations, which are different
in different parts of the earth; and in some degree, periodical. It has also a
small diurnal variation; receding from the east or influence of the sun from 8
o'clock in the morning to 2 in the afternoon; and from the west, or the same
influence, from 2 o'clock to 9 P. M.; and during the night, remaining
stationary. Is not this owing to the repulsion of light and heat? If so, is
there not an analogy between this diurnal variation, and the phenomenon of
polarity? If light and heat, falling on one side of the needle, repel it in a
small degree; is it not rational to conclude that the equatorial heat, should
repel the magnetic point, and direct it to the north? That is, the needle
points toward that portion of the atmosphere which is most perfectly electric.

It may be objected that the needle does not always direct itself to the same
point. True; but there is some periodical revolution in the electricity of the
terrestrial regions; as the appearance and disappearance of the lumen boreale,
at certain periods, warrants this suggestion. It seems to be admitted that
there is a current of electricity from the equatorial regions toward the polar
regions, within the earth, and in the upper parts of the atmosphere, a current
of the same element from the poles toward the equator. This idea is derived in
part from the lumen boreale, and receives countenance from the fact, that a bar
of iron, standing directed toward the pole will acquire polarity or magnetic
properties; but directed toward other points in the heavens, no such effect is
produced; indicating a stream of electricity passing through the bar, from the
center of the earth toward the pole, but not in any other direction.

Should this idea be well founded, and should it be admitted that the lumen
boreale is a current of electricity from the north to the south, will not the
periodical appearance and disppearance of this light, indicate a revolution in
that current about the axis of the earth, or perhaps an axis of its own? If so,
on what laws does it depend, and how will it agree with the variations of the
compass?

It will be said, that the variations are different in different places, and
not uniform in the same place. True; but the general course of variations in
the same place is tolerably uniform.

With respect to different degrees of variations in various places, I have one
observation that is probably new. It is very probable, if not evident, that the
distributions or forces of electricity are different in different quarters of
the globe. I say distributions or forces; for a difference in the state of
existence or modes of acting, will as well account for the phenomena, as
difference in quantity. My reasons for this opinion are, that the barometer has
different altitudes, in different places, at the same time. The mean altitude
for a month or a year, in places of the same elevation, is very various. Hence
we conclude that the weight of the atmosphere cannot be the cause of these
variations, for this on a level of the ocean, must, on hydrostatic principles,
be every where the same. Yet the actual differences amount to one half or two
thirds of an inch.

See Phil. Trans. No 435. B^d. Mem. Vol. 10. 81. It is easy to account for this
difference of pressure on the principle of different combinations of the
electric principle with vapor or other local matter in the atmosphere, which
may vary the force or elasticity of the air; but I do not see how the weight of
a fluid alone, whose pressure must be equal, if of equal height and density,
can account for these differences. It is utterly repugnant to all known
principles of the equable pressure of a gravitating fluid, to suppose a mere
change in the form or composition of that fluid, should alter the absolute
weight. Water admits none of these varieties, being always of equal density and
gravity at equal altitudes.

On the same principle of a difference of pressure or elasticity in air and
water, without a change of weight, perhaps we may account for the very
different elevations of the tide in different places, and in some instances, in
the same latitude. It is rational to conclude that the electricity is various
in its combinations or quantity, in different places, according to the heat of
the climate, the neighborhood of land and high mountains, or perhaps to the
seats of volcanoes? The fact that tides do not rise as high, on the main ocean,
as near land, seems to countenance this idea. It seems to indicate that the
medium by which the moon influences the water, has different powers near the
land and at a great distance.

Another fact that seems to favor the hypothesis that electricity is the
instrument of tides, is, the great irregularity of tides. In many instances
there have been preternatural ebbings and flowings of the tide -- sometimes the
river Thames, for instance, has been left almost dry, for many hours, when
there has been neither wind nor earthquake to ^unt for the phenomenon. A recess
of this kind is ^tioned in 1114, when the Thames for the whole day, on the 15th
of October, was so low, that children waded over between the Tower and London
bridge. In 1247 there was a cessation of the flowing of the tides for three
months, before a severe earthquake. See Short vol. 2. 145. I should not be
inclined to credit these relations if modern observations did not serve to
confirm them. On the 11th of March 1785 and 25th of January 1787, the Tiviat, a
large river in the south of Scotland, receded and left its channel dry, in the
former instance, two hours, and in the latter, four. No convulsion of the earth
was known in that neighborhood, nor within two or three weeks of the first
instance. As earthquake happened on the 26th of January, the day after the
second instance, but could not be the cause. A similar recess happened on the
day of the earthquake, in the river Clyde. On the 12th of September 1784, in
perfectly calm weather, the water in the Lock Tay in Scotland suddenly ebbed
300 feet and left the channel dry, then flowed again, and thus alternately rose
and fell for two hours. The same phenomenon, in a less degree, occurred in
several succeeding days.

Sinclair, vol 6. 624. The facts related of the sea and rivers in Holland on
the day, but not at the hour, of the earthquake, at Lisbon, in 1755, when ships
snapped their cables, and water dashed over the sides of vessels, without the
least sensible motion of the earth, are strong proofs of the same insensible
but immensely powerful action of the electricity of the globe. The swelling of
the ocean in the time of earthquakes is not so much owing to the rising of the
earth beneath, as to the force of electricity. The intumescence sometimes
begins before the shock, as it does before hurricanes in the West Indies.

In Scotland, during the great earthquakes in Calabria, in 1782, the water in
the locks was agitated without any motion of the earth, and the mercury in the
barometer fell within the tenth of an inch of the bottom of the scale. On the
12th of February 1787, the barometer at Edinburgh fell nearly to the same point.

These phenomena can be resolved into no cause but some operation of
electricity, and they add much weight to my suspicions, that tides are governed
by some laws of electricity, which are influenced by the phases of the moon.

The great fall of the barometer in Scotland is a strong evidence that the same
energetic principle governs that instrument. It is absurd to suppose the
atmosphere could have lost such a portion of its weight. Indeed it is far from
being impossible that the rise and fall of the barometer may be occasioned by
the force of electricity acting on the qicksilver itself.

If any person should hesitate to believe that a mere change in the combination
of electricity and aerial substances, may vary the spring or elasticity,
without the least alteration of their weight, let him attend to the different
powers of wine, cider or beer, before and after fermentation begins. It is not
presumable that the liquor has more weight in a state of fermentation, than
when quiescent, before that process begins; yet the force with which it acts
upon the cask containing it, is increased perhaps a hundred fold. I suspect
that the changes in the atmosphere which affect the barometer and the human
body are analogous to what we observe in liquors -- mere alterations in the
combinations of the parts, producing various elastic powers, without any change
in the general gravity of the atmosphere. Hence it is easy to conceive that the
elastic power of the atmosphere may be diversified by substances exhaled from
the earth, in different situations; this may occasion small variations of the
barometer in two distant places, having the same altitude, and be one cause of
differences in the salubrity of the air.

This idea it still better illustrated by the different properties of gunpowder
in the kernel and in a state of explosion. In the former state, an immense
elastic power is confined to a compass inconceivably small -- by adding to it a
spark of fire, this elastic power is set loose with tremendous effects.




These irregularities have invariably happened in years, which have been
remarkable for electrical phenomena. To this point I have paid particular
attention. They are not always attendant on earthquakes, or volcanic eruptions;
but they occur in the same year, or near the same period; evidencing that when
those visible discharges take place, insensible discharges take place in remote
countries, and on the opposite side of the globe.

Should it be admitted that electricity may be unequally distributed or operate
with different forces, in various places, according to its combinations with
aerial substances, at different times, we may find some probable causes of the
great diversity of diseases in the same year, as well as of the different
heights of the barometer. The stimulus applied to the human body, may be
different in various places, according to the predominant operation of one or
more of the following causes.

I. Soil, which may affect the air in various ways.

II. Situation in regard to elevation, to water, hills, mountains, minerals,
fresh air.

III. The population of places, and all the consequent evils of noxious
exhalations.

IV. The cultivation of a country, which has a most salutary effect on the
atmosphere.

It is very certain that the condition of the atmosphere is very different, in
places which appear to be equally favorable to health. Children and
valetudinarians are very sensible of these differences. It is hardly possible
to remove an indisposed person a distance of five miles, without a sensible
effect on his health; be is better or worse in his new atmosphere. Under the
combined operation of such various causes, we are not to be surprised at the
irregularity in the appearance of autumnal and epidemic diseases.

Much labor has been employed to investigate the cause of sensation and
perception. The most able philosophers maintain the necessity of a medium
through which we receive impressions of distant objects. The rays of light are
supposed to be the medium of vision, and an elastic air, the medium of sounds.
But by what means impressions on one part of the body are almost
instantaneously communicated to the other parts, may be a question of difficult
solution.

It appears to me probable that the medium by which impressions are conveyed
from one object to another, is that most elastic fluid, the principle of fire
or electricity, which pervades every object and is diffused through creation. A
motion given to this fluid in the brain is instantly conveyed, by its elastic
property, to the remotest fiber, and vice versa. The same fluid, diffused
through the solar system, and all creation, may and probably is the medium by
which distant orbs make impressions on each other.

It is absurd to suppose that the bodies that compose the solar system, or any
other system of worlds, can be suspended in an immense void, and revolve about
a common center, at distances of many millions of miles, without some medium of
connection; some tie to bind them together. It is absurd to suppose that an
influence can be exerted between them, unless through the medium of a substance.
This substance is doubtless that subtle, elastic fluid which constitutes the
basis of fire, heat, light, or electricity. This fluid, receiving an impression
from one globe, in any part of space, may impart it to another, in a few
moments, by means of its elastic powers. This theory accords with the known
properties of electricity; and affords a sublime idea of the magnificent
structure of the universe.

The heat of a fever may proceed from the same fluid; and hence the value of
water, as a conductor, to carry off the heat of a fever. In all fevers, this is
the indication of cure given by nature. Hence the obvious and prime utility of
perspiration, in the cure of pestilential fevers, which seize the very feat of
life, the essential organs of the nervous system -- parts of the body which
medicines taken into the stomach do not easily reach. Perspiration and
salivation, by throwing out moist and fluid substances, thus conducting the
heat or electric principle to the surface, seem to be the most certain remedies.

This elastic principle, if any thing, is the substance which has given rise to
the doctrins of galvanism, animal magnetism -- and Perkinism. But if those
doctrins have any just foundation, the nature and modifications of the
principle are so little understood, that all attempts to reduce the doctrins to
certainty or system have hitherto been defeated. Primary causes elude all the
researches of man, and compel him to acknowledge his ignorance.

On the popular modes of guarding against infection.
MANKIND have, in all ages, resorted to a variety of expedients to guard
themselves from pestilential distempers, and to check them when existing. The
use of aromatics as a pestifuge, is as old as the journey of the Israelites
from Egypt; for when the plague had broke out among them, Aaron took his
censer, put on incense, and standing between the dead and living, the plague
was stayed.

Numb. xvi. 47. Herodian relates that in time of pestilence, the Romans stuffed
their nostrils with aromatics, but without success.

Mignot relates that the Turks, at this day, make great use of aromatics, to
guard themselves from the plague.

Hist. Turk. Emp. vol. 2. Diemerbroeck chewed tobacco as a preservative, and
alleges many instances of its good effects. It is not improbable that this
article, by promoting discharges of the saliva, may prevent the noxious matter
from entering the system by the sauces, which are principal agents in absorbing
the poison. Any other herb that will promote spitting, would probably be
equally salutary. Washing the mouth frequently with fresh water is very useful
in the same way; and nurses should never inhale the effluvia of the sick,
without immediately washing the mouth.

In our country, many similar expedients are employed toward off infection.
Camphor is worn in little bags around the neck, or frequently applied to the
nose.

It does not appear that aromatics and pungent salts have much effect in
resisting the attacks of pestilence. There is probably no attraction between
the particles of such substances and the poison of the plague. Stimulants are
useful, in some cases, when applied to the whole body; but applied to the nose,
their effect is local, and wholly inadequate to the purpose. A spoonful of
fresh water, taken frequently into the mouth, and discharged, is better than a
pound of camphor; for water mingles the infectious particles with its mass, and
renders it harmless or carries it off.

It is possible however that, in some cases, an atmosphere impregnated with the
stimulating effluvia of spiceries may preserve the body from the attacks of
this disease. An instance is related in Acta Eruditorum of the year 1721,
published at Leipsic, that persons living near storehouses of spices escaped
the plague. We should however be cautious of drawing conclusions from a single
fact. The effect may have proceeded from an unsuspected cause.

Skenkius, from Alex. Benedictus, informs, that it is a custom among the
Tartars in the Crimea, to kill their dogs in time of pestilence and suffer them
to putrefy on the earth; alleging that the fetor arrests the plague by changing
the air. Page 773. This is certainly a most singular remedy, and the fact
requires good authority and explanation to induce belief. It however
corresponds with some instances, in which pestilence has been least severe in
filthy places.

The burning of powder is held to be useful in checking the plague, by
generating respirable air. Lernnius, lib. 2. The blowing up of a magazine has
been said to put a stop to pestilence.

During the civil wars in England, which ended in the death of Charles I.
Fuller relates that the plague in Litchfield was arrested by the firing of
cannon, at the siege of that town. The pious author says that many ascribed
this to the purging of the air by the bullets, but divines ascribed it to God's
good providence.

It is related in Van Swieten that the fermentation of wines on the Moselle, in
time of vintage, had a most sensible effect in checking the plague.

It has been customary to burn resinous substances in the streets to stop the
progress of pestilence, but without any sensible effect. It was attempted in
Philadelphia in 1793 and in New York in 1795, but the ill success has prevented
a repetition of the attempt.

Authors relate that the ancient physicians put a stop to the plague, by
enkindling large fires in the streets. I consider the fact as doubtful, for it
is not agreed among writers, whether this was done by Hippocrates, or another
man.

It was however on the strength of the story, that great fires were kindled in
London in 1665; but the deaths were more numerous on that night, than they had
been before. If fire can be of any use in the plague, it must be by creating
motion in a stagnant air, or by drying a moist one. The latter effect is that
which Galen supposed to have resulted from the fires used by the ancients; and
there may be situations and times, when a fire in infected houses may be
applied to good purpose, by removing damp stagnated air. But it is questionable
whether the atmosphere of a city can be sensibly and beneficially changed by
public fires; and the experiment is very hazardous, for if the fire should be
communicated to the buildings, it would not only consume property, but double
the rage of pestilence. Thus the plague in Constantinople in 1539 was greatly
inflamed by a fire which consumed a large part of the city. Fatigue and
distress, added to the previous causes, multiplied the new cases, and one third
of the inhabitants perished.

Mignot's Hist. Turk. Emp. vol. 2. Every thing which collects, fatigues and
alarms people, at such times, is very prejudicial; as the fire in Philadelphia,
in 1793; in Providence, in 1797, and the launching of the frigate in Baltimore,
in the epidemic of the latter year.

The only effectual safety is in flight. When a few cases of the plague first
appear, they should be removed, or other precautions taken to prevent my ill
effects from infection. They may be sporadic cases, and such precautions may
save a city from the further progress of the distemper, among visitors and
attendants. But if these precautions prove fruitless, as they usually will, and
as they always will, when the disease is the effect of an atmospheric
principle, which is the fact, nineteen times in twenty, the only certain means
of security, are in quitting the city. The practice of shutting up, which is
customary in the east, if the people can live in high rooms, may save life, but
it is very inconvenient, and less safe than an abandonment of the infected town.

On Venesection.
THE extensive mortality occasioned by the plague, the rapidity of the disease,
and the virulence of its poison, which often defies all medical aid, have
called forth all the exertions of talents and knowledge, to invent some mode of
defeating its ravages.

It is agreed on all hands, that perspiration, if induced on the first seizure
of the patient, is the most effectual prescription. Hence the universal use of
alexipharmics in pestilence.

But it often happens, that no application whatever will excite perspiration,
and especially, in the later stages of the disease.

No part of the practice of medicin has excited such warm controversies, as
venesection. It is foreign from my plan to discuss this question; my remarks
are intended rather to explain the cause of this diversity of opinions, from my
observations on historical facts.

Most of the medical writers who were personally acquainted with the true
plague, in former ages, when it frequently overspread Europe, have decided
against bleeding.

In the plague which ravaged all France in 1565, Charles IX. then king,
demanded of all the physicians to give information of the best mode of
treatment, and they unanimously decided against the practice of bleeding
liberally.

Skenkius, p. 770. Ambrosius Paraeus, in the same plague, made extensive
enquiry, as to the success of bleeding and purging, the answer of his medical
friends was, that in all cases, these evacuations, if powerful, were fatal.

Sennertus, p. 356. Forestus, observed, in the plague of 1557, at Delph, that
those all died, who were bled after twelve hours from the invasion of the
disease. Palmerius has ^ed to the same effect, and so has J. Ant. Sarracenus,
in ^cribing a plague in Geneva.

Fallopius remarked in the plague which raged from 1524 to 1530, that all died
who were bled. This was observed also by H. Florentus, a physician of Leyden --
by Simonius, in the plague of 1602 -- Hildanus, in the plague at Lausanne, and
a multitude of others. See them collected in Diemerbroeck, de peste, 130. and
sequel, who found in the plague at Nimeguen "venesectionem damnosissimam
fuisse" -- bleeding was extremely injurious.

On the other hand, we have in the same author a long list of names of eminent
physicians, who warmly advocate venesection. To this list may be added the name
of the celebrated Sydenham.

The source of this difference of opinion is doubtless the difference of the
symptoms in the disease under different constitutions of air, in different
places, and in different habits. The great difference in the same disease,
under different epidemic constitutions, was most distinctly observed by
Sydenham; and this variety seems to constitute no small nor easy part of the
physician's investigation.

Sydenham observed what is undoubtedly true, that the same disease is
characterized with different symptoms, under different conditions of the air;
and often the same apparent state of air produces very different diseases. It
is very evident, that the visible qualities of the seasons are not the only
circumstances that modify diseases. The learned Boil remarks the great
diversity in plagues, requiring remedies altogether different.

Vol. 5. p. 60. Hence at one time, the plague, in a few hours after invasion,
induces a state of debility, in which bleeding will, in almost every case,
accelerate death. At other times, the disease may maintain, for two or three
days, a highly inflammatory diathesis, in which a timely, and judicious use of
the lancet may prevent a fatal termination.

I am persuaded that history will justify these remarks, and make practitioners
very cautious of prescribing for the name of a disease. This caution is more
especially necessary on the first appearance of an epidemic before the ruling
type of the disease is fully manifested. The doctrins of Sydenham, in regard to
the controlling influence of different constitutions of air, seem not to have
been studied and pursued, with the diligence due to their importance. They are
the basis of an interesting branch of philosophy as well as medicin; being
grounded on those varieties incident to the same object, which characterize all
the works of creation -- varieties which constitute the revolutions in the same
disease, analogous to those already described in a series of epidemics and in
many other phenomena of the world.

On Vapor or Mephitic Air, extricated from the earth by means of discharges of
the electrical fluid.
I HAVE suggested in the preceding pages, that epidemic diseases may be
sometimes occasioned by a vapor extricated from the earth. That such has been
the fact in cases of earthquakes, has been proved by several examples; that a
deleterious vapor may be expelled from the earth and produce diseases, without
a concussion, appears from the case at Rouen in 1753, and the sickness and
death of fish are strong evidences of the truth of the principle. Other
considerations lead to the same result.

In the account which Sir W. Hamilton has given of the eruption of Vesuvius in
1794, Univ. Mag. Oct. 1795, it is observed, that "after every eruption of that
volcano we read of damage done by mephitic air, which coming from under the
ancient lava, insinuates itself into low places, as cellars and wells near the
foot of the mountain." Several instances happened after the eruption of 1767,
of persons going into cellars and being struck down with this vapor, who would
have died, without assistance. This vapor on an open plain subsides near the
earth, being heavier than common air; but it fills cellars, wells and hollow
places, so as to endanger life, and actually proves fatal to birds, beasts, and
vegetables; sometimes to men. This vapor or fixed air is generated by the
action of vitriolic acid on calcareous earth; and by other means in the immense
laboratory of Nature's works.

The facts here stated and which are well known to every chemist, will perhaps
account for the damps in wells, as this fixed air is called in popular
language. It is a common idea that air will become impregnated with this vapor,
by mere stagnation in a well. This is probably a mistake. Nor is it probable
that any substances in the well generate this air. It cannot proceed from
water, nor from the earth, or stones, or rocks which compose the sides of the
well, unless the earth is different from common earth. It is probable therefore
that this mephitic vapor is expelled from the earth by force of internal heat
or electrical fire; and that this happens not uniformly, or at any certain
times. I suspect that the discharge of it happens at particular times in
various parts of the earth, from causes not yet explained; and that it
occasions epidemic diseases among men, beasts and fishes. To aid us in an
enquiry of this kind, it would be necessary to examine a great number of facts,
and discover whether this mephitic vapor is ever found in wells, except when
epidemic diseases of some sort or other prevail among animals.

On the 30th of August 1795, just after the pestilential fever appeared in
New York, two men fell victims to this vapor, in a well belonging to a brewery
in Pine-street, within a few yards of the house where I then resided. The well
had been dug but a few months, and was not used, but covered over with boards.
It was about 25 or 30 feet deep, contained a few feet of water, and was so full
of mephitic vapor, that a candle was extinguished within eight feet of the
surface of the earth, as I found by experiment. This was during the sickness,
and a question arises whether the two things were connected in cause. Had not a
similar vapor been silently thrown from the bowels of the earth, over all the
coast and region from New Jersey to Connecticut, for some months previous? And
may not the sickness of the oysters and shad on that coast, from 1794 to 1796,
as well as the destructive epidemic angina, fevers and dysentery, be ascribed
to that cause? I offer this hint to excite enquiry. Gov. Ellis, in a paper on
the subject of hurricanes, Museum, vol. 9. 215, mentions, among the precursors
of those tempests, thick vapors in the air "sensibly mephitic." If this vapor
is the cause of diseases, it will account for the greater prevalence of them in
low situations.

There is reason to suspect that this mephitic air is expelled from the earth,
in considerable quantities, at particular times, but incorporating itself with
the common air, it does not often prove fatal to men, although it may lessen the
vital powers of the atmosphere, and aid in the production of diseases.

In 1729, on the 19th of July, a Mr. Adams of Boston and his servant perished
by this air in a well. Let it be observed that in this year, the influenza
spread over Europe. Whether it was in America or not, I cannot learn; but the
measles was epidemic in Boston, in that year; and other parts of America were
sickly.

But what among other things inclines me to the opinion that this species of
air is not generated gradually in wells, but is expelled from the earth
suddenly, is a fact related in the same paper with the foregoing, Baddam's Mem.
vol. 9. 4. Phil. Trans. 411; that on the 9th of May preceding this accident,
two men at work in a well in School-street, Boston, were suddenly attacked by
this species of vapor, and came near losing their lives. The well had recently
been dug and enlarged, the workmen experiencing no inconvenience; and that the
vapor did not proceed from opening a new chasm, or breaking a new stratum of
earth or minerals, is certain; for the men were not the^ digging, but stoning
the sides of the well.

In Philosophical Transactions, No. 119, it is said that damps are generally
observed to come about the end of May, and to continue during the heat of
summer. At that season also they are most violent in mines infested with them,
during the whole year. But by a subsequent paragraph, it appears that the
writer in that remark made no distinction between fixed air and inflammable.

If it is true that this vapor is expelled from the earth in spring and summer
only or principally, to what cause shall we ascribe that circumstance? Not to
internal heat certainly, for that at the depth of 20 feet is always the same.
We may perhaps find a solution in the excited atmosphere of summer, which may
occasion discharges of electricity.

It might be well for the world, if experiments were made to ascertain these
points. If a vapor is at times thrown into the atmosphere from the internal
parts of the earth, and becomes noxious to health, it is of great consequence
to the world to know the fact, as this air subsides into the lower grounds, and
might often be avoided. A deep covered well and not used, might be kept for
this purpose, and a lighted candle or lamp let down to its bottom once a month.
If there had been a discharge of mephitic air, it would be found in the well;
but if the air of the well should be found good, we might conclude that the
atmosphere had received no taint from subterranean vapor.

This subject deserves investigation. The herbage is at times affected by a dew
or clammy substance, which is visible, tangible and offensive to cattle.
Instances have been related in the preceding history. The honey-dew is a
curious phenomenon, not well understood. This is a substance that resembles
honey or wax, deposited on the leaves of trees, and attaching itself to blades
of corn. It is sweet to the taste, and the honey-bee is seen to feed upon it.
To corn it is very prejudicial, by causing a blast.

I have not been able to ascertain whether this is a periodical or an
accidental phenomenon, nor to find the causes of it in the known properties of
air or water. Is it the produce of a vapor from the earth; or of some unusual
combination of aerial substances?

We live in a fluid, composed of various ingredients, each of which has its own
properties, and by various combinations, and incessant changes, these
ingredients are daily generating new properties. One day, the sky is calm and
cloudless; the next, the heavens are wrapped in vapor, and the earth deluged
with rain. One moment, we are shrouded in chaotic darkness; the next presents
to us the heavens and earth in a sheet of livid flame. Instantaneous is the
transition from the silence of the grave to peals of thunder that shake the
earth beneath our feet; and the field that smiles with its golden fruits, to
day, is tomorrow torn with the raging tempest, stripped of its beauties, and
converted into a barren waste.

Immersed in elements productive of these sudden and tremendous effects, how is
it possible that man should pass through life without feeling inconveniences
from principles capable of such astonishing vicissitudes? Instead of wondering
at the phenomenon of pestilence and other epidemic diseases, and hunting, with
microscopic view, for a bundle of clothes in which to find the germ of a malady
that desolates the earth, men would show more wisdom and more correct
understanding, if they would collect facts, with care, examine them with candor,
and endeavor by this process to arrive at some knowledge of the powers and
effects of those elements which compose all animal bodies, and from whose
ope^ations are immediately derived all the vital energies. There we may find,
although we may not be able to comprehend, principles of disease as powerful and
as universal as the laws of nature.

On the revolution of certain Comets.
SINCE this work has been in the press, I have had the curiosity to trace back
the revolutions of two or three comets, whose periods were calculated by Dr.
Halley, to find how far his astronomical calculations are verified by the
history of the appearance of comets, in former ages. The following are the
results.

The comet of 1682 Dr. Halley found to have a period of 75 years. If this
calculation is exact, the same comet must have appeared in the following years.
The first column contains the years when the comet must have appeared,
supposing its period to be exactly 75 years -- the second, contains the years
when a comet appeared, according to the preceding history.

A. D. A. D. 1757 1757 856 858 1682 1682 781 784 1607 1607 706 1531 1531 631
632 1456 1456 556 556 or 8 1380 1380 481 480 1306 1305 406 407 1231 331 1156
256 1081 181 181 1006 1005 106 931 31

I have found no mention of a comet in 1231, 1156, 1081, 931, 781, 706; but the
physical phenomena at those periods, as severe winters, inundations,
earthquakes, pestilence, etc. render it more than probable that a comet was
visible, in those years, or in the next preceding or following. In some other
periods, a comet is mentioned in the next year, to that which is designated in
the first column; but I take this difference to proceed from the fractions of a
year -- the period of the comet not being exactly a year.

If these calculations and facts may be relied on, this comet must have
appeared in the year 256, in the midst of the mortal pestilence, in the reign
of Gallus and Volusian, and in the year 31 or 32, a little before the
crucifixion of our Savior.

The calculations respecting the return of the comet of 1661 coincide
remarkably with historical facts. Its period is supposed to be 129 years. If
so, then it must have appeared in the years named in the first of the following
columns -- the second column contains the years when a comet did actually
appear, according to the history in the first volume.

A. D. A. D. 1790 500 502 1661 1661 371 1532 1532 242 1403 1402 113 1274 1274
Before Christ. 1145 1145 16 1016 1017 145 145 or 7 887 274 758 759 403 629

I have no account of a comet in 887; but in page 112 of Vol. I. a severe
plague and hard winter are mentioned, under that year. The events related in
page 77, under the years 242 and 3, are such as lead me to suspect a comet, at
that period, which corresponds with the calculations; but I have no account of
any. The same remarks may be made respecting the events of the years 114 to
117, when Antioch was destroyed, as related page 70.

Of the events before Christ 16, I have no particular account. The three
preceding periods of this comet, before Christ 145, ^74, and 4^3, correspond
with great pestilence. See pages 4^ and 43 -- 48 -- 56 of Vol. I. And this
might have been the star alluded to by Justin, in the passage quoted in page 43.

But we have an insuperable difficulty to these calculations -- this star, if
its period is 129 years, should have appeared in 1789 or 90; but no comet was
seen. One appeared in the autumn of 1788, but I know not whether the elements
of its trajectory corresponded with those of the star of 1661. Calculations of
this kind are yet too uncertian to be the basis of a system.

It is greatly to be desired that the revolutions of the comets could be
reduced to as much certainty, as those of the planets. Such calculations would
enable as to account for many of the violent changes on this globe; and aid us
to fix the era of certain great phenomena of antiquity: For no fact is better
established, than that comets have a prodigious influence on the electricity of
the earth and its atmosphere.

The comet of 1680 is supposed to have a period of 575; and the appearance of a
splendid star of this kind in 1105 and 531, gives reason to believe the
calculation just. If so, it must have appeared before Christ 44 -- 619 -- 1194
-- 1769 and 2344. The latter year falls within 8 years of the period assigned
to the deluge. But the uncertainty of ancient chronology leaves room to
question all results from these calculations.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN the course of my investigations into the origin of the bilious plague, I
have had so many opportunities to detect the error^ proceeding from common
report, that I am led to question every fact that does not come directly from
the persons concerned in the transaction related. I had such confidence, for
instance, in the facts published and believed by the people in New Haven,
respecting the origin of the fever of 1794, in that city, from imported
sources, that I had prepared an account of it for the press, before I called on
the persons best able to give me correct information. On examination, I was
surprised to find most of the supposed facts totally unfounded: and Mr. Gorham
and Capt. Truman, the persons concerned, when informed of the reports which had
been circulated on the subject, expressed their surprise that people should
have propagated such tales, without calling on them for a true state of facts.

It was said and published that Polly Gorham, the second person seized with the
fever, was present in Mr. Austin's store when the chest of clothes was opened.
The gentleman who published this report, has since informed me that he had no
authority for it, but the story of a child of six or seven years old. But Capt.
Truman who opened the chest himself informs me, that Polly Gorham was not in
the store at the time.

It was reported and is still believed, by most of the people in the town, that
Isaac Gorham's wife washed infected clothes; but Mr. Gorham assures me that
there is not the least foundation for the story, and he is astonished that such
a tale could have been circulated. He cannot assign any good cause for the
fever in his family, and is inclined to the opinion that no infection was
received from the sloop.

It is possible and probable that some persons who came in the sloop had been
into Gorham's house; at least into the shop in the front room. And this is the
only possible way to account for the propagation of infection from that sloop,
even admitting that it contained infected clothing. But even in this case, it
would seem strange that Gorham himself should escape, and his wife and niece
who were usually in the back room, should contract disease. But the following
facts which have been received from Capt. Truman, since the first volume was
printed, will show the improbability, if not the impossibility, of such a
communication of infection.

This sloop, called the Iris, arrived from Martinico at New York in May. All
her men and passengers were and had been, during the passage, in good health.
The sloop of course was permitted to enter as a clean vessel, and she was
hauled up to a wharf, where she lay ten or twelve days wind-bound, before she
could proceed to New Haven. She had no cargo on board, except a few salted
hides, which were taken out and put on board of a coaster, commanded by Capt.
Miles to be transported to New Haven. This was done without the least injury to
any person concerned in removing the hides. At this time happened a long series
of easterly winds and rainy weather, succeeding the memorable frost after the
17th of May 1794. In these rains the vessel was washed incessantly day after
day, and she was visited by many persons who had business on board; and as it
happens with all vessels that lie at a wharf in such a place, hundreds, if not
thousands must have been on board, while she lay at New York. Now it happens
that not a soul among all that were on board, from the time of her leaving
Martinico, till she arrived at New Haven, was affected with fever. How the
sloop or the hands, after having intercourse with so many persons, came to
reserve their infection for New Haven, I submit to be determined by wiser heads
than mine. The facts are here stated from the information of the persons
concerned -- those which have been before published, are mingled and confounded
with popular rumors which can be traced to no genuin sources.

Let it be noted that when the two first persons were seized, no person
suspected the disease to be the yellow fever. Mrs. Gorham probably died without
ever knowing her disease -- at least her physician did not suspect it, till she
vomited black matter, the evening before her death. Hence it happened that no
enquiry into the origin of the fever, took place till several days afterward,
and not till after the death of Mr. Austin and his clerk. This is one reason
why it became difficult to obtain a true state of facts -- a difficulty that
was greatly increased by the alarm and consequent perturbation of the public
mind.

And after all the question of domestic or foreign origin is much better
decided by the character and phenomena of the epidemic, than by any human
testimony relating to things not visible. The case of a bilious fever, attended
with black vomit, mentioned in page 306 of Vol. I. occurred in the last week in
March, near the wharf and in the center of the ground, afterward the seat of
the fever. It was less malignant than in autumn, but from the description of it
given me by the woman's mother and the attending clergyman [the physician being
dead] I must conclude the disease to have been of the same species, and
indicating a disposition in the atmosphere of the place to give to fever that
particular character. The physician, Dr. Hubbard, after the fever appeared in
summer, mentioned to the Rev. Mr. Hubbard, that it was of the same species with
that which occurred in March. This case was nine or ten weeks before the
arrival of the Iris.
The scarlatina was then the current epidemic. In May this declined, and
gradually disappeared, in June and July, as the yellow fever advanced. To a
philosophic mind, these facts amount to evidence of domestic origin, that far
out-weighs the uncertain and contradictory evidence of the importation of a
substance which is neither visible nor tangible.

With respect to the origin of the fever at Hartford, I have this further
evidence. The sloop mentioned in page 347, had never been in the least infected
with any disease whatever, before she arrived at Hartford. Her former Captain
died in May of a lingering com^* He went to New York after he was unwell and
growing worse, he returned and died at home. Captain Tucker then took the
command, went to New York and took on board a cargo of salt. From thence he
sailed to New Haven, where he lay five or six days, at the wharf, endeavoring
to fell the salt. While there, people indiscriminately were on board, and among
them several gentlemen of my acquaintance who give me this information. This
was about the middle of July, and as it was just after the Neptune arrived from
China, the wharf was unusually crowded with people, who were passing and
repassing between the wharf and that ship. Here then the sloop did no mischief.
She went to Hartford and discharged her salt. I have unequivocal evidence that
not a person concerned in unloading her, was affected with fever, and that
several of the persons first seized in Hartford, had not been near her. After
she left Hartford the captain and mate were seized, and the former died [not
both as stated in page 347.]

Another vessel, I find, has by some been suspected of introducing the fever
into Hartford. This also was a coasting vessel, which took in a passenger at
New York, who sickened, after he came on board, and the master landed him at
New Haven. If I am rightly informed, this vessel did not arrive at Hartford,
until after the first cases of fever occurred; but of this I am not certain.
Certain it is, that no person on board, except the passenger landed at
New Haven, was ever ill, and therefore the case deserves no consideration.

It ought further to be stated that two or three weeks before the alarm at
Hartford, and before the arrival of those vessels, a case of fever occured of
the malignant kind, and in all essential points, with the character of the
yellow fever. I have lately learnt that a similar fact occurred in Boston in
1798. These cases are not usually numbered with those of yellow fever -- but
the truth is, and such will it appear to be, when science, philosophy and
candor shall triumph over prejudice and popular tales, that these milder cases
of fever, bearing the character in a degree, of the subsequent epidemic, are
the precursors of the disease to follow -- they are the effect of the
atmospheric principle on particular susceptible constitutions, before the
proper season for the full force of the principle to operate -- they are
irresistible evidence that the diseases which they precede, are usually, if not
always, generated in the place where they exist.

SINCE the first volume was printed, I have obtained from attending physicians,
an account of the fever at Middle-Haddam, in the town of Chatham, on
Connecticut river in 1796. [This is mentioned in page 331 to have been in 1797,
but it was in 1796.]

This fever was traced in every instance to a vessel from a port in Hispaniola,
which was highly infected. No person was affected, without direct intercourse
with the vessel, the clothing or the sick. About 30 persons were affected,
eight of whom died. When carried to a distance, the fever did not spread.

That this was a disease contracted from imported infection is evident from
this circumstance -- that in every case it could be traced to intercourse with
the sick or infected articles -- it was not taken by passing along the street
nor from house to house. Another fact is equally demonstrative of this origin;
which is, that it commenced late in September and had no precursors. When it
arises from the atmosphere of the place, it always begins as early as August or
earlier -- and this is probably true of every autumnal complaint in our
latitude.

The fever in that place therefore was what I call a disease of mere infection,
in contradistinction from yellow fever originating in the country, which begins
uniformly in the hot months, is taken without intercourse with the sick or with
infected articles, has its precursors and absorbs all other diseases or gives
them all its predominant type. The distinction is so obvious that it is not
easy to mistake it.

Of the diseases from imported source this is one -- two or three other
instances in the United States have been mentioned. But most of the instances
of this fever in America, since 1790, have had the unequivocal characters of
epidemics -- such characters as never attend, and as cannot possibly attend,
diseases of mere infection.

IN the summer past, the wild pigeons in the western parts of New York state
and in Pennsylvania, have been affected with a disease of which many have died.
It is understood that the head or neck was swelled; but I have no correct
account of the distemper.

FROM the report of a master of a vessel, it appears that fish of various kinds
perished in September or October last, on the Carolina coast from Cape Look-out
to Cape Fear, a distance of 70 miles. Some were seen dead and others dying, as
far as the eye could reach. The yellow fever has also prevailed in some parts
of both Carolinas. Does not the death of fish afford reason to believe that the
electrical fluid or mephitic air, is occasionally discharged from the earth in
unusual abundance? And may not local diseases be ascribed to that cause?

IN addition to what I have said in the 16th section, relative to
predisposition to a particular disease, I would observe, that we ought to make
a distinction between a natural aptitude to a disease, and an adventitious
liability to it, from artificial causes. The latter is what usually passes
under the name of predisposition: And this may lead to error. When persons say,
a man will not take a fever by infection unless he is predisposed, they usually
mean that he has, by accidental causes, prepared his body to be affected. Hence
we continually hear the doctrine that infection will not operate in a healthy
atmosphere; but in order to give it force and effect, the atmosphere must be
prepared; that is, must suffer a change favorable to a disease, but not
sufficient to produce it.

I apprehend this doctrine is erroneous. The fact, as a general one, is the
reverse; and the longer a body remains in health in an infected atmosphere, the
less liable is it to the disease. So true is this, that prisoners in jails
suffer no injury from the air, which will destroy the lives of men who enter
it, from fresh air. This fact is well known. It is equally true, in our cities,
during pestilence, that persons from fresh air, are much more liable to be
seized, on entering the infected atmosphere, than those who have lived in it.
Hence in every case of mere infection, persons are most exposed to it, who are
least prepared or predisposed by breathing an infected air.

But not such is the fact with regard to the influence of atmospheric causes on
particular bodies. In this case, the cause singles out and seizes the persons,
who have a particular aptitude or habit of body, in a manner altogether
unaccountable. Sometimes this power is evidently in operation a long time,
before it produces disease.

Perhaps this natural aptitude of a body to receive or resist disease, may be
illustrated by the following fact, which is under every man's observation. Let
two apples or pears, be taken from a tree at the same time -- let them be
apparently alike in soundness and in every particular on which their
preservation may be supposed to depend. Lay them by the side of each other --
equally exposed to heat and moisture. In this case, one may and often will
perish many weeks before the other. This aptitude to perish is natural, and
doubtless consists in the interior organization of the fruit; but this is
utterly invisible, even with the best microscope.

This idea seems to be important toward accounting for the operation of a
pestilential atmosphere on various bodies, and is confirmed by the facts
related of pestilence that has seized particular families or tribes of men,
while others, equally exposed, have escaped. This may be called natural
predisposition or aptitude to a disease, in distinction from that state of the
body which is the effect of artificial or accidental causes, and which may be
the commencement of the disease, according to Brown's definition.

SINCE the first volume was put to press, I have collected from various
authors, accounts of several plagues in Egypt, which I had not then found. As I
have suggested that pestilence is usually marked by catarrh, it may be proper
to lay together further evidence of the fact. Egypt and Constantinople are the
places where autumnal fevers are most apt to take the form of pestilence.
Catarrh, in those cities, seems closely to attend the plague. Witness the
following examples.

A. D. 1580 influenza. A. D. 1581 deadly plague in Egypt. A. D. 1591 influenza.
A. D. 1592 general plague. A. D. 1593 general plague. A. D. 1597 influenza. A.
D. 1598 general plague. A. D. 1599 general plague. A. D. 1600 general plague.
A. D. 1602 influenza. A. D. 1603 plague. A. D. 1610 influenza. A. D. 1611
deadly plague in Constantinople, etc. A. D. 1613 deadly plague in
Constantinople, etc. A. D. 1693 influenza. A. D. 1694 plague in Egypt. A. D.
1699 influenza. A. D. 1700 plague in Egypt. A. D. 1712 influenza. A. D. 1713
plague in Egypt. A. D. 1717 influenza. A. D. 1717 plague in Egypt and Turkey,
etc. A. D. 1718 plague in Egypt and Turkey, etc. A. D. 1726 plague in Egypt,
etc. A. D. 1728 plague in Egypt, etc. A. D. 1729 influenza. A. D. 1732 plague
and influenza. A. D. 1733 plague and influenza. A. D. 1736 plague deadly in
Egypt. A. D. 1737 influenza. A. D. 1738 deadly pestilence in West Indies,
Mexico, Ockzakow, etc. A. D. 1739 deadly pestilence in West Indies, Mexico,
Ockzakow, etc. A. D. 1743 influenza and plague. A. D. 1744 influenza. A. D.
1745 plague in Egypt. A. D. 1758 influenza -- plague began. A. D. 1759 plague
in Egypt. A. D. 1762 influenza and plague in the Levant. A. D. 176^ influenza.
A. D. 1769 plague in Constantinople and Egypt. A. D. 1770 plague in
Constantinople and Egypt. A. D. 1782 influenza. A. D. 1783 plague in Egypt and
Asia. A. D. 1784 plague in Egypt and Asia. A. D. 1785 plague in Egypt and Asia.
A. D. 1787 plague in Asia and Africa. A. D. 1788 influenza in Europe. A. D.
1789 influenza in America. A. D. 1790 influenza in America. A. D. 1791 began
pestilence in America, and West Indies which has not yet ceased. Severe plague
in Egypt.
There are some long periods in which I have no account of the diseases. The
plague of 1705 in Egypt is the only one of which I have an account, that I
cannot trace to a connection with universal catarrh; and I have no account of a
plague in Egypt after the influenza of 1709. I ascribe this however to the
imperfection of my accounts. How greatly to be regretted is the want of
accurate and complete registers of epidemic diseases!

Let this detail of authentic facts, be compared with what every man may
recollect in America. How the present series of plagues was introduced by a
double portion of catarrh! for the influenza of 1789 was followed in 1790 by
another influenza -- the only instance I can find on record of two of these
epidemics within the short space of six or eight months! Let it be recollected
also that catarrh was prevalent in the spring of 1791, 1793 and 1798, and that
in our large cities, pestilence has in every instance, been introduced or
followed [or both] by influenza, which has sometimes been local, that is, very
much limited to the place where the pestilence had prevailed or was to prevail.
Who then can deny that catarrh and plague are connected in cause? It is not
possible to deny it -- the evidence is conclusive -- and when this subject
shall be fully investigated, it will appear that pestilence, whether plague or
yellow fever, is produced by the same general change in the properties of the
air, which produces influenza -- the transit^o^^ from the one epidemic to the
other being caused by the seasons, or other unknown cause.

I learn from a communication of the British Consul at Alexandria, that it was
^alculated a mill^on of people had perished by the plague in Upper and Lower
Egypt between 1795 and 1796; and our accounts from that country, mention that
the disease had not ceases, the last spring; that is, it returned (...) the
proper season. I^ seems therefore that pestilence in Africa runs cotemporaneous
with pestilence in America.

I have recently learnt from Irwin's Travels, that there was no plague in Egypt
from 1770 to 1777, and from other writers I collect that it was not there for
two or three years after. This is a remarkable fact, as Egypt is seldom exempt
longer than five years in one period. Now it will be remarked that in the same
period, and for some time before and after, no epidemic infectious yellow fever
occurred in America, nor as far as I can learn, in the West India Islands. Yet
this was a time of war between Great Britain, America and France. No comet was
seen between 1770 and 1784 -- a period of more than thirteen years -- such an
interval had not happened within 150 years, and probably not in three centuries.
But it is a curious fact, that in those parts of the earth most subject to
pestilence, the plague and yellow fever should have disappeared at the same
time; and in countries 5000 miles distant, certain kinds of diseases should
have lost that peculiar character which distinguishes the plague.

But the history of epidemics furnishes numerous instances of similar
revolutions in the prevailing type or character of diseases.

In Mr. Tytler's Treatise on the plague and yellow fever, which I have just
read, I find a passage, in page 379, which asserts that certain quotations in
my letters to Dr. Currie in 1797 were made "with a view to dispute the
contagious nature of the yellow fever." This is not accurate. My view was to
prove a meterial difference in the yellow fever at different times, and to show
certain inconsistencies in the reasoning of my antagonist.

It is proper now to mention that I wrote those letters, with a view if
possible, to settle the question of the origin of the yellow fever, by a fair
statement of facts and fair conclusions from the facts. I had not then attended
to the history of epidemics; and it will be seen by one of my letters, that I
had embraced the popular opinion then current, that the influenza in 1789 and
1790 was a new disease. Since I have studied this subject, I am surprised not
only at my own ignorance, but at the ignorance of all classes of men, in
whatever regards the history of epidemic diseases, and the physical phenomena
of the earth and atmosphere. On this subject and whatever regards the origin of
the plague and yellow fever, Mr. Tytler's Treatise has disappointed my hopes
and expections. His history of pestilence is from first to last imperfect and
inaccurate. And how it is possible for a man to suppose that the plague was
originally sent upon the Jews as a punishment, and by them has been conveyed to
other nations, p. 47. or that the plague in Rome in the year 80 was occasioned
by infection conveyed from Jerusalem, by the army of Titus in the year 70. p.
13. 45. 50. Or that it is of divine original, p. 369, any more than all other
distempers -- Or that it has been usually propagated by war and commerce p.
369, when it is evident from scripture that it was a disease in Egypt, before
the days of Moses -- and has in every age infested nations who had no
intercourse with the Jews -- when also it is expressly declared by Livy and
Orosious to have been usually in Rome in time of peace -- I say, how it is
possible, in this period of the world, for such opinions to exist, I cannot
conceive.

On the subject of contagion also, or rather infection, Mr. Tytler, has adopted
the common theory -- a theory acknowleged to be inadequate to the solution of
the phenomena of pestilence, as plague and yellow fever always cease, at the
proper season, when the infection is most general.

The results of my investigations will explain most, if not all, the
difficulties attending this subject.

The origin of pestilence is traced to essential changes in the atmosphere,
which recur at certain unequal periods. The evidence of these changes are
certain epidemic diseases, as measles, affections of the throat, and especially
influenza, which pervades the globe or large portions of it within a few months
or at most, in two years. Near the time of these phenomena, and usually
subsequent to the influenza, the plague occurs in Egypt and Constantinople, and
if the change in the atmosphere is very great, the plague occurs in all parts
of the Levant and in other parts of Africa, Europe and Asia. At the same time,
in the more cool and healthy regions of the north, epidemics of a milder type
than the plague, but malignant and infectious, prevail, and in short, ordinary
diseases assume new and more fatal symptoms. In America, the same or similar
changes are observed. The fever of the West Indies, which is usually not
infectious, becomes more malignant and assumes in a degree the character of the
plague. In our large cities, the autumnal remitting fever is changed into the
same malignant form, and the country suffers by measles, scarlatina, dysentery,
typhus and remitting fevers. These changes usually take place in both
hemispheres at the same time; but sometimes the pestilential principle seems to
be more severe on one continent or in one country, than in another

These changes are usually distinguished by visible and remarkable phenomena in
the natural world.

The periods of pestilence are unequal and indefinite -- sometimes of only five
or six years duration; at other times, extending to ten or fifteen years. But
in the latter case, the epidemics mentioned usually run through a country twice
-- that is, two pestilential periods occur, without an interval of time.

During these periods, contagion and infection aid the propagation of certain
diseases, particularly the measles, smallpox, whooping cough and angina
maligna. In the dysentery, yellow fever and plague, infection has its effect
and obviously spreads the diseases. But all those diseases originate without
infection, in all countries where the heat, moisture or other local cause will
permit the disease to exist. In some cases, they are introduced and spread
solely by infection, but they are then always within human control, and it is
the fault of man, if the sphere of their operation is not very limited. In most
cases, these diseases have the unequivocal characters of local epidemics, and
no human power can restrain them.

On the subject of cure, if I may be permitted to have an opinion, I should
concur with Mr. Tytler in the preference of the diaphoretic method.
Circumstances may indeed defeat this method, and compel the physician to adopt
others. But from the indications of nature, and the immense capacity of vapor
to absorb heat, I take perspiration to be the natural remedy for fever.

On the subject of the proximate cause of the plague, the opinions of Mr.
Tytler are highly respectable. I fully agree with him in the influence of the
electrical fluid. I believe this active and elastic principle to be the great
agent in all the changes visible and invisible, in our atmosphere, and I cannot
but think my investigations have unlocked very important secrets on that point.
I believe also that this fluid is the immediate agent in supporting life, and
the intellectual powers. Received into the lungs, it supplies the body with
heat, and by its elastic power, dilates those organs of life to receive new
supplies. The machinery of the body is thus calculated, while it lasts, to
preserve perpetual motion. At the same time, this fluid, by the same elastic
power, becomes the medium of sensation, throughout the nervous system, and by
its instantaneous motions, communicates sensation and thought, with the
celerity of lightning.

New Haven, November 1799.

