ANALYSIS OF The Report of the Committee OF THE VIRGINIA ASSEMBLY, ON THE
Proceedings of sundry of the other States IN ANSWER TO THEIR RESOLUTIONS.

BY ALEXANDER ADDISON.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR, No. 106, Chesnut-street.
1800.

ANALYSIS OF The Report of the Committee OF THE VIRGINIA ASSEMBLY.
THE Legislature of Virginia, having, on the 21st. December 1798, ordered
certain resolutions, censuring the administration of the Federal Government, to
be transmitted for the concurrence of the Legislatures of the several states,
and receiving in its last session, proceedings of some of the states on those
resolutions unfavourable to their views, referred those proceedings to a
committee, and received a report, revising, examining, and justifying the
resolutions, and solemnly adhering to them, as true, constitutional, and
salutary.

The resolutions, embracing a variety of topics, if not intended, were well
calculated, as a declaration of war by the state of Virginia against the
government of the United States; and the transmission of them to the several
states was well calculated to combine every state, under the plausible pretext
of preserving the constitution, in a system of hostility against the Union.
They have no doubt answered part of the purpose they were intended to effect,
in the elections of the several states; and the report now brings them forward,
in their best shape, to influence the Union in the election of a President. The
report, evidently the work of one man, is drawn up with great art and
ingenuity. With some it may be doubtful whether it be the work of a candid mind
ingenously endeavoring to impress on others its own convictions; or the work
of an ingenious mind uncandidly endeavoring to persuade others to believe what
it believes not itself. Of the end which it prosecutes such is my opinion, that
it cannot be prosecuted without a great sacrifice either of principle or of
understanding. In this opinion I may perhaps have to claim, and ought therefore
to give, much charitable allowance for the steps by which an upright mind may
be led to its own deception: but the report will hardly claim apology from
defect of understanding. In answers or refutations, a greater diffusion of
style is often requisite, than in the propositions which give rise to them.
Much of the original subject must be repeated, to make the remarks on it
intelligible. And some things, which yet may be doubted, cannot be more shortly
expressed. If in the analysis which I am about to undertake of the reasoning in
the principal points in this report, I can attain to any considerable degree of
its classical brevity of expression, it is more than I expect, and all that I
desire.

The 1st. and 2d. resolutions vindicated by the report profess a maintenance of
the Constitution, and an attachment to the Union of the United States. This is
well, if it be sincere: but prosessions of this kind, put in, by way of
protestation, that things in themselves evil, may be construed as favorable as
possible, are frequently a preface to matter of very different tendency, and
may perhaps be more justly considered as ground of suspicion, than means of
justification, of the principal matter.

The 3d. resolution declarea "the powers of the Federal Government as resulting
from the compact to which the states are parties, no farther valid, than they
are authorized by the grants enumerated in that compact; and that, in case of a
deliberate, palpable, and dangerous exercise of other powers, the states, who
are parties thereto, are bound to interpose, for maintaining within their
respective limits, the authorities, rights, and liberties, appertaining to
them."

Without controverting the ground on which this resolution is supported, or
remarking on the vague terms in which it is couched, I shall discuss its main
purport, that the stotes are bound to restrain within their limits the
authority of the Federal Government.

Among a variety of (...), of which the word states is susceptible, the report
adopts the following, as the sense in which it is to be understood in this
resolution: viz. the people in their highest sovereign capacity. This sense of
the word states, the report justly maintains, "because, in this sense the
constitution was submitted to the states: in this sense the states ratified it;
and in this sense the states are parties to the compact from which the powers
of the Federal Government result." In this sense, therefore, the word states is
equivalent to the people of each state, who are parties to the compact of the
Union expressed in the constitution of the United States.

This sense of the word states may be farther illustrated and supported by
comparing the constitution with the confederation of the United States. The
confederation was an act, not of the people of each state, but of the
legislature of each state. The delegates who framed it were chosen not by the
people, but by the Legislature of each state; it was ratified not by the
people, but by the Legislature of each state; and the members of Congress who
acted under it were chosen not by the people, but by the Legislature of each
state: it was an Union of (...) Governments, rather than of the people, of the
several states; and the governments, not the people of the several states, were
the parties to this compact. The delegates who framed the constitution were,
indeed, also chosen by the Legislatures of the several states, because they
were chosen under the confederation; but they framed the constitution, not in
the name of the Legislatures, but of the people of the several states; and they
fubmitted it to the ratification, not of the Legislatures, but of the people of
the several states. The people, not the Legislatures, of the several states did
ratify it, and made it their act. And the people, not the Legislatures, of the
several states, thus became parties to this compact, and choose members of
Congress to act under it.

It appearing then, that the people of the several states are the parties to
the compact in the constitution, it will not follow that, because the parties
to a compact must be the judges whether it has been violated, the Legislatures
of each state are the judges whether the constitution has been violated. Yet
this is the position maintained by the resolution; and, unless this position be
maintained, the resolution fails. It seems clear, that the reasoning in the
resolution does not support it: and I know no reasoning that can support it. To
give the reasoning in the report its full force, it amounts to this, and to
this only. The people of the several states in their sovereign capacity are
parties to the compact in the constitution; every party to a compact may judge
of its violation: the people of Virginia, in their sovereign capacity, are a
party to this compact; therefore the people of Virginia, in their sovereign
capacity, may judge of its violation. It is manifest that this reasoning will
not support the resolution; for it claims a right of the Legislature of
Virginia to judge of the violation of the compact. To support the resolution,
the reasoning ought to be thus. The Legislature of Virginia is a party to the
compact; every party to a compact has a right to judge of its violation;
therefore the Legislature of Virginia has a right to judge of its violation.
The premises are false, the conclusion is not true, and the resolution fails.

The people never act, in their sovereign capacity, but either in framing or
dissolving a constitution. While the constitution is in force, the people are
either subjects or agents of the constitution. The powers of sovereignty are
divided by the constitution among several agents; the legislative, the
judicial, the executive, and the elective agents. One or more of these powers
may be exercised by the people; but not as sovereigns, but as agents of the
constitution. Each of these powers may be considered as a part of the
sovereignty, and the agents may be called the sovereign for that part, and for
that part only. For whenever they act on subjects not committed to them, they
are usurpers, not sovereigns. And the Legislature, acting on a judicial
subject, is no more sovereign, than the Judiciary acting on a legislative
subject. It is usurpation in either. The people of the United States have, for
general purposes, united all the states into one state, territory, or empire;
and have given general legislative, judicial, executive, and elective power to
agents for this empire. The people of each state have given legislative,
judicial, executive, and elective powers, within their several limits, to
agents for those limits. By authority derived from the people of each state,
subordinate powers are given to agents for inferior districts of each state.
Within their powers, those subordinate agents are as much sovereigns as the
Legislature of the state. And the Legislature of Virginia has no more right to
arraign the exercise of the powers of the Legislature of the United States,
than county Commissioners of Pennsylvania, to arraign the exercise of the
powers of the Legislature of Pennsylvania. The right of judging of the exercise
of the powers of the Legislature of the United States is vested in the
Judiciary, or (to use the words of the report) in "the people in their highest
sovereign capacity." The members of the Virginia Assembly were chosen by the
people of that state to make laws for Virginia, not to judge of the laws of the
United States. When they underdertake to judge of the laws of the United
States, they act not in a corporate or sovereign capacity, but give their
opinion as individuals, and without any public authority.

The exercise of this judicial power, over the acts of the Federal Government,
by the state Legislatures, is as dangerous as it is illegal; and, with such
exercise of power, it may be averred, that the Union cannot subsist. The
Legislature of Virginia consists of more members than the Congress of the
United States; and the Legislatures of the other states are numerous. I shall
not make any invidious distinction between the capacity and information of the
members of the several state Legislatures, and of the Federal Legislature; but
I may fairly state that influence is not in proportion to capacity and
information, nor these in proportion to number; and I may fairly presume, from
the importance of the subject, and the opportunity of discussion, that the
capacity and information of the Federal Legislature is superior. Their
integrity may be presumed equal: for all are equally bound by the laws; and
equally influenced by a contest for power. And the chance, that the Federal
Legislature is in the right, may be better, from the habit, under the
confederation, of exercise by the state Legislatures of powers vested by the
constitution in the Federal Legislature. Extinguished claims do not readily
yield to new rights. Supposing therefore the authority of the Federal
Legislature to be legal and proper, what chance would there be for its
preservation (with a people not always possessing the best means of
information, and not seldom corrupted by false information) in a contest
between it and the Legislatures of all the states, each claiming to act by
authority? In such a contest, the preservation of the Federal Government would
seem to be a matter rather of miraculous, than of just, calculation; no
reasonable man would calculate upon it; and the dissolution of the Union would
be a consequence almost necessary.

If each of the state Legislatures has authority to judge of the acts of the
General Legislature, what chance would there be for uniformity of decision?
Endless diversities of opinion would exist; the passions of the people would be
embarked and distracted; and the Union would be dissolved.

The people of each state, the parties to the compact, have not vested their
several Legislatures with this judicial power. They have given it to other
agents, the Judiciary departments, rising in various grades, from a Justice of
the peace to the Supreme Court of the United States, and all being the agents
of the people. By suffering this power to remain where the people have placed
it, uniformity of construction can be regularly and happily attained. If
corruption is to be presumed, will the Legislature, a numerous body, with
little profit or duration attached to their authority, have greater respect for
their character, than the Judiciary will have? If there be a paramount judicial
authority, its exercise results not to the Legislature, which is but another
agent of the people, for another purpose, but to the people of each state, the
parties to the compact, who can correct the evil in their elective or sovereign
capacity.

The 4th. resolution "expesses deep regret, that a spirit has been manifested
by the Federal Government, to enlarge its powers by forced constructions of the
Constitution, and a design to expound certain general phrases so as to destroy
the effect of the particular enumeration, which necessarily limits them, and so
as to consolidate the states into one sovereignty, the tendency and result of
which would be to transform the republican system of the United States into an
absolute or mixed monarchy."

As instances of "a spirit in the Federal Government, to enlarge its powers by
forced construction," the report enumerates "The Alien and Sedition acts, the
Bank-law, and the Carriage-tax." The two first are the subjects of very severe
censure in a subsequent resolution. I shall on this point only observe, that
the judiciary of the United States, the agents of the people for this purpose,
have determined, that the Sedition-act and the Carriage-tax are within the
constitutional power of Congress, by a just and not forced construction; and it
lies not in the mouth of the Virginia legislature, to controvert this. And,
with respect to the Bank-law, it will be recollected, that the Congress under
the confederation did deliberately, solemnly, and almost unanimously,
incorporate and establish the Bank of North America, Journals 26th. May and
29th. December 1781.
which remained in existence at the formation and adoption of the constitution
of the United States. So notorious an exercise of this power, by a Congress of
far less authority than that which established the Bank of the United States,
unrestrained and unnoticed by the constitution, seems a strong argument, that
the power to establish Banks existed in Congress under the confederation, and
exists under the constitution. This argument is strengthened by this
circumstance, that Mr. Madison, one of the four members of Congress who voted
against the establishment of the Bank of North America, and a member of the
committee who made the report to the Virginia Legislature, was a member of the
general convention, which framed, and of the Virginia convention which adopted,
the constitution. Strength is also given to this argument by the general
acquiescence in the establishment of the Bank of the United States. So that the
censure of the report looks rather like a pettish adherence to an obstinate
prejudice than a sound opinion on a constitutional point.

"The design to expound certain general phrases in the Constitution, so as to
destroy the effect of the particular enumeration which necessarily limits
them," has, it seems never manifested itself in any act of the Federal
government; and the report justifies the resolution, from a vague reference to
"debates in the Federal Legislature," from "a report of the late Secretary of
the Treasury on manufactures," and from "a report of a committee of Congress on
the promotion of agriculture." Admitting the censorial power exercised by the
Virginia Assembly, their vigilant exercise of it is highly meritorious, since
it is not merely corrective but preventive, and, like the laws of Heaven,
extends not merely to the conduct but to the heart, not merely to acts but to
designs, not merely to any branch of the administration, but to every member
and agent of any branch.

The resolution mentions no general phrase, which a design appears so to
expound, as to destroy the effect of the particular enumeration necessarily
limiting them. This defect is supplied by the report, which states, that "the
general phrases here meant must be those of providing for the common defense
and general welfare."

The proofs of a design to pervert the construction of these phrases are
debates in Congress, a report of the late Secretary of the Treasury, and a
report of a committee of Congress. No debate in Congress is specified as a
proof of this. If any were, it would be proof only of a design or mistake of
the individual member. It is stated "that in the Secretary's report, it is
expressly contended to belong to the discretion of the National Legislature, to
prenounce upon the objects which concern the general welfare, and for which,
under that description, an appropriation of money is requisite and proper. And
there seems to be no room for a doubt, that whatever concerns the general
interests of LEARNING, of AGRICULTURE, of MANUFACTURES, and of COMMERCE, are
within the sphere of the National Councils as far as regards an application of
money." "The report of the committee on agriculture" (it is stated) "assumes
the same latitude of power in the National Councils, and applies it to the
encouragement of agriculture." It was not thought prudent to mention, that
these principles had been sanctioned by the judgment of the late President of
the United States. The venerable name of WASHINGTON, whom even envy and malice,
the constant attendants of living virtue, now cease to disturb in his grave,
might have covered these principles with such a shield of integrity and wisdom,
that the assaults of the Virginia Assembly would have been harmless. But,
without sheltering them in the shade of an ILLUSTRIOUS name, let us examine the
reasoning with which they are opposed.

The report of the Virginia committee states, that the power given to Congress
by the constitution, "to provide for the common defense and general welfare of
the United States," is limited by the subsequent enumeration of particular
cases, and extends not beyond them. This position it supports, by the
similarity of expression in the 8th. article of the confederation, and in the
8th. section of the 1st. article of the constitution of the United States; and
by a conclusion, that if the general phrases were so limited in the
confederation, they must be so limited in the constitution. The conclusion
might have appeared just, if the constitution had manifested no design to
enlarge the powers of Congress; if our union under the constitution had been,
as under the confederation, an union of governments, and not, as to general
purposes, an union of people; and if Congress were not now, what it was not
formerly, a representation of the people in each state, as the Assembly of each
state is a representation of each county of that state. In such a great change
of circumstances, the conclusion, that the powers remain the same, is hardly
logical, and surely not necessary.

The Virginia report contends, that, though Congress has power to raise money
and apply it to provide for the general welfare of the United States, it has no
power to apply money to any case not specially enumerated in the constitution.
Whenever money is to be applied to a particular measure, a question arises
whether the particular measure be within the enumerated authorities vested in
Congress. If it be, money may be applied, if it be not, no such application can
be made. This interpretation is enforced by the clause in the constitution,
which declares that no money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but
inconsequence of appropriations made by law. An appropriation of money to the
general welfare, would be deemed rather a mockery, than an observance, of this
constitutional injunction.

The GREAT FATHER of his country, the committee of Congress, and the late
Secretary of the Treasury, may be fairly believed as competent to give a just
interpretation of the constitution as the Virginia committee, and their
interpretation will not be weakened by the interpretation of the constitution
as the Virginia committee, and their interpretation will not be weakened by the
interpretation of the Virginia committee, but so far as this is supported by
reasoning. The late Secretary of the Treasury says, and he is supported by the
late President, and by the committee of Congress, that it belongs "to the
discretion of the National Legislature, to pronounce upon the objects which
concern the general welfare, and for which, under that description, an
appropriation of money is requisite." The necessity of an appropriation before
money can be drawn, and the mockery, if there were any, of an appropriation to
the general welfare, will not operate against this interpretation. Congress
will first pronounce, that a certain measure is necessary or conducive to the
general welfare of the United States, and direct the manner of its
establishment, and then appropriate money to that particular measure.

There is nothing therefore in the Virginia reasoning to invalidate the
interpretation of the late President, the committee of Congress, and the late
Secretary; and it will not be pretended, that, on mere authority, the
interpretation of the Virginia committee or Assembly desorves a preserence.

The Virginia report argues not fairly. On the presumption that Congress has no
powers but those specified in the constitution, it concludes, that the power by
the first clause of the 8th. section of the Is It article of the constitution
granted to Congress "to raise money to provide for the general welfare," is
explained and limited by the subsequent clauses, which specify the instances,
and the only instances, in which Congress has power to provide for the general
welfare of the United States. On this ground, all the other clauses, and
Congress has no power but one, to raise money, or, in the words of the
constitution, "to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposes and excises;" and all
that follows of this section is only descriptive of the objects, to which this
money is to be applied; the first clause describing the object in general
phrases, and the other clauses detailing the particular measures comprehended
within those general phrases. This section will then amount to this: Congress
shall have power to raise money, in order to borrow money, in order to regulate
commerce, in order to establish an uniform rule of naturalization and uniform
laws of bankruptey, in order to regulate the value of money and fix the
slandard of weights and measures, in order to provide for the punishment of
counterfeiting, in order to secure to authors and inventors the exclusive right
to their writings and discoveries, in order to constitute tribunals, in order
to desine piracies, in order, etc. etc. and for no other purpose whatever. This
interpretation of the constitution will seem absurd, but it is clearly
supported by the reasoning of the Virginia committee. If their interpretation
can be supported, mine may be also, and if mine fails, so must theirs. For if
the phrase "general welfare," do not imply a distinct power, (or duty which
involves a power) but be limited by the subsequent phrases, all the subsequent
phrases taken together can mean no more that it.

Admitting that Congress has no powers but those specified in the constitution,
and that the 8th. section of the 1st. article is a specification of their
powers, it seems clear, that (instead of the first clause being general phrases
explained and limited by the subsequent clauses) every clause gives a distinct
power, and every power is coupled with a duty, the discharge of which is
submitted to the discretion of Congress. Thus the first clause imposes on
Congress a duty "to provide for the common defense and general welfare" of the
United States; and submitting to the discretion of Congress what objects or
measures are necessary or conducive to these ends, for their accomplishment
gives to Congress a power "to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and
excises." The second clause gives another power to the exercise of which a duty
is necessarily imposed, whenever Congress, in its discretion, shall think its
exercise necessary. And so of every other clause of this section.

It seems strange indeed, that expressions in the confederation, which gave no
internal legislative powers to Congress, should, by the Virginia committee, be
applied to limit expressions in the constitution avowedly made to give to
Congress internal legislative powers. Under the Confederation, it was the duty
of Congress "to manage the general interests," Confederation, Article 5.
provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States; but
for this purpose, they had no power to raise money. The constitution has, to
this duty, united this power; and Congress has, under the constitution all the
superintending and provident duty which Congress had under the confederation,
together with all the legislative power, for the discharge of this duty, which
the confederation had left with the several states. The 8th. article of the
confederation was not a limitation of the powers of Congress, but a direction
how the money, for the exercise of those powers, should be raised by the
states. The necessity of an auxiliary state power, to enable the Federal
Government to discharge its duties, and the impossibility of efficaciously
obtaining this aid, was the great defect of the confederation. This is supplied
by the constitution, which gives to Congress all legislative power, for the
execution of their duties; and makes the government of the United State; a
complete government with all powers within itself for general purposes. In
judging of the power of Congress under the constitution, we must not limit it
by the power of Congress under the confederation: for it has now all the power
which the former Congress had to prescribe and require, and the power which the
state legislatures had to execute or provide means for executing the
prescriptions and requisitions of Congress. The proper comparison between the
powers would therefore be, that in cases where the former Congress could
officially, and for the general welfare, require the state legislatures to pass
laws; the present Congress can pass those laws itself. Thus if the former
Congress had declared to the several state legislatures, that the United States
were in danger from the residence of Aliens, and the prevalence of Seditious
Libels; and that the general welfare required that each state should pass Alien
and Sedition laws; would any one doubt that it was the duty of each state to
obey this requisition? And if it was the duty of each state legislature to do
so then; is it not the duty of Congress to do so now when legislative powers
have been given to enable Congress itself to discharge all its duties?

As the Constitution thus enlarged the powers of Congress, it enlarged also the
control of the people over the exercise of those powers, by giving to the
people of the United States the immediate election of Representatives in
Congress, without whose consent no act of Congress can be made. So that now the
General Legislature having power over all general concerns and care of the
general welfare, ought to be deemed as immediately the representatives, and as
justly entitled to the confidence of the people of the United States, as the
state legislatures are the representatives, and entitled to the confidence of
the people of their respective states. The welfare of the several states is
entrusted to the care of their several legislatures; and the general welfare to
the General Legislature, with competent powers to each for the discharge of the
duties imposed.

As the Constitution plainly gives to Congress power over the means to provide
for the general welfare, the propriety of exercising this power by the
Representatives of the people of the United States can hardly be questioned.
The regulations of no state can extend beyond its own limits; and the
concurrence of all the states, in every measure necessary for the general
welfare, is not to be expected, or must be tardy and incumbered. If Congress,
therefore, do not apply their power over the means to every case of general
welfare, some cases will be unprovided for; and Congress, by neglecting to
apply its power, will neglect its duty, and betray the interests of its
constituents, the people of the United States.

The condition in which the Virginia report would place the nation of the
United States is singularly absurd; a nation without authority to provide for
its own welfare. The individual states cannot provide for it: for their
authority is limited within their several boundaries. Congress, as the report
says, cannot provide for it: for its authority extends only to some cases of
the general welfare. The constitution is not so absurd. It gives to Congress
power over the means, and imposes the duty of providing for the general welfare
in all cases whatever, to which in its discretion the means ought to be
applied. And this power and discretion is to be controlled, like the power and
discretion of the state legislatures, by the judiciary, or by the people in
their elective or their sovereign capacity.

If such then be the just construction of the constitution, the objection
stated in the report, that it tends to consolidate the states into one
sovereignty, has no force; for the constitution is the work of the people of
the United States; and an objection to a just construction of the constitution
is an objection to the constitution itself, which is an objection to the act of
the people of the United States, and will not lie in the mouth of the
Legislature of Virginia, who are but agents, for a particular purpose, of a
part of the people of the United States.

Ever since the "United States assumed a separate and equal station among the
powers of the earth," they have been, as every nation must be, consolidated, as
to general purposes into one sovereignty. The confederation vested the powers
of this sovereignty in Congress; and the constitution enlarged the powers of
this sovereignty, enlarging also the control of the people over the exercise of
those powers. The enlargement of the general authority of the United States,
become indispensable, was effected by a diminution of the individual authority
of the several states. What was taken from one set of agents of the people, was
given to another set of agents of the people; and the control of the people
over their agents was still preserved. The authority of the people was not
diminished, the power only of their agents was altered. That there should be a
sovereignty, or power co-extensive with the territory, and adequate to the
general wants and [welfare, is not an objection, but a praise, to the system of
government adopted by the people. If it can be urged as an objection, it will
lie only against the extent of territory, not the extent of power, and will
conclude, not to a diminution of power, but to a diminution of territory -- to
a dissolution of the Union -- a separation of the states. Is it to this
conclusion that the report would lead?

That a power to raise money in order to provide for the general welfare, or a
power to provide for the general welfare, should, by any possible construction
be so extended as to amount to a power to legislate in all cases whatever, and
so to consolidate the states into one sovereignty, seems a supposition so
extravagant, that I cannot persuade myself, it will ever be honestly and
seriously urged. But admitting it possible (probable it is not) is it a greater
evil, that the general welfare of the United States should be provided for by
one body of representatives of the people, instead of several; or should be
left altogether unprovided for?

This dreaded consolidation of the states, and its portended result, the
transformation of our republican system into a monarchy, I cannot confider as
the work of honest rational conviction, but as either the fiction of (...), or
the delusion of party on the passions, prejudices, or inexperience of the
people. If it have a rational foundation, it must be this, that a general
authority of a republican form cannot be exercised over so extensive a
territory as that of the United States. From this position the conclusion will
be, either that there must be a diminution of territory, in other words, a
separation of the Union; or our republican government must be changed to a
monarchy; or the welfare of the United States must be unprovided for, which, in
other words, is, that the powers shall be incompetent to the purposes of
government. Can any fears of a change of government justify the withholding
from government the means of providing for the welfare of the people?

The report contends, that the result of consolidation will be monarchy,
"because the legislature will increase the prerogative of the executive, by
delegating to it legislative powers; because the consolidation will increase
the patronage of the executive; and because this increase of prerogative and
patronage will either enable the Chief Magistrate, quietly and repeatedly, to
secure his election, and finally to regulate the succession; or will render the
elections of Chief Magistrate so violent and corrupt, that the public voice
itself might call for an hereditary in place of an elective succession."

I shall not spend time in discussing conjectures like these; but will just
observe that any prerogative, given by the legislature to the executive, may be
restrained, or reclaimed by the power which gave it, and the legislature will
always be under the control of the people; that the people will always control
the election of President in spite of all patronage, while they remain
uncorrupted, and fit for the exercise of their rights; that if corruption in
the people admit hopes of monarchy, such hopes, with the present or without any
patronage, will excite violence sufficient to produce the effect dreaded from
it; and that, if the public voice ever call for an hereditary succession, no
constitutional provisions can prevent it.

But I am not convinced that a republican form, with a proper distribution of
authority and power, is incompetent for the government of an extensive
territory. If there be a well organized general and subordinate government; if
there be, in the general government, a power to provide for the general
welfare; and, in the subordinate governments, a power to provide for the
particular welfare; and if there be, in each of these authorities, a force to
secure the execution of them, and make the power and benefit of government be
every where felt; a republican government may promote and serve the happiness
of the people of an extensive territory.

The 5th. resolution "protests against the palpable and alarming infractions of
the constitution in the cases of the Alien and Sedition acts; the first of
which exercises a power not delegated to the Federal Government, and by uniting
legislative and judicial powers to executive, subverts the principles of free
government, and the provisions of the Federal Constitution; and the other of
which also exercises a power not delegated, but expressly forbidden by the
constitution, a power which, more than any other, ought to produce universal
alarm, because levelled against that right of freely examining public
characters and measures, and of free communication among the people, which has
ever been justly deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right."

The report, viewing this as the great leading resolution, enters into an ample
investigation of it. As the Alien and Sedition acts have been elsewhere so
clearly justified, I shall endeavor to confine my observations on this part of
the report (interesting as it professes to be) to such points as have been less
notoriously and sully discussed.

To show that the Alien act is an exercise of power not delegated to the
Federal Government, the report makes some preliminary observations, and answers
arguments urged in justification of this power.

The first observation is, "that the powers not delegated to the United States,
by the constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, being reserved to the
states respectively or to the people," Constitution, Amendment 1^.
it is incumbent to prove, that the constitution grants every power exercised
by the Federal Government.

It is sufficiently understood, that their amendment of the constitution here
relied on, like other amendments, made little, if any, alteration of the
constitution. Borrowed from the confederation, it proceeded from a false
jealousy, rising from a false principle, and applying to a compact made by the
people, of power to be exercised by representatives of the people, restrictions
in a compact made by the governments, of power exercised by representatives of
governments. However this may be, it will not be pretended, that this amendment
deprives the government of the United States of any power given it by the
constitution; nor that Congress, under the constitution, has less power than
Congress had before; nor that any nation would be so absurd, as to form a
government without power to manage its general interests, and provide for its
common defense and general welfare. Nor will it be denied, that the government
of the United States has power to carry on intercourse with foreign nations,
make war or peace, or form treaties of alliance and commerce; and that no
individual states has any authority to interfere in any foreign affairs; nor
that the government of the United States is entrusted with the management of
its general interests, with providing for the common defense and general
welfare, with the protection of each state against invasion, and domestic
violence, with the preservation of the peace and safety of the United States,
and with power to make all laws necessary and proper for executing its powers
and duties. Nor will it be demed, that aliens may be dangerous to the peace and
safety of the United States; nor that the government of every other nation has
power to remove aliens, when and how it chooses, on all reasonable occasions,
in any reasonable manner, without any respect to the rules by which it is
governed in the punishment or restraint of its own subjects. The declaration of
Independence, which raised the United States to the rank of a nation, gave to
any government, which the people of the United States should establish with the
charge of common defense and foreign intercourse, all the rights which the law
of nations gives to every sovereign government. The people have established the
government of the United States with this sovereign charge, and the law of
nations gives it all sovereign rights with respect to other nations. The
restrictions of the constitution are not restrictions of external and national
right, but of internal and municipal right. And power over aliens is to be
measured, not by internal and municipal law, but by external and national law.
It affects not the people of the United States, parties and subjects to the
constitution; but foreign governments, whose subjects the aliens are. Foreign
governments, parties to the code of national law, may call the government of
the United States to account for the abuse of its right under this law; but the
constitution of the United States restrains it not. The government of the
United States being exclusively vested with the power of peace and war and
foreign intercourse, must be exclusively vested with the means (and the
admission or expulsion of aliens may be one of the means) of producing or
affecting either. And being charged with the common defense and protection
against invasion and domestic violence, the government of the United States,
with a discretion to judge of the proper means, must be vested with all means
conducive to these ends, and consistent, according to their respective objects,
with the municipal law, and the law of nations. The constitution could never
intend to make the government of the United States, as the report would make
it, a government of duties without powers: for it was framed expressly to add
powers to duties. The constitution was established by the people of the United
States, "to form a more perfect union, insure domestic tranquillity, provide
for the common defense, and promote the general welfare." Any construction of
this constitution, not unavoidable, which would deprive the government of any
proper means to promote those ends will be rejected. Whatever is fairly
involved in any power granted by the constitution, is a power granted by the
constitution, and cannot be restrained by the provision that the powers not
delegated are reserved. And all powers of peace and war, and foreign
intercourse, and therefore the means of producing or affecting either, are
delegated to the United States by the constitution, and prohibited by it to the
individual states.

The next observation in the report is, that there is a distinction, by the law
of nations, between alien enemies, and alien friends. To be sure there is:
Alien friends have by the law of nations certain hospitable rights subject to
the reasonable discretion of the government under which they live; and alien
enemies have no rights. But the question is, whether every government may not,
when it judges it proper for its own safety, order and compel "aliens, members
of a friendly nation," to depart out of its territory. Every government has, by
the law of nations, authority to do this. The right of a nation to the
exclusive enjoyment of its own territory is, like the right of an individual to
the exclusive enjoyment of his own house, a perfect right, subject only to the
right of hospitality, an imperfect right, at the discretion of the owner. This
is a doctrine too well established by the law of nations, to need any
authorities to support it: a very slight inspection of any book of this law
will justify it. And, on this principle, it was thought necessary, to stipulate
in the confederation, Article 4.
that "the people of each state shall have free ingress and regress to and from
any other state, and enjoy therein all the privileges of trade and commerce."

A third observation is, that, "admitting the object of the alien act to be
preventive, not penal justice, and within the power of the Federal Legislature;
this power has not been exercised in a constitutional manner."

I hope, it has already appeared, that this power is given to the government of
the United States: and, as its object is not municipal justice, either penal or
preventive, but public national defense, and as it affects no party to the
constitution, but a party to the law of nations; its exercise is to be
regulated, not by the constitution or municipal law, but by the general law of
nations. Has the constitution prescribed, that aliens, like "the citizens of
each state, shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in
every state?" Was the denial or retraction of an imperfect right, a favor or
indulgence, ever called a punishment? Or has the law of nations ever called the
removal of aliens a banishment? It were well if the Virginia Assembly would
allow to Congress as much preventive vigilance, with respect to dangerous
aliens, as they have themselves exercised in their assumed authority on the
design to expound general phrases; and would as readily suppose that aliens may
be dangerous, as that the government of the United States may be corrupt.

Having made these observations, the report proceeds to answer the arguments by
which the alien act has been justified.

The first answer suggests a doubt, whether the discretionary power of
admitting aliens be vested in the Federal Government, or in the state
governments; that is, whether, though Congress has power to establish an
uniform rule of naturalization, every state has not a power to naturalize,
without any regard to the uniform rule of Congress. Can the Virginia committee
discover in the Federal Government a design so grossly to pervert the
constitution, as is manifested in this doubt? This committee, and the Secretary
of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in a note to one of the laws of that
state, are the only patrons of this doubt that I know.

" But it cannot be a true inference, that, because the admission of an alien
is a favor, the favor may be revoked. A grant of land or a pardon may be a
favor, but irrevocable. Admission of an alien to naturalization is as much a
favor, as admission to residence."

If the favor be complete in one act, as a grant of land, or a pardon, to be
sure, it cannot be revoked. But if the enjoyment of the benefit depend on the
continuance of the benevolence, the favor may be revoked. If I convey my house
gratuitously, and thereby part with all my right in it; I cannot divest the
right I have conveyed. But if I give a stranger a lodging in it for a night, I
may turn him out next day. Admission of an alien to residence is not admission
to naturalization: the first is revocable, like a permission; the other
absolute, like a grant. The author of the report, who had ingenuity to devise
the illustration, did not want judgment to discern the fallacy of the
reasoning. Admission of aliens to residence is not a grant of naturalization:
this, until the grant be absolutely made, must depend on the continuance of the
benevolence of the government toward them.

I pass by the four following answers to justifications of this act, either
because the justifications have been sufficiently and publicly established
before, or because I think them not necessary.

The next is an answer to the justification, "that the means of preventing
invasions are included in the power of protecting against them."

One would have thought it would not be denied, for it is evident, that a power
to protect against invasion did include a power to use all proper means to
prevent it, or defeat its success; and what means more proper to protect
against invasion can there be, than the means given by the alien act; a power
to remove "aliens dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States, or
concerned in any treasonable or secret machinations against the government
thereof." As aliens are not entitled to the privileges of citizens, any farther
than the constitution and laws direct, and as the constitution says nothing of
them, the legislature has a right to prescribe in what manner, they shall be
dealt with. As the legislature has referred to the discretion of the President,
to determine who of them shall be deemed dangerous, or concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government, and as such removed;
and as their removal is consistent with the law of nations, by which only it
can be judged, and is a proper mean of preventing or defeating an invasion,
which is clearly the same as protecting against an invasion; their removal in
this manner seems clearly within the power and duty of Congress to protect
against invasions by a just and natural construction of the constitution. To
adopt an illustration used by the report, a municipal power to punish involves
a municipal power to prevent: for the judge who can try a breach of the peace,
can bind over to keep the peace. What a municipal judge can do in the manner
prescribed by the municipal law, the legislature can do or direct to be done,
with respect to an alien, in any manner consistent with the law of nations.
Will the report deny that a power to protect against an evil includes a power
over the means proper to prevent it? What would the committee think of a
physician engaged for a yearly sum, who should tell his employer, when seized
with a fever, I saw this fever coming on you, and could have prevented it; but
I am engaged only to cure, and not to prevent diseases?

The committee seem aware of such absurd reasoning, and only refuse to grant,
"that a power to act on a case when it occurs, includes a power over all the
means that may tend to prevent its occurrence." Is not this confounding power
with discretion, a reasonable with a wanton discretion, and ^nferring a want of
power from a possibility of its abuse? On such reasoning what power might not
be denied?

To lessen the force of the clause in the constitution enjoining the government
of the United States to protect against invasion, the report considers it as
"either a specification of the power of war in general, before granted, or as a
duty superadded to a power;" and reasons thus, "Invasion is an operation of
war. To protect against invasion is an exercise of the power of war. A power,
therefore, not incident to war, cannot be incident to a particular modification
of war. And as the removal of alien friends has appeared to be no incident to a
general state of war, it cannot be incident to a particular modification of
war." If this reasoning means any thing it must be this: a power not incident
to war, is not incident to war; or a power not incident to all war, is incident
to no war, or is not incident to invasion. The first proves nothing: for the
proof and the position are the same. The second proves too much, and is
therefore false: for there may be powers incident to some wars, or to invasion,
which are not incident to all war. One of the steps of the syllogism is false,
and therefore the conclusion cannot be considered as true. For it is not true,
according to the law of nations, that the removal of aliens members of a
friendly nation, if they are supposed dangerous, is not incident to a state of
war, or to very state of reasonably apprehended danger. The report says, that,
"without this clause of the constitution, the power to protect against invasion
is included in the power to declare war." This on the principle so much relied
on by the report, that general phrases are limited by the particular
specifications and every power not specified is refused, is saying, that to
declare war is to protect against invasion. Presumptions it would seem are
admissible to lessen, but not to enlarge, the powers of Congress.

Without assenting to the reasoning by which the next answer is supported (for
I think it exceptionable) I shall not discuss it; because it seems not material
to the main point. Can it be supposed that the constitution meant to deny the
government of the United States the important right of using, toward other
nations, all means, consistent with the law of nations, for the common defense
of the states, and their protection against invasion. Nothing appears from the
constitution, that can show, that the people of the United States meant to deny
their own government any right, which, by the law of nations, any other
sovereignty enjoys with respect to foreign nations: and the Alien law affects
only foreign nations. The limits of power of any government, toward its own
subjects, were never meant to be applied as limits of power of that government
toward the subjects of other governments. And the question, whether a
government conducts itself well toward a subject of another government, is not
a question of municipal, but of national law: it cannot arise between the
subject of another government and the government of which he complains, but
between this and his own government. How then can the constitution of any one
government be made a rule to decide this question?

If the candor and "respect," which the report professes, had been justly
"felt;" the captious censure on an expression in the report of a committee of
Congress would have found no place in it. The constitution is the act of the
people of the United States, and is the supreme law of the land; and no
individual state ever had power of the common defense, or of foreign
intercourse, war, or peace.

Not having access, at present, to the Alien law of Virginia, from which a
justification of the Alien law of the United States has been drawn, I cannot
satisfactorily discuss the answer to this justification. From the
misapplication of the pronoun who, in the statement of that law in the report,
it is difficult to say, whether it be the alien or his government, that is the
object of suspicion of hostile designs. If it be the alien, the Virginia law is
the same as the law of Congress. If it be the state, an apprehension of
hostility is not hostility; there is no war, and the alien is an alien friend,
who, from the reasoning in the report, ought to be treated as a citizen, and
not punished, but for an offense actually committed. And the cruelty so much
deplored in the report, would be the same under both acts, if a harmless alien
were removed, whether his government were hostile or friendly.

What remains of the report respecting the alien act, as to its union of
legislative and judicial with executive powers, and the influence of this
union, having been sufficiently and publicly discussed elsewhere; I shall
content myself with observing, that this union can only be dangerous, when it
is constitutionaly and permanently established; not when it is only occasionlly
permitted by the legislature, for a convenient and practicable execution of
legislative power, and always under the control of the legislature, which is
under the control of the people.

On this resolution, as it respects the Sedition act, the reports states, "that
it affirms; 1st. that this act exercises a power not delegated by the
constitution: 2nd. that this power is expressly prohibited by one of the
amendments to the constitution; and 3d. that this power ought, more than any
other, to produce universal alarm; because levelled against that right of free
examination of public characters and measures, and free communication thereon,
which has ever been justly deemed the only effectual guardian of every other
right."

I think, I am disposed to treat all public authority, not perverted to
improper purposes, with respect, and to examine the report with candor. But so
extravagant seem the positions, and so dangerous their consequences, in many
parts of this report, that I cannot reconcile them with the ingenuity shown in
it, and, at the same time with sincerity.

First, On the first point, the report begins with observing, "that the Federal
Government being composed of powers specifically granted, with a reservation of
all others to the states; the positive authority, under which the Sedition act
could be passed, must be produced." I have already mentioned, that this
principle was introduced into the constitution, which is a government made by
the people, from a false imitation of the confederation, a government made by
the legislatures of the states. From this it seems to be contended, that the
Federal Government has no power, but such as the constitution expressly gives.
There is nothing in the constitution to justify this: and the report afterward
admits, "that particular parts of the common law may have a sanction from the
constitution, so far as they are necessarily comprehended in the technical
phrases, which express the powers delegated to the government; and so far as
such other parts may be adopted as necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the powers expressly delegated."

In justifying the Sedition law, it had been urged, that it created no new
offense; for every thing punishable under it was punishable at common law.
Referring to this argument, the report censures, as "novel and extravagant, the
doctrine lately advanced, that the common or unwritten law makes a part of the
law of these states in their united and national capacity." And, to justify
this, it reviews the colonial state of this country, and the effects of the
declaration of independence, the confederation, and the constitution of the
United States.

The report admits, "that, prior to the revolution, the common law was the
separate law of each colony, but not operating through the whole as one
society; because there was no common legislature or judiciary for the
colonies." This confounds the term common with the term general, and argues,
from the circumstance of the unwritten law being called the common law, that
there could be no common law, because there was no general legislature or
judiciary over all the colonies. This is an abuse of words. It also confounds
principles: for it might as well be contended, that there can be no religion
where there is no revelation; and no obligation, where there is no power to
enforce it.

What are now the United States were separate colonies, settled under the
authority of England, and, as part of its territory, subject to its laws: for
it is of the nature of colonies, to take with them the laws, rights, and duties
of the mother country. The mother country may give its colonies power, more or
less, to make laws for their separate internal government, or may combine two
or more of them in a confederacy, with power to make laws for the confederacy.
But the government of the mother country remains the controlling head, and
sovereign power, in a legislative and judicial capacity; unless it divest
itself of this authority; or until the colony, as in our case, grow to such
strength, as to be able to support itself, and deny the right and oppose the
force of the mother country. As a colony of England, therefore, each state was
subject to the law of England, the general and controlling law of all; except
so far as each had authority from England to alter this general law, according
as their several circumstances required.

The law of England is of two kinds written and unwritten. The written is
called the statute law, because composed of statutes or acts of Parliament. The
unwritten is called the common law, because founded on an implied common
consent, from long acquiescence in its authority and use. The authority of both
is thus equally the will of the community. The common law is founded on the law
of nature and the revelation of God, to which all men are subject; on the law
of nations, to which every nation is, as a nation, and the individuals
composing it, subject toward every other; and on certain maxims or usages,
which have long prevailed, and been sanctioned by judicial authority, as
naturally rising out of the circumstances by which the subjects of that
government were connected with each other, and therefore imposing duties on the
individuals of that nation toward each other. Of these maxims or usages some
are general, and prevail in every part of England; and some, from the separate
authorities formerly existing there, or from other circumstances, are
particular, and prevail only in certain parts. Parliament may adopt some part
of this common law, and, by putting it in an act of Parliament, make it statute
law; or may alter or annul it by act of Parliament. Any part of the common law
may also cease, or become obsolete, by the circumstances ceasing to exist,
which manifestly were the reasons of its establishment: and this will be
considered as a repeal by the same authority which enacted. The colonies,
therefore, severally carried with them all the common law of England, which was
applicable to their circumstances, with power, so far as given by the mother
country to alter this law, by the acts of their several legislatures. Thus, the
circumstances of each colony more or less differing, and each having a distinct
legislature; the common law throughout the colonies would be, in part, general
maxims or usages prevailing in all the colonies; and, in part, maxims or usages
prevailing only in one or several of the colonies. The government of the mother
country was the general superintending government.

The declaration of Independance, though it annulled the power of Britain over
the colonies, established no superintending government in its room; and each
colony became a free and independent state. But this could not alter any of the
law of the several states, except what necessarily resulted from the change of
situation. There was a common law in each state before the declaration of
Independence, and it remained after this declaration.

From every organisation of individuals, of domestic or commercial connections,
of societies, and of governments, certain powers and duties arise; a sort of
common law for the good of all concerned in the organisation. Men can neither
live without law, nor put every law in express words. Incidental powers,
without being expressed, result from every civil organisation: for it is the
will of those concerned that it should be effectual for its purposes. Thus,
before the confederation, which gave the power, Congress formed (...); by a
sort of common law, which gave to Congress, as the only general organ, the
authority usually annexed to such a government. The same idea seems to be
expressed in the report: "In the interval between the commencement of the
revolution, and the final ratification of the articles of confederation, the
nature and extent of the union was determined by the circumstances of the
crisis." It would not indeed be "alleged, that the common law could have birth
during that state of things." It was born long before; "in a time whereof the
memory of man runs not to the contrary." The colonists brought it with them
from their native land, with their other possessions, for their common
protection against murderers, against thieves, and against libellers; for the
recovery of their debts, the execution of their contracts, and the redress of
their wrongs, The people of every state modify it according to their several
circumstances; and, so modified, it has been constantly preserved, and will be
forever preserved as a rule of right, and standard of action. There never was a
time in any society or government, in which a common law did not exist: it is
incidental to the constitution of every regular state, and inseparable from its
existence. However the condition of men, societies, or governments may be
modified; whatever shape or station they assume, certain rights, powers, and
duties, forming a common law, is attached to each.

The confederation was not intended to give any legislative or judicial
authority to the Federal government, except in a very few instances. But
proving that there existed no one general authority over the whole, does not
prove, "that the common or unwritten law makes not a part of the law of these
states in their united and national capacity." The confederation altered not
the rules or nature of offenses, trespasses, or duties: the common law remained
as it was, except such alteration as resulted from the change in the government.

The last question made by the report on this review of our state is, "whether
the common law, be introduced as a national law by the present constitution of
the United States." Its introduction is admitted, so far as necessarily
comprehended in technical phrases, or necessary and proper for the execution of
given powers; but beyond this its admission is denied by the report.

It states, that from the provision of the constitution, "that the judicial
power shall extend to all cases in law and equity, arising under this
constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made under their
authority;" Article III. Section 2.
it had been inferred, that, besides cases arising under the laws and treaties
of the United States, other cases are presumed to arise, by a common law, thus
established by the constitution. This inference appears just, and little, if at
all, different from the admission made by the report. Every organisation of
authority must have the means of protection and execution of the powers vested
in it. This is a common law in all countries, and in all cases; and no
supposition of other possible or probable constructions can lessen the force of
this reasoning.

From the expression "cases in law and equity," and a subsequent expression
"that the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is of law and fact," the
report would exclude criminal cases from federal jurisdiction; for criminal
cases in equity would be a language unknown to the law; and the fact in
criminal cases is not a subject of appeal.

There is something in a guilty mind and a bad cause, which will now and then
betray itself. In the manner of Samson with the Philistines, we might ask the
reporter how he came by the exposition of this riddle. "Criminal cases in
equity is a language unknown to the law." To what law? To the common law
surely. The fact in criminal cases is not a subject of appeal. On what
authority is this asserted? Not on the authority of the constitution; for it
gives appellate jurisdiction in all cases, with exceptions which the report
says "do not mean criminal cases." It is asserted on the authority of the
common law only; and yet the report says "the common law has no authority under
the constitution of the United States!"

The report having thus palpably admitted the common law as part of the law
under the constitution, and having admitted, that particular parts of the
common law comprehended under technical phrases are sanctioned by the
constitution; the phrase, all cases in law and equity being a common law
technical phrase, and adopted in the constitution; we may fairly conclude that
under this phrase the common law jurisdiction of the Federal courts is
sanctioned.

But on the authority of the common law, which directs that, in criminal cases
there is no appeal from the finding of fact by a jury, to conclude, because the
appellative jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is both as to law and fact, that
criminal cases are not within the jurisdiction of the Federal Courts, is not
fair: for it amounts to this, that no words in a description shall extend
beyond the meaning of one word. This appellate jurisdiction may be as to fact
in civil cases, and as to law in criminal cases: for it will not be denied,
that on a judgment on a conviction in a criminal case in an inferior court, a
writ of Error will lie in the Supreme Court. And, though, in case of an
acquittal in a criminal case, by the common law, a new trial cannot be granted;
yet, in case of a conviction, a new trial may be granted by the common law; and
if the inferior court refuse a new trial, the Supreme Court may have appellate
jurisdiction as to fact to grant it, where the conviction is contradicted or
not supported by evidence.

The constitution provides that "all civil officers of the United States shall
be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery,
or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Art. II. Sect. 4.
But the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable to indictment, trial,
judgment, and punishment according to law. Art. I. Sect. 3.
And the trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury,
and in the state were the crime shall have been committed; or when not
committed within any state, at such place as the Congress may by law have
directed." Art. III. Sect. 2.
Can it be supposed, that the general expressions here used are to be limited
to the particular offenses enumerated in the constitution; treason, piracy and
felony at sea, counterfeiting and bribery? Is not the phrase high crimes and
misdemeaners a technical phrase at common law? not a libel a misdemeanor at
common law? And may we not, from the expressions used in the clauses of the
constitution just cited, fairly conclude, that all offenses, which are subjects
of impeachment, or, when committed at sea, of indictment in the Admiralty
courts, are when committed at land, and against the authority of the United
States, subjects of indictment in the common law courts of the United States?
This opinion is fortified by the amendments to the constitution proposed by the
conventions of some of the states, which speak in such general terms of the
trial of crimes, of offenses, of all suits at common law, of criminal
proceedings by states; and of making laws touching religion, as seem to suppose
general legislative authority in Congress, and general common law jurisdiction
in the courts of the United States.

Whenever a government was established for the United States, with judicial
organisation for the trial of offenses, there resulted a common law
jurisdiction in the Federal Courts, over all offenses against the authority of
this government. Government, the sovereignty, is as it were the person of civil
society. And, like individuals in a state of nature, governments in the civil
state will not submit their wrongs to the determination of any other, but to
themselves alone. Every offense is an offense against the sovereign. The
sovereign alone examines, tries, judges, punishes, or pardons it, according to
its own organisation. The state courts cannot try an offense against the
Federal government only: there is no law empowering them. Prosecutions there
are in the name of the respective states, and punished or pardoned by them. The
courts of the United States cannot try an offense only against any of the
individual states. Thus the rights and honor of the several governments are
respectively reserved to themselves, and full judicial authority vested in each
for their several protection.

It is not necessary for me to controvert the position, "that section 2 of
article III. of the constitution is a complete enumeration of the powers of the
Federal courts: for it is fairly proved from the report itself, that this
enumeration includes the common law. But the report is evidently wrong in
saying that the second paragraph of the 6th. article is an enumeration of those
powers.

If the common law be not a law of the United States, and a guide to the Judges
of the United States, and if the description of the law of the United States in
the constitution be a precise and complete enumeration, excluding the rules of
the common law, helpless indeed would be the suitors in the Federal courts,
outlawed, as it were, from the protection of natural rights, the rules of
common justice, of debts, contracts, and property, and of the redress of
wrongs. Are not the Federal courts, in trying claims or injuries arising in any
state, bound to apply to them the law of the state where they originate, and is
not the common law part of the law of each state? May not an action for a libel
be brought in a Federal court, by a citizen of one state, against a citizen of
another state? Is it not an action at common law, to be decided by the rules of
the common law? If this libel be for describing the plaintiff as an impious
atheist, a blasphemer of God, will the common law, the principles of religion,
be no guide to the Federal Judges? Have "the rights of man" no authority in the
Federal courts, because they are not enumerated in the Federal constitution? Or
had they no authority, by a common law, till they were recorded in some
constitution? By what law is a promise, contract, or grant valid? What law
defines impeachable misdemeanors? By what law do legislative and judicial
bodies punish contempts? Is it not by the common law? Have the legislative and
judicial organs of the government of the United States no such power? Are they
destitute of all such means of protecting their own dignity and authority? And
if they have such means, from what law are they derived? From the common law
surely.

Confusion has been introduced into the reasoning of the report by an ambiguous
application of the phrase common law, using it sometimes as a limit of
jurisdiction, and sometimes as a rule of judgment.

Considering the common law as a limit of jurisdiction, the Legislature of the
United States, as of every nation, has authority to make all laws necessary or
proper for the defense of its own authority, but no other common law
jurisdiction; and the courts of the United States have authority to determine
all cases arising under any law of the United States, and all cases of
misdemeanor, or offense against the authority of the United States. This
plainly results from the nature of government, and is fairly deducible from the
constitution. But the constitution expressly gives to the courts of the United
States a further jurisdiction, either, on the principles of common law, for the
protection of the peace, dignity and authority of the government, as in case of
certain crimes, and in the case of foreign ministers, and in cases of maritime
law; or for impartiality, as in disputes between citizens of different states,
or for titles derived from different states.

As a rule of judgment, the common law, in all cases where it is applicable, is
an universal guide to the Judges of the Federal courts. It is no objection to
the application of this rule, that it may differ in different states. The
common law of England, so far as it rests on general and local customs, differs
in different portions of that territory. The Judges apply it, as it exists, as
a rule to the case before them. The statute law of each state may differ; the
Federal Judges will apply it, as the courts of the state having jurisdiction
over the case would apply it. So the common law of each state will be applied
by the Judges of the Federal court, as the judges of the state, having
jurisdiction over the case would apply it.

It is no objection to the common law being considered by the constitution as a
guide to the Federal courts, that this would give it a constitutional
establishment, make it part of the constitution, irrevocable by the
legislature. The constitution considers the law of each state, both common and
statute law, a guide to Federal courts; but leaves all law to be modified by
legislative authority, saving always the paramount authority of the United
States. The Federal courts, like the state courts, must take the statute law of
each state, as it stands in the existing statutes; and the common law of each
state, as it stands in established usages and decisions. Whatever parts of the
common law are altered by the change of circumstances of the United States, by
the constitution or laws of the United States within their constitutional
limits, or by the constitution or laws of the individual states within their
constitutional limits, will no longer remain law over cases affected by the
alteration.

The picture drawn of the common law, and the difficulties and consequences
stated in the report, from the introduction of this law into the Federal code,
seem so merely the work of a busy imagination, that any farther discussion of
them would be useless.

Its preamble declares, that the people of the United States ordained their
constitution, "in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure
domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the general
welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty;" and from this, an argument was
drawn for the power of Congress to pass the Sedition-act. The report says, "a
preamble usually contains the general motives for the particular measures, and
is always understood to be explained and limited by them." I will say, that,
wherever the body of an instrument admits of two constructions, one of which
will better than the other promote the intentions expressed in the preamble,
that construction which will best promote the intentions is the just
construction of the instrument. And it is a less evil, that the restrictions be
not adhered to, in the most rigid sense, than that the only government
established by the people with general powers should, where a reasonable
construction will prevent this, be deprived of a power necessary or proper to
promote the general welfare.

The constitution enables Congress "to make all laws, which shall be necessary
and proper for carrying into execution all powers vested by it in the
government of the United States, or in any department or office thereof;" and
requires that the President of the United States "shall take care that the laws
be faithfully executed;" and that "the United States, shall protect each state
against invasion and domestic violence." Hence it has been inferred, that, to
enable the President to take care that the laws are duly executed, and to
suppress insurrections, Congress has power to make laws to suppress the means,
by which insurrections and obstructions to the execution of laws are usually
excited; and, as seditious libels are the most usual and efficacious means,
that Congress may make laws to suppress them. All this seems natural and
logical enough. But the report says, that a power for faithful execution does
not imply a power to provide that no opposition be promoted; and that a power
to protect against insurrection, does not imply a power to prevent it. There is
no doubt that libels on the government will excite insurrections; but
government shall not suppress libels; for it may suppress the insurrections.
Let the libels go on till they have excited an insurrection, and then the
government can take all necessary and proper measures for its suppression. If
then the combination be such that the government has not force to suppress it,
the government is not to blame; it has used constitutional means, and the
constitution is overturned in due form.

The report, admitting that the grant of a power involves the means of
rendering it effectual, limits those means to such as are strictly necessary
for its execution. It, therefore admits that the grant of the crop growing in a
field includes a power to cut down, carry off, and secure the grain; but not to
repair the fences, nor keep off the cattle from destroying it before it is ripe.

Though Congress has power to make all laws necessary and proper for carrying
into execution the powers vested in the Federal Government, yet the report will
not admit that this implies a power to make all laws which may have a tendency,
whether proper or not, for the execution of such powers. I shall not dispute
this point.

Though Congress has power to make all laws necessary and proper for carrying
their powers into execution; yet the report contends, that Congress shall make
no laws but such as are necessary for this purpose. And, if the law which they
make or means which they prescribe be not necessary, but only proper; they have
no authority for the law or the means, and they are invalid; for the judiciary
alone can determine the propriety of the law or the means!

The report has admitted, that a power to punish implies a power to prevent the
mischief. The judiciary will execute their preventive authority, by all the
means prescribed by law, whether common or statute law. The legislature will
execute their preventive power by statutes. The discretion of the choice of
means, necessary or proper, for executing their powers lies with the
legislature. If the legislature choose means palpably unnecessary and improper,
the judiciary can then only exercise their judgment, by the authority of
construction of all laws vested in this branch of government. But the
legislature of Virginia ought not, in the exercise of usurped power of judging
of the means used by the Congress, or courts of the United States, for the
execution of their powers, presume themselves wiser than the constituted
authorities. A power over the end implies a power over the means; and a power
to make laws, for carrying any power into execution, implies a power to make
laws for preventing or removing obstructions to the execution: and it is
indifferent, whether those obstructions be acts of violence or acts naturally
leading to violence. The experience of other governments, and of our own, has
shown us, that libels on the powers of government are obstructions to the
execution of those powers, and naturally lead to insurrections. Denying the
Federal government the power of supressing libels is, therefore, denying it
proper means, and may be denying it all means, of executing its powers. For, if
the libels proceed, the obstruction of the powers of government may be too
strong for removal. This is vesting in the people "the holy right of
insurrection," while the government is vested with the right of suppressing it;
and leaving with the people the best means of exercising their right, while the
government is stripped of the best means of exercising the right vested in it.
With such a disposition of powers, we should soon see a very unequal contest,
with very fatal effects; and the most summary exercise of the people's
sovereign power over their servants, that the most modern professor of liberty
could desire. It would indeed bind the government, hand and foot, from all
resistance, till, in this condition, the knife was at its throat. This is the
end to which the clamours against the Sedition act and a standing army
naturally tend. If the people would preserve their government free they have
their choice of the alternative; indictments to suppress sedition, or a
standing army to suppress insurrection. A government, possessing force,
independent of public opinion, may more safely suffer public opinion to be
tampered with. Samson, while he retained his strength, might slumber in the lap
of Delilah, amidst the ambush of the Philistines, or be incircled with the
walls of Gaza. Let every government watch where its strength lies, and guard it
from corruption. If the strength of a government, as of ours, lie in the
opinion of the people, the corruption of public opinion will ruin the
government. No injury to public opinion is too slight to be overlooked; for
every injury to it is a wound in a mortal part. "Lilliputian ties" intwined in
Gulliver's hair made him surrender at discretion, though spears and arrows did
him no material hurt.

Second, On the resolution, as it respects the Sedition act the report next
states, that the power exercised by this act is expressly prohibited by one of
the amendments of the constitution.

The amendment or additional article of the constitution here referred to is
the third, which provides, "that Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or
abridging the freedom of speech or of the press."

The report observes, that, "to vindicate the Sedition act it has been
contended; 1st. That the freedom of the press is to be determined by the
meaning of this expression in the common law; and 2d. that the article supposes
the power over the press to be in Congress, and prohibits them only from
abridging the freedom allowed to it by the common law."

In answer to the first of these, the report says, " It is deemed to be a sound
opinion, that the sedition act, in its definition of some of the crimes
created, is an abridgment of the freedom of publication recognized by
principles of the common law in England." The meaning of this is, that there
are offenses declared by this act, for which an indictment would not lie at
common law. The report prudently declines supporting this opinion; and I may
safely assert, that it is not a sound opinion, and that this act does not
create any new offense, and that every offense declared by it would have been
an offense indictable at common law in the Federal Courts, if this act had
never been made, and would be indictable if this act were repealed.

The people of England, and the common law writers there, say, the press is
free there; the report says, it is as free there as here: here and there, it is
subject to no previous restraint; here and there, the abuse of it is, by the
common law subject to penalties. Yet the report will not admit, that the common
law idea of the freedom of the press is the American idea! The circumstances
being completely the same, it will surely be incumbent on the author of the
report to point out the difference in the ideas: and to show why punishment of
the abuse would not as effectually check the freedom of the press there as here.

The sagacious contrast between the principles of the American government and
the principles of the British government can give no force to the reasoning in
the report, unless it be meant to establish, that, because the sovereign
American people can change their government when they please; every individual
is at liberty, by lies and without any just reason, to incite the people to
change their government whenever he pleases. Or unless it be meant to
establish, that the American people ought to have less confidence in a
President chosen for four years, than in an hereditary King, or in Senators
chosen for six years, than in an hereditary House of Lords; or in
Representatives chosen for two years, than in members of the House of Commons
chosen for seven years; or, in a word, that it is more an offense to abuse the
government there, than to mislead the people by abusing their government here.
In any shape in which it is possible to put his report, its author will be
obliged to maintain, that among the rights of the American people, one is, that
every individual has a liberty to use the press to produce mischief, by
publishing falsehood or indecency. For it is well known, that, as by the common
law of England, so by the common law of America, and by the Sedition act; every
individual is at liberty to expose, in the strongest terms, consistent with
decency and truth all the errors of any department of the government.

To contend, that where the government is elective, there ought to be a liberty
of the press beyond the bounds of decency and truth; is to contend, that, where
the people have a right to choose their magistrates, every individual has a
right to misrepresent the character and conduct of the magistrates, to pervert
the judgment of the people, and render it impossible for them to make a right
choice. The degree of the restraint ought to be in proportion to the danger of
the offense. To mislead the judgment of the people, where they have no power,
may produce no mischief. To mislead the judgment of the people, where they have
all power, must produce the greatest possible mischief.

The "practice, here and in England," will not change the law, any more than
trespasses will give a right to the soil. It is possible, that, both here and
there, too much indulgence has been given to libels: but, in either country,
when a libel has been tried and found, has the practice prevented a judgment?
Not only libels, but thefts, robberies, and murders have been common in both
countries; and the trials and punishments have not been so numerous as the
offenses. It is not from a corrupt practice, but from a settled practice
allowed by judicial decisions, that the common law is to be taken.

That the liberty of the press is an excellent engine to destroy a bad
government, and the licentiousness of the press to destroy any government, all
experience will confirm. But where the government is, like ours, founded on the
people, I venture to assert, that a degree of liberty beyond that given to the
press by the common law and the Sedition act, will tend only to make the people
miserable, to corrupt and destroy the government, and to introduce anarchy,
and, in the end, despotism. Some means of destroying a bad may not be the means
of preserving a good government. To preserve a good government the confidence
of the people is necessary: but falsehood, if it may be propagated with
impunity, may be as fatal to a good, as truth to a bad government. To preserve
our best blessings in an useful state, we must restrain unlimited indulgence.
The care and industry of man must be constantly exerted for a proper enjoyment
of the gifts of Providence. To make the fruit of the tree good and abundant, we
must prune its natural luxuriance. And to preserve the liberty, we must
restrain the licentiousness of the press.

When it is known, that our Sedition act, like the common law, forbids the
publication of only "false, scandalous and malicious writings against the
government," and permits the publisher, if he can, "to give in evidence the
truth of the matter;" every candid mind will regret the misrepresentation in
the following sentence. " Had Sedition acts forbidding every publication been
uniformly enforced against the press, might not the United States have been
languishing at this day under the infirmities of a sickly confederation; or,
possibly, miserable colonies groaning under a foreign yoke?" By this the author
must mean, either that our Sedition act forbids every publication against the
government; or that there is as much ground of censure of the government now as
before the constitution and revolution; or that there would have been no
constitution or revolution, if lies had not been published of the confederation
and the British government; or that American juries are not to be trusted with
the examination of truth.

The last argument in the report on this point is founded on a fallacy. "The
freedom of conscience and of religion are the same by the common law of
England, and of America. The difference between the actual freedom there and
here is made, not by the common law, but by statutes there; and our
constitution restrains Congress from making "any" such statute here,
"respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof." The right of conscience is a natural right of a superior order for
the exercise of which we are answerable to God. The right of publication is
more within the control of civil authority, and was thought a more proper
subject of general law.

There is nothing therefore in the reasoning of the report that can show, that
the meaning of the words "freedom of the press" is not to be ascertained by the
common law. It is a common law phrase. The common law of England is the
foundation of our law. Their language is ours. We use the terms of the English
law in the English sense of those terms. And where we mean to restrain,
enlarge, or alter this sense, we do so in express terms. Where this is not
done, a law phrase is nearly as well understood to mean the same thing here as
in England, as a mathematical phrase is so understood. The freedom of the press
is plain language, to be understood in the common acceptance of this term here
and in England. There and here absolute freedom of the press did not exist. In
every state, Libels were punishable at common law. With this state of freedom
of the press, the people were content, and only restrain Congress from
abridging this freedom. Forbidding power to abridge, implies a previous general
power over the subject, and leaves a power to punish an abuse of this freedom
without abridging it. If this were not so why is there so sudden a change in
the manner of expression in this amendment? Why as respecting religion, was is
not declared that Congress shall make no law respecting the freedom of the
press?

This however is denied by the resolution; and, on arguments drawn from
discussions of the constitution previous to its adoption, from propositions of
amendment made by some of the state conventions at the time of its adoption,
and from the proposition of amendment made by Congress after its adoption; the
report asserts "that this amendment is a positive denial to Congress of any
power whatever on the subject."

It is very clear, that the power exercised by Congress is not included by this
amendment; and I think it has been shown, that it is fairly involved in powers
actually given, and necessarily results from the organization of the
government; and that it gives no new jurisdiction to the Federal courts; for by
the common law, the principles of right and wrong, morality, the rules of
religion; the criminal courts of every government must have jurisdiction over
this offense. A libel is an offense against all those laws, a violation of the
rights of man, one of which is reputation, and is punished under every
government in the courts of the government offended by it. No evil can arise
from the exercise of this power by Congress as a general authority: it depends
on no local information; the honor and safety of the general government is
involved in it; it is proper, that there should be a general law uniformly
affecting this case, and that the courts of the general government injured by
the offense, should be the organs of its correction. Under all these
circumstances, the construction will be favorable to the power, and an useful
power will not be taken away but by strong and express words, and such do not
exist, in the amendment.

In the discussion of the constitution, some of its opponents may have charged
it with powers which it had not, and some of its advocates may have denied or
dissembled powers really in it. Each, with perhaps honest views, may have
labored to carry his point, and if he succeeded knew that false arguments
would not affect the determination, and might be forgotten. On similar ground,
many in the state conventions acceded to the propositions of amendment. Those
propositions gave some justification, to their arguments; with, or without
them, the ratification was equally valid, and they made it more palatable; they
were supposed harmless, or, if mischievous, they had no force then, and could
be opposed again after the constitution was established. At any rate a
proposition that a thing should be done, will not control the construction of
the act as done, any more than a preamble will control an act. A contract is to
be taken not from the previous conversations of the parties, but from the words
in which it is expressed in the writing. Virginia was but one of the parties,
and, admitting that there might have been, in the convention of that state, a
desire to give the Federal government no power respecting the press; this might
have been contradicted by the other states. Exclusive of Rhole Island, six
states ratified the constitution absolutely. Three annexed propositions of
amendment, but not including this respecting the press, though one of them, New
Hampshire proposed, that "Congress shall make no laws touching religion, or to
infringe the rights of conscience." And only three states proposed the
amendment respecting the press. So that the constitution was completely
ratified without any view to this amendment, and must be understood to give all
the powers which this amendment was intended to restrain; and the amendment
restrains only the power to abridge. It is not necessary, therefore to show, as
might be done, that the declaration by the Virginia Convention, admitting it
sincere, is founded on a principle, which, though true, will not support it.
And were it every way supportable, it is susceptible of a construction, which
would defeat that contended for by the report. It combines two powers with
certain attributes, which, reddendo singula singulis may be taken thus; the
liberty of conscience cannot be modified, and the liberty of the press cannot
be abridged, by authority of the United States. But in any construction, how
can a law, which only abridges the unlimited degree of punishment for abuse of
the press, be said to modify the liberty of the press?

The author of the report must have known that the Virginia Convention in
endeavoring to establish the liberty of the press, understood this liberty as
every one else does to be a liberty from previous restraint and not from
subsequent penalties for its abuse; and did not understand it in the sense
contended for by him in the report, a freedom from all restraint previous and
subsequent and by him said to be the sense of the Virginia Convention. "A law
inflicting penalties on printed publications would," says the report, "have a
similar effect with a law authorizing a previous restraint." Now this Virginia
Convention. together with the amendment on the freedom of the press, proposes
an amendment, "That every freeman ought to find a certain remedy by recourse to
the laws for all injuries and wrongs he may receive in his person, property, or
character." If for all injuries to his chracter, he ought especially to find a
remedy for the worst of all a libel. A verdict in an action for damages may be
(and we have a late remarkable instance of it) a severer penalty than any that
would probably be inflicted by a sentence on an indictment; it may be a severer
penalty than can be inflicted by the Sedition act. Yet this Virginia
Convention, which, the report says meant to make the press free from all
restraint previous and subsequent, subjects it to this subsequent penalty at
common law without limitation. If the opinion of the Virginia Convention were
material on this point, it appears, that it never meant to leave the press free
from all restraints for abuse. And (since the report will argue from the
opinion of Conventions) it appears from this and other amendments proposed,
that a general legislative authority was supposed to exist in Congress, and a
general common law jurisdiction in the courts of the United States. And it
appears that the Virginia Convention believed, that without the proposed
amendment which I have cited, Congress might make a law, denying the right of
action for a libel, and therefore might make a law respecting the freedom of
the press; and that the Federal Courts might deny that an action lies for a
libel, and, therefore, that they had common law jurisdiction, by which alone
such action could be brought before them.

The preamble to the proposition of amendment by Congress is no evidence that
the amendment declared the press to be wholly exempt from the power of
Congress. There are other amendments proposed, which might correspond with the
desire of the states, and might extend the ground of public confidence. This
amendment was desired only by three states. If it was the intention of Congress
to satisfy the desire of those states, by proposing this amendment, it must be
presumed that they proposed it in terms corresponding with the desire. None of
these states ever desired that the licentiousness or abuse of the press should
not be restrained or punished; and Virginia expressly desired the contrary.
They desired that the freedom of the press should not be violated or
restrained. By the freedom of the press, they must be understood to mean the
freedom of the press as it then existed at common law in all the states. The
amendment corresponds with this desire, and the Sedition law with this
amendment, for it neither violates nor abridges the freedom of the press in the
known and established sense of that expression. The intention of those who made
the amendment must be collected from the plain meaning of the words used in it.
Some may have intended greater restraint, and others less: the question is what
is done. Congress must leave the freedom of the press as it was. There shall be
no previous restraints on this freedom; but there may be subsequent penalties
on the abuse of it.

Third, The last point discussed in this resolution is, "that the power
exercised by Congress, in this act, ought, more than any other, to produce
universal alarm, because levelled against that right of free examination of
public characters and measures, and free communication thereon, which has ever
been justly deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right.

On this point, the report, having stated part of the act, makes various
observations on it.

"The constitution supposes that the President, the Congress, and each of its
Houses may not discharge their trusts. Hence they are made responsible to their
constituents, at the returning periods of election. Should it happen, that
either of these branches has not discharged its trust, it is proper, that
according to the degree of their faults, they should be brought into contempt
and hatred of the people. Whether this has happened, can only be determined by
a free examination and communication among the people. And whenever it has
happened, it is the right and duty of intelligent and faithful citizens, to
discuss and promulge it freely, as well, for control, as for remedy; and those
who are to apply the remedy must feel a contempt or hatred against the
transgressing party. During the continuance of this act, two elections of the
entire House of Representatives, an election of two-thirds of the Senate, and
an election of a President were to take place: and, during all these elections,
the remedial rights of the people were to be exercised, and the responsibility
of their public agents to be skreened under the penalties of this act."

Who, reading these observations, would not suppose, that the people of the
United States were by this alarming sedition-act, restrained from a free and
fair discussion of the public conduct of their public agents, with an honest
intent of bringing them into disrepute when they deserved it? But does this act
forbid this? No: it forbids, as the report itself shows, "a knowingly and
willingly publishing a false, scandalous, and malicious writing, with intent to
defame the government," etc. Do the people of the United States wish to retain
a right, wilfully, maliciously, and falsely, to publish scandal against their
officers? Is this one of the rights of man under a free government? Does the
restraint of this right alarm them? Or have they made a constitution to protect
it?

It is evident, that the freedom contended for in these observations and the
report generally, is a freedom from all restraint; subsequent, as well as
previous; from the state governments, as well as from the Federal government;
from action, as well as from indictment. For "it is equally a restraint" (says
the report) "whether it precede or follow the publication; and so is it equally
a penalty, whether assessed by a jury In Virginia Juries assess fines.
or by a court, by a state court or by a Federal court. This freedom is a
contradiction to all experience, to common understanding, to natural justice,
to the rules of religion, and to the judicial decisions of every state. It is a
violation of the rights of man, one of the dearest of which is reputation.

The Sedition act enables the person prosecuted for a libel, "to give in
evidence the truth of the matter contained in it," and enables the jury "to
determine the law and the fact, under the direction of the court, as in other
cases." But the report says, "its baneful tendency is little diminished by this
privilege." And why is its baneful tendency not diminished? Why is it not
entirely removed? Because a restraint from publishing truth would have a
baneful tendency; is there any baneful tendency to restrain the publication of
falsehood? Because the press ought to be permitted to publish every truth
interesting to the public; ought it to be permitted to publish every lie?
Because "an intelligent and faithful citizen" has a right, honestly, decently,
and freely, to examine the public conduct of every officer, and, by exposing
the truth, expose the officer to contempt and hatred; has every impudent or
malicious man a right, wilfully, falsely, and scandalously to defame every
officer. It is not a free, but a false publication that is prohibited by this
act.

But it is objected by the report, that, "where simple and naked facts alone
are in question, there is sufficient difficulty of meeting a prosecution from
government with the proof necessary in a court of law." This will infer, that
in order to save offenders from the trouble of producing the necessary proof in
their defense, there should be no prosecutions, but a general impunity for
crimes, for murders, rapes, robberies, thefts, misdemeanors in office, etc.
Libels of public officers, where the people have a right of election, are
offenses of great magnitude and dangerous tendency. And it is as safe for a
person accused of a libel to have the accusation tried by a jury, as for a
person accused of any other offense.

As to "opinions, inferences, and conjectural observations," they must be drawn
from facts. If a man wilfully, maliciously, and with intent to defame, publish
an opinion not supported by fact, it is an offense. If there be fact to justify
it, he may give it in evidence. If there be none, why should not a wilful,
false, and malicious inference be a libel, as well as a wilful, false and
malicious assertion. The inference implies the assertion.

As to the intent to defame, the report reasons absurdly, "that in proportion
to the guilt of the officer will be the certainly and criminality of the intent
to defame him." Nothing like this can be drawn from the act. The intent to
defame is never criminal, where the matter of the accusation is true. All
depends on the truth or falsehood of the matter of the publication. If the
publication of the officer's official conduct be true, the intent to defame,
however malicious will not make the publication a libel. So that the intent to
defame is not criminal unless the publication be false; and is criminal in
proportion to the innocence or merit of the officer. There is good reason why
the authors of publications against officers should be responsible, that they
publish nothing but truth. For if falsehood might be published of officers, and
the publishers were liable to no restraint, the whole of an officer's time
might be taken up in examining or refuting slander; or the people concerned in
the officer's character might be misled by false information.

No less absurd, and more pernicious in its application, is the reasoning of
the report, from "the right of electing the members of the government." It
proceeds on a confusion of freedom with falsehood; as if a discussion could not
be free, without being false, or the restraint of a false were a restraint of a
free discussion. If "the value and efficacy of the right of election depends on
the knowledge of the comparative merits and demerits of the candidates" the
greater ought to be the restraint on falsehood in examining their character. A
free discussion will not be pretended to include a false one: it means a full
and fair discussion. A full and fair discussion is not forbidden by the
Sedition act. It forbids only a false discussion with a malicious intent. It
forbids not diffusing information, but diffusing corruption, among the people;
misleading their judgment, and seducing them from their duty. It puts not the
officer in a state of greater protection than the citizen. Any truth may be
published of the officer, which may be published of the citizen; and every
truth may be published of the official character of the officer. Would the
committee desire more? Because a man is an officer, shall every slander of him
be published with impunity? Because Mr. Adams is President of the United
States, shall leave be given to mislead the people, by publishing falsehood or
slander of him; in order that another candidate, not in such responsible
station, may be on equal terms for a chance of election to that office!

A free means not a false discussion, any more than the liberty, means the
abuse, of the press. The greatest injury " to the right of election," and the
greatest danger to " the blessings of a government founded on this right," is
slander; which perverts the opinions and choice of the people, and leads them
to prefer bad to good men. In proportion to the freedom of the government ought
to be restraint on libels. And the sedition-act no farther abridges the liberty
of the press, than by declaring that false publications are subject to
penalties.

To whom then is the sedition-act alarming? To slanderers, to libellers, to
robbers of reputation, to disturbers of the peace, to violaters of the rights
of man. It is, as law ought to be, "a terror only to evil doers."

The three following resolutions and the report on them contain only matter
less important or already considered. Perhaps Pennsylvania deserves the rebuke
which may be implied in the declaration of the patriotism of Virginia, in "
maintaining the authority and laws of the Union, without a single exception of
internal resistance of commotion. And while I cheerfully give all due praise to
the people of Virginia for this uniform submission, I cannot allow any share of
this merit to the authors or promoters of the resolutions or the report. And of
the people, for this respect for public authority, we shall find room to praise
not only the patriotism but the prudence. There is among them a force, which,
if the bands of public authority were relaxed might be fatal indeed.

The resolutions conclude as they commenced, with a profession of affection for
the states, and anxiety for the Union. I will not say (for they profess
otherwise) that the object of the resolutions is to dissolve the Union; but I
may with little hazard of contradiction, say, that they are (especially
accompanied with the report) well calculated for this purpose. On the ground
that "a wilful and material breach of a part is a breach of the whole compact;
having deliberately determined that palpable and alarming infractions of the
constitution have been made;" they lay a sufficient foundation for the
dissolution of the Union And I will say also, that, in making this deliberate
and solemn determination, the legislature of Virginia is mistaken, and has
usurped a power not given to it by the people; but given to the judiciary, or
reserved to the people themselves, as parties to the compact, in their highest
sovereign capacity. This is a deliberate, palpable, dangerous, and alarming
exercise of powers not granted by the constitution: for the powers of the
legislature of Virginia are no farther valid, than they are authorized by the
constitutions of that state and of the Union. And the people are in duty bound
to interpose, for arresting the progress of the evil, and maintaining within
their respective limits the authorities, rights, and liberties appertaining to
them."

POSTSCRIPT.
When I wrote what is said in page 12 of the opinion of General Washington, on
the power of Congress to provide for the general welfare, I alluded to this
opinion as officially delivered to Congress. I had not then seen his will
giving a donation to A NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, in the hope that Congress would
establish such an institution. This is a deliberate declaration of a WISE and
VIRTUOUS man, in whom LOVE of COUNTRY was the ruling passion; made in the full
strength of this passion, in a solemn moment when he was preparing to part with
all earthly things, and to meet his GOD.


