MR. ALDEN'S SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF GENESIS WASHINGTON.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE SOUTH CHURCH IN PORTSMOUTH, ON THE V JANUARY,
MDCCC. Occasioned by the sudden and universally lamented DEATH OF George
Washington, Commander of the American Armies, and late President of the UNITED
STATES.

BY TIMOTHY ALDEN, JUN. A. M COLLEAGUE PASTOR WITH THE REV. SAMUEL HAVEN, D. D.

Published at the desire of a respectable number of the HEARERS, to whom it is
affectionately dedicated.

PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE, PRINTED AT THE UNITED STATES' ORACLE-OFFICE IN
JANUARY, AND REPRINTED IN FEBRUARY, MDCCC: BY CHARLES PIERCE.

ON THE DEATH OF Washington.
O DANIEL, A MAN GREATLY BELOVED!

DAN. x. 11.
FROM the respectful mourning vestment, which clothes this sacred desk; from
that gloom, which sits on every countenance; from that breathless silence,
which pervades this house of prayer; I know, my christian friends, that every
fiber vibrates to the truth, that WASHINGTON was greatly and justly beloved.

It devolves upon us, in common with millions in America, and millions beyond
the broad Atlantic, to mourn that our beloved WASHINGTON, the friend of MAN,
and the favorite of HEAVEN, is now no more! WASHINGTON, the great, the brave,
the good, has bid adieu to scenes below! WASHINGTON, who, under Providence, has
been the savior of his country, the guardian of her rights, and the avenger of
her wrongs, has paid the last debt of nature, and is enrolled among the sheeted
dead!

Tears have streamed from every eye, at the solemn knell of his departure, and
every heart is filled with grief.

Oh that the united virtues, which dignify and adorn the warrior, the patriot,
and the christian, could avert the stroke of death! Then WASHINGTON had lived
forever; but, Heaven forbid the thought! To live like him, is to vanquish the
king of terrors. To die like him, is only to put off these clogs of
imperfection, scar beyond the starry orbs into the vast regions of perfect
light, and SHINE HIGH IN RANK AMONG THE HEAVENLY HOSTS.

Who can behold such a prodigy of human excellence, without an ecstasy of
gratitude to Heaven? He seems to have been raised up, by a particular
providence, to combine, for the happiness and the glory of our Israel, the
characters of Moses and Joshua.

It would be a pleasing task to draw the analogy, which, in many respects,
would be striking, between the fortune of ancient Israel and that of the
American people, and also between the character of Moses and that of
WASHINGTON. We might show that the latter, in some respects, even exceeded the
former, and embraced some distinguished traits in the character of Joshua. J.
M. SEWALL, Esquire. ingeniously drew the comparison between MOSES and WASHINGTON.
A public performance in course of the last week has superseded the propriety of
such an attempt, which was previously intended for the present solemn occasion.

To recount the personal accomplishments and the domestic, martial, and
patriotic virtues of WASHINGTON, would be a delightful, interesting, and useful
employment; but, they are engraved deep on every grateful American heart. Some
living Belknap will transmit them to the eve of time. Thousands of sculptors,
engravers, painters, poets, and orators will exhaust their genius to do him
justice. It is sufficient, for the humble minister of Jesus, merely to glance
at the most prominent features, which have marked the beloved WASHINGTON, as
the hero, and the benefactor, of his country. On this occasion our narrative
will therefore be short.

WASHINGTON was an important instrument, under Heaven, in extricating us from a
POWER, which, elated with the triumphant flourish of her flag, in every quarter
of the globe, threatened us with the galling chains of despotism. He conducted
us through a wilderness of memorable perplexities and distress. He gave us the
rich blessings of liberty and independence, in a land flowing with milk and
honey. Having secured to his country the unalienable rights of man, and having
retired from the din of arms to the rural shades of his beloved Vernon, he was
called, by the united suffrages of his countrymen, to the FIRST OFFICE in the
union. The world knows that he might have continued in THAT OFFICE, till the
day of his death; but, he gave another convincing testimony of the greatness of
his mind, by resigning the reins of government and becoming a private citizen.
When a cloud, of threatening aspect, began to gather on our political horizon,
he again stepped forth like a guardian angel. What more need we say of the man,
whom all nations are proud to honor? We will not intrude upon the province of
the historian; but, justice to the memory of THE BEST AND THE GREATEST MAN UPON
EARTH demands of us to say, that, like Daniel, who was distinguished for his
WISDOM, at the court of Babylon, even to a proverb; WASHINGTON, FOR HIS WISDOM
IN THE CABINET AND IN THE FIELD, IS THE DELIGHT AND THE WONDER OF THE WORLD.

IT BECOMES US, MY CHRISTIAN FRIENDS, AS FOLLOWERS OF JESUS, TO MAKE A
RELIGIOUS IMPROVEMENT of that sudden, unexpected, and melancholy event, which
has bedewed our country with the tears of millions.

A great man is fallen in the American Israel! Our beloved WASHINGTON is no
more. If the Psalm, 82.
gods die, like men, who can hope to live? If the mighty fall, how can the
feeble think to stand? If WASHINGTON be fallen, who can expect to evade the
shafts of death?

How weak, how foolish, how inconsiderate is man! No age, nor rank in life, is
exempt from the ravages of the tyrant of tyrants. The infant, robed in
innocence; the youth, glowing with the blush of morn; the man vigorous as the
oaks of Bashan; and the head, covered with the lilies of the grave, are equally
the prey of death, and the food of worms. The rich and the poor, the tyrant and
the slave, the unlettered peasant and the laurelled head, fall without
distinction among the clods of the valley.

The air we breath, is fraught with death. Every element teems with the arrows
of destruction. The food we eat may prove our bane, and every antidote a poison.

At the longest, how short is the life of man! Threescore years and ten, when
they have rolled away, appear like a dream; and yet, one half of the human race
does not reach one quarter of that contracted span.

In the humbler spheres of life, our fellow creatures are continually dropping
into the grave, around us yet, how many regard the solemn admonition, with as
much indifference, as they behold the falling leaves of autumn. They forget
that the present scene is only an introduction to the great drama of existence.
They live, in the world, as if tomorrow should be as this day, and much more
abundant. They take no thought for the regions beyond the grave. But, my
christian friends, if the frequency of death among our fellow mortals, in the
humbler walks of life, can give no alarm, shall not the solemn tidings that our
beloved WASHINGTON has joined the assembly of the dead? Shall an event, which
pours the tide of grief into every dominion of the globe, soften no heart into
a tender concern for things of eternal moment?

If all would, as sincerely prepare for the world to come, as they mourn the
departure of our NURSING FATHER, his death, so improved, would be a greater
blessing, than all the achievements of his life.

Upon serious reflection, what can we find to court our residence in this vale
of tears? "Riches have wings and grandeur is a dream." The highest applause,
the trump of fame can sound, like the ephemeris, is but the creature of a day.
What can avail the marble column and the sculptured bust? Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity.

The wealth of Croesus, the intellects of Newton, the strength of Samson, the
wisdom of Solomon, the exalted virtues, the unrivalled exploits, the immortal
glory of WASHINGTON are no barrier to the approach of death. However great the
celebrity, in the world, all must sink into the dark and dreary mansions of the
grave. However beloved, or however despised, all must pass that bourne whence
no traveller returns. All must moulder and mingle with their kindred dust.

If, with some modern MANIACS, we could persuade ourselves, that death is an
eternal sleep, of all beings, in this lower creation, we should be, by far, the
most wretched; but, we know that our Redeemer lives. Although in our flesh we
shall see corruption; yet, we know that these bodies shall be purified and
triumph over the grave. We know that the trump of GOD shall sound; that its
rending voice shall pierce the bowels of the earth; that all nature shall
receive the alarm; and that the dead shall rise immortal; and be adjudged,
according to the deeds done in the body, AT THE HIGH CHANCERY OF HEAVEN.

It is the unshaken faith, that our existence will never end, and that
happiness will eventually attend on virtuous deeds, which enables us to brave
the storms of life, and bid defiance to the sting of death.

Here, my christian friends, is a noble illustration of the happy effects of
that holy religion, which we profess. In our beloved WASHINGTON we see the
christian faith triumphant.

Let christendom rejoice. The name of WASHINGTON may now be added to those of
Newton, Lock, Bacon, Boil, Addison, and Hale for another stumbling block to
those modern INFIDELS, who boast the omniscience of human reason.

It was the CHRISTIAN FAITH, which supported our beloved WASHINGTON amid scenes
of jeopardy unparalleled in the annals of the world. It was this FAITH, which
enabled him to meet the hour of death, without a MURMUR OR A GROAN. It was this
FAITH, which enabled him, though ready to sink under the most excrutiating
pain, to look with TENDERNESS AND LOVE on his weeping friends. It was this
FAITH, which enabled him to say, with emphasis, I AM NOT AFRAID TO DIE.

Through the kind indulgence of heaven, we may be crowned with the luxuries of
life; we may adventure far into the regions of human science; we may shine as
the patriot and the sage; we may win a wreath of laurels in the field of Mars;
but, it is a PRINCIPLE OF CHRISTIAN FAITH AND PIETY ALONE, which can bring us
peace at the last. It is this PRINCIPLE, which gave a luster and a dignity to
every excellence, which adorned the immortal WASHINGTON, and gave him a
fortitude in death, which would have done honor to a martyr at the stake.

Our beloved WASHINGTON evinced his belief in the christian dispensation by a
most devotional and regular attendance on the instituted means of grace. Like
Lord Chief Justice Hale, of England, he observed the holy Sabbath, with the
most solemn reverence. He was not ashamed to kneel at the altar and receive the
bread of life. Such was his devout attention, in the house of God, and so deep
was his sense of divine truths, that, while the word has been dispensed, by the
humble servants of the cross, TEARS HAVE OFTEN BEEN SEEN TO ROLL DOWN HIS
CHEEKS.

There are many, who put on the appearance of religion for a cloak. They are
the vilest hypocrites. Of all characters they are the most detestable. Far from
this was the American HERO.

Secret prayer is the most convincing testimony of our sincerity in religion.
Our beloved WASHINGTON daily poured forth the sorrows and the joys of his heart
in secret and solemn adoration. Like the beloved Daniel, in whom was the spirit
of the living GOD, he daily kneeled down in his chamber and devoutly prayed to
his heavenly Father. According to credible information, when he was at the head
of the American army, he so constantly and conscientiously devoted ONE HOUR,
EVERY DAY, to this important duty, that none could interrupt him, but on the
penalty of his high resentment.

If such were his piety, like that of Daniel, who can wonder that, like him, he
prospered in every undertaking? We are positively assured that it shall be well
with them, who fear God.

It is happy for the preacher of religion and morality, when he can adduce the
example of those, who have been GREAT, in the estimation of the world. Although
we have a greater than WASHINGTON, for a guide; yet, his example is an
important acquisition to the christian cause. We may say of him, as it has been
said of the primitive christians, that he taught most sublimely, for he lived
irreproachably. This is saying as much as we can, with propriety, say of any
man upon earth. By it, we do not aim to represent our departed beloved
WASHINGTON, as a perfect man. There is no such thing as perfection in this
world of depravity. Our principal object is to exhibit him as a rare instance
of GREATNESS in a religious and moral sense of the word. Such was his undoubted
character, and we may venture to predict that HIS EXAMPLE will be urged, with
the happiest success, as another PROP to the christian fabric, till the
glorious era shall arrive, when Jews and Gentiles, universally convinced of the
truth of our holy religion, shall break from the yoke of Satan and fly to the
standard of the cross.

Let the incense of gratitude rise from every christian heart, that, while we
behold, with astonishment, the heroic and patriotic virtues of WASHINGTON, we
can exhibit him as an amiable pattern of religion and morality. His character
is so important, in this view, that there would be a striking propriety, on
this solemn occasion, if time admitted, in improving it by an induction of
particulars, to the confusion of every vice and the incitement to a
conscientious observance of every moral and religious duty. We can attempt such
an improvement only in a partial degree.

It is said of the celebrated Boil that he never pronounced the name of GOD
without a solemn pause. Such was his regard for the Deity, that he seemed to be
lost at the name of that glorious Being. Every body was struck with the solemn
and devotional manner, in which WASHINGTON pronounced that holy name. Here is a
lesson for thousands in our country.

Profanity is one of the crying evils of the present day. It is a vice without
the shadow of temptation, and consequently, without the shadow of an excuse. It
is become fashionable, particularly among the rising generation, through the
depravity of the heart, and the false supposition that it gives a kind of
dignity to the man; but, my young friends, let me suggest to you, that it
betrays a conscious poverty of character. In common conversation, to add the
sanction of an oath, betrays a consciousness that your word is not worth
believing. Besides, it is awfully criminal in the sight of Heaven. As a new
persuasive against that impious custom, let me ask, do you ever hear the name
of WASHINGTON without being fired into a love of every virtue, which he
exhibited, and a detestation of every vice, which he detested? Then let it be
added, as a well known fact, that he ever showed the most pointed disdain for
every man, whatever his rank might be, who profaned the name of the great
Jehovah. On a certain time, General WASHINGTON, having a number of the American
OFFICERS at his table, soon perceived that one, in the rank of Colonel, so far
broke over the bounds of decorum, as to make use of profane language. The
General, with his usual gravity, turned to the person, who had been directed to
give the invitation, and said, I thought, sir, that I desired you to invite
GENTLEMEN to dine with me to day. The word, GENTLEMEN, was pronounced, with
such a mortifying emphasis, that the Colonel was never again heard to make use
of similar language in the presence of the General.


IT is inexpedient to descend to a more particular enumeration of those
christian virtues, which adorned our immortal HERO. It is sufficient to say,
that the excellence of religion and morality shone, with uncommon luster, in
the various scenes of his public and private life. Like a good General, he had
an exemplary command over himself. He, who conquers his appetites and passions,
is a greater hero, than he, who conquers the world.

That WASHINGTON was no stranger to the excellence of MORALITY and VITAL PIETY,
and that he was persuaded of their infinite importance to the social and the
individual character, it would hardly be pardonable, on this occasion, not to
adduce his own language on this interesting subject.

"Of all the dispositions and habits, which lead to political prosperity, says
this illustrious MAN, RELIGION and MORALITY ARE INDISPENSABLE SUPPORTS. In vain
would that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert
these great pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of
men and citizens. The mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to
respect and cherish them. A VOLUME COULD NOT TRACE ALL THEIR CONNECTIONS WITH
PUBLIC and PRIVATE FELICITY. Let it be simply asked, where is the security for
property, for reputation, for life, if a sense of religious obligation desert
the oaths, which are the instruments of investigation, in the courts of
justice? And, says he, let us with caution indulge the supposition, that
MORALITY can be maintained without RELIGION. Whatever may be conceded to the
influence of refined education, on minds of peculiar structure; reason and
experience both forbid us to expect, that national morality can prevail in
exclusion of RELIGIOUS PRINCIPLES." This is the important creed of our beloved
WASHINGTON, as recorded in his AFFECTIONATE FAREWELL ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF
THESE AMERICAN STATES. In this masterly ADDRESS is displayed the full dignity
of his mind and the unrivalled benevolence of his heart.

The concluding passage from his circular address, at the time of his
resignation of the military command, is another transcript of his pious soul.

"I now, says he, make it my earnest prayer that GOD would have you in his holy
protection; that he would most graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do
justice, to love mercy, and to demean ourselves with that charity, humility and
pacific temper of mind, which were the characteristics of the DIVINE AUTHOR OF
OUR BLESSED RELIGION, AND, WITHOUT AN HUMBLE IMITATION OF WHOSE EXAMPLE IN
THOSE THINGS, WE CAN NEVER HOPE TO BE A HAPPY NATION."

Here is a man, my christian friends, without a rival in the list of fame; and
yet, whose character, as a pattern of religion and morality, gives him a more
exalted glory. A CHRISTIAN IS THE HIGHEST STYLE OF MAN. YOUNG.


While we mourn the loss, which our country and the world sustains, by the
death of our distinguished PATRIOT; have we not reason to exult in the honor,
which his character reflects on the christian religion? Must not infidelity
receive a deadly blow from the example of THIS GREAT and PIOUS MAN?

How happy is that country, whose princes rule in judgment! What an
incomparable blessing, to the American people, must we consider our beloved
WASHINGTON! Were Moses and Joshua, unitedly, a greater to the tribes of ancient
Israel?

The political salvation of our country seems to have depended on the abilities
and address of WASHINGTON.

As a warrior, he equalled, in prudence, the Roman Fabius, and, in bravery, the
great Duke of Marlborough. In peace, he was ambitious of no higher rank, than
that of a private citizen, in a free and independent country. The rural shades
of his beloved Vernon afforded him that retirement from the noise and bustle of
the world, and the happy opportunity for those philosophic amusements, and for
that pious meditation, which were congenial to his soul. When we behold him
leaving those domestic recreations, at his country's call, for the helm of
state, it brings to mind the celebrated Cincinnatus, who left his plow, when
his country was in the most imminent danger, for the dictatorship of Rome. When
we behold him, voluntarily resigning the reins of government, and once more
retiring to spend the remainder of life, in an undisturbed repose, the mind is
filled with astonishment! But, what shall we say? a lowering cloud, black with
vengeance indescribable, rises in the east, and we again behold him stepping
forth, like a GUARDIAN ANGEL, to disarm it of its thunder!

Such was the man, whom AMERICA, and THE WORLD HAVE DELIGHTED TO HONOR. There
is no nation, so lost to a sense of human excellence, as not to revere his
name. The Algierine will drop a tear to his memory. The tawney tribes, beyond
the western mountains, will pierce the heavens, with their cry of grief, and In
the year 1794, if I mistake not, several of the Illinios and Wabash chiefs
visited the public rooms at Harvard College. They had a little before been
treated with kindness, at Philadelphia, by President WASHINGTON. As soon as
they entered the Philosophy Chamber, they cast their eye on an elegant portrait
of the President, the work of Savage. They all as one recognizing the original,
immediately made a most respectful obeisance. Such was their veneration for
this great and good MAN!
bow with reverence, to every portrait, which bears the name of WASHINGTON.

Who can behold such a character without an admiration, if it may be so
expressed, almost to idolatry! So much wisdom, prudence, humility, benevolence,
and piety, are seldom the portion of one man.

It is a melancholy reflection, that, among those, who are great in the
estimation of the world, we do not in general find the most exemplary
christians. In WASHINGTON is a noble exception. He not only exhibited the most
eminent military and political talents; but, to crown his worth, he was a
SINCERE CHRISTIAN. As we have endeavored to maintain and illustrate, so we may
with confidence, assert, that he was a pattern of singular piety, and morality,
in an age of infidelity and vice.

Here let the hordes of modern infidels, who exalt themselves above all that is
called GOD, behold a MAN, whose shoes they are not worthy to carry. Here let
them behold a man, unrivalled in fame, invariably exhibiting a most profound
regard for the great Jehovah, the holy Sabbath, and every christian duty! Can
they trample on the laws of GOD, and die in peace? Can the infidel, like
WASHINGTON, meet the hour of death without a fear? "Men may live fools, but
fools they cannot die." The infidel is, like the coward, bold in council, but,
in battle never brave. On the verge of eternity, he surveys his dismal
situation, with horror, and with his expiring breath, trembles and believes!
Voltaire, one of the greatest champions of infidelity, the world has ever seen,
spent his life in the attempt to crush the christian fabric; but, unhappy
mortal, his closing scene was a mere hell upon earth.

When we cast our eyes across the wide Atlantic, and behold the RULERS OF A
GREAT AND POWERFUL NATION, unitedly, condemning the word of GOD, abolishing
every religious institution, and proclaiming to the world, that death is an
eternal sleep; who can wonder that they oppress the helpless, wrong the
innocent, give unbridled reins to a lawless ambition, and slaughter friends and
foes till their country is drenched in the blood of millions!

If we give up our belief in the being and providence of GOD; if we renounce
the idea of a future state and an impartial retribution; we, at once, sap the
foundation of society and open wide the floodgates of anarchy and vice. Our
towns become a Golgotha, and our villages mere fields of blood.

Society cannot long subsist without religion. Every man is therefore a
blessing, or a curse, to society, in proportion, as he promotes, or injures,
the cause of religion.

In THIS VIEW, THEREFORE, WASHINGTON SHINES, WITH SPLENDOUR, AS A LIGHT OF THE
WORLD. While we offer the tribute of gratitude to Heaven for those blessings,
which have been poured on our country, through the heroic and patriotic
services of this great and dignified CHARACTER, let us never forget, that he
was an EXEMPLARY CHRISTIAN. Have we not reason to believe that, like Daniel, he
prospered in the important undertakings, to which Providence called him, in
consequence of his piety and prayers? From such data as we have, may we not
suppose that, like Solomon, HE ASKED WISDOM ONLY OF HIS GOD, and so was crowned
with blessings, which even Solomon might envy?

To weep for a man, so greatly and justly beloved, as WASHINGTON, is godlike;
but, gratitude should mingle with our tears, that our country was blessed, for
such a length of time, with such a favorite of Heaven. Thanks be to GOD! that,
as, when Elijah was translated, Elisha caught the parting mantle; so, when
WASHINGTON retired from the chair of state, an ADAMS rose, and lives to fill it.

Although our beloved WASHINGTON scarcely reached the age of David; yet we may
say of him that he was full of days, riches, and honor; but he is fallen
asleep, and is gathered unto his fathers. The LORD gave and the LORD has taken
away, blessed be the name of the LORD. None of us will ever behold him again,
in this vale of tears. We shall celebrate the day, which gave him birth no
more; but the hour is coming, when, we shall all behold him before the
assembled universe, and hear HIS ELOGY PRONOUNCED BY THE SON OF GOD.

MEMORANDUM.
When WASHINGTON made his last tour, through the Nothern States, and had
reached the vicinity of Portsmouth, the question was asked, what title shall we
give him? The venerable DOCTOR HAVEN replied, in the true sublime; Fame spread
her wings, and with her trumpet blew;
Great WASHINGTON is near! What praise HIS due!
What TITLE shall he have? She paused, and said,
NOT ONE, HIS NAME ALONE STRIKES EVERY TITLE DEAD.

GEORGE WASHINGTON, was born 11 February, 1732, at the Parish of Washington, in
the county of Westmoreland, and state of Virginia. He was appointed Commander
in Chief of the American Armies, in 1775. He resigned his Commission, in 17^^.
He was chosen President of the United States, in 1789. He resigned the
Presidency, in 1796. He died at Mount Vernon, between the hours of 10 and 11,
Saturday evening, the 14 December, 1799.


