AN ORATION ON THE CHARACTER OF THE LATE GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON: PRONOUNCED
BEFORE THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF WESTERN, ON SATURDAY THE 22d OF FEBRUARY,
1800.

BY JOSEPH ALLEN, JUN. ESQUIRE.

PRINTED AT THE REQUEST OF SAID TOWN.

PRINTED AT BROOKFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, BY E. MERRIAM and Co. March, 1800.

To JOSEPH ALLEN, JUN. ESQUIRE
SIR,
THE inhabitants of the town of Western having chosen us as their committee to
wait on you, with their thanks for your ingenious Oration, delivered this day,
on the illustrious character of our lately departed WASHINGTON, and to request
a copy for the Press: -- Therefore, in conformity to the vote of the town, we
solicit your compliance with their wishes.

Committee.
DANFORTH KEYS, MATTHEW PATRICK, JOSEPH FIELD, DAVID BUROUGHS, ASA PATRICK.

Western, Feb. 22, 1800.
GENTLEMEN,
IN compliance with the wishes of the inhabitants of the town of Western, as
expressed in your Note of the 22d instant, I submit for the Press a copy of my
Oration delivered on that day.

JOS, ALLEN, JUN.
February 24, 1800.
THE SELECTMEN OF WESTERN.
AN ORATION.
IN defiance of a doctrine which DESPOTS have taught their Slaves, that
INGRATITUDE is the vice of a REPUBLIC, WE are assembled my FELLOW CITIZENS at
the recommendation of our GOVERNMENT, to commemorate the virtues and deplore
the loss of the BENEFACTOR of OUR COUNTRY -- WASHINGTON is no more! The man to
whom under GOD, we are indebted for the inestimable blessings of INDEPENDENCE,
sleeps the sleep of DEATH! The ARM, which has protected from rapine the fruits
of our SOIL, and from violence the chastity of our FAIR, FOW moulders with its
kindred dust! The TONGUE which by its mildness has so often charmed the soul of
sensibility, and by its energy has "spoken daggers to a tyrant," is hushed in
eternal silence! The STAR which guided our watchmen to their political
salvation has set in GLORY.

Arrogance would be a mild epithet for the man, who should attempt by his
rhetoric or his eloquence to give additional luster to a character already
beyond the voice of eulogy. -- Ours is the melancholy, yet pleasing duty simply
to record the glorious deeds, and to call into recollection the important
services which were performed by this JOSHUA of our land, for the benefit of
OUR FATHERS, OURSELVES and POSTERITY.

In the first stage of his political career, we find him appointed by the
government of Virginia to a trust honorable and important; and this too at a
period of his life when public HOPE could scarcely be supposed to have ripened
into CONFIDENCE.

The history of our warfare on the frontiers with the FRENCH and the NATIVES
introduces us to a second acquaintance with our departed FRIEND and warmly
engages our feelings in his interest, by its recital of the memorable defeat of
the brave, but imprudent BRADDOCK. Had this unfortunate General been guided by
the advice of the man, though young in ARMS, yet sage in COUNSEL, in all human
probability the disasters of that melancholy day had been averted. -- But
Heaven allotted a reward to the courage and circumspection of WASHINGTON, to
him has justly been ascribed the glory of covering the retreat, and saving the
remains of that slaughtered army. From this period, his talents were directed
to the more particular service of his native state, until his appointment to
the command of our confederated troops. -- At this epoch, so distinguished in
the annals of liberty, the cruel, the unnatural, the damnable arrogation of
supreme power by the British government demanded the united and determined
opposition of our Nation -- the demand was not unheard, nor its efficacy unfelt
-- our Congress had modestly petitioned, and the petition was discarded, it had
manfully remonstrated, and the remonstrance was ridiculed. -- Dutiful and
affectionate as had been the then Colonies to their parent country, it would be
impossible for the human mind to explore a cause for the conduct of the latter,
were it not known, that it was governed by a Parliament divested of principle,
and a Monarch destitute of intellect. -- But America was not to be lulled into
slavery -- the corruption, which originated, and the folly which supported the
design of invading our liberties, was early penetrated by the sentinels of our
freedom. To combat the designs of this unprovoked enemy, it became necessary
that an army should be raised and of course that a leader should be appointed.
The GUARDIAN GENIUS of our county surely presided on that auspicious hour,
which deposited this all-important trust in the hands of WASHINGTON. -- My
FELLOW CITIZENS, let the FIFTEENTH DAY OF JUNE ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY FIVE be hallowed in our memories. Reflect, that on that day your
EARTHLY FATHER unsheathed his sword in the defense of your RIGHTS and that it
never returned to its scabbard till your WRONGS were avenged -- guided by his
"ruling passion" the love of his country, he relinquished domestic happiness,
and with a nobleness of mind peculiar to himself, refused the pecuniary
emoluments of his station. -- The acceptance of this important command
naturally led him to the seat of war, and on the second of July following, he
commenced his official duty at Cambridge -- but a few months succeeded, and the
term for which our little army had enlisted expired. -- Many of you, my fellow
citizens, can recollect, and those of us who cannot, have been told, that
"darkness, clouds and shadows" then rested upon our country -- patriotism had
not so far gained an ascendency that a body of naked, unfed, unpaid and
undisciplined troops would patiently submit to the hardships of war, and, far
from their homes, encounter the inclemencies of an approaching winter --
liberty, majestic as is her form, seemed to faulter in her steps at the
apparent indifference of her disciples. Her eye had lost its luster, and her
garb was sackcloth. -- This was a crisis in our political disease, which
requited the constitution of a WASHINGTON to support. His was framed by Heaven
to meet the MALADY, to counteract its prison, and to mock its terrors. Neither
intimidated by the formidable appearance of a neighboring and a veteran foe,
nor depressed by the distracted situation of the army which he commanded, he
philosophically planned and calmly pursued those measures, which restored the
inhabitants of our capital to the enjoyment of their former possessions.

On this occasion, it must be unnecessary to recapitulate the scenes of our
revolution, for the purpose of pourtraying the brilliant features of
WASHINGTON. -- Every father knows, and it is presumed has taught his children,
that during the gloomy periods of the contest his courage was unshaken and his
ardour unabated; that in the splendid and glorious career of his victories, he
never forgot that he was the servant of his country -- dreary must have been
his prospects at Long Island and through the Jersies, yet his fortitude did not
forsake him -- his brilliant success at York Town, though noticed with religious
gratitude, seemed little to elate that tranquil mind, which adversity could not
depress. Relying on the justice of that Being, whom WE sacredly invoked at the
commencement of our hostilities, with fervent hope and humble dependence to
him, he entrusted the decision of that important question, whether "ALL MEN"
were, or were not, "born FREE AND EQUAL." The decrees of HEAVEN sanctioned the
declaration of our rights, and the PILOT of our choice having encountered
perils and tempests, conducted our POLITICAL BARQUE to the haven of
INDEPENDENCE. Crowned with laurels of unfading luster, he left the "tented
field," and his pathetic farewell and solemn address to the disbanding army
evinced that the wisdom of the SAGE was not inferior to the valor of the
HERO. The commission which had been reluctantly accepted was cheerfully
resigned, and the MAN who had saved an EMPIRE retired to the shades of private
life. -- Had the turbulent spirit of a CAESAR or a CROMWELL been implanted in
the breast of WASHINGTON, what human power could have affixed the limits or
prescribed the terms of his dominion? An army of which he was the Idol,
disaffected with what they considered the ingratitude of our government, and
irritated by the artful suggestions of designing incendiaries, was almost
ripened for revolt and ready to point their weapons at the bosom of their
country. -- A nod, a smile of approbation from their chief would have been
sufficient to have "let loose the dogs of civil war," and to have placed a
fortunate and a favorite commander in any station to which his ambition might
have aspired. Happy is it for America and propitious to the cause of universal
liberty, that a "restless and ungoverned temper" was not WASHINGTON's. As
anxious to hush the murmurs of his fellow soldiers, as he had been eager to
lead them to victory and honor, his persuasive eloquence and confident
assurances effectually silenced the voice of discontent, and disarmed the
Demons of insurrection.

But a few months of peace and independence had been enjoyed, when experience
taught us, that the nerves of our government were too weak for a regular
system. -- The Confederation, which had been adopted in the exigency of the
moment, was mouldering to decay; its strength was insufficient to support its
own weight, and our young Republic was tottering to its ruin. The elders of our
country, the prophets of our land, alarmed at the impending danger, laid the
basis and reared the columns of that glorious Constitution which WE now enjoy,
and which, under a wise administration, will effectually secure our privilegesi
and protect our dignity.

In the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, WASHINGTON was elected
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES, and again left the repose of private life, for
the arduous and responsible duties of that important station. It would be an
impeachment of the gratitude of my countrymen, to remind them, with what
devotion he then dedicated his time and his talents to their service. -- It
must be engraven on every heart, and the recollection can never depart but with
the departure of our existence.

While our feelings are thus gratefully alive, let us remember the sacred
legacy which he left his constituents, at the time of his resignation of office
-- so long as truth shall be believed, and wisdom revered, shall WASHINGTON's
"FAREWELL ADDRESS" be classed with the first of human productions.

Fatigued with the weight of government, he modestly retires again to private
life, and is again called forth to the command of our armies. In conformity to
the wishes of the people whom he loved, he accepted the appointment, and
although age had scattered its wrinkles on the MAN, the WARRIOR was yet in
bloom. -- Here the curtain must drop! The public life of this GREAT man closes,
for he pays the dept of nature. -- This day, had Providence permitted, would
have completed the sixty-eighth year of a life of unsullied virtue and
unrivalled glory -- but he is gone! His expiring moments witnessed his
FORTITUDE and his RELIGION, and ANGELS now smile on their COMPANION.

THE END.

