MR. BASCOM's ORATION, ON THE Death of GENERAL Washington.

AN Oration, DELIVERED FEBRUARY 22, 1800.

THE DAY OF PUBLIC MOURNING For the Death of General George Washington.

BY REV. JONATHAN BASCOM, OF ORLEANS, To the PEOPLE of his Charge.

Quis nostrum tam animo agresti ac duro suit, ut Roscii morte nuper non
commoveretur? Cicero pro Ar. Poeta. Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill,
BOSTON. 1800.

ORLEANS, March 10, 1800.
IN Town-Meeting, voted that Deacon RICHARD SPARROW, and Mr. HEMAN LINNEL be a
Committee, to present the thanks of the Town to the Rev. Mr. BASCOM, for his
ORATION delivered before them, on the 22d February last; and to desire a copy
of it to be printed, at the cost of the Town.

Copy of record, by TIMOTHY BASCOM, Town Clerk.

An Oration.
FELLOW-CITIZENS and FELLOW-MOURNERS,
I use this new address, as I stand before you now in a new character, and upon
a new occasion. In my attempt to perform the task you have assigned me, I feel
myself supported by a confidence in your well-known candor.
THIS day is remarkable. This day, sixty-eight years ago, had the honor to
witness the nativity of one of the greatest and best of the human race. You
will readily conceive, that the reference applies to the late General GEORGE
WASHINGTON, whose memory is blessed. This day, therefore, has often been
celebrated, in many of our cities and towns, in commemoration of that happy
event. -- Some of you, I presume, have seen the lively impressive emblems of
public joy displayed upon that occasion, and have partaken in the high-wrought
affection.

HAPPY were it for us! happy were it for the whole nation! were this the only
object of public attention, this day. But the case is greatly otherwise. The
harp is now turned to mourning; for that venerable and illustrious Personage
has lately closed his eyes upon the light of life, and is now no more.

ON the 14th December last, a regretful day now to be adopted into the gloomy
annals of mortality, his invaluable life was taken from the earth.

THE winged tidings, as if an host had perished, or a whole city rushed to
ruin, pervaded the whole land. The bereaved nation is now seen, as the Prophet
saw the tents of Cushan, in affliction; or, as were the chosen tribes in the
wilderness, lamenting the death of their Moses.

THIS day, so often the joyful anniversary of his birth, is now, by authority,
made sacred to his funeral honors. Alas for the day! Quantum mutatus ab illo!
How is the scene changed! Yet, the nature of this changeful world considered,
perfectly in order.

SHOULD the propriety of the public solemnities of this day be demanded, while
the public loss, and the sublime virtues of our ascended Patriot, in solemn
assemblies, resound from the lips of a thousand selected orators; I shall make
some reply.

MOURNING for the dead, with funeral respect for the great and good, especially
such as have been great and public benefactors, is a dictate of nature,
ex-emplified in the practice of all nations, the disciples of Divine Revelation
not excepted; and appears to be countenanced, at least, by Revelation itself.
The principle, like other natural principles, has been indulged to excess; has
often been the parent of the grossest absurdities, and even of abominable
idolatries. Hence, mere frail mortals have been deified; and some of the most
polluted wretches, sainted. Last respects to virtuous deserving character, when
nothing more can be done, are often overdone. This is no reason that nothing of
the kind should be attempted. If any thing be due from the living to the dead,
it is an honorable remembrance. Who lives, and wishes not that his honors, if
he has any, may outlive him? Such a principle, under due restraint, is not
without its use; is a stimulus to the acquisition of personal accomplishments
and merit; a motive, among greater motives, to a virtuous and honorable
practice. More virtue exists, we presume, because it is known, that its praise
shall survive its possessor. What less than to check vice, and encourage
virtue, did the wise king of Israel intend, when he uttered that memorable
aphorism? "The memory of the just is blessed; but the name of the wicked shall
rot."

As Pagan, Jewish, and Christian princes, potentates, heroes, etc. have been
publicly honored by their funeral rites; who will deny the present claim, in
behalf of our WASHINGTON, to be just?

I PRESUME, it is now the wish of this whole audience, most certainly it is
mine, that I were able to do justice to a character, so much the ornament and
boast of our nation. But, instead of attempting to describe a character so
exalted, I will honor him yet more another way; by acknowledging it is above
my reach. To this small tribute of praise (for small indeed it is) I will add
that which is far greater; by announcing to you, that others, consummate
Eulogists, who have acted the part before me, have confessed the attempt to be
desperate. -- What description of the fun, when shining in his meridian luster,
shall improve the intuitive idea of his splendour? That must be a fair hand,
that touches the driven snow without injury to its native whiteness. Suffice it
for me further to say, that on every pronunciation of the glorious name,
GENERAL WASHINGTON, rides forth the idea of a bright assemblage, if I may not
say, the aggregate, of virtues.

I SHALL attempt, however, with great and comprehensive brevity, and as great
diffidence, to retrace the mighty and beneficent deeds of one, who has been so
much the organ of salvation and blessings to his native country, and our own.

SINCE the day of some, and before the day of others, of us, the now United
States of America were appendages of the British nation. The parent state
ceased to govern them with affection, and forged political chains for them.
Born free, and accustomed to a liberal government, they revolted at the idea of
subjugation. Coercive policy met their firm united resistance. Fleets and
armies were employed against them. It was necessary that an opposing army
should be raised and organized. An important, but not difficult question arose;
Who shall take the chief command? no doubt was long entertained. WASHINGTON was
appointed. Not for filthy lucre, not from the pride of his heart, not to
support a lawless faction, not to drive in sunder the nations for conquest or
plunder; but "for the help of the Lord against the mighty;" for the help of his
then oppressed, already wounded, and bleeding country, he greatly arose, and
accepted the awful charge.

WHAT followed is well known. He came; he fought; he conquered. Long time, with
various success, at the head of his brave republican legions, he opposed the
mighty invaders of our rights and possessions; those who blockaded our
harbors, ravaged our coasts, burned our cities to ashes, and shed rivers of
innocent blood. When the prospect darkened before him, despondency found him
not; success could not flatter him to abate his vigilance. As the fruits of his
prowess, so happily accompanied with prudence and perseverance, whole armies,
one after another, became his mortified captives; and he unbuckled not his
armor till all opposition gave way before him; till he saw the proud foe of
humanity prostrated and trembling under the point of his sword, and his native
land a quiet habitation. Then, and not before, he resigned the august command,
and retired to the common rank of a citizen.

IT was not long, before the united voice of the nation called him forth from
his beloved retirement, to preside over the realms his valor had saved. -- This
honor was done him a second time; a third time was prevented only by his
absolute refusal, for reasons he adduced. By his administrations, as Chief
Magistrate, it was made evident, that nature had formed him for the scepter, as
well as for the sword.

THE nation being threatened again with the calamity of war, to whom was it
natural for them to look for protection, under God, but to their veteran Hero,
who had so recently conducted them to victory and peace? The solicitations of
Government, therefore, prevailed with him to resume the conquering sword, and
take the command of the precautionary forces. Under the honors of this
appointment, at the command of the Arbiter of life, to which the highest must
submit, he made his mighty exit, and retired, all are confident, to peaceful
regions.

How imperfect the review! Draw upon your memories, call up faithful history,
to supply the present lack of narration. From these sources of information it
will appear, that such were his virtues and talents, and so directly and
successfully exerted for the benefit of his generation, that he rose to fame by
his own merits, and, foreign to his main object, attached to himself honors to
an effulgence of glory. His praise is in all the nation; it surpasses her
limits; and, like the rays of the prince of day, is gone out into all the
world. It re-echoes to us from every enlightened people. It will progress with
civilization, till both embrace the ends of the earth. And his name shall
endure, as long as virtue and talents, employed for the best purposes, shall
command plaudits from a human tongue. We express our confidence of its
perpetuity, by addressing to him that ancient poetic line, as pertinent to the
purpose as in its primary application; Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque
manebunt. Pardon the unknown tongue, and take the sense thus: Forever live thy
name, renown and praise.

DESERVEDLY great as the public mourning is, is there no consolation?

No grief so great, but remedies are found;
There Is balm in store to heal a nation's wound.
IN behalf of our deceased benefactor, mourning, we presume, is needless; tears
would be wasted. -- Why weep for the dead, who have accomplished every
important purpose of life, and retired to their rewards? To his more public
character as a patriot, we are happy in being able to add, that he, whose
memory we celebrate as the Savior of our country, was himself a disciple of
the Savior of the world; believed in, and professed, the Christian Religion;
was in church fellowship; and attended the sacred ordinances; and, in his more
private walks, ordered his steps by the heavenly rules and maxims of the
gospel. Such a one must have happiness secured. Earth, bad as it is, cannot
deny it him; death cannot deprive him of it; the eternal world, most certainly,
must improve it to perfection.

For Vernon's mount, that with a palace vies,
He now possesses heavenly paradise:
Elate in honors which outshine, outlive
The fading plaudits fellow-mortals give:
Anointed high above his fellows there,
As much as he surpassed the vulgar here.
THE public loss we justly deplore. The breach is wide like the sea. But,
consolation offers itself to us from the highest source. We piously exult in
the language of the Prophet, in a dark day; "Art not thou from everlasting, O
Lord our God, our holy One? We shall not die," as a nation, though WASHINGTON,
so long and so much the breath of our nostrils, be taken from us. Be we but a
virtuous people, and the Lord will provide for us. With him is the residue of
the spirit. When Moses the servant of the Lord was dead, He raised up Joshua,
to lead the chosen race to their destination. Nor are we left in a situation
only to hope against probability, so long as there is an ADAMS, a JEFFERSON,
and others we could name; even an host of patriots who survive, to watch over,
defend, and improve the glorious fabric of our union and polity, according to
the pattern that has been showed them from the Mount (Vernon).

AND may we not console ourselves, in part, from the consideration of the
flourishing state of literature in our nation? that the scientific fountains
will provide for a succession of wise and faithful rulers, to go in and out
before us; and of Generals too, to command our armies, so long as the world
around us shall remain so depraved and rapacious, as to make the art and
occupation of war necessary for defense.

BUT, shall we praise our WASHINGTON, and neglect HIM who is higher than the
highest? Herod made an oration to the people, and committed an error that
proved fatal to the pompous orator himself; "he gave not God the glory." And
far be it from us, in imitation of a late refinement upon heathenism, to
address our public gratitude to our national genius. We are not ashamed to
mention the name of the Lord, who rules in the kingdom of men; our hope in the
day of evil; in the day of prosperity, our song. Is WASHINGTON celebrated this
day, as having been our political Father, our Benefactor, our Savior? For this
purpose God raised him up, to show forth by him his mighty power, and his
extensive goodness, before all the people. -- He foresaw our destinies, and
fitted him exactly for our purpose: raised him up in the right time: he was of
proper age the moment his services were wanted; nearly the age of Moses when he
entered upon his divine legation, to liberate the posterity of Jacob, from the
oppressions of the tyrant of Egypt. The Creator of man united in him strength
of body, and vigor of mind; formed him by nature and education for his work;
made him impregnable to the force of corruption, should the proffered price of
his fidelity be the greatest, and lavished upon him the talents of war and of
government. The Preserver of man strengthened his warlike arm, and covered his
anointed head in the day of battle; not an hair of his head fell to the ground;
nor was a drop of his blood shed by the sword of the enemy. Happy for us! the
same man, WASHINGTON, had, and retained, the Chief Command of our forces, from
the beginning to the end of the memorable conflict. -- The honored instrument
deserves an honorable remembrance; but the ultimate praise must take an higher
direction, even to the God of armies and battles, who turns the victory on
which side he pleases. Thus we "render unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's;
and unto God the things that are God's."

LOOK now for a reward of your further attention, in a concluding word of
advice.

DO we honor the memory of General WASHINGTON this day, as having been our
benefactor, and so much the instrument of our national freedom, and present
happy establishment? Hence, these are benefits; benefits to be appreciated,
defended, and improved. He has left us in a situation most friendly to the
acquisition and enjoyment of public and private property; the cultivation of
every virtue; and the practice of pure and undefiled religion, which is under a
divine promise of this life, and the life to come. Therefore, let us stand
fast, let us stand right in, and prize and improve, the liberty with which we
are made free, by the sword of the LORD, and of WASHINGTON his faithful servant.

YOU will now allow me to retire within my proper sphere, and act the preacher,
so far as to exhort all present, heedfully to attend to the voice that cries,
"All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass:" the
solemn voice of mortality, I mean, now become peculiarly impressive, by the
fall of this mighty one, this earthly god, who has died like another man, and
fallen like one of the princes. In regard to death, the high and low, the
illustrious and obscure together, stand on equal ground; there is no
pre-eminence. "The small and the great are there"; "and there is no discharge
in that war." Let us fight the good fight of faith; and the reward will be, a
crown of glory that shall not fade.

FINIS.



