MR. ALEXANDER's SERMON, ON THE Death of General Washington.

A SERMON; OCCASIONED BY THE Death OF HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON,
LIEUTENANT GENERAL OF THE AMERICAN ARMY, AND LATE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.

Who departed this life, December 14, 1799, AET. 68.

(Published by desire.)

BY CALEB ALEXANDER, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Mendon.

Know ye not? that there is a prince and a great man fallen, this day, in
Israel. DAVID. Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON.

1800.

Advertisement.
THIS sermon was composed and delivered, before any official intelligence was
received of the death of our ILLUSTRIOUS CHIEF. The event, however, had
obtained a general credibility. This circumstance must apologize for the
insertion of the extracts from Mr. Marshall's speech, the notes in the
Appendix, and the imperfections of the discourse; as a very short time was
allowed for its composition.

The AUTHOR.

A Funeral Sermon; OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF HIS EXCELLENCY, LIEUTENANT
GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.
PSALM, LXXXII. 6, 7. I HAVE SAID, YE ARE GODS. -- BUT YE SHALL DIE, LIKE MEN;
AND FALL, LIKE ONE OF THE PRINCES.
DEATH makes no distinction between the high and the low, the rich and the
poor, princes and people. Men of high character and exalted stations, in life,
are as much exposed to the infirmities of human nature, and the stroke of
death, as the common class of men. They are equally the posterity of Adam. They
are equally under, the sentence, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou
return." To them it is, equally, appointed, "Once to die." In reflecting on the
common mortality of man, the wise king of Israel said, "There is no man, that
has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit; neither has he power in the
day of death: And there is no discharge, in that war." For, in this respect,
"All things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him, that
sacrifices and to him, that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner;
and he, that swears; as he, that fears an oath."

In describing the common fatality of all men, and their equal exposure to 'The
king of terrors,' a certain elegant poet says, With equal foot, impartial fate
Knocks at the palace, as the cottage gate.


The same appears to be the sentiment contained in the words of our text: "I
have said, ye are gods. -- But ye shall die, like men; and fall, like one of
the princes." Your station is exalted. You are raised to high power and
authority among your fellow creatures. In point of interest, character, and
influence, you are raised above the common level, and have obtained the title
of gods on earth. But these high distinctions shall not exempt you from
disease, pain, and death.

To the rulers, in the Jewish church, were the words of our text, first,
addressed. The government of this church was theocratic. The Most High God was
their particular king. He formed their mode of government. He made their laws,
and ordained all their rules of discipline. In the first, distinct, formation
of their government, he appointed Moses and Aaron to be the chief rulers over
his people, and gave directions, in what manner, their successors should be
introduced into office, and invested with power over the people.

As the government of the Jews was theocratic, as God was their particular
king, so all the officers chosen to govern this people, and introduced
according to divine appointment, were the legal representatives of the Most
High. They represented his person, majesty, and power, by requiring obedience
to his commands, and by punishing disobedience with exemplary punishment. Their
high power and authority, their exalted character and respectability they
received, by special delegation, from God. They were his judicial and executive
officers, to judge in matters of controversy between man and man, and to
inflict the penalties of his kingdom. Referring, if we mistake not, to the
delegated power of the officers, in God's holy kingdom, Paul commands the
followers of Christ, in these words: "Let every soul be subject unto the higher
powers: For there is no power but of God; the powers, that be, are ordained of
God." (Romans 13. 1.) And because of this delegated power, the rulers in Israel
were called gods. In the context, it is observed, "God stands in the
congregation of the mighty: He judges among the gods." The judges, in Israel,
you see, were styled gods, as being the legal representatives of Jehovah,
acting in his kingdom, vested with his authority, and carrying into execution
the laws of his house. And being God's representatives, they were under the
most solemn obligation "To defend the poor and fatherless, to do justice to the
afflicted and needy; to deliver the poor and needy, and rid them out of the
hand of the wicked."

Sustaining this high character, and being under these solemn obligations, they
were amenable to God for all their conduct, in their judicial and executive
departments. On God they were dependent for their being, their high distinction
among men, and their continuance in office. He put them into office; he had a
sovereign right to continue them in office, and to remove them from office,
when and in what manner, he saw fit. And, that they might not be elated with
pride, he reminds them of their frailty and mortality. "I have said, ye are
gods. -- But ye shall die, like men; and fall, like one of the princes."

These remarks apply, in a special manner, to the rulers in God's ancient
church. They were his subjects, his peculiar people, and treasure. For wise and
holy purposes, he selected them from among the nations of the earth, gave them
a code of laws, appointed their rulers, gave them their charge, and invested
them with all their power.

As among the Israelites, their rulers were subject to the misfortunes of life;
and to the last, the solemn scene of leaving this stage of action; so it is
equally the case among other nations of the world. The greatest riches, the
highest office, and respectability do not exempt men from the shafts of death.
As in Israel, their rulers were called gods, from their being invested with
power over the people; so this character, in some measure, may be applied to
the kings, princes, and great men of other nations.

In whatsoever government a man may be a ruler, a chief man, he may, in this
respect, be called a god; and yet he is subject to die, like men; and fall,
like one of the princes. Whether a man become a ruler, by the special
appointment and delegation of God, as among the Israelites; or by hereditary
succession, as in a monarchy; or by a combination of certain great men, as in
an aristocracy; or by the free election of the people, as in a republic; yet
his exaltation to office and dignity does not liberate him from the common
evils of life, nor from death, "the last debt of nature." Power and authority
are no preservatives from sickness and mortality. Consumptions, severs,
inflammations, and other mortal disorders will, as soon, seize the constitution
of a ruler as a subject. The scepter of government, the robe of state, and the
sword of power will be no protection, whenever death comes with hasty strides,
apprehends the prisoner, and is conveying him to the land of silence. When the
summons of death arrives, nothing can withstand its execution. Neither the
cries nor wishes of the people, nor the aid of physicians, nor riches, nor
power, nor usefulness, will defend, in this awful, trying, moment.

This affecting truth has, lately, been exemplified, in the death of LIEUTENANT
GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.(A) Although born to give liberty and independence to
a nation, to rule and protect a nation, he has died, like a man; and fallen,
like one of the princes. In his death, America has lost her first character and
her best friend. For more than forty years, his life and talents were devoted
to the good of his country, both in the cabinet and field. When a young man, he
gave striking evidence of his future greatness and usefulness. At this period
his wisdom and bravery were eminently displayed, in saving the remnant of the
American and British army, when General Braddock was defeated by the French and
Indians. Endowed with a strong mind, with shining talents, with an astonishing
command over his own passions, he early distinguished himself, in the list of
same, and gained the attention and love of America.

That nature produces but one extraordinary man, in an age, is the common
remark of historians. This age has seen George Washington appear, on the
theater of life, and perform wonders, which have astonished the world. Our
affection for him, our admiration of his person, abilities, and usefulness may,
perhaps, be carried too far. But should we say, he is the most dignified
character, that has appeared, in this century, we should speak the general
voice of America, (B) and of Europe. In comparison with him the crowned heads,
princes, and generals of Europe appear to lose their luster and dignity. Of the
last king of Prussia it has been said, he sent to General Washington, in the
late war, his own likeness, with this note, "FROM THE OLDEST GENERAL IN EUROPE
TO THE GREATEST GENERAL, IN THE WORLD."

The character, whose death we are lamenting, was, principally, formed, in the
late American revolution. When America was, cruelly, oppressed by her mother
country, when the British Parliament assumed the right of making laws to bind
us, in all cases whatever, and sent her fleets and armies to enforce those
laws, our eyes were turned to this Great Man. With a brave, intrepid heart, and
humble reliance, as we conceive, on the God of armies, he stepped forth to
defend his country, and guide her to victory and independence.

As the friction of a diamond will make it shine the brighter; so difficulties
and dangers will rouse the heroic soul, and make it appear, in all its native
strength. This was the case of Washington. Taking the command of a weak,
undisciplined, army, he risqued his life and reputation, in opposing a mighty
foe. Through unseen dangers and difficulties, he led, with a skilful, unerring
hand, his little band of heroes, and humbled the pride of an imperious,
haughty, nation. (C) Calm and unruffled as the smooth ocean, he could see,
without perplexity, (D) one danger rising after another, and yet not deviate
from the grand object in pursuit. Conscious of his own integrity, and depending
on the justice of his cause, he persevered with fortitude and constancy, till
he drove the oppressors from this land of liberty, and gave peace to his
country. And, then, with the love of his citizens and applause of the world, he
retired to the private walks of life, and the repose of domestic happiness.

"When the debility of our Federal system had become manifest, and the bonds,
which connected the parts of this vast Continent, were dissolving, we saw him
the Chief of those patriots, who formed for us a Constitution, which, by
preserving the Union, will, I trust, substantiate and perpetuate those
blessings our revolution had promised to bestow. In obedience to the general
voice of his country, calling on him to preside over a great people, we saw
him, once more, quit the retirement he loved, and in a season more stormy and
tempestuous than war itself, with calm and wise determination, pursue the
interest of the nation, and contribute, more than any other could contribute,
to the establishment of that system of policy, which will, I trust, yet
preserve our peace, our honor, and our independence." See Mr. Marshall's
speech, on receiving the news of Washington's death.


Rejoicing in the happiness of America, and willing to exert his talents for
her safety, he forsook, the second time, the sweets of private life, ascended
the chair of state, and steered the helm of government, with the same impartial
hand, and the same impartial love, that induced him to wield the sword, in her
defense. Amidst jarring interests and different politics, he appeared to have
been influenced, by the highest good of his fellow citizens. His administration
was happy and benign. And, abating some instances, the people were contented
and prosperous, under his government. For one man to please all classes and
descriptions of men, especially when their sentiments and interests are in
opposition, is, perhaps, impossible. But, amidst the different views and
feelings of America, no man, it is presumed, has, so generally, had the love
and confidence of the great body, as the MAN, whom they have, so often,
delighted to honor.

"Having been twice unanimously chosen the Chief Magistrate of a free people,
we saw him, at a time, when his re-election, with the universal suffrage, could
not have been doubted, affording the world a rare instance of moderation, by
withdrawing from his high station to the peaceful walks of private life.
However the public confidence may change, and the public affections fluctuate
with respect to others, yet with respect to him, they have, in war and in
peace, in public and in private life, been as steady as his own firm mind, and
as constant as his own exalted virtues." See the abovementioned speech, which
was received after the sermon was delivered. As it contains sentiments so noble
and so congenial to the feelings of America, it was deemed proper to insert
these extracts.


After having retired, the second time, to the endearing scenes of private
life, and taken an affectionate farewell of a grateful people, in an address,
(E) that honored his genius and his heart, he was, for the third time, called,
by the general government, to take the command of the army, they thought proper
to raise for the public safety. In the opinion of candid and impartial men,
this was esteemed an additional luster to his glory; as he had been, once
before, Commander in Chief of the American Army, and twice chosen to the
Supreme Magistracy of the United States. His accepting a General Lieutenancy,
under these circumstances, was clear proof of the goodness of his heart, and
that he preferred the weal of his country to the etiquette of honor.

In private life, he was social, courteous, and condescending; a tender
husband, a kind friend, and pleasant companion. In public life, he was affable,
grave, prudent, and energetic. His eye was piercing, his aspect commanding, (F)
and his morals unblemished. (G) Although born and educated in the midst of
pleasures and gaiety, he shone in the morals of a Seneca, the philosophy of a
Socrates, and patriotism of a Cato. In his character were happily blended all
the endearing and illustrious qualities of a husband, a friend, a citizen, a
general, and statesman. With equal facility and grace, he could command the
pen, the scepter, and sword. Such were the sweetness of his mind and happy
talents, in doing business, he could refuse, without disobliging; and punish,
without offending. (H) Like Virgil's man of gravity, "At his presence the
maddening crowd would stand, with listening ears, and sedition hide its head."
With a little variation, we may say of him, as Cicero said of the celebrated
Roscius, "Though he died in advanced age, yet such was the excellence and
inimitable beauty of his art, that we thought him worthy of living forever."

But he has gone from "The busy scenes of life" to the world of spirits. He has
bidden a farewell, a long, eternal, farewell to his dear and amiable consort, to
his friends, to his country, to his greatness, and dignity below the sun. "Our
Washington is no more! The hero, the sage, and the patriot of America -- The
man, on whom, in times of danger, every eye was turned, and all hopes were
placed, lives now only in his own great actions, and in the hearts of an
affectionate and afflicted people." As David said of Abner, "That a prince and
a great man is fallen, this day, in Israel;" so we may say of the illustrious
Washington, that a prince and a great man has fallen, in our nation. To say, he
was, in all respects, the most dignified character in America, is no reproach
to the living. "I receive," said the President of the United States, in his
answer to the House, "I receive with great respect and affection the condolence
of the House of Representatives on the melancholy and afflicting event, in the
death of the most illustrious and beloved personage, which this country has
ever produced."

In him the officers and soldiers of the late continental army, have lost a
man, whom they loved, feared, and respected. In him America has lost her best
general, her wisest counselor, and truest friend. At his death, every heart
must grieve, and every eye stand big, with the tear of mourning. In this great
hero and statesman are strictly verified the words of our text, "I have said,
ye are gods. -- But ye shall die, like men; and fall, like one of the princes."
Raised to eminent stations of honor and trust, by the unanimous and repeated
voice of America, he discharged his duty with fidelity and punctuality. By
unshaken perseverance in righteousness, he gained a character of renown, which
has eclipsed the greatest heroes of ancient and modern times. Born to a great
fortune, and endowed with brilliant talents, he devoted his interest, and time,
and abilities, to the good of his country, and deeply fixed his memory in their
affections.

But neither his fortune, nor talents, nor character, nor the affections of his
citizens, have been able to defend him against the awful messenger of death.
Like a man he has died. Like a prince he has fallen; and he is, now, slumbering
in the silent tomb, "not to rise again, till the heavens be no more." Though
removed, by death, from his friends and country, yet his name will, forever,
remain impressed on their hearts, as on pillars of marble. By the page of
history, his memory will be transmitted to the remotest generations. And,
whenever, in future times, the infancy and rising glory of America shall be the
subject of conversation, the name of Washington will be mentioned, with wonder
and delight.

In the present crisis of human affairs; when such important and astonishing
events are rising to view, on the great theater of Europe; when "nation is
rising against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and men's hearts are
failing them for fear, and for looking for those things, that are coming on the
earth, and the calamities of war are raging through cities and towns, and
effecting such awful destruction of men, the death of our illustrious General
must be sensibly affecting to every true American. Removed as we are from these
dreadful scenes of carnage and desolation; we are, however, in a great measure,
connected with the politics and revolutions of Europe. And the present times,
especially in America, demand men of firmness, of cool tempers, of
dispassionate hearts, and impartial love to guide the people in the path of
righteousness and safety. Although we are not destitute of distinguished
characters, both in the cabinet and field, yet the name of Washington was alone
worth a host of veteran troops. In the courts of Europe, his reputation had
risen to the highest grade of same. And, while they viewed him as firmly
attached to the constitutions and best good of his country, the prospect would,
naturally, give a check to their intrigues and maneuvers to draw us, with
themselves, into the same vortex of ruin.

In the late glorious struggle for our rights and liberties, when oppressed by
a domineering nation, we saw him at the head of our armies, directing all his
plans, with the greatest wisdom, secrecy, (I) and expedition. When raised to
the head of civil government, he appeared in all the sagacity and dignity of
the most profound statesman. And we hoped to have enjoyed, in his last
acceptance of office, his counsel and arm to defend our neutrality and preserve
peace, in our borders. But America was not destined to enjoy, any longer, his
presence, the good of his counsels, nor strength of his arm. At no time, could
his departure from this vale of tears have been more interesting to this land,
and to the world. By a sudden, unexpected, malady, the sovereign disposer of
men has taken him from this to the unseen world. His sun has set forever. --
"No; the name of WASHINGTON -- the American President and General, will triumph
over death; the unclouded brightness of his glory will illuminate future ages."

To the rulers in America, his death affords a most solemn, affecting,
admonition. Could greatness of mind, could dignity of person, could usefulness,
and the love of his country have preserved him, he "would not have died." But
neither greatness of mind, nor dignity of person, nor usefulness, nor the love
of one's country is able to retain the spirit, in the hour of death, in whose
'war there is no discharge.' Although exalted to the high station of gods, yet
rulers must "die, like men; and fall, like one of the princes." To them the
grim 'king of terrors' will pay no more respect, than to the lowest of the
people. From their seats of renown and power, they will be taken down, by the
hand of death, and laid in the dust, on a level with their fellow worms. --
From the active scenes of life, of power, and glory, they will, ere long, be
summoned to the bar of that holy, impartial God, who shows no respect to
persons; but judges and rewards every one according to his conduct in this
life. In the presence of the omniscient and holy God, kings, and princes, and
presidents, and governors, and generals, and magistrates, and people will
appear on equal footing, and each receive, in the final judgment, according to
the deeds done in the body. In the final day of retribution, the virtuous,
upright, and faithful magistrate will receive the approbation of his Judge and
be seated on a throne of unfading glory. But the tyrants and oppressors of
mankind; "who have caused their terror, in the land of the living," will be
frowned from the presence of Jehovah, and filled, with eternal shame. "Be wise,
therefore, O ye kings: Be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling."

Our subject may remind all classes not to trust in health, nor in power, nor
in "uncertain riches; but in the living God." While in health and usefulness,
"the rich man's wealth is his strong city." But experience has, often, taught,
that "riches profit not in the day of wrath." Of what avail are fine houses,
beautiful gardens, fertile fields, bags of gold, and a numerous train of
servants, in the hour of death. Agonizing with pain, and expecting, every
moment, to launch into eternity, the trembling soul can receive no comfort from
its popularity and hoards of wealth. Religion is the only comfort of a dying
man. The reflection of having commanded armies and gained victories, of having
swayed the scepter of government and obtained the applause of nations, will not
soften the pains of a dying man, nor give ease to an accusing conscience. When
earthly wealth and grandeur are failing, and nature sinking under a load of
distress, the "rejoicing" of a good man is, "the testimony of his conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom; but, by the
grace of God, he has had his conversation, in the world.

May God grant, that all the rulers, in America, may feel, though they are
gods, they must die, like men; and fall, like one of the princes. Impressed
with this solemn thought, may they realize the importance of religion, the
necessity of being influenced, by the principles of righteousness and fidelity,
in the making of laws, and carrying them into execution. In all their conduct,
in the legislative, judicial, and executive departments, may they feel their
accountability to God, the force of religion in their own hearts, and their own
mortality. Acting under the impression of these sentiments, may their lives be
long, their administration happy, and may they "come to their graves, in full
age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his season."

AMEN.
APPENDIX.
To pay a tribute of respect to the memory of the AMERICAN HERO, it is thought
proper to add a few explanatory notes.
(A.)
GENERAL WASHINGTON departed this life, on the 14th December, 1799, of an
inflammation in his throat, as appears by a letter from his private Secretary,
Mr. Lear, to the President of the United States. "It is with inexpressible
grief, that I have to announce to you the death of the great and good General
Washington; he died, last evening, between 10 and 11 o'clock, after a short
illness of about twenty four hours. His disorder was an inflammatory sore
throat, which proceeded from a cold, of which he made but little complaint, on
Friday. On Saturday morning, about 3 o'clock he became ill. -- Every medical
assistance was afforded, but without the desired effect. His last scene
corresponded with the whose tenor of his life. Not a groan, nor a complaint,
escaped him, though in extreme distress. With perfect resignation and full
possession of his reason, he closed his well spent life."

(B.)
The voice of America, respecting the eminent qualities and worth of General
Washington, is happily expressed in the communications and doings of the
Federal Government, in consequence of receiving the melancholy news of his
death.

In his MESSAGE to both houses of Congress, the President says, "It has pleased
Divine Providence to remove from this life, our excellent fellow citizen GEORGE
WASHINGTON, by the purity of his character and a long series of services to his
country, rendered illustrious through the world. It remains for an affectionate
and grateful people, IN WHOSE HEARTS HE CAN NEVER DIE," to pay suitable honor
to his memory."

In waiting on the President, "The House of Representatives" unanimously say,
"Penetrated with a sense of the irreparable loss, sustained by the nation, by
the death of that great and good man, the ILLUSTRIOUS AND BELOVED WASHINGTON,"
We "wait on you, Sir, to express" our "condolence on this melancholy and
distressing event."

To which the President made the following reply, "I receive, with great
respect and affection, the condolence of the House of Representatives, on the
melancholy and afflicting event in the death of THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND
BELOVED PERSONAGE, WHICH THIS COUNTRY EVER PRODUCED. I sympathize with you --
with the nation, and with good men, through the world, on this irreparable loss
sustained by us all."

To honor this worthy chief, directions have been given to the Navy of the
United States, in these words, "Desirous, that the Navy and Marines should
express, in common with every other description of American citizens, the high
sense which all feel of the loss our country has sustained, in the death of
this good and great man, the President directs, that the vessels of the Navy,
in our own, and foreign ports, be put in mourning for one week, by wearing
their colors half mast high, and that the officers of the Navy and the Marines,
wear crape, on the left arm, below the elbow, for six months."

To the Army of the United States, the orders are given, in these words, "The
President, with deep regret, announces to the Army the death of its beloved
Chief, Genesis George Washington. Sharing in the grief, which every heart must
feel for so heavy and afflicting a public loss and desirous to express his high
sense of the vast debt of gratitude, which is due to the virtues, talents, and
ever memorable services of the ILLUSTRIOUS deceased, he directs, that funeral
honors be paid to him, at all the military stations, and that the officers of
the army and of the several corpse of volunteers wear crape on the left arm, by
way of mourning, for six months."

The resolutions of Congress, on this mournful event, reflect the highest honor
on our nation, and on its late illustrious Chief, now in the mansions of the
dead. They are thus expressed, "Resolved, that a Marble Monument be erected, by
the United States, in the Capitol, in the city of Washington, and that the
family of Genesis Washington be requested, to permit his body to be deposited
under it; and that the monument be so designed as to commemorate the great
events of his military and political life. -- That it be recommended to the
people of the United States to wear crape, on the left arm, as mourning, for
thirty days. -- That there be a funeral procession from Congress Hall to the
German Lutheran Church, in honor of the memory of Genesis George Washington, on
Thursday the 26 instant, and that an oration be prepared, at the request of
Congress, to be delivered before both Houses, on that day."

If we look through the annals of all nations, we shall find no evidence, that
similar tribute of respect was ever paid to the memory of any man. When the
great heroes of antiquity died, the world, instead of being clad in mourning,
rejoiced, and felt, not that great, good, and virtuous men had departed from
their affections; but that monsters, in human shape, had made their exit. As to
the greater part of those heroes, they were the mere scourges of nations, and
butchers of the innocent. But the American Hero was humane and benevolent,
virtuous and brave, the friend of the people, the defender of his country, the
scourge of oppressors, and a shining example worthy of the imitation of every
succeeding General and President. At his death all hearts are grieved, and the
mourning (...) tear stands big in its transparent sluice." BENNET.

(C.)
The taking of two British Armies, commanded by the celebrated Generals,
Burgoyne and Cornwallis, the acknowledging of American independence, and the
separating of these flourishing Colonies from the British crown, events, that
took place, under the direction of our Hero, and to which he contributed more
than any man, were very humbling to the pride of that great nation. In losing
America, the king of England lost the brightest jewel, in his crown.

(D.)
His intrepidity and command over his own passions were truly astonishing. The
history of his retreat from New York, his winter's campaign of '77 in the
Jersies, his undaunted bravery in the battles of Brandywyne, Germantown, and
Yorktown, are complete illustrations of his character. When surrounded by the
greatest dangers, he never discovered to those near his person, by a look nor
change of voice, nor rash action, his own apprehensions. At these times, what
he did, he did with greater dispatch, than was common, without the least change
of voice, or countenance; and this dispatch was the only evidence they had,
that he apprehended any danger. A rare instance of bravery and self command.

(E.)
This address will forever remain a monument of his abilities and attachment to
the constitution and prosperity of his country. Although not surrounded by a
king and a queen, and a splendid retinue of princes and dukes, as was Charles
V. when he surrendered to his son Philip his extensive dominions in Spain,
Germany, and South America, yet, in declining to be a candidate in the third
election to the Presidential chair, he discovered a mind, not less noble; and a
dignity, not less splendid.

(F.)
Of the late General Lee it was a frequent remark, "that he had often, in
Europe, been in the presence of kings and princes; but he was, never, in the
presence of any man, who commanded so much attention and respect as Washington."

(G.)
By his looks and silent gravity, the officers of the late Continental Army
knew, their General disapproved gambling, profanity, and every action bordering
on immorality. To a company, rowing him over Hudson River, in a hazardous time,
he said, "My lads, cease from your swearing. It will avail nothing. You will
have to give account to your Maker for every idle word you speak."

(H.)
His approving the sentence of death, passed against Major Andre, and his
selecting, by lot, Captain Asgill to suffer for the murder of Captain Huddy,
met the unanimous, the affecting, consent of America and Europe.

(I.)
To illustrate this quality of a consummate general, and how it shone
conspicuously in our departed Chief, we may, just, call to the reader's memory,
the profound secrecy and martial deception, by which was formed the expedition
against Earl Cornwallis, at Yorktown. To effect this, in the best manner,
fascines, boats, and other costly preparations were made, with manifest intent
of invading New York, then under the command of Sir Henry Clinton. Letters were
written, intercepted, and conveyed to the British General, which strengthened
his apprehensions of being invaded. Washington's suddenly crossing the Hudson,
encamping before Staten Island, building ovens, and his other military parade,
perplexed the enemy, distracted their counsels, and they never knew their
danger, till they heard, the American Army was at the head of the Elk, in full
march against the troops under Cornwallis. The expedition was crowned with
success, gave the finishing stroke to the war, and confirmed our independence.

"Surge ad judicium;" Rise to judgment: "Gloria Deo;" Glory to God, are
inscriptions on his coffin.

FINIS.

