A FUNERAL ORATION, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON; AND
DELIVERED ON THE FIRST OF JANUARY, 1800.

IN THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH, AT NEW-ROCHELLE, IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK,

BY SAMUEL BAYARD, ESQUIRE.

NEW-BRUNSWICK: PRINTED BY ABRAHAM BLAUVELT.

1800.

AT a meeting of the Minister, Wardens and Vestry of Trinity church, at
New-Rochelle, on the 6th day of January, 1800.
Resolved,
That the thanks of this board be given to SAMUEL BAYARD, ESQUIRE. for his
excellent ORATION, delivered on the first instant, upon the melancholy occasion
of the much lamented death of our beloved WASHINGTON; and that a copy thereof
be requested for publication.

FREDERICK GUION, Clerk.

AN ORATION.
FRIENDS and FELLOW CITIZENS!
NOT to mourn with a mourning country -- not to mingle our tears with those of
the American people on the present melancholy occasion, would argue a
reproachful want of social sympathy. And not in some public manner to express
the regrets we feel at the irreparable loss our country has just sustained,
would be an impeachment of our sensibility as men, and of our patriotism as
citizens.

THROUGH the channel of our public prints, we learn that our country mourns the
departure of her first and favorite SON. On this occasion "the mourners"
emphatically "go about the streets," and the traces of "grief unfeigned" are
beheld in the public countenance. On the arms of every class of our fellow
citizens we see the emblems of that sorrow which their bosoms feel. Our
national council stand forward in the first rank of mourners; every public body
through the union follows in the sad procession. Our churches are clad in
black. Their tolling bells in unison with the public sentiment, add solemnity
to the scene, and deepen the gloom that beclouds the public mind. Our army --
our navy -- every political circle -- every religious denomination -- how
divided so ever in their sentiments on other topics, all unite in deploring the
loss of the most universally beloved and respected character, which this, or
any country on earth; which this, or any prior age has ever produced.

YES my friends, the sighs and tears of our afflicted country, on every side
proclaim, that WASHINGTON is dead! As if an angel from heaven had announced it,
the melancholy intelligence is every where heard with sorrow and dismay. We ask
ourselves if it be possible, that one so eminent for talents, so ennobled by
his virtues, so rich in the esteem and affection of his country, is indeed no
more. Alas! the event is but too certain. WASHINGTON, the hero, the sage, the
friend of liberty, and the father of his country, is now sleeping in his grave.
Never more shall his majestic form be seen at the head of our armies; never
more shall his enlivening voice be heard in the hall of our national senate;
his wisdom and experience shall no longer direct our councils, nor his presence
again call forth the enthusiastic admiration of his country.

MUTE is that tongue, whose accents were never heard but with attention and
respect; and lifeless that form which once attracted the gaze of thousands. Low
it lies beneath the "clods of the valley," never to rise again, till the trump
of the great Archangel shall wake it from the dead.

YET, could talents the best employed, or virtues the most sublime; could the
prayers of surrounding friends, or the influence of medical skill; could the
wishes, or supplications of an affectionate and grateful country have suspended
the immutable decree of heaven, his life would have been immortal as his fame.
But no, his work was finished -- his tour of earthly duty closed -- and that
awful moment had arrived when his manly frame must "return to the dust as it
was," and his enlightened "spirit to the God who gave it."

THE removal of such a character from a state of trial, to a state of rest, is
an event calculated to inspire every reflecting mind with pious awe. It is
calculated to awaken those sentiments of esteem and veneration which we have
been accustomed to cherish for the ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD; and it calls upon every
citizen who honors merit, or who loves his country, to pay the tribute of a
tear, to the memory of the boast and ornament of the present age.

YET what can we do, or what can we say, that can add to the luster of his
fame. As well might we by the aid of a taper endeavor to add splendor to
yonder sun, as to increase his reputation by our praise. His own actions, and
his own sentiments, recited with that simplicity which characterised his style
of writing and of speaking, will ever constitute his highest eulogium.

STILL, however his merits may transcend our praise, we can express our
admiration of his character, and our gratitude for his services; and although
we have neither wealth nor power to raise a mausoleum to his memory, we can
embalm his virtues with our tears, and raise a monument to his glory, in the
affections of our hearts.

So many are the splendid and good actions of his life; so numerous and
impressive the maxims of sound and liberal policy delivered to his country,
since she first assumed a place among the nations of the world, that merely to
recite them, would fill a volume. Be this the historian's duty; and be it ours
at present simply to point out a few of those estimable tracts of character,
and of those eminent services which have raised our WASHINGTON's, above every
Grecian and Roman name; above every name that stands on the records of modern
history.

THERE are two characters in which he has appeared most familiar to our minds;
as a hero, and a sage; as our GENERAL in war, and our PRESIDENT in peace; in
each of these characters, requiring qualifications so different, let us for a
moment contemplate this unequalled man. In both we shall find him exhibiting
those high endowments of mind, and those excellent qualities of heart, which
have rendered him an honor to his country, and a blessing to the world.

"IN war" says an author Mr. Jefferson.
(now second in point of rank in the federal government) "In war we have
produced a WASHINGTON, whose memory will be adored while liberty shall have
votaries; whose name will triumph over time, and will in future ages assume its
just station among the celebrated worthies of the world, when that wretched
philosophy shall be forgotten, that would arrange him among the degeneracies of
nature."

ALTHOUGH not educated a soldier; although unskilled in military tactics, and
unpractised in the European system of war; we behold him at the voice of his
country, (expressed by the unanimous vote of its delegates in congress)
assuming the chief command of an army, raised in defense of the rights, and to
prevent the subjugation, of these States.

HE undertook this important and hazardous charge, not for the sake of personal
emolument. With a generosity as disinterested as it was unexampled, when he
first accepted the appointment, he expressly declined receiving any
compensation for his services. From this resolution he never departed. Whatever
increase of fortune others may have derived from the American revolution;
whatever rewards other generals may have received from the gratitude of their
country, the COMMANDER IN CHIEF declined every compensation offered for his
unparalleled services. He wished for no reward, save the approving voice of his
own conscience and of his fellow citizens. Nor was honor more than emolument
his aim, in accepting this appointment. What honor could he expect to derive
from commanding a body of undisciplined militia -- a hasty association of
citizens; who, whatever might be their enthusiasm for liberty, or their native
bravery, must prove unequal opponents to men who had been trained to arms; to
veteran soldiers whose profession was war, and whom discipline had rendered
obedient as machines.

No, the great ruling principle of his life, was love to his country, zeal for
her interest and welfare, founded on rules of eternal justice. It was this
sublime principle which supported him amidst the trials, the dangers and
fatigues which he had to encounter during the three first years of the American
contest. It was from a conviction that his governing motive was the public
good, that the American people, notwithstanding their early disasters, never
lost their confidence in him. They were satisfied of his talents, and they were
still more assured of his zeal and sincerity in the cause he had espoused. What
other character beside himself could have kept together the shattered remains
of our army at the close of the unfortunate campaign of '76? Had he through
fear for his person or his property; through levity, disgust, or despondence,
then abandoned the cause of liberty, who afterward could have rallied the
broken, dispirited remains of our federal army? who could have roused a
sufficient spirit in the country to oppose any effectual resistance to the
victorious troops of Britain? This was a period of trial; and at this period
the firmness, the intrepidity, the patience and heroism of our COMMANDER IN
CHIEF, like the beams of a bright and cheering star, suddenly bursting from
beneath a thick cloud in a stormy night, shone forth to the astonishment and
joy of United America. From the lowest state of depression, the public mind was
now elevated to hope, and encouraged to perseverance.

THE eventful campaign of '77, though attended with some disasters, terminated
advantageously to the American cause. The capture of one entire British army,
and the resolute resistance opposed to another, ensured us at the commencement
of the campaign of '78, the effectual aid of France. An aid, prompted by
whatever motive -- whether by that of reducing the power of an ancient rival,
of aggrandizing herself, or of revenging former losses and defeats, was
nevertheless of incalculable importance in the establishment of American
independence. From this time our affairs brightened till the glorious campaign
of '81, which ended with the capture of a second British army, under the
command of one of the most able and enterprising generals that Britain could
boast. This decisive event satisfied the English government that the
subjugation of America was impracticable, and led to the final acknowledgment
of American Independence.

THE close of war, and the return of peace, so pleasing to all, was peculiarly
grateful to the heart of our excellent WASHINGTON. He loved retirement. He had
left it with regret, wholly from a sense of duty, and not from a wish for
change. With pleasure he anticipated the moment when he should again lose the
Commander of an army in the private citizen. That moment had now arrived. His
services as a general are no longer necessary. His army is about to be
disbanded. He is about to be separated (possibly for ever) from the companions
of his cares and dangers, from men who for eight years had shared his perils
and anxieties, and who had been witnesses of his wisdom and his valor. But at
this closing scene of the drama, he is not permitted to sheathe the sword and
return to his loved retreat, without performing a memorable service to his
country -- a service in which his personal agency, his zealous and well timed
exertions, prevented a great national evil; prevented his army from tarnishing
the laurels he had acquired through a long and glorious war, and instead of
defenders, becoming the despoilers of their country.

THE pay of this army was greatly in arrear. They had received already much of
what was due to them in a depreciated paper currency. In discharge of what
their country still owed, the same currency and remote, unsettled lands were to
form the materials of their compensation. They were about to return to the
pursuits of civil life, with only the shadow of reward, for years of danger and
of toil; for health impaired, and the prime of life devoted to the public
service. They expected more of their country. Their country regretted that
their exhausted resources, then enabled them to do no more. The army urged by
the artful insinuations of an anonymous writer, were on the point of rising,
while yet embodied, and of wresting from their country by force, that
compensation which they had in vain demanded of its justice. Never did zeal for
the welfare of his country, and the honor of his army, blaze forth with greater
splendour even in the actions of a WASHINGTON, than on this occasion. By private
influence; by public persuasion; by an appeal to the honor of soldiers, and the
patriotism of citizens; by the regard they owed to their personal character,
and their country's good; by every motive that could influence a generous mind,
he conjured them to disband in peace, and to expect from the justice and
gratitude of their country, what they were instigated to extort by violence.
His influence was triumphant. He succeeded in preserving the honor of his army
and his country from an unnatural civil war.

THIS great object accomplished, we see the American HERO resigning the chief
command of the army, and retiring into private life, amid the plaudits and
benedictions of his admiring country. He hoped; he believed he had now taken a
final farewell of public life. His glory seemed to be complete. It appeared to
be placed beyond the reach of fortune's hand, and to have had the seal of
immortality impressed upon it. But no; the will of heaven had otherwise
decreed. New cares and new duties await him. Again his character is to pass
through the furnace of general scrutiny, and his fame once more be launched on
the restless ocean of popular opinion.

THE feebleness of our general government every day becoming more and more
notorious; the decay of our commerce; the decline of manufactures; the loss of
individual and national credit; the weakness of some States, and the
interfering claims of others, threatening to involve us in domestic broils, and
exposing us to the attack of any foreign invader; imperiously demanded the
review of our articles of confederation, and the substitution in their place,
of an efficient form of government. A convention is accordingly assembled. A
plan of national government is framed. It is recommended to the people. It is
adopted and put in operation.

AGAIN this great and good MAN, by the unanimous voice of his country is called
to sit at the helm of the new government, and to execute its laws He accepts
the call, but not for himself. Once more he expressly declines receiving any
emolument for his services. At the close of the first period, for which he had
been elected PRESIDENT, had he consulted only his personal ease or enjoyment he
would have quitted his elevated station, and returned to private life. But
higher motives influenced his mind. Love to his country, and the critical state
of her affairs, induced him again at the uninfluenced, unanimous call of his
fellow citizens to accept the charge of presiding over the United States. With
what fidelity; with what judgment; with what firmness and devotion of time and
talents, he fulfilled the duties of this high station, no American citizen need
be informed.

WE have seen him in all his measures, endeavoring to promote or preserve the
peace, the welfare, and the happiness of his country. We have seen him filling
the various departments of government with men of talents, of integrity, and of
private worth. We have seen him sacrificing his personal attachments on the
altar of the public good; and amidst all the obloquy heaped on him by a few
factious spirits, who were more friendly to the views of a foreign power, than
to the true interests of their own government; we in no instance see him taking
any measure from resentment, but with a magnanimity above all praise, suffering
the slanders that were propagated, to die unnoticed.

FIRMNESS of mind was a quality for which he was eminently distinguished. But
when was this estimable trait of character more strikingly displayed, than in
the conduct he observed toward the first ambassador of Republican France.

WHEN that bold, but ill-advised minister, seconded by a powerful party among
ourselves, endeavored to subject the measures of our government, to the will
of his own -- when he sought by every artifice to involve us in a war with
Great Britain; and when, on discovering the fixed resolution of our government,
to preserve a neutrality amid the contentions of the European powers, he
threatened to appeal from the decision of the PRESIDENT, to that of the people;
what was the conduct of our immortal WASHINGTON? Convinced of the rectitude of
his own views, and the soundness of his policy; fearless of the threatened
resentment of France, and superior to the clamours of party, we see him stand
like a firm and venerable oak, against which the storms of faction beat with
fury; but beat in vain.

ANOTHER crisis soon occurred in our affairs, which required the exercise of
inflexible firmness, and consummate prudence.

THE first naval power in the world, proud of her own strength, and fortified
by an alliance with the governments, that first coalesced to crush the
democratic system of France; at the close of the year '93, issued orders, the
tendency of which was to ruin the commerce of the United States. Our unarmed
merchantmen were seized, wherever met, by British cruisers; conveyed into
British ports, and there condemned. Their cargoes without discrimination were
confiscated, and our wretched seamen destitute of aid in foreign countries, and
stripped of every thing valuable, by the hands of merciless captors, were
obliged to borrow, or to beg, the means of returning to their native country.
The public mind indignant a these spoliations on our trade, was prepared at
every risk, for defensive war: Our national council too, feeling for the
injured dignity, and adopting the sentiments of their constituents, commenced a
system of measures that must soon have led to an open rupture with Britain.

ALL eyes were now directed to the CHIEF MAGISTRATE of the Union. In
circumstances so embarrassing, what conduct could he pursue that would at once
secure the interest, and preserve the honor of the United States.. Uninfluenced
by resentment, or by party spirit, and consulting only the true honor and
interest of his country, he resolves on making one great effort to avert the
calamities of war; persuaded that if unsuccessful in the attempt, his fellow
citizens would be more united and determined in measures of defense.

IN prosecution of this system of pacific policy, we see him with equal
judgment and patriotism, selecting as the messenger of peace, a citizen Mr.
Jay, the present governor of New York.
of known prudence and ability, whose firmness, integrity, and eminent public
services, had long endeared him to his country, and fixed him in her
confidence. A negotiation takes place. Commenced with moderation and good
faith, it could not prove abortive. It resulted in a treaty, afterward
ratified by the PRESIDENT, with the approbation of the SENATE, which preserved
our national honor, and, what was of more importance than language can
describe, saved us from the fearful vortex of a most destructive war.

To prevent the ratification of this treaty, and thus to embroil us in a war
with England, every artifice which French intrigue could devise, was practiced,
but happily without effect. Neither flattery nor abuse could divert the steady,
undeviating mind of our enlightened PRESIDENT, from pursuing that line of
conduct which became the government of a neutral nation.

AT this momentous epoch, the friends of virtue, and the lovers of peace, in
Europe, as well as in America, beheld his manly and judicious conduct, and
beheld it with mingled astonishment and delight. In their eyes, as in ours, he
seemed,

"Like some tall rock that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm;
Though round its breast, the rolling clouds be spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head." GOLDSMITH.

FROM the elevated place of PRESIDENT of the United States, we see him now
voluntarily descend, and once more retire to the humble duties and enjoyments
of private life. He retires, full of glory as of years; and like the setting
sun, retains a fuller orb of greatness, than when in the meridian of life and
power.

THE hostile language and conduct of France, within the last three years having
rendered defensive armaments necessary, by land as well as by sea, once more
his country claims his aid, as the Commander of her forces. He assists in
organizing the army, and notwithstanding the infirmities of age, and his
predilection for private life, stands prepared to take the field, should it be
necessary, in defense of his native land. But while discharging the duties of
this high command, he is summoned by Heaven to another scene. A mortal disease
attacks him. Its progress is rapid. It baffles the exertions of the most
eminent professors of medicine. From its first approaches, he foresees its
fatal issue. He arranges his affairs with composure. He languishes scarce 24
hours; then with a resignation worthy of his useful life, on the 14th day of
the last month, he finished his glorious career on earth, and hastened to that
"bourne from which no traveller returns."

RETURN then great and virtuous spirit, to the bosom of thy Father and thy God!
While thy frame here moulders in the dust, bedewed with the tears of the worthy
and the wise; thy soul, freed from the shackles that chained it to earth, shall
wing its flight to regions of eternal bliss. May the tutelary angels who watch
over the interests of this great and growing empire, welcome thee with triumph,
to the abodes of the blessed. There, amidst friends and companions of thine
earthly labors; amid the sages and patriots of other ages, and other countries
-- encircled by a Warren and Montgomery; a Socrates and a Cato; a Sully and a
Hampden; may thou taste those pure enjoyments, which saints and angels only
know; which "eye has not seen, nor ear heard; neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive."

To us, who still travel on in this "vale of tears" -- to us it belongs to
honor his memory, and to imitate his virtues. While his country records his
glory, and erects a monument to his fame, American citizens, to remotest ages,
will hold his character in remembrance and esteem.

WITH pride and pleasure they will remember their beloved WASHINGTON, whose
fame adds luster to his age and country; in whose character were combined more
exalted virtues, unalloyed by the extremes to which such virtues are most
exposed, than in the character of any man of whom we have heard or read. Never
did any man better understand the human character, or employ more suitable
agents for the accomplishment of his views and plans. In a remarkable degree,
he united genius, with judgment; the enterprise of youth, with the caution of
age. He was brave, but not rash; fearless of death, but not prodigal of life.
He possessed zeal without intemperance, liberality without profusion, and
economy without avarice. His piety was rational and sincere, tinctured neither
with superstition nor hypocrisy. His dignity never wore the garb of
haughtiness, nor his modesty that of affection. Moderate in prosperity, he
never lost his equanimity in misfortune -- faithful to his friends, he pitied
and forgave his enemies. He lived the Hero, the Statesman, and the Sage; and
died the humble, and resigned believer. Behold the man, whom while alive, his
country esteemed and loved, and whose memory now, she "delights to honor."

AUTHOR of his being, and Parent of every good! we bless thee for having raised
up so great and good a man, and for having lent his precious life for such a
lapse of years to the American people!

I CANNOT close this address in a manner more becoming, or in language so
elegant and pathetic, as that used by our national senate in their letter of
condolence to the President of the United States.

Adopting their words, every American may with truth, and from the heart say --
"WITH patriotic pride we review the life of our WASHINGTON, and compare him
with those of other countries who have been pre-eminent in same. Ancient and
modern names are diminished before him. Greatness and guilt have too often been
allied; but his fame is whiter than it is brilliant. The destroyers of nations
stood abashed at the majesty of his virtue. It reproved the intemperance of
their ambition and darkened the splendour of victory. The scene is closed, and
we are no longer anxious lest misfortune should sully his glory; he has
traveled on to the end of his journey and carried with him an increasing
weight of honor; he has deposited it safely, where misfortune cannot tarnish
it, where malice cannot blast it. Favored of Heaven, he departed without
exhibiting the weakness of humanity; magnanimous in death, the darkness of the
grave could not obscure his brightness.

SUCH was the man whom we deplore. Thanks to God, his glory is consummated:
WASHINGTON yet lives on earth in his spotless example; his spirit is in heaven.

LET his countrymen consecrate the memory of the heroic General, the patriotic
Statesman, and the virtuous Sage: Let them teach their children never to forget
that the fruits of his labors, and his example, are their inheritance."

FINIS.

