AN EPITOME OF THE LIFE and CHARACTER OF THOMAS JEFFERSON.
THOMAS JEFFERSON was born in the year 1743, in the county of Albemarle in
Virginia, where he now resides. His father was a reputable land-holder of that
county, and gave this, his eldest son, a college education at the university of
William and Mary, in the city of Williamsburg. After passing his degrees, being
designed for the bar, Mr. Jefferson commenced a student at law, under the
guidance of George With, now the venerable judge and solo chancellor of
Virginia.

In 1766, Mr. Jefferson came to the bar of the supreme court of his native
state, and continued to practice therein with great success and reputation,
until the commencement of the American revolution in 1775, and the consequent
occlusion of the courts of justice: during this period of active practice, the
industrious mind of Jefferson found time to digest the first volume of reports
of adjudged cases in the supreme courts of Virginia, which were ever exhibited
in that state, and which to this day are admitted authority in those courts;
remaining a monument of his early labors and useful talents.

In 1774, when all America were roused into action by the aggravated wrongs of
the British government, Mr. Jefferson stepped forward a bold and able champion
of his country's rights, and published his much admired pamphlet, "Summary View
of the Rights of British America," addressed to the King, which brought forth
against the author threats of prosecution for treason, by lord Dunmore, then
governor of Virginia; threats which produced no other effect on the independent
mind of Jefferson, than publicly to avow himself the author, prepared to meet
all consequences.

About this time Mr. Jefferson married the daughter of Mr. Wayles, an eminent
counselor at law, and continued to enjoy uninterrupted domestic felicity in
the society of one of the most aminable of women, until the year 1780, when by
her death he became the mourner of her virtues and the guardian of their two
daughters and surviving issue, to whose education and settlement in life, and
the service of his country, he has ever since faithfully devoted himself, still
remaining a widower.

In the year 1775, Mr. Jefferson was elected a member of the Virginia
convention, and on the 4th of August, in the same year, one of the members to
represent the state, then colony, of Virginia in congress.

In that memorable year, 1776, the natal year of American emancipation from
British tyranny, and of the independence and sovereignty of the United States,
Mr. Jefferson was one of a committee of five, to wit, Thomas Jefferson, John
Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman, and R. R. Livingston; appointed by
Congress to draught the Declaration of Independence; and it was from the pen
and enlightened mind of Jefferson, first named of the committee, that that
glorious instrument proceeded, which was reported by the committee, and
unanimously adopted by Congress, entitled, " The Declaration of Independence,
etc." An instrument which, so long as the records of time shall endure, will
perpetuato the fame of its author; and preserve in the American mind, forever
and inseparable, the names of Independence and Jefferson.

In the same year, 1776, the ardent mind of Jefferson, eagerly pursuing the
glorious principles of the revolution, and foreseeing that so long as the
corruptions of British systems existed, we were independent in name not in
fact, produced for the adoption of the legislature of his native state the four
following important acts, to wit: -- 1. An act for establishing religious
freedom. 2. An act to regulate descents, to prevent estates entail, and the
rights of primogeniture. 3. An act for the apportionment of crimes and
punishments. 4. An act to establish public schools.


The influence of these acts upon the relative principles they embrace, will be
universally seen and felt by those who prize civil liberty as a primary
blessing, and regard the preservation of it as among the first behests of God
to man -- whilst systems of universal toleration in matters of religion; for an
equal distribution of property; and in subversion of the aristocratic and
unnatural principle of entail and primogeniture right; for ameliorating the
sanguinary code of criminal law; and for extending to the poorest class of our
citizens, the benefits of education at public expense, will be viewed as the
emanations of a great and good mind, zealously endeavoring to promote the
happiness and improve the condition of his fellow-beings.

Equally evincive of watchful regard to the rights of his countrymen, was the
scheme and suggestion made by Mr. Jefferson, for the formation and adoption of
the constitution of Virginia, in the same year, and for prefixing thereto "A
Bill of Rights, declaratory of the natural and unalienable rights of man,"
which was accordingly done.

In the year 1778, Mr. Jefferson being then a member of the Virginia
legislature, presented to that body the act to "prevent the importation of
slaves," which was enacted into a law in the month of October in the same year,
and was shortly after followed by another act "to authorize manumissions,"
being the commencement of a system of gradual emancipation, also proposed by
him.

In the year 1779, Mr. Jefferson, at the age of 36, was chosen governor of
Virginia, and continued in that office until June 1781 -- during which time the
state experienced three invasions, and was also brought into a critical state
of collision respecting its boundary lines, with two neighboring states,
North Carolina and Pennsylvania. His conduct in that station, amidst the
jarring conflicts and trying difficulties of foreign invasion and domestic
disquietude, was such as secured to him, six months after he left the office,
and upon the fullest public enquiry, the unanimous vote of thanks of the
legislature, consisting of 180 members, "for his attentive administration of
the powers of the executive whilst in office."

It was during the same year, 1781, amidst the cares of government and scenes
of private affliction, that Mr. Jefferson prepared his celebrated work,
afterward published in France, and which he modestly styled "Notes on
Virginia." In this work, so justly admired by all the learned world, for its
philosophical research, ingenious theory, and able disquisition, equally
evidencing an enlarged, liberal, and pious mind, the author, in a superior
style of eloquence, boldly attacks and fully refutes the fallacious theories of
M. Buffon and the Abbe Raynal, which tend to disparage the animal species, both
man and beast, of the American world, and reduce them to a scale smaller than
those of Europe; vindicating with truth and intelligence the equal distribution
of nature's blessings to America.

In the year 1783, Mr. Jefferson was again appointed to a seat in Congress from
his native state, and in the following year, on the 7th of May, was nominated
by that honorable body minister plenipotentiary of the United States to the
court of France, as the successor of our illustrious Franklin, whither he
embarked early in the same year, and remained absent from the United States, in
the execution of the duties of that important trust, until the month of October
1789, when he returned home by permission of the then president, Washington,
who upon being elected to the chief magistracy of the federal government,
immediately destined Mr. Jefferson to still the next most honorable and
confidential station in the executive government, near his own person.

During his mission to France, Mr. Jefferson, with that peculiar address,
intelligence, and attention to promote the essential interests of the United
States, which directs all his conduct, obtained from the French king an arrete,
highly beneficial to the American commerce, for the free admission, exempt from
the customary foreign duties, of oil, fish, and whalebone, the product of the
American fisheries, into certain ports, and for the sale of American built
ships in all the ports of France -- benefits which our eastern brethren
continued to reap the peculiar advantage of, until the commencement of the
revolutionary convulsions which have agitated that nation.

About the same period also, Mr. Jefferson, in conjunction with our immortal
Franklin, negociated with a minister from the court of Prussia, then at the
Hague, that celebrated treaty known by the name of the "Prussian Treaty," in
which an astonished world has, for the first time, seen a public avowal and
positive provision by treaty, between two sovereign and independent nations,
for the establishment of those two great and glorious principles, promotive of
universal peace and happiness, to wit, 1st, "That free ships shall make free
goods;" and 2d, "That privateering in time of war be abolished" -- principles
which it were to be wished could be rendered universal and eternal. Mr. Adams,
now President of the United States, was one of the commission for negociating
this treaty, and on its completion it was sent over to London, where Mr. Adams
then resided as minister of the United States, for his signature. It is greatly
to be regretted that Mr. Adams could not be content to retain to himself a
share of the glory which reflects on the authors of this celebrated treaty.
But, unhappily for our country, since he became President of the United States,
we have seen him nominate his son, John Quincy Adams, as minister to the court
of Prussia, for the express purpose, as declared, of renewing the treaty with
that nation, which having been limited to continue in force for ten years only,
had expired. Accordingly, another treaty has been made by his son with Prussia,
which has been approved by a majority of the Senate, and ratified by the
President; but which, instead of renewing and continuing the old treaty, is in
itself a new one, expressly abandoning and renouncing the two inestimable
principles, 1st, "That free ships make free goods," and 2d, "That privateering
in time af war be abolished;" -- principles which, it appears, from the
correspondence accompanying the negotiation laid before the Senate of the
United States by the President, the wise and enlightened ministers of the
Prussian monarch were brought with great difficulty and reluctance to abandon,
on the earnest solicitation and reiterated demand of the American negociator,
under the suggestion that the maritime powers, particularly Great Britain,
would never sanction or permit them.

In the year 1789, Mr. Jefferson being returned to the United States, and
appointed by President Washington, secretary to the department of state,
immediately entered on the arduous duties of that important station, having
previously stipulated with the president, that in consideration of the many
years absence from his family and estate, he might be permitted at the
expiration of the constitutional term for which the president was elected, to
retire from the public service.

The first result of the labors of Mr. Jefferson in the department of state,
were exhibited to congress in the following reports, viz.

1st. A report on the fisheries of the United States. 2d. A report, on coins,
weights and measures. 3d. A report, on the waste and unappropriated lands of
the United States. 4th. A report on the privileges and restrictions on the
commerce of the United States in foreign countries.
Each of these reports displayed the usual accuracy, information, and
intelligence of the writer.

But it was reserved for a more critical and delicate period in the affairs of
the United States, that the pre-eminent talents of the American secretary
should become more conspicuous, and interestingly useful to his country: The
non-execution of the treaty of peace with the United States, on the part of
Great Britain, her detention of our Western Posts, and the attendant
spoliations on our commerce, both by Great Britain and France, then at war with
each other, added to the intrigues of the minister of the latter, Genet, all
conduced to a situation difficult and perplexing. Besides which, Spain
continued to withhold from us the free navigation of the Missisippi, so
essential to all Western America. In this state of things, the just confidence
which the discriminating mind of Washington had reposed in Mr. Jefferson, was
amply repaid by that promptness, zeal, and ability with which the American
secretary contributed by his labors to relieve the executive from
embarrassment. Through a series of masterly and unequalled diplomatique
correspondence, which he maintained at the same time, with the respective
ministers of Great Britain and France -- namely Hammond and Genet, he traversed
and rebutted their respective causes of charge and complaint against the United
States, and having fully proved the various aggressions and infractions of
treaty on the part of their respective governments, pointed to the means of
preserving the honor and maintaining the rights of his own country; whilst
alike superior to the intrigues of Great Britain or of France, he fully
manifested that he held no particular attachment to any foreign nation, but was
equally prepared, with the decision, firmness, and intelligence of a True
American, to oppose and resist the aggressions of all. The recall of Genet, and
appointment of his successor, with the subsequent proceedings between the
United States and France, the appointment of Mr. Jay, his treaty with Great
Britain and the recall of Mr. Hammond, appointment of Mr. Liston, and subsequent
proceedings with Great Britain, are all well known. In respect to Spain, the
labors of Mr. Jefferson were more immediately effective and complete. Having
possessed the commissioners of the United States then at Madrid, negociating a
treaty with the court of Spain; with the most ample and pointed instructions,
and also of the form and provisions of a treaty predicated on the basis of the
free navigation of the Mississippi, it remained only for Mr. T. Pinckney, the
minister from the United States at London, under special instruction from the
President, and appointed envoy for that purpose, to repair to Madrid, and
seizing the favorable moment for effecting it, to accomplish this desirable
work. This was accordingly done, with equal promptness and decision on his
part, and jointly to that, and the labors of the American secretary in the
cabinet, are the United States indebted for the most liberal, honorable, and
beneficial treaty, they have ever yet entered into with a foreign nation.

About this time, having, at the pressing entreaty of the then President
Washington, remained one year longer at the head of the department of state,
than he had before stipulated to do, he resigned his office, and retired with
the warmest thanks and regret of the President, Washington, to his estate at
Monticello, in Albermarle County, Virginia, where he continued for upwards of
two years uninterruptedly to enjoy the sweets of domestic ease, and a respite
from the fatigues of public life, following with avidity his favorite pursuits
of philosophical research and agricultural improvement, until the voice of his
country again summoned him to the more active scenes of public duty, and placed
him in nomination for the presidential chair, as the successor of Washington.
The issue of that election is well known, and but for a false return in one
state, and the suppression of a return in another, Mr. Jefferson would have
been declared President; as the return however stood before Congress, it
appeared that he had 68 votes, and Mr. Adams 71, consequently the latter was
declared President, and the former Vice President of the United States.

In the month of January, 1797, Mr. Jefferson was elected President of the
American Philosophical Society, held at Philadelphia, as successor of the great
and virtuous Rittenhouse, who was the immediate successor of our immortal
Franklin, the founder of that society.

And now, for the second time, the voice of his country has placed Mr.
Jefferson in nomination for the Presidential chair.

Fellow-Citizens of the United States,

The foregoing character of Mr. Jefferson, is drawn not by the partial hand of
a friend, nor under the influence of political or party prejudicies; there is
no need of fabrication, falsehood or deception. You see it in the faithful and
unerring record of his many great and virtuous deeds; in the public usefulness
and eminent services of a well spent life; in the numerous testimonials of his
country's approbation, and by the universal suffrage of the foreign world, in
their acknowledged tributes of respect and esteem for the talents of his head
and the virtues of his heart. Its leading features present to you a man of
pure, ardent and affected piety; of sincere and genuine virtue; of an
enlightened mind and superior wisdom; the adorer of our God; the patriot of his
country; and the friend and benefactor of the whole human race.

And such, fellow-citizens, is the true and real character of Thomas Jefferson,
unaided by artificial colorings of the false varnish of deceptive flattery.

AMERICANUS.
Pennsylvania, July 1800.
TO THE READERS OF THE MIRROR, etc.
The Presses, Pulpits, Benches, and Theaters, under the immediate direction or
intermediate control of government or its agents, have long teemed with the
vilest abuse, detraction, and falsehood, respecting the character of Mr.
JEFFERSON. They have represented him as a Deist, disbelieving the Christian
Religion; as an Atheist, denying the being of a God; as a Traitor, striving to
subject his country to foreign domination; and as an Anarchist, seeking to
subvert all government and order.

These, and a number of other charges equally false and absurd, have been
echoed and re-echoed, till those with whom they originated have, by their own
ingenuity, almost brought themselves to believe what at first they knew to be
false. And numbers whose intentions were laudable, but whose means of
information were contracted, deceived and misled by these organs of envy,
error, and perversion, now actually consider him as a man unworthy public
confidence or private esteem.

Could merit or usefulness procure an exemption from calumny, Jefferson would
have remained uncalumniated. For no man ever strove with more ability and
success to subserve the interests of humanity and his country. Unfortunately,
however, his virtue and talents have subjected him to the most unqualified
abuse and detraction; because, while he retained the affections of the people
he was an insuperable barrier to the schemes of ambition, avarice, and
aggrandizement, which had been planned by men amongst us destitute of
patriotism, virtue and honor.

Anxious to give to you the means of repelling and refuting these "false,
scandalous, malicious," and unfounded charges, which are made for no other
purpose but to "bring unto contempt and disrepute" the MAN OF THE PEOPLE, we
have presented you with an Epitome of his Life and Character, extracted from a
pamphlet, the author of which is unknown. The calm, dignified, and
dispassionate manner in which the writer of this Epitome has expressed himself,
bespeak a heart uninfluenced by party, and uncontaminated by the style and
language too prevalent in political writings of the present day: while the
precision and perspicuity with which he has narrated facts, declare him to be
accurately acquainted with the subject of his address. From both these causes
he is eminently entitled to your confidence and belief.

When the clouds of misrepresentation and falsehood with which the enemies of
republicanism and liberty have enveloped the character of Mr. Jefferson, shall
be dispelled by the penetrating ways of reason and truth, you will see him as
he is -- The brightest luminary of the western world.

Mirror-Office, Sept. 3, 1800.
WILMINGTON: PRINTED BY JAMES WILSON, AT THE FRANKLIN PRESS. 1800.


