REV. MR. BANCROFT's Eulogy ON THE CHARACTER OF THE LATE GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON.

AN EULOGY ON THE CHARACTER OF THE LATE GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON.

DELIVERED BEFORE THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF WORCESTER, COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS, ON SATURDAY THE 22d OF FEBRUARY 1800.

BY AARON BANCROFT.

Printed according to a VOTE of said Town, requesting a Copy for the Press, and
directing that each Head of a Family should be furnished with one.

Worcester: PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. March -- 1800.

AN EULOGY.
IN the solemnity of the hour, you, my FELLOW TOWNSMEN, call upon me to paint
the character and to portray the virtues of the favorite SON OF COLUMBIA.
Unable to rise to the height of his excellence, I must submit his merits to
your knowledge of his actions; and lodge his worth in the grateful affections
of your hearts.

ON this day, sixtyeight years complete their revolutions, since our WASHINGTON
was given to his country. The Parent of Being endowed him with superior powers
of mind and body. These by the progress of time were expanded to the most
commanding features of man. His clear and comprehensive understanding was
improved by a general acquaintance with science, an extensive knowledge of
history, and an intimate view of human nature. Possessing these grand
principles of knowledge, he early discovered a happy genius to apply them to
practice. His opinions were always formed upon an high scene of observation.
His capacity can be measured only by the sphere in which he moved. Elevated
offices he filled with dignity* and difficult undertakings he accomplished with
renown.

HIS youthful essay of enterprise and patriotism displayed the bold lines of
his character, and gave a sure pledge of his meridian splendour. Commissioned to
carry, to an encroaching enemy, on a distant frontier, the just remonstrances
of his government; he sustained the fatigues and dangers of the embassy with
the constancy of the veteran soldier; with Vauban's penetration he traced the
site of the fortress which was to be the future protection of the country; he
conciliated the irritated minds of the Indian Tribes; and, on his return, bore
honorable testimony of the address and fidelity with which he executed his
mission. The province of his nativity appreciated the merit of his service, and
appointed him to command the troops embodied to enforce his remonstrance. His
maiden sword was not unsheathed in vain: In his first campaign the laurel was
entwined, that since has flourished around his temple with perennial, with
increasing verdure.

ON the next summer, General BRADDOCK commanded a well appointed army to repel
the French from their encroachments, and we find WASHINGTON an extra Aiddecamp
in his family. His knowledge of the country, his acquaintance with the Indian
mode of warfare, enabled him to give advice, which might have insured success
to the expedition: But the European General, in the pride of professional
skill, spurned the advice of the American Youth; and for his temerity, he lost
his life, and his defeated army was indebted to the prudence and bravery of our
Young Hero for their preservation from ruin.

IN the subsequent campaigns, the fatigues of the field became oppressive to a
constitution not yet grown into the firmness of manhood. Pulmonary symptoms
warned him to retire to the care of his friends. This interval was employed to
form and strengthen the social ties, to cultivate and exercise the social
affections, and to follow the leading bias of his mind in the pursuits of
philosophy and practical agriculture.

ALTHOUGH warmly attached to domestic life, and supremely happy in his family,
he was not permitted to enjoy the pleasures of philosophic retirement. Heaven
devoted him to the public, and the public demanded his care and labor.

FROM the close of the French war, to the commencement of public resistance to
the impositions of the British Parliament, the judicial concerns of his
country, and the military and legislative transactions of his province,
engrossed his time. When the affairs of our country approached their crisis,
and the wisdom of our nation was collected to decide her destiny, among an
assembly as august and venerable as America ever saw, was our Patriot. When the
appeal was made to the sword, by the unanimous will of this body, he was placed
at the head of our armies. With a "band of undisciplined husbandmen," he
restrained the operations of a veteran army; with nine rounds of powder to a
man, he, for six months, confined them to their quarters; See Genesis WASHINGTON'S
Letter to the President of Congress.
and, when his stock of ammunition warranted the attempt, he drove them from
the fortified capital of this Common wealth.

YE Veterans, who followed his standard and fought under his banner, ye best
can recount the arduous conflicts of the subsequent years of his military
command. Ye can inform us of the fortitude he exhibited when every heart was
despondent -- the abilities he displayed as a commander -- the appearances he
assumed to deceive the enemy at the hazard of his own reputation -- the
constancy with which he persisted in his own system of war, though urged to
desperate enterprises by the ardent and sanguine. Ye saw his undaunted spirit,
his boundless resources in the day of defeat; and beheld his moderation and
humanity in the hour of victory. Ye can witness, that in him ambition was ever
an incitement to the noblest actions.

HIS military triumphs complete -- American Independence acknowledged, and his
country visited with the beams of peace, he carried into the shade of
retirement, the affection and confidence of his army, the gratitude of his
country, and the applause of the world.

WE thought he had then attained the zenith of human glory. The prayer of his
warmest friend, on this point, was summed in the petition, may no unpropitious
event take place to fully the luster of his achievements; in quietness may he
descend to the grave, the laurel unwithered on his brow.

NOT so the will of heaven. The decree had been registered in the divine
archives, that America was free and independent: The American Joshua had led
his people into the promised land: But the band was wanting which might unite
the parts of the nation: Our Republic was destitute of the necessary principle,
to give energy to her powers and force to her will. Among the Sages who arose
to fix the center of attraction to our political bodies, and to mark the zone,
in which the sun of our national life and power should revolve, was our
Patriot, first among equals. Their system we adopted, as the ark of our
political safety, amidst the deluge of popular factions, whose torrents had
swept every preceding Republic from the face of the earth. Through United
America there was but one voice respecting the man who should preside in its
administration.

THE experiment of a Republican form of government was then to be decisively
made; and the world in solemn silence attended the issue. On the dawn of an
administration, in which new paths were to be explored, first principles
adopted, and precedents established, the friends of our Statesman were
tremblingly alive. But this new sphere of public action displayed talents,
which before had not fully been called into exercise. With the eye of
intuition, he surveyed the relations of his country, and with his own integrity
and firmness pursued her interests. Under his auspices, the salutary maxim was
confirmed, that a sacred regard to moral obligations, the observance of public
faith, the undeviating adherence to the plain rules of truth and rectitude, are
more certain pledges of national attachment, and surer principles of success,
than the subtilest intrigues and artifices of the Machiavilian Politician.
Moments indeed there were, when we heard the hoarse clamors of disappointed
ambition; and saw the dark movements of the sons of faction and anarchy: But
experience tested the wisdom of his measures; and the tide of public respect
and gratitude set with increasing fullness and force. The fame of the President
of the United States is equalled only by the glory of the General of the
American Armies. In every future period of our national existence, the
instruction to the Military Commander, and the charge to the Political Guide,
will be comprised in one sentence, GO, IMITATE OUR WASHINGTON.

WITH an equal mind our venerable countryman descended from his elevation. He
was not corrupted by the power and influence of office. He consented to become
the head of his nation from a sense of the duty he owed his country: Every
public obligation fulfilled, he gladly resorted to his beloved retirement. This
act was pronounced by a celebrated English Philosopher, as the consummation of
character; as the last evidence of the greatness of the man.

HE was not long permitted, by his presence to irradiate the circle of private
life; by the smiles of his countenance to cheer the hearts of his friends and
dependants. His sun was not to set in private, whose light rose with public
splendour, and shone with increasing luster to the perfect day. The majesty of
our nation was insulted -- her rights of sovereignty were invaded, and she
summmoned her venerable chief to her aid. His mind, as true to the principle of
patriotism as the needle to the pole, obeyed the summons. He unsheathed his
sword, and in the post of danger stood collected to repel the aggressions, and
to revenge the injuries o^ an enemy, intoxicated with ambition, and insolent
from success.

OUR illustrious Citizen was as much distinguished for the reverence of his GOD
as for the love of his country. Religion had a lively influence on all the
transactions of his life. In him we beheld piety without the gloominess of
superstition; and devotion without the extravagance of enthusiasm.

DO you inquire into his private character? Follow him to his domestic walks;
the scene of the quiet but refined virtues of man: With him enter the circle of
his friends: Behold him in the bosom of his family: There you will see all the
tender sensibilities of the human character; and witness the exercise of all
the offices of humanity and benevolence. The more beloved, the more known; as
free from private as public blemish. So diffident of himself, as to be induced
to engage in the arduous duties of the field and cabinet, only from reliance on
divine wisdom to aid good intentions, and divine strength to succeed laudable
exertions. So disinterested, as to refuse every pecuniary reward for a life of
public labor. So unconscious of his own merits, as in astonishment to look
around for the origin of that fame, which every breath of air wafted to his ear.

SUCH was the man, whose death we deplore: As fortunate as great: As happy as
good.

IN this period of expectation, when the convulsions of the old world shake the
stablest fabrics of antiquity; and threaten to lay prostrate the pillars of
social order and national felicity, we fondly hoped the life of our beloved
Citizen might have been protracted. In his influence we confided to check the
progress of dangerous opinions; and to counteract the contagion of pernicious
principles. Under him, we reposed as the public shield, should our country be
invaded, and our armies encountered in the field of battle. But he is gone,
never more to engage in works of patriotism and humanity. Neither
accomplishments of greatness, nor pursuits of dignity; public honors, nor
national affection; extensive wealth, nor domestic felicity, were a security
for his existence. That crisis is passed upon him, which Solon thought
necessary to pronounce a man happy. He died as he had lived. His mind was
fortified for the event, not by the cold maxims of philosophy, but by the
enlivening hopes of religion. The unassuming disciple of the Prince of Life, to
him the valley of death was illuminated by the beams of revelation: The
prospect of exchanging the glory of this world, for an unfading, an immortal
wreath, supported him through the last scene of humanity.

COMPARE this exit with the impious boast of the great Frederic of Prussia:
"Glory is my Deity. Glory is the only reward of great actions which I expect. I
dare challenge the resentment of Heaven; for by a voluntary death I can elude
the power of GOD; and in vain will the Almighty hurl his thunderbolt against my
tomb." This sentiment is contained in a treatise of the King of Prussia on the
subject of Glory, published at Berlin, and addressed to Marshal Keith.


IN the public legacy of the Father of our country, we have the means to
support and perpetuate the fair fabric of national independence and happiness,
which his hand erected. His private Will testifies that the love of liberty in
him was a living principle. He has undone the heavy burden and let the
oppressed go free. As far as his power extended, he has given freedom to those
unhappy beings, whom avarice first enslaved, and who are now holden in bondage
by the plea of necessity.

DOES the page of history contain a name more illustrious than his? Did man
ever close life with a reputation more immaculate? To compare him with those,
whose progress of ambition was marked with blood, and whose greatness was
erected upon the agonies of the human heart, is to profane his virtues.

IN other countries, individuals have been illustrious as Heroes and Statesmen.
The talents which immortalized their respective names were united in our
American Alfred; and he was free from the vices and weaknesses, which were the
shades of their characters. In him were combined the most excellent qualities
of man; and in his life appeared an assemblage of the noblest virtues of
humanity. "His life was one stream of light," and the shadow of night rests not
upon it. The picture of man in him was perfect, and there is no blot to tarnish
its brightness.

HIS character we must all contemplate with supreme delight: In it we view the
dignity of our nature; and the glory of our race. As an American character, we
may all exult in it, as the ornament of our nation and the honor of our age. As
the Patriot, whose exalted talents and preeminent endowments were devoted to
our country, we feel the obligations of public gratitude -- we are melted to
emotions of tenderness -- we are disposed to express every mark of admiration
and respect.

LET the sculptured marble preserve his resemblance, and the superb monument
proclaim his achievements; these are but the decent expressions of the public
mind. But the sculptured marble and the costly monument are alike unnecessary
to perpetuate his worth. His memory is embalmed in the affections of his
grateful countrymen: His name is written in the book of immortal fame: He shall
be had in everlasting remembrance.

HIS country has appreciated his merits. By a consistency, as honorable to
herself, as to him, her confidence has at no moment been withdrawn.

PRIVILEGED Mortal! endowed with heaven's best gifts; divinely supported in thy
race of honor and glory: An enlightened and virtuous country to recognize thy
merits; and a world for thine admirer!

HAPPY Country! to whom Heaven granted this illustrious personage to be thy
Leader and Father, when thou did assume a name and a place among the nations
of the earth.

CLOTHE thyself with mourning, O America! thy brightest ornament is faded: Dead
is thy exalted, thy most beloved Son: Bow your heads, ye Warriors, in sorrow!
silent is that voice which waked the thunder of the battle; cold is the heart
which animated you to victory and glory. Weep, ye fair Daughters of Columbia!
weep in sympathy with her, from whom is removed the greatest and the best of
men; whose residue of life must be dark and solitary. -- Weep for yourselves,
your Protector is no more! While alive he never oppressed the heart of
tenderness, nor caused the tear of distress to fall from the eye of
sensibility! Through lust of triumph, he never made the wife a widow, or the
child an orphan: He never consumed the widow's morsel, or the orphan's bread.
His conquests were those of humanity: His power was ever exercised in defense
of innocence and virtue. Bedew then his urn with the tear of gratitude! Teach
your children to lisp his praise: Instill into their minds his spirit; and
cherish in them the growth of his virtues.

DWELL, ye Youth, on his merits, till you rise to admiration of his character!
Enkindle in your hearts the love of country: Fan in your Souls the fire of
Patriotism: Like him reverence your Maker: Regard moral obligations: Covet his
endowments: Emulate his purity, his integrity and disinterestedness. Then shall
you rise up to fill the honorable stations of society; and your country will
call you blessed. Two hundred and fifty male youth, between the age of eight
and eighteen years, walked by themselves in the procession of the day, and were
seated in the galleries of the Meeting house.


Is the light of our nation extinct? or have we bodies which will shine only in
the absence of our Sun?

WISDOM, PATRIOTISM and VIRTUE, are the natural growth of our country. Pursue,
my Fellow Citizens, the system which has established our nation. Transmit
inviolate to posterity, our fair national inheritance. Raise characters of
worth to elective offices: Then, as an ADAMS has succeeded a WASHINGTON, to him
shall succeed an uninterrupted line of illustrious Statesmen and Patriots.

WHILE on this day, we join in condolence with United America, let the feelings
of mourning be blended with those of gratitude to GOD, who made our countryman
the greatest public blessing. Let the grateful tribute be presented on the
altar of Heaven, that his invaluable life was preserved in every hour of danger
-- that his magnanimous labors were crowned with success -- that he lived to
witness the increasing prosperity of his nation -- to be hailed the Savior of
his country -- to wear the testimonials of public affection and gratitude -- to
find his happiness, in the happiness of those to whose interests he devoted his
life -- that he retained his powers nearly to the allotted period of human
existence; and was taken from the world without feeling the decripitude of age,
or suffering the degradation of a second childhood.

SUCH was thy will, Heavenly Parent! In the exalted mind and dignified
character of thy deceased Servant, we adore thy work: Through thy benignant
influence his services were made a rich national blessing. May his example form
future public characters of wisdom and virtue: And of thy mercy grant, the
success of his measures, to every administration of our government, till time
shall be no more.

FINIS



