A Sermon, DELIVERED TO THE SECOND BAPTIST SOCIETY IN BOSTON, ON LORD'S DAY,
DECEMBER 29, 1799.

OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, Who departed this Life
the 14th Inst. AE. 68.

BY THOMAS BALDWIN, A. M.

Pastor of the Second Baptist Church in BOSTON.

Published by particular Desire.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING, SPRING-LANE.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS MEMORY OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE
AMERICAN ARMIES, AND LATE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: THE
FOLLOWING DISCOURSE, AS A SINCERE, THOUGH VERY UNEQUAL TRIBUTE OF RESPECT, IS
WITH GREAT DIFFIDENCE MOST

HUMBLY INSCRIBED BY THE AUTHOR.

WASHINGTON.


2 SAMUEL, iii. 38. KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE AND A GREAT MAN FALLEN
THIS DAY IN ISRAEL?
IF splendid talents and sublime virtue; if undeviating integrity and heroic
patriotism, are not mere empty names; if a life, the most useful and important,
devoted to the dearest interests of his country, can command the affection and
esteem of a grateful people; then the NAME of WASHINGTON will be always dear to
Americans.

In the character of this great Man were united all those excellent qualities
which adorn and dignify human nature. He was raised up at a period when such
uncommon talents were most wanted, and when, by an extraordinary combination of
circumstances, he had the fairest opportunity of displaying them to the
greatest advantage. His death, though delayed by a kind Providence till he had
nearly filled the usual span of life, has cast a most solemn and affecting
gloom over the whole nation. And who, my brethren, is not ready to exclaim in
the melancholy language of the text, Know ye not that there is a Prince and a
great Man fallen this day?

These words are a part of that short but beautiful Eulogy pronounced by King
David at the funeral of Abner. They were the undissembled effusions of a heart
deeply impressed with the sudden loss of a brave and worthy man. Abner was
chief general of all the armies of Israel which yet adhered to the house of
Saul; and from duty and principle had been a public enemy to the kingdom of
David. He had probably sworn allegiance to the family of Saul; and, like a
faithful man, he endeavored to maintain the honor of that crown as long as
there was a probability of success. He evidently saw that the kingdom of David
was daily increasing in strength, and that of his master as rapidly declining.
Reason and humanity united in urging the necessity of a union of all the tribes
under one common head. He announced his determination to the King, and, after
conferring with the Elders of Israel upon the subject, he thought proper to go
in person to Hebron to accomplish the business. King David received him and his
suit in the most cordial, friendly manner. The preliminaries of the union were
agreed upon, and Abner dismissed in peace. Immediately after, Joab, who led the
hosts of David, returned to Hebron, and was informed of what had passed. He
went in directly to the King, and reproved him severely for his credulity;
denouncing Abner as a treacherous spy, and all his pretended friendship as the
basest duplicity. The fact was, he entertained a murderous design against
Abner, who had slain his brother Asahel in battle some time before. He soon
became resolved in the business, and sent messengers after Abner, which brought
him again to Hebron. As soon as he had reached the gate, Joab met him with the
appearance of friendship, and, smoothing his sullen brow, he concealed the
baseness of his design under a false, insidious smile; and in this unguarded
moment he plunged the fatal dagger into the breast of this worthy Hero.

When the information of this melancholy event had reached the ears of David,
he declared himself and kingdom "guiltless before the Lord forever from the
blood of Abner." He gave commandment to Joab as head of the military
department, and to "all the people that were with him, to rend their clothes,
and mourn before Abner." "And King David himself followed the bier." "And the
King lift up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept.
And the King lamented over Abner and said, Died Abner as a fool dies?" No.
"Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put in fetters; as a man falls before
wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again. And the King said
unto all his servants, Know ye not that there is a Prince and a great Man
fallen this day in Israel? I am this day weak though anointed King." We have
seldom seen this excellent man in a more dignified attitude, than when weeping
at the grave of Abner. He discovered a magnanimity of soul upon this occasion
worthy of imitation. To lay aside all resentment against a man who had so
lately acted as his foe, and to pay a voluntary tribute of public respect to
his memory, was doing a still greater honor to himself. It is not a mere
weakness in human nature, but a real excellency, to weep over fallen greatness.
Shall we not then, my brethren, indulge our tears upon the present occasion;
when we reflect that the Man who conducted us to freedom and independence, and
who so ardently "loved our nation," is now no more?

Perhaps the words of the text could never be applied to any man with greater
propriety, than to him whose death we this day deplore. If we should look over
the characters of the greatest and wisest of men who have lived in any age of
the world, we shall find few, if any, who have excelled him in wisdom or
virtue; and who have sustained such important trusts with so much dignity to
themselves or advantage to mankind. But neither the great nor the good are
suffered to continue, by reason of death. Yet, while we mingle our undissembled
sorrows with the tide of general grief, and mourn their loss, we may hope that
God will raise up others to fill their places with equal reputation.

From the subject thus introduced, the following observations are proposed to
your consideration and improvement, viz.

FIRST. That in every age and nation it has pleased God to raise up and
qualify some men for the most distinguished honors, and for the most eminent
usefulness.

SECOND. That when such highly respected characters are removed by death,
justice and gratitude demand a suitable tribute of respect to be paid to their
memories.

Both sacred and profane history unite in establishing these propositions. To
illustrate the first, we shall bring into view some of those characters who
have been particularly distinguished in different professions, and at different
periods.

That all men are absolutely equal either in their natural or acquired
endowments, or that they are equally fitted to fill the most elevated stations,
none, I presume, will undertake to prove.

The system of nature not only discovers an infinite variety of beings, but a
great variety of grades in the same species. Order and subordination are seen
through all her works. We behold the sun in the center of our system, shining
with pleasing majesty, while the primary planets are continually revolving
around him; they, in their turn, receive a similar attention from their
satellites, which revolve about them. "One star differs from another star in
glory; so also is the resurrection of the dead." There must then have been as
real a difference before the resurrection: for this will be conformably to the
characters they sustained in life; and in heaven, that state of perfect
felicity, we read of "angels and archangels, of cherubim and seraphim, of
thrones and dominions, of principalities and powers."

As men are formed with very different capacities, so they are undoubtedly
designed for very different employments. Every man has it in his power to be
useful in his proper sphere. The wise Author of nature has designed some
particular pursuit and employment for each individual. In this, and this o^^^
he can do all the good he is capable of.

Those who have been the greatest blessings to mankind, have not all been
eminent for the same things, nor in the same degree. Such as have been raised
up by God, from age to age, to lead, to instruct, and to deliver his people,
have generally been considered as the greatest blessings to their fellow-men;
and therefore their memories have been the most honored. Hence the ingenious
Artisan and the penetrating Philosopher, the enlightened Divine and the
patriotic Civilian, the wise Statesman and the brave General, have always been
highly respected by all civilized nations.

Man was at first occupied in tilling the ground; and however simple it may
appear to some, it must be allowed to be one of the most interesting
employments to mankind. "The King himself is served from the field." But
husbandry could never have flourished without the assistance of the arts. Hence
we find at a very early period, even long before the deluge, the arts were
cultivated. Tubal-Cain is mentioned as an instructor of every artificer in
brass and iron; and Jubal as a teacher of music, or the father of all such as
handle the harp and organ: the use of the square and plumb were undoubtedly
known at the time of the building of Babel; as were also the principles of
architecture to Noah, without which he could never have constructed such an
astonishing vessel as the Ark.

The motion and order of the heavenly bodies early arrested the attention of
man. He beheld with rapture those glittering orbs which adorned the spangled
firmament, and shed their soft luster upon the mantle of night. In the book of
Job, which is supposed to have been written by Moses, there are some things
which lead us to conclude that they had considerable knowledge of astronomy at
this early period. This may be inferred from several things, besides the
mention of " Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades." Job, ix. 9.


But we pass with rapidity over these distant ages to the deliverance of the
chosen tribes, in which the interposition of Heaven was more visible. Here we
find Moses, raised up of God, and eminently qualified to be the leader and
deliverer of that people. The character of Moses, in some particulars, stands
unrivalled; especially the prophetic part. As a General and a Legislator, he
has rarely, if ever, been equalled. What a sacrifice he must have made in
exchanging the peaceful retreats of Midian, for the noisy honors of a camp!
His magnanimous design -- the invincible firmness with which he pursued it
(though obstructed by the most unaccountable and unheard of difficulties;) --
the glorious things which he achieved for his nation; -- above all, his godlike
meekness under the most aggravating insults; have rendered his name as immortal
as time! Joshua, who succeeded him, was very little, if at all, inferior to him
in virtue or bravery. He conducted the tribes across Jordan into the land of
promise, and divided their inheritance by lot to them. After his death, for the
space of four hundred years, their government seems to have been irregularly
administered; and, at times, nearly reduced to a state of anarchy. Yet, in this
period, God raised up several eminent men, who were honored as the deliverers
of their country: such were Gideon and Barak, Samson and Jephthah, of whom we
cannot particularly speak.

Let us now meditate a moment on the history of David. Here we behold a
pleasing assemblage of those extraordinary qualities which dignify human
nature. His delicacy of behavior when introduced to the royal family of Saul;
-- his sacred friendship to Jonathan; -- his unrivalled valor in meeting, in
single combat, the huge champion of Gath, whose gigantic appearance had struck
terror through the whole Hebrew army; -- above all, his fervent piety, -- his
devout attachment to the institutions of religion, and the sublime sentiments
of his poetic writings, will render his name illustrious to all generations.
Humanity drops a tear, and then spreads a veil over his imperfections
Solomon, who succeeded him, was distinguished by his wisdom and riches; and,
during his long and peaceful reign, ^e raised the Jewish throne to a degree of
splendor which it never exhibited before nor afterward.

Had we time, we might notice several others of distinguished merit in that
favored nation, whose history we have in the sacred pages; but if we turn to
the Gentiles, we shall find among them many shining characters, who, by
endeavoring to enlighten and reform their fellow-men, were eminently useful in
their day, and ornaments to the age in which they lived. They are commonly
known by the general appellation of Philosophers. Their names alone would fill
a volume. Of these we can only notice three or four. Pythagoras, who was born
at Samos, about 590 years before Christ, was much celebrated by the ancients.
He traveled, for the sake of obtaining knowledge, to Egypt, Babylon, and
through various parts of Greece. And although he imbibed many of the errors of
the age in which he lived, he is said 'to have made considerable discoveries in
arts and sciences, and delivered a great variety of precepts for civil and
political conduct.' It is remarked of Heraclitus, an Ephesian Philosopher, who
flourished about two centuries after, that he 'continually bewailed the wicked
lives of men, and as often as he came among them, to have fallen a weeping.'
Socrates, who lived at the same time, or soon after, made very considerable
improvement both in natural and moral philosophy. He was convinced of the
absurdity of polytheism, and 'for deriding the plurality of the Heathen gods,
was condemned to drink the juice of hemlock.' Plato, who was the disciple of
Socrates, after studying with several other men of great eminence, took a
voyage into Egypt, where, it is supposed, he became acquainted with the Jewish
religion. He believed in one Supreme God, although he admitted other
subordinate deities. He died 348 years before Christ. His system was generally
received till long after the introduction of Christianity; and by many of the
ancient Fathers not unfrequently mixed with the doctrines of the Cross. But
both natural and moral philosophy, since the spread of Christianity, have
emerged from that darkness in which they were before enveloped.

Many things which were unknown to the ancients, and others which were denied,
through ignorance and superstition, are now established beyond the shadow of a
doubt. Among the moderns, who have explained the phenomena of nature, and
rendered her laws more easy and intelligible, we may reckon a Copernicus, a
Galileo, a Gassendus, a Newton, and a Franklin. Their names are inscribed upon
the page of immortality. But I proceed to take notice of another class of men,
not less useful than the former.

As man could not enjoy, in a state of solitude, all the happiness he was
designed for by his all-wise Creator; so neither could he in a state of
society, without submitting to the restraints of law and order. Hence those,
whether in the character of Civilians, Legislators, or Statesmen, who have
contributed to the establishment of wise and equal laws; in order to protect
the rights of the innocent, and bring the vicious to punishment, have been
justly considered among the friends of human happiness.

Moses stands foremost in this list. Many of his precepts, especially those of
a moral nature, are practiced upon to this day, by different nations of
different religions. The Gentiles, who had not this law, were a law to
themselves. Lycurgus, the famous Lacedemonian Legislator, has been deservedly
celebrated. He reformed the government of the Spartans, and enacted a number of
excellent laws, which he engaged them by a solemn oath to keep until he should
return from a journey he was about to make: being convinced of their great
utility, and fearing they would release themselves from their oath in case he
returned, he put an end to his own life while absent. Solon, the boast of
Athens, and one of the wisest men of his day, was justly esteemed as an
excellent Civilian. He abrogated the laws of Draco, and enacted others more
equitable; and taught, with surprising success, the great principles of
jurisprudence. We may add to this list the names of Grotius, Montesquieu,
Hambden, Sidney, and the late noble Earl of Chatham, with many others.


Permit me, my Brethren, also to observe, that teachers of piety and morality
have generally been received, and respected by all nations. It is said by an
inspired writer, that "the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should
seek the law at his mouth." Although, it must be acknowledged, that some have
dishonored their sacred profession, and caused the people to err; yet, I
believe, that many have been, and ought to be, highly esteemed for their works'
sake. How venerable did the Jewish High Priest appear on the great day of
atonement, when, clad in his sacerdotal garments, he entered the most holy
place, and sprinkled the blood before the mercy-seat! Yet in all this he was
only a type of Him who was to come. Our great High Priest has entered into
heaven itself, and now appears in the presence of God for us.

Often did this people relapse into idolatry, and often God sent his prophets
to teach them the right way; and though they sinned with a high hand, yet he
remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Israel, and would not destroy
them. At length, the time to favor them drew nigh, and John the Baptist was
sent to announce the coming of the Son of God. "He was a burning and shining
light," and thousands of penitents rejoiced in the salvation which he made
known. He pointed his hearers to Jesus as the "Lamb of God who takes away the
sin of the world." The Apostles of our Lord, who were supernaturally qualified
and sent forth to preach the gospel, were made unspeakable blessings to
mankind. They not only preached the gospel in Judea, but were sent to enlighten
the Gentile lands. They carried the knowledge of a Savior with surprising
success throughout great part of the then habitable world. God has never left
himself without witness, but has, in every age, raised up some men of eminent
abilities and piety, to teach the way of truth and righteousness, and to oppose
the errors of the day.

In the fifteenth century, when superstition and the grossest ignorance had
overspread great part of the Christian world, God raised up Luther and his
cotemporaries to begin a glorious reformation; the principles of which have
been gaining ground unto the present day. The spirit of intolerance and
persecution was not, however, wholly eradicated by the reformation: had it
been, perhaps our forefathers had never left their native country, and sought
an asylum upon these western shores. Deprived of the rights of conscience at
home, they were determined to seek a better country. Religious liberty was a
primary object with these first adventures. For the enjoyment of this, they
were willing to make almost any sacrifice. The difficulties and delays they
experienced in leaving their native country, the tediousness of their voyage,
and the sufferings and hardships they underwent in the beginning of their
settlement here, would probably have subdued the fortitude of any set of men
actuated merely by worldly motives. But fired with a noble zeal for religion,
they preferred the privilege of worshipping God agreeably to the dictates of
their own consciences (though in a desert) to all the enjoyments of this life.
We have not time, nor would it comport with our design, to trace their history;
but would just observe, that in times of affliction and calamity, when they
were neglected or oppressed by a corrupt ministry at home, and exposed in their
infant state here to the most distressing dangers, they made God their refuge.
He heard their cries, he saw their tears, and raised them up deliverers from
time to time.

We might here give you a long list of worthy names, who deserved well of their
country; but time forbids. We therefore hasten forward to that period, which
brought into more public view the Man whose death we this day lament.

Our injured country had long seen with extreme regret, their chartered rights
violated, and an insidious ministry determined to deprive them of every vestige
of rational liberty, and to subject them to the most arbitrary impositions.
They saw their loyal humble petitions and remonstrances, either treated with
total neglect, or construed into the voice of rebellion, and an armed force,
prepared to give the last fatal blow to their expiring liberties, already
stationed among them. Driven to this extremity, they did not hesitate a moment
between death and slavery! They made their solemn appeal to Heaven, and
determined to repel force by force.

At length the storm burst! -- the blood of our countrymen began to run! --
their expiring groans mingling with the smoke of their dissolving habitations
ascended up to heaven! Distress and anxiety were depicted in every countenance.
Our affairs appeared in the most perplexed, deranged situation conceivable;
until by a wise choice dictated by the will of Heaven, our beloved WASHINGTON
was appointed to the chief command of our armies. The gloom now gradually
disappeared; and confidence in our public measures increased daily. The army
was soon organized in the best manner possible, and subordination and
discipline were so far established, as in a short time to give our little camp
a veteran appearance.

But perhaps some account of General WASHINGTON, prior to his taking command of
the American army in 1775, would be desirable to a number present. It shall be
attempted. The task is pleasing; but I confess I feel a trembling diffidence in
approaching a character so venerable and sacred.

The ancestors of this illustrious Man came from England to this country in the
year 1657. He was born in the parish of his own name in the county of
Westmoreland, in Virginia, on the 11th of February, 1732. His father died when
he was only ten years old. Yet his education was properly attended to, and
conducted principally by a private tutor. He early discovered very uncommon
talents, connected with a most enterprising genius. Before he arrived to the
age of twenty, he entered the military department with the rank of Major. He
was soon after advanced to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, and before he was
twenty-two to the chief command of the regiment.
He distinguished himself upon several occasions in his military character,
before the memorable year 1755, when he achieved immortal honors, in
conducting with so much skill and bravery the retreat of General Braddock's
defeated army. He continued in the service of his country with increasing
reputation, until his ill state of health, in the year 1759, obliged him to
resign his command.

He now enjoyed a recess from the toils of war for about the space of sixteen
years, in which he sedulously cultivated the arts of peace: yet in this space,
talents like his could not be exempted from the calls of a discerning public.
Hence he frequently served his country as a Legislator, a Magistrate, and a
Judge. He was elected a Delegate to the first Congress in 1774, and also the
year following, until his appointment to the chief command of the army removed
him from the council to the field.

Eight long years he continued in this command without compensation or reward.
In reviewing the hardships and dangers, the anxieties and fatigues, which he
must have suffered during that period; we may say of him as Jacob did of
himself, "In the day time the drought consumed him, and the frost by night, and
his sleep departed from his eyes." That superior wisdom and invincible firmness
which he displayed in every part of his conduct, secured to him the confidence
of all, but especially of the army. New scenes of danger served only to bring
into operation those great talents which so eminently qualified him to meet the
exigency of the moment. By a surprising skill he seemed to pervade the most
secret councils of his enemies; and by his timely, prudent caution, often
defeated their most dangerous, deep laid plots. His fame is by no means built
on his having destroyed the most lives, but on his having saved them.

In several instances the fate of our country seemed to hang in the most
doubtful suspense; particularly in the years 1776, and 1777. At the White
Plains, it was evidently the design of the British commanders to have brought
the matter to an issue by a decisive pitched battle; they accordingly employed
every art in their power for that purpose. Our brave WASHINGTON beheld with
painful regret the inferior strength of his army, and well knew that he could
not engage with any probability of success; and yet to avoid it with honor,
required more than Fabian skill. He wisely foresaw that a defeat at this time
would probably have ruined our cause forever. Therefore both patriotism and
humanity compelled him to decline a general action.

If we trace him in his retreat through the Jerseys, we shall find him with
scarce the appearance of an army. A little handful of brave, but half naked and
barefoot troops, still continued with him, and supported the standard of
liberty. Yet soon after with this small force to the astonishment of many, he
re-crossed the Delaware, and commencing offensive operations, obtained several
important victories, which greatly animated the inhabitants of that State, and
seemed to give a new turn to the progress of the war.

To give a full account of the dangers he encountered, and the victories he
obtained, during our long struggle for liberty, until lord Cornwallis, with his
whole army, gave up to his standard, and surrendered themselves prisoners of
war, This article was omitted at the delivery.
would far exceed the speaker's abilities, or the limits of this discourse. The
sequel, will long be remembered by Britons as well as Americans.

When a peace was negociated by our ambassadors in Europe, he received the
intelligence, not with the indifference of a mercenary chief, whose only
support is derived from his profession; but with those emotions of joy which
are known only to patriotic minds. He immediately prepared to resign his
command into the hands of those from whom he received it. And even in the act
of resigning, he appeared with equal dignity as in the embattled field. His
farewell address made a very sensible impression on people of all ranks, and
served to strengthen their attachment to him. Thus blessed by his liberated
country, and covered with glory, he retired again to the peaceful shades of
Mount Vernon.

Four years had scarcely elapsed, before we find him again publicly engaged in
the cause of his country: In the year 1787 he was appointed by the State of
Virginia a Delegate to the Convention which framed our excellent Constitution,
and in which he presided. The year following, when this Constitution was
received and ratified by the States, and a Chief Magistrate was to be chosen,
the eyes of all were at once fixed on him, whom they considered, under God, as
the Deliverer of their country; and the enlightened freemen of America
proclaimed as with one voice, WASHINGTON IS THE MAN!

However much his inclination might lead him to wish the pleasures of
retirement, the call of his country was too sacred to be disregarded. He
accepted their appointment, but with the greatest diffidence and distrust of
his own abilities to discharge the important duties of his elevated and
responsible station. He was a second time unanimously chosen, and a second time
he accepted. During the whole of his administration, he exhibited all the
attributes of magistracy in such an amiable and engaging light, as could not
fail to secure the warmest affection of the people over whom he presided, and
the most respectful esteem of foreign nations. In his military triumphs he has
left a most solemn lesson for tyrants, and in his civil administration an
excellent example for all future magistrates. In his farewell address he has
left us a rich LEGACY, in which, although "being dead, he yet speaks." Let us
carefully preserve it, and hand it down, as a mirror to posterity to see him
in, to the latest ages. Perhaps it would not be saying too much, to say, that
no more uninspired man was ever more beloved and respected than he was; nor
their deaths more universally and sincerely lamented.

We proceed,

SECONDLY, to observe, That when such highly respected characters are removed
by death, justice and gratitude demand a suitable tribute of respect to be paid
to their memories.

This sentiment being so congenial with your feelings, upon the present
occasion, it will need little said to enforce it.

The children of Israel mourned for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days.
This was a national act, and expressive of their deep sorrow upon this
afflictive dispensation. The death of Moses differed in some respects from that
of other men. He was particularly notified that it was at hand. Hence he
employed the last month of his life in making immediate preparation for his
final departure. He delivered a most solemn and affecting address to his nation
a little before he left them. Vide Deuteronomy. xxxii.
In this he recapitulated the many dangers they had escaped, and pointed out
those to which they were still exposed; and reminded them of the many past
interpositions of Divine Providence in their behalf; and concluded by saying,
"Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which
ye shall command your children to observe to do." After this he proceeded from
tribe to tribe, and left his fatherly blessing with them; and by a spirit of
inspiration pointed out their future destiny. From the tent of Asher, behold
him ascending mount Nebo! See the tribes taking their last sad look of their
kind Deliverer! Every heart transfixed with grief, and every eye swimming in
tears! They watch his ascending steps, until he is lost from their sight! Moses
at length reached the towering top of Pisgah, and from this lofty eminence he
surveyed "the land of Gilead -- unto the utmost sea, and the south, and the
plains of the valley of Jericho, and the city of palm trees unto Zoar." Having
thus seen the land of promise, he dropped the vail of mortality, as Elijah did
his mantle, and ascended to the bosom of his God. He was now released from all
his cares, and made happy in the mansions of rest; whilst a bereaved nation was
mourning on the plain below. This bears the greatest resemblance to our present
situation of any instance I recollect in the sacred pages. Moses, though
considerably advanced in life, yet retained his full strength; "his eye was not
dim, nor his natural force abated." He had not outlived his usefulness, so as
to be half forgotten before he was dead; but retained the vigor of youth,
enriched with the long experience of years.

Although his services were still eminently useful, and seemed to be much
needed, yet he had probably conducted that people through their greatest
dangers; and what was highly consoling, had transferred his authority before
his death to his worthy successor, who was able to carry on the work which he
had begun. You cannot help, my Brethren, observing a coincidence of character
and circumstances, between the Jewish Lawgiver and the American Patriot.

The beautiful Elegy of David, upon the death of Saul and Jonathan, is replete
with all the fine sentiments of fraternal affection, and sympathetic sorrow.
The friendship between him and Jonathan had been long and uninterrupted; but
Saul had been his persecutor for many years. Twice he had been delivered into
his hands, and twice he had spared his life. When one of his aids requested
leave to smite him to the earth at once; David replied, "Destroy him not: for
who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's anointed, and be guiltless?"
The time may come, said he, when "he shall descend into battle and perish." The
event had now taken place. It might have been supposed, that if David had not
rejoiced at the fall of his greatest foe, he would at least have refrained from
weeping. But he considered Saul as having been anointed at God's command, and
vested with supreme authority; therefore he honored him as the "minister of
God." The affecting circumstances of his death, connecting with it that of his
amiable son, subdued all former resentment, and awakened in his soul every
tender sensibility. His harp was now attuned to mourning, and every strain
warbled lamentation and woe. Forgetful of the former miscarriages of Saul, he
now indulges all the luxury of generous grief, and weeps at the awful stroke of
fate, which lodged a father and a son together in the cold arms of death, upon
mount Gilboa. "The beauty of Israel," said he, "is slain upon thy high places;
how are the mighty fallen!" They "were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and
in their death they were not divided. Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
who clothed you in scarlet with other delights, and put on ornaments of gold
upon your apparel." And will not the fair daughters of Columbia weep for a far
more amiable character, for our beloved WASHINGTON? Surely they will. When they
consider how much they are indebted to his arduous toils, his sleepless nights,
his counsels and his care, for their present happiness and prosperity, I doubt
not but they will partake largely in the general grief.

Our context exhibits further proof that the memories of the virtuous and the
brave have ever been honored. The Eulogy pronounced upon Abner; the character
of the Orator; above all, the sorrowing tears of the audience, witnessed the
high respect they had for the virtues of this brave, but unfortunate General.

Some of the Kings of Israel, who distinguished themselves only for their
wickedness, were denied the privilege of being buried in the sepulchers of
their fathers; whilst such as were virtuous and reigned well, never failed of
being honored both in life and death. When Hezekiah died, "they buried him in
the chiefest of the sepulchers of the sons of David, and all Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his death." But how do all the
instances of public grief, which are to be met with in sacred and profane
history, diminish to a point, when compared with that which was exhibited at
the death of CHRIST?

When the SAVIOR of men expired upon Calvary, nature, suspending her usual
gaieties, threatened the return of universal chaos. The pained rocks burst
asunder! The groaning earth trembled to its center! The sun shrouded himself in
black, and the world was curtained round in awful darkness! -- The daughters of
Jerusalem followed him to the fatal place weeping! The disciples stood afar off
beholding! Many of the crowd who beheld the sight, smote upon their breasts,
and withdrew from the affecting scene. The death of JESUS will be gratefully
remembered, and frequently celebrated by Christians to the latest ages of time.
Any attempt to swell our present grief to a comparison with this, would be most
solemn trifling. Yet our loss is great indeed.

The Man, who was destined by Heaven to be the instrumental Savior of his
country; who went before our armies, and conducted them safely amidst perils
and dangers, and who led them on to final victory; the Man who presided over
our national councils with so much honor, and whose administrations bore the
most dignified marks of wisdom, prudence and integrity; "the man who was raised
up on high" -- Alas! we shall see his face no more.

It is observed by an ingenious writer, that when that celebrated statesman and
friend to universal liberty, the late noble Earl of Chatham, was interred, the
tide of public grief and respect rose higher, than had been ever known before
upon a similar occasion; and such as was not usual even at the funeral of
kings. Belsham's Memoirs of Geo. III.
But, my Brethren, what is all the funeral pomp which attends the exit of
kings, compared with that generous sorrow which at this moment oppresses the
bosom of every American? Our tears are not a tribute extorted from us by
custom, but the genuine expressions of our heartfelt grief. We humbly hope our
Divine Master will not be offended with our mourning for the Man whom we so
much loved, since he himself wept at the grave of Lazarus.

It becomes us upon the present occasion to mingle with our sorrows, the voice
of thanksgiving, to that God whose counsels are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out. We will adore him, that he has honored our nation to give birth
to one of the most illustrious of men; who has very justly been considered as
'the pride of his country,' and the admiration of the world. Let us adore the
God of Armies who covered his head in the day of battle, and who sustained him
amidst so many trials and dangers. Nor have we less cause of thankfulness, that
he was enabled to discharge with so much wisdom and integrity, the very
difficult and important duties of his responsible station as Supreme Executive
of the Union. While we mourn his sudden departure from us, we have great reason
to acknowledge that goodness which spared him to us so long. That he did not
fall upon the high places of the field, by the hand of his enemies; nor "by the
hand of wicked men," like the man who is the subject of our text; but that
Heaven, who cannot err, appointed the time, the instrument, and the manner of
his death. Let us with reverence submit to the awful dispensation; and be
careful that we do not offend God, by any indecent expressions of our grief.
However much he was honored and revered, he was but a man; and we know that
"it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in princes:" for
though they are called gods, they must die like men. Could the fond wishes of
his country, or the tears of his surrounding friends, have delayed the awful
stroke; -- WASHINGTON had not died. But the sentence was irrevocable! He
submitted to it with calmness, and we trust his nobler part is gone to that
world, where virtue receives its full reward. Gratitude shall erect upon his
tomb a lasting monument inscribed with his worthy deeds; whilst his precious
dust shall rest in peace beneath its hallowed base, until the Archangel shall
wake the sleeping dead.

" Ye gentlest ministers of fate,
Attend our HERO as he lies,
And bid the softest slumbers wait
With silken cords to bind his eyes.
Glory with all her lamps shall burn,
And watch the Warrior's sleeping clay,
Till the last trumpet rouse his urn
To aid the triumps of the day."
God grant, that we may then all unite the everlasting hallelujahs of the
redeemed. Amen.

FINIS

