Discourse DELIVERED AT SOUTH PARISH IN SITUATE, FEBRUARY 22, 1800. The Day
assigned by Congress, To mourn the DECEASE and venerate the VIRTUES of GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON.

"GO AND DO LIKEWISE."

BY DAVID BARNES, D. D.

Published by Desire.

BOSTON: MANNING and LORING, Printers, near the Old South Meeting House.

G. W. Born Feb. 22, 1732. Died, at MOUNT VERNON, Dec. 14, 1799. Aged 68.


Discourse.
IT is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, is
the observation of one, who was well acquainted with human nature, and capable
of giving excellent directions for the conduct of human life. That this is such
an house, appears from the sadness of every countenance, proceeding from real
sorrow of heart and the symbols of mourning conspicuous to every eye. To
suggest some seasonable thoughts, on this mournful occasion, is the business of
the speaker; and that he may be better able to arrange his ideas and fix the
attention of his hearers, he will attempt a comparison between the greatest man
in the East and the greatest man in the West, whose death is this day
universally lamented, and to perpetuate the remembrance of his virtues
thousands, nay millions, are assembled.

THE passage I shall select from the sacred volume for my text, you may find in
DEUTERONONY 34 Chap. part of the 5.7.8. verses. Moses the servant of the Lord
died. Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died. His eye was not
dim, nor his natural force abated. And the children of Israel wept for Moses.



SO died Moses at an advanced period, without feeling those decays, which have
been the portion of the human kind in every age: So died WASHINGTON in the full
possession of his mental powers, and without any material decay in his senses
or his limbs, at an age, when such an exemption could hardly be expected. I do
not know that there was any thing miraculous in either. They both, early in
life, adopted such principles and pursued such a course as had a direct
tendency to protract life, as far as within the reach of human ability, and to
prevent the natural decays of age.

THEY were both favored with good natural constitutions; they were both
temperate in all things; they were both abundant in labors; they were both men
of piety and unspotted virtue; and of consequence enjoyed easy and quiet minds,
without anxiety and without vexation; they both went to the grave in peace.

BUT they did not resemble each other more in their deaths, than they did in
their lives. They were both born for public life, they filled important
stations with dignity to themselves and advantage to mankind. We shall descend
to a few particulars in which the resemblance appears.

MOSES was a man of great modesty and exceedingly diffident of his own
abilities to fill the station to which he was called. He declined the arduous
task assigned him, as far as prudence and submission to unerring Wisdom would
permit. Had he gone any farther, his modesty would have been converted into
obstinacy.

WASHINGTON was equally diffident and distrustful of his qualifications for the
important work to which he was called. It was impossible for him to be without
his fears, that the spirit of liberty, which pervaded all orders of men, would
decline, if not die, and that the people would grow weary of suffering and wish
to return to their former state. Success was what he could not command, how
well soever he might deserve it. If he had failed at an early period, the most
ignominious death must have been his portion. If he had had an hundred lives,
justice, his enemies would have said, demanded them all. Nothing short of the
unanimous voice of the Congress, of the army, and the people, could have drawn
him from his beloved retirement. He made up his mind on the most mature
consideration, and came forth, determined to deliver his brethren from their
oppressions and their fears, or perish in the attempt. The joy expressed at his
acceptance of the command of our armies, was nearly equal to the grief that has
been manifested at his death.

IF he had been appointed like Moses immediately by Heaven, we could not have
put much greater confidence in him. Unanimity was the consequence; unanimity
saved us. It is true, the Farmer's maxim, uttered at an early period, was in
every mouth: "United we stand, divided we fall." But this maxim would have had
but little effect, if we had not had a leader to give it force.

MOSES was a man of great prudence.

HE was cool in his temper, deliberate in his behavior, a rash word seldom, if
ever, proceeded from his lips; nor did the want of foresight and discretion
plunge him into difficulties and embarrassments to such a degree, as to wound
his reputation and prevent success.

WASHINGTON had the most important qualification of an able general, a wise
discernment betwixt things difficult and impracticable. To shrink from the
former is weakness, to attempt the latter madness. Such was his wisdom of
prevention, he had but little occasion for that of remedy. His uncommon
sobriety, unremitted attention, and continual activity, preserved him from
hurtful errors and mistakes. He lived not a moment without thought, nor was any
thing put off till tomorrow that could be done today. Though he heard every
thing, yet this did not prevent his seeing every thing, so far as circumstances
would permit. He always considered the eye of the general more influential than
his words. Where danger was most imminent, and his presence most needed, there
his exertions were most conspicuous. As he never avoided the post of danger, he
led others to consider it a post of honor. Great prudence was necessary to
form a union in the American army, composed, as it was, of raw, undisciplined
troops, drawn from different quarters, possessed of different principles,
habits and prejudices, and all in a great degree void of that spirit of
subordination absolutely necessary in an army. These difficulties were all
surmounted, and nearly as much harmony was found in the American as in the
British camp, without that loss of spirit, that is often, if not always, found
in those who have been drilled to the service by the severest discipline. The
Americans, taken from the fields of freedom, could not bear that severity of
discipline frequently found in veteran armies. Our prudent leader conformed to
their humors and their habits, so far as public safety would permit, and by so
doing he was obeyed more from affection than fear.

MOSES was a man of fortitude. His courage never forsook him, though his
situation was often distressing and his prospect gloomy. He was early convinced
there was no safety but in perseverance. To look back was death or worse.

THE courage of the American chief was never doubted by friend or foe. If it
had been, it would totally have disqualified him for his place. The want of
personal bravery is a weakness in a general not to be forgiven. WASHINGTON on
all occasions had the perfect command of himself. He never fled when duty
called him to pursue, nor did he quit the ground as long as any hope of victory
remained. During the first stages of the contest, his courage and skill were
more conspicuous in his retreats than in his victories. These were conducted in
such manner, that the enemy profited but little by the victories they won and
the advantages they gained. A defensive mode of war he adopted, as being the
only mode the Americans were able to pursue, and which he was well assured
would lead to conquest in the end. It is time and service that makes soldiers;
it is danger that creates courage; it is hardship that makes men hardy. The
American army must grow better with time, the British decay. The Americans will
conquer if they are not conquered, was his maxim.

THE patriotism of the Jewish lawgiver equalled his fortitude. His patriotism
was of the virtuous kind. It was the first wish of the Jewish leader to deliver
his brethren from oppression and slavery. Avarice and ambition were not in his
heart, nor was the desire of making conquests, like some ancient and modern
republics, the ruling passion of his mind. Could he see his friends and
companions in the possession of freedom, he was content. As to himself, while
he dwelt in Pharaoh's court he had nothing to endure, nor any thing to fear. He
was too important to be insulted or neglected; and we know of no reason that he
had to dread a change of circumstances: "But Moses chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season." We commend his choice, and do most sincerely wish that such patriots
may increase in the old world and in the new.

WASHINGTON was not inferior to Moses in this amiable virtue. If ever there was
a man in the world, who discovered a truly patriotic spirit, who spent life for
the good of his country and countrymen, who exposed his health, hazarded his
life, and every thing dear to him of a temporal nature, WASHINGTON was the man.
History furnishes no instance of a man, who went beyond him in a truly public
and patriotic spirit. Possessed of an ample fortune, he might have lived much
at his ease. Books, a few select friends, and rural employments, in which his
soul delighted, would have made him as happy as the present state of things
would permit; but he chose rather to risk his fortune with that of his
brethren, than enjoy the pleasures his circumstances afforded him.

MOSES was a man of great humanity. This appears from the general tenor of his
conduct. If in some instances there is the appearance of severity, it is owing
to necessity or peculiar circumstances, and not to a cruel disposition. Time
will not permit me to descend to particulars.

WASHINGTON was equally humane. He might have obtained more glory in the
opinion of some, if he had been more lavish of human blood. He never exposed
his men to danger any farther than necessity required, or there was an hopeful
prospect of obtaining some permanent advantage. Less blood, perhaps, was never
shed in a war so complicated, so lengthy, and for the most part carried on
against superior numbers. It was his humanity that enabled him to secure the
affections of the army, beyond what is common. This affection, principally,
held the army together during certain periods of suffering all the pains of
hunger, cold, nakedness, and incapacity of making any great resistance, if the
enemy had known their weakness, and been disposed to attack them with their
whole force. His pathetic entreaties more than once detained the men in camp
after their enlistments were expired. They could not forsake their general, who
was willing to spend and be spent for the good of the army and the happiness of
his country.

MOSES was as much distinguished for his meekness, as for any other quality of
his mind. Our children are not badly instructed, when in their infancy or early
childhood, they are taught that MOSES excelled all in this amiable disposition.

WASHINGTON in this respect was not inferior to Moses. Passions he had, and
they, who have been best acquainted with him, say they were strong. This we can
easily believe, for such are always found in strong minds. It was the first
lesson of his life, to reduce them to reason. He effected it; and this paved
the way to promotion, and prepared him to take the command of his brethren.
When his spirit was stirred within him and his heart waxed hot, the singer of
silence rested on his lips. He early learnt what the most passionate are
willing to acknowledge, that nothing is well done in anger, that rashness in
action lays a foundation for repentance at leisure. If he was not so decisive
as some; by accustoming himself always to think, he made fewer mistakes than
others. His foresight and attention prevented the necessity of doing things
twice in order to be wise.

MOSES was as much distinguished in the cabinet, as in the field. He was the
greatest lawgiver, the world had ever seen. He formed a republic under which
the people for a long time enjoyed an uncommon share of liberty and safety, and
which might have continued much longer than it did, if the wantonness of some
and the wickedness of others had not led them to wish for a change.

WASHINGTON was as much respected at the head of our councils, as he had been
at the head of our armies. As he had been first in war, so he was first in
peace. The people, though divided in every thing else, united in choosing him
their president, and in such manner as was seldom if ever known before, and the
like is hardly to be expected again. Among many men scattered over an immense
tract of country, possessing different views, interests, and habits, there was
but one mind. The voice of millions was considered by our great friend and
patron as the voice of God, and he consented to take the helm when the ship was
supposed to be in great danger. His prudence, patience, and fortitude lessened,
if it did not exterminate, the spirit of party; and all orders united for the
benefit of the republic. Many had supposed, during the contest, that when the
rod that had been held over us, was removed, our lot would be that of the
Grecian states, who waged perpetual war with each other. The Federal
Constitution laid a foundation for perpetual union. WASHINGTON was at the head,
when it was framed; and the commencement of its administration was committed to
his hands, and he continued in office longer than he intended, because he was
determined not to quit the helm in a storm. The line he adopted, when it was
extremely difficult to determine what course it was best to pursue, has (under
Providence) saved this nation from the calamities of a dreadful war, and
enabled us to enjoy a great share of peace, and as large a portion of temporal
prosperity as the world has ever seen.

WHEN war broke out in Europe, our political Father thought it best that
America should observe the line of neutrality. By taking an active part, we had
every thing to lose and nothing to gain. The voice of the people, if I mistake
not, was for war; they have since been convinced of their mistake. If we had
engaged, we should probably have lost all that we had gained, and both our
circumstances and prospects would have been infinitely worse, than they were
before the revolution began. The war has not yet ended, and we cannot say how
or when it will. The principles that were first adopted by the French
revolutionists appear to be nearly abandoned by those now in power, and all
hope of establishing a free republic is at an end. Let them adopt what form
they may, military despotism must continue for some length of time. By
observing the line of neutrality, we have suffered; but nothing, it is
probable, to what we should have done, if we had been weak enough to have
engaged in war. The enmity between the two great rival powers has been the
source of nearly all our sufferings; but they have not been so great, as they
would have been, if we had joined with one side or the other. They have divided
the people, it is true, but the probability is, that we shall soon be on pretty
good terms with both. We have reason to hope that our Envoys will be well
received; if not, the good we have already received from the appointment is
more than a balance for the expense.

ONE thing, that I cannot forbear mentioning, that tends much to exalt the
character of our late beloved President, is, the impartial world, that have
been acquainted with his public movements of every kind, and have had
opportunity to examine all his motives, have not in a single instance, that I
recollect, condemned his conduct; and I doubt not, but that we shall hear, that
his death is considered as a loss to the human race.

MOSES was a man of piety, religion and morality. And so was WASHINGTON.

HE was never heard vauntingly to say, My wisdom, my courage, my zeal, have
vanquished all my enemies. My arm has gotten me the victory.

ON the other hand; My God, my officers, my soldiers, the good sense and firm
conduct of my fellow-citizens, in the cabinet and in the field, have crowned my
labors with some success, was the language of his heart and his lips. He was
no sophist, nor atheist. If he had been, his example might have done infinite
harm; it might have given a tone to the faith and manners of the nation. The
prevalence of infidelity in Europe, we have reason to hope, will be followed
with some happy consequences. It has nearly extirpated that spirit of credulity
and superstition which for a long time disgraced the Christian religion and
threatened its total destruction. In plucking up the tares, in popish countries,
the wheat has been plucked up with them. The tares were so numerous and so
rank, that this could not be well avoided. Thanks to Heaven! the good seed is
not lost, the ground remains, and we are not without hope, that it may be
prepared in such manner, that when the good seed is sown, it shall bring forth
an hundred fold. If the ways of Heaven are often dark and unsearchable, one
thing is certain, the general good is invariably pursued.

IN some things, the Jewish lawgiver and the American chief bore but little
resemblance. Moses had only to follow the directions of an infallible Guide.
His path was so plainly marked by Heaven, that it was nearly impossible for him
to mistake it. Not so with our patron and friend: he was obliged to keep his
invention always upon the rack. Not a moment was allowed him for relaxation and
repose beyond what nature absolutely required. He was as thoughtful on the day
of victory as on the day of defeat. Orders, it is true, he often received, but
of necessity they must be often discretionary, especially as to ways and means
of carrying them into execution. He might find himself under a necessity of
disregarding them; to do this, in his responsible situation, might be as
painful to him, as it was to our Envoys in France when they were negotiating a
peace with Britain. It is true, he was allowed to depart from orders, as
circumstances or imperious necessity demanded; but to be always ready to take
the advantage of circumstances, required continual attention.

THIS one thing, the taking advantage of circumstances, distinguishes the
character of a general more, perhaps, than any other that can be named. Without
a good share of prudence of this kind, the most brilliant talents, in other
respects, will never command success.

MOSES was constantly aided by miracles. The elements were at his command, the
heavens fought in his favor. WASHINGTON had no direct assurance from the
Deity, that he would lead him on to victory, and crown his labors with
success. He believed his cause to be just, but this afforded him no absolute
security against disappointments. If he had owned the box early in life, that
he returned to the Donor at his death, this would have convinced him, if
conviction was wanted, that the most prudent, patriotic and brave, may be
unfortunate, and suffer an ignominious death. He never expected that miracles
would be wrought in his favor. He could not say as Moses did, when hemmed in
on every side, Stand still and see the salvation of God. At the same time, he
and we, in a thousand instances, have noticed the hand of Heaven visibly
displayed in our favor. My time will not allow me to descend to particular
instances, that made a deep impression at the moment, on the minds of such as
then lived, and never will be forgotten.

THE gift, or rather loan of such a man, in our particular circumstances, was a
favor beyond estimation. If we had been allowed to search the world, one more
suitable to the exigencies of the times, we have good reason to believe, could
not have been found. That he was continued so long, and made so useful to the
last day of his life, demands our warmest gratitude. Though it was never our
wish, that he should pass through a second childhood, and spend the last of
life in a useless way, bereft of (...) and of sense; yet his removal at the
present period is a loss, that we have great reason to lament. The conduct of
the United States this day evinces beyond contradiction, that they are sensible
of the loss they have sustained. Were he, who wept at the grave of Lazarus,
with us at the present moment, he would undoubtedly mingle his tears with ours.
We commend rulers and people for devoting this day to mourning. Our public
conduct has a tendency to wipe off the reproach that has been frequently cast
on republics, that they are ungrateful. Pecuniary rewards for his services he
would never receive. To perpetuate the memory of his virtues, is all the reward
we are allowed to give. To benefit the deceased we do not expect; he is gone
beyond our reach. To promote the happiness of the living, the rising generation
in particular, and the children yet unborn, is what we have in view. We say to
all, this day, who wish to live beloved and die lamented, "Go and do likewise."

ALL orders of men may in some degree be benefited by his example, let their
sphere of life be what it may. He was as exemplary in private life as he was in
public. His example has made that line of life honorable, which, as we expect
to become a great and flourishing people must be attended to beyond all others.
Commerce we shall have, but commerce in such a country as this, without
agriculture, can never be gainful. A price is put into our hands, God grant
that we may have wisdom to improve it.

Let us all take the warning that is given us. In a short time we shall all be
upon a level. As we wish to be lamented when dead, it behooves us to be useful
while living. To prepare for our passage is the business of time. Blessed are
the dead who die in the Lord, they rest from their labors and their works do
follow them.

FINIS


