A SERMON, PREACHED DECEMBER 29, 1799, IN THE NORTH MEETING HOUSE, Salem, THE
LORD'S DAY AFTER THE MELANCHOLY TIDINGS WERE RECEIVED OF THE DEATH OF GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON, WHO DIED DEC. 14, 1799.

BY THOMAS BARNARD, D. D.

Minister of the North Church and Congregation.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF THE TOWN.

SALEM: Printed by THOMAS C. CUSHING, at the Bible and Heart.

A SERMON.
ISAIAH xxviii. 26. For his God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach
him.
ALL who acknowledge God to be the Creator of man, and that He commands his
birth in the division of the earth he chooses, together with the peculiar
circumstances in which he is placed, will hear our text as the voice of
indisputable truth when addressed to any individual of mankind. "His God does
instruct him to discretion, and teach him:" He affords him both speculative
knowledge, and ingenuity to improve it to wise and useful ends.

How far minds may be equal in an independent state, is one of those abstruse
questions which we have not abilities to ascertain.

But this we know, putting aside all our own exertions, there are innumerable
differences between men -- their tastes, their discretion, their capacity of
instruction, and their improvements -- which we cannot but think are greatly
owing to causes which we can neither control nor direct -- to the peculiar
formation of our bodies, to the climate where we are born, the circumstances in
which we are stationed; to peculiar conjunctures favorable to the display of
our particular abilities. The objects of knowledge and discretion to which some
are passionately attached, and which they learn to comprehend with great ease,
others turn from with indifference and disgust: in their nature and use it
seems impossible to instruct them, unless we could communicate to them powers
which they have not, or have but in a very feeble degree. Some are born into,
and are continued in, situations which are unfavourable to their instruction,
though their faculties are strong; they are like the diamond in the quarry,
which cannot display its brilliancy for want of light and the polish of the
artist. Great numbers, no doubt, of this class die in every quarter of the
earth, who neither suspect themselves their abilities of eminence and
usefulness, nor are esteemed by those around them above the rank of ordinary
men. Some, though they have been in an indulgent situation for the acquisition
of knowledge, and the discreet use of it; and, had they been called to action
in circumstances favorable to their usefulness and fame, would have made a
conspicuous figure in the world, and been distinguished blessings, have by an
uniform series of events been hindered any striking exhibition of themselves.
If these remarks are just, and we feel their force, must we not promptly say,
with deep-felt humility, and lively gratitude, that "God does instruct us to
discretion, and does teach us," while with vigorous zeal we devote ourselves to
his honor and service? Did not He give us our constitution of body, united
with the strength of our minds, and the liveliness of our imagination? Has not
He blessed us with the health necessary to our enjoyment, and the successful
improvement of our abilities? He appoints the place of our birth, either in
barbarous climes which knowledge never enlightened, the very air of which
enervates the soul; where, if any, there is but a feeble stimulus to the
exertions which render men great, amiable and good; or in a situation which
fosters both bodily and mental vigor, and where all causes conspire to render
us the ornaments of human nature, and the blessings of mankind. He orders "the
times and the seasons," in the exercise of his sovereign wisdom, so as to bring
forward our discretion and various knowledge in those striking attitudes which
raise our reputation and fortune high, and give us a benignant influence upon
the worth and happiness of our fellow men; or, continues us in circumstances
which doom us to concealment and inaction, while we are conscious of those
excellent powers which, indulged, would greatly benefit our country, and
gloriously distinguish ourselves.

Nor may we conclude, as we shall be apt to do if we think but superficially
upon this subject, that, because we are ultimately indebted to God for our
discretion and mental improvement, it is therefore wholly unnecessary we should
labor to acquire them by the exercise of the original powers He gave us, which
grow with our growth, and render us capable of increasing judgment and
knowledge: For He -- and certainly He has a right to convey his undeserved
blessings to his creatures in the mode He chooses -- has seen fit inseparably
to connect these together. God has seen fit to command us "to lift up our
voices for understanding, and search for wisdom as for hidden treasure," whom
we are sacredly bound to obey, by the principles of duty, and the motives of
honor and happiness.

Having made these observations, always important, I shall now lead you to a
consideration of several ways in which the ALL-WISE AND BENEFICENT BEING, who
rules over all, "instructs men to discretion," and teaches them how to increase
the security and welfare of the societies to which they belong, and the
individuals with whom they are intimately connected, and to secure and promote
their future happiness as accountable beings. I shall conclude with several
practical reflections upon the effects which the liberal distribution of His
invaluable gifts in our NATION should have upon our minds, affections and
actions. Nor shall I fail to make honorable mention of the Great and Good Man
who has lately "fallen in our Israel, and for whom the whole land so sincerely
mourns."

We consider, then --

I. Several ways in which the ALL-WISE AND BENEFICENT BEING, who rules over
all, "instructs men to discretion, and teaches them" how to increase the
security and welfare of the societies to which they belong, and the individuals
with whom they are intimately connected; to secure and promote their future
happiness as accountable beings.

FIRST. Our text is spoken by the prophet of the Farmer; and therefore
AGRICULTURE will claim our attention before any other kind of instruction which
God has given our race. By agriculture in a large sense is meant a judicious
method of preparing the earth for the reception of seeds, and dressing the
fruits she yields so as to be fit for the food and nourishment of man. This
was, after man became ignorant and barbarous in any of those abodes to which he
wandered from the state of civilized knowledge, however familiar the business
may have become to us, who have by long experience been better instructed,
esteemed the most useful art of which he could be made master. In the mere
savage state we should be in frequent want of the necessaries of life; we
should be obliged to seek a precarious and unplentiful subsistence with
incessant labor; and ofttimes would our most painful searches be wholly in
vain: we should esteem him, therefore, in this state of mortification and want,
the most eminent of our number, and hail him our first benefactor, who should
teach us the discretion necessary to cultivate the soil, and cause it to yield
a sufficiency of food to satisfy the cravings of hunger, and invigorate our
bodies.

In the short history we have of our first parent there are expressions which
admit not of an easy explanation, unless we suppose he was peculiarly taught of
God this most useful art. Before his creation, it is there said, "there was not
a man to till the ground." But, uninformed either by observation of other men,
or by his own experience, how to perform this important work, whence could he
derive his knowledge but from his Maker? After his creation, we are told also,
"the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it,
and to keep it." This knowledge he no doubt communicated to his immediate
descendants, and they to theirs. Yet some of his children, in the successive
ages since his day, have through misfortune and distress sunk into the pure
state of ignorance and barbarity, and lost, almost entirely, this beneficial
art. The wise and good, who have entered amongst tribes of men in so degraded
and afflictive a condition, have taught them agriculture, as a most efficient
means of their civilization, and of increase to the comforts of their lives, as
tenants of the earth. Duly appreciating the benefit, they have esteemed
themselves under such immense obligations of reverence and gratitude to them
for their lessons, and the happy alteration they have made in their modes of
life, that they have hailed them divine persons, who have visited the earth for
their good. They have consecrated their memory with religious honors, though
they were in reality only men better taught than themselves by God, who alone
deserves adoration. Agriculture indeed ought ever to rank in our minds as a
most valuable species of knowledge communicated to us by the Father of our
spirits. Under her benignant influence "the wilderness becomes a fruitful
field, and the desert blossoms as the rose;" man lives without constant dread
of want, and is far more agreeably fed and clothed; his body and his mind both
are pleasingly and honorably employed in obedience to her direction; and in a
way which tends powerfully to the common and universal good of his race with
whom he has any communication.

SECOND. Military discretion seems, in the course of things, to have been
taught men by their Divine Instructor, next to the knowledge how, profitably,
to cultivate the earth. Universal history proves wherever tribes of men have
by their knowledge and industry acquired a fruitful inheritance, there have
been other tribes around, who, either from the motives of ambition and power or
the desire of more plentiful accommodation, have attempted, when artful
measures have failed of the end, to gain the dominion over them by violence. We
may exclaim, Alas! why do men increase the miseries of their present existence
by the harsh calamities of war, when evil enough are our days without them? Why
do they shorten each others' lives, when they will quickly go down to the
grave, though they have nothing singular to hasten them? We may pray, and we
ought to pray with fervency, that the just, the mild, the benevolent religion
of Christ may prevail, and men learn war no more. We may join our reasonings
and advices to succeed its complete influence; and we ought to do it, because
no order of things would more advance the tranquillity and happiness of
mankind. But still God has given us abilities to learn the regular processes,
and the various stratagems, of attack and defense: "He has taught our hands to
war, and our fingers to fight." The course of the Divine Providence seems also
to prove, that we must make use with spirit of the armor which is given us, in
every just and honorable method, during the continuance of the present
corruption of human nature, until it is essentially altered for the better,
unless we are willing to be oppressed, to be slaves, and miserable. Hence we
find, that upon necessary occasions men in general are easily roused to war,
and soon learn to perform its duties, as well as bear its hardships. Nor does
the Wise and Beneficent Being, who rules over all, and tenderly regards his
injured creatures, fail to raise up for them on such emergences intelligent
commanders, and celebrated generals, to guide and direct them.

THIRD. After men have taken up their abode together in a situation which they
have chosen, enjoy a fair and good inheritance, and are able to defend
themselves in their possession, still they need interesting instruction from
God, their great Teacher. If they are at all worthy their lot, they will wish
to be acquainted with constitutions of civil government favorable to their
freedom and happiness; and with the peculiar motives which, placed before the
minds and passions of those raised to their administration, shall render them
content with their legitimate reverence, honors, and support, while with
unremitted fidelity they exert themselves for the public safety and happiness.
With extensive, beautiful and luxuriant territory, with numbers and martial
skill equal to their defense and aggrandizement, while alone, they may yet
mourn the choicest blessings of society. But, when to these are added
well-chosen and equal governments, carried into effect by well-improved, just
and patriotic men, they then have as much security and enjoyment as public
bodies of men can have in this state of imperfection. Yea, wise and equal
government, with intelligent, faithful and kind rulers, softens the harshest
climates, fructifies barren soils, inspires man with the love of country, and
causes him to rejoice in circumstances naturally calculated to dispirit him,
and render him habitually unhappy.

The knowledge which produces this admirable order is slow in its growth, and
sparingly diffused amongst the inhabitants of the earth; owing either to
indisposition on the side of those in power, or to the necessity and indolence
of their subjects. Until within a short period of time a well-balanced
government has not been contemplated by the human mind, like other objects
which are intimately connected with the improvement and felicity of man. The
governments which illustrate this idea are rare, amidst the innumerable ones
which would be made use of to show, in a pointed view, how vastly important to
the dignity and happiness of mankind that it should be universally realized, in
the authorities which govern them.

There is perhaps in all civilized countries, blessed with the means of good
education, a sufficient number of wise and faithful men, who, invited from
their retirement, and patronized, would produce forms of government in theory
excellent, and which, in operation, would yield them quietude and freedom,
order and prosperity. If they are not brought forth to this good work, through
the influence of causes so commanding that it would be imprudence and madness
to counteract them, the evil must be borne with resignation, as an evil which
the Supreme Ruler ordains or permits, in abatement of their worth and felicity.
But if this failure is owing to their negligence, and unworthy attachment to
their individual interests, or the interest of any particular order to which
they belong, all they lose and suffer must be charged to a degree of
criminality which deserves his rebuke and chastisement.

FOURTH. COMMERCE and the ARTS are cheerfully embraced and improved by
individuals and nations in situations which are favorable to their acquisition
and growth. Commerce they prize a fruitful source of private and national
wealth, which they dearly love for the distinction, splendor and varied
enjoyments it so liberally confers. The arts increase their necessaries and
conveniences, and greatly embellish human life; they are therefore objects of
their strong desires. And who, that passes over the chart of the world with
attention, but will be convinced that, wherever the Father and Benefactor of
men has allotted them habitations indulgent to commerce and the arts, he has
given them, though in different degrees, discretion and spirit to gain and
advantageously exert themselves in their improvement?

FIFTH. Nations, in proportion as they become civilized, and engage in the
profitable and ornamental businesses of life, esteem the means of a good and
useful, a more improved and liberal education amongst the important blessings
which their God confers upon them. As the stages of society advance, we find we
are not accomplished for our condition, unless we have the knowledge of
language and figures. Without these, we may have pleasing persons, agreeable
qualities, and sound understanding; and yet shall be comparatively despised. We
cannot, though every thing else should favor us, rise beyond very lowly
circumstances. Yet a young man, who is only master of these branches of
knowledge, and yet rises to easy circumstances; who has mental industry, and
has ardent wishes to know all that the most enlightened men know, may rise to
their state of intellectual improvement. Such examples, however, are very
uncommon. Nations well instructed therefore in the best-appointed means of
public and private knowledge, connected with individual reputation and
enjoyment, as well as the general security and welfare, have made ample
provision for the higher grades of education, which those may improve who have
inclination and taste.

SIXTH. God has taught his children of mankind the divine and moral knowledge
they possess, which tends to the purification of their hearts, and their
progress in virtue; which blesses them, whenever it has its suitable effect
upon them, with peace and joy in this state, and prepares them for higher
felicity in future scenes of existence. This he has done in sundry ways, and in
different proportions, as has seemed best to his unsearchable understanding.
Some he has instructed in these important truths only by their reason,
conscience, and moral feelings, aided by the labors of philosophers. Holy men,
righteous patriarchs, and inspired prophets, have been his teachers to a
different division of the human race; while others, in which number we are,
through his discriminating bounty, are more highly illuminated by Jesus, the
Great Light of the moral world. The design of this varied instruction is to
encourage us to virtue as our highest health and happiness, to excite within us
an expectation, notwithstanding we must perish here, yet that we shall live
forever hereafter in a state of just retribution; an expectation which
communicates superior vigor to the motives of virtue, and the dissuasives from
vice. However incompetent we may be to judge why; however firm our conviction
that the Judge of all the earth can be neither unjust nor cruel; yet we must
acknowledge the disciples of Christ are far better taught in religion and
virtue than the rest of their fellow creatures have been, or are now; have more
powerful motives and assistances to well doing; have a future state of reward
and punishment placed before them in a much clearer, more splendid and more
influential light.

Thus I have considered mankind "instructed to discretion, and taught" by their
God, in several views which are calculated to inspire us with the liveliest
sentiments of gratitude and love to Him for his goodness, and to engage us to
serve Him with constant fidelity. I proceed, as was proposed in the second
place --

II. To several practical reflections upon the influence which the liberal
distribution God has made in our nation of his invaluable gifts, should have
upon our minds, affections, and manners.

FIRST. When we consider the degree of knowledge of our national interests, and
disposition well to improve it, which God has kindly communicated to us --
should we not address him with unfeigned thanksgiving and praise?

Agriculture, commerce, military and naval science, accompanied with
rapidly-increasing numbers of hardy sons; a just and enlarged acquaintance with
civil obligations and rights, and therefore of the line which forever
distinguishes liberty from licentiousness; constitutions of government which
are the genuine offspring of such knowledge, administered by men of our own
election, and removeable at our choice, whenever they betray their trust;
advantages of education, rising gradually from the lowest to the highest form;
a religion pure and beneficent, which frowns upon vice, and encourages piety
and virtue with those alarming considerations which tend to render us good
citizens of particular societies here, and of the great society hereafter
formed out of "every nation, kingdom, and tongue;" -- These, these are now
operative causes, in the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, which will, unless we basely
counteract them, render us a virtuous and happy, a great and powerful nation.
Often should we meditate upon these rich and undeserved blessings of the Divine
Providence and Grace, and, whenever we do, we should say, with exulting and
grateful spirits, "Bless the Lord, O our souls, and let his praise be
continually upon our lips."

SECOND. We ought ever to remember with honor and affectionate gratitude those
who, though now removed from this world by the wise providence of God, yet have
passed through life "instructed to discretion, and taught by Him," and have
uniformly exerted their abilities for the safety and prosperity of their
country.

Be this, our hearts immediately rejoin, thy praise, O WASHINGTON! The grave
now shrouds thee from our sight! No more shall thou be instrumental on earth in
doing us good! But we will still draw thee up before us by the aid of
imagination; we will behold thee with increasing satisfaction and delight:
never will we behold thee, but we will praise thee?

General WASHINGTON was truly a great and good man. While history records the
truth, his character will ever stand super-eminently high; and in every country
where her pages are read he will be esteemed and admired. But the view of him,
which must most endear him to us, is that of the Father of this People, their
constantly active and powerful friend, both in the quietude of retirement, and
amidst the threatening evils of war. Though, at home, independent in his
circumstances, happy in his family, respected and loved by all around him, yet,
whenever called upon by his country, he has cheerfully resigned ease, and
enjoyments which were dear to him, and devoted himself to her interests. Call
after call he has never disobeyed. His fortitude has borne him through
hardships oftentimes very severe. He always exerted his good sense, his amiable
qualities, his military skill and bravery, to render his nation independent and
prosperous. He was a great farmer, he was a friend to commerce and the arts, a
friend to useful education and literature, a friend to christianity; to the
purity of heart and excellent manners which she enjoins -- The Man predestined
in the counsels of God, which take in all ages, from the beginning of time,
until time shall be no more, to be at the head of the new empire in the new
world: an empire which cannot fail to rise to great celebrity while its rulers
and people continue to follow his wise and good example. He died with the same
greatness he had lived. We are told, by an authority which we cannot dispute,
"His last scene corresponded with the whole tenor of his life. Not a groan,
not a complaint, escaped him, though in extreme distress. With perfect
resignation, and a full possession of his reason, he closed his well spent
life." Yet, no doubt, with fervent prayer, at this awful season, with more
fervency than he ever before experienced, he failed not to entreat the
forgiveness and mercy of his God -- and added still -- O Great Protector of
men, and Friend of human happiness, continue to preserve and bless my country!
Shall we ever forget affectionately to remember and praise this man? No -- each
one of us should reply for himself -- "If I forget thee, let my right hand
forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof
of my mouth."

THIRD. Could this great and good person audibly address our nation, assembled
in the act of mourning for his departure, would he not thus address us? -- My
countrymen and friends! I more delight in your freedom, stability and
happiness, than in any thing human! The fabled pulpits -- the mourning bells --
the slow-sounding artillery -- the sad countenance so universally spread
amongst you in consequence of my death, I esteem high testimonials of your
respect and affection for me. But the best and most sincere respect ye can pay
my memory is, the treasuring up my advices in your hearts, joined with
obedience to them in your lives. Let no arts persuade you to loosen your UNION.
Treat all other nations with justice and kindness; but impressively remember,
this is your nation, and sacrifice not her interests from predilection to any
other. Be economical, industrious, punctual. Take care that the fear of God,
and those works of righteousness, are amongst you, the fruits of which "are
peace, quietness and assurance forever." Can we hearken to more salutary
advice? Can we more properly testify our esteem and love for our departed
Chief, than by steady obedience to his excellent counsels?

FOURTH. If we improve with fidelity the knowledge and advantages we enjoy, we
may firmly hope we shall never want statesmen and military commanders
"instructed by their God to discretion, and taught" how to defend us in time of
danger, and lead us on to continued safety and prosperity. From the PRESIDENCY
through the various important departments of GOVERNMENT we have persons of
approved talents and integrity to rule over us, at the present time. Who will
question the skill and bravery of our Land and Sea Officers whenever they shall
be called into action? "Our Fathers have told us" upon how many occasions God
appeared for their deliverance when there was seen before them no human
resource of safety. His loving kindness and tender mercies have repeatedly been
displayed toward this people during our own experience. Why then should we
mistrust his continued protection and blessing? No doubt He will continue our
friend and bountiful benefactor, until we basely forsake our duty and our
happiness. -- I conclude.

My conclusion will be in honor of JESUS CHRIST. He was the Wisdom of God in
the most emphatical sense of the terms. For our sakes he left the highest
honors of heaven; "he became a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief;
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted," that he might enlighten, purify and
save us. We ought therefore to venerate, love and obey him with far more
reverence, affection and zeal than we do any other instructor and friend in our
form. The MEMORIAL of his death and benefits some of us are soon to enter upon.
I pray God there may soon be a larger number to "do this in remembrance of
him." It was Communion Day.
His religion affords us the highest consolation and joy upon such instances of
mortality as we are this day peculiarly called to mourn. With respect to
himself he says, "Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life
that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of
myself: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This
commandment have I received of my Father." With respect to his followers he
says, "I am the Resurrection and the Life;" and assures us, all the just shall
be raised incorruptible and immortal. When his disciples began to degenerate,
and grow less mindful of his instructions, he commanded his beloved John thus
to address the churches: "I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them."
"There was solemn Music adapted to these words after the Sermon.
May these assurances rejoice our hearts when we contemplate the wise, the
good, and the great, under the dominion of death: may they engage us all, in
our several characters and relations, to act a wise, good and christian part
here, that we may hereafter, in our several measures, partake with them in
their joys, through the mercy of God in Him who loved us, and died for us.

AMEN.

