A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE Presbyterian Church, IN THE CITY of BALTIMORE,
THE 22d of February, 1800. -- the DAY DEDICATED TO THE MEMORY OF Genesis George
Washington.

BY THE REV. PATRICK ALLISON, D. D.

BALTIMORE, Printed by W. PECHIN -- for the Editor of the AMERICAN.

A Discourse, etc.
2 Chronicles. 35, 24. AND ALL JUDAH AND JERUSALEM MOURNED FOR JOSIAH.


THE mourning of affectionate survivors for deceased friends, prevails among
all kindreds and languages on earth without exception; it is co-extended with
death's unlimited sway, and will descend down through the unborn ages of all
future time, 'till the universal conqueror shall be subdued. The custom is not
blameable, but eminently laudable, as evincing a tender susceptible disposition
which both Reason and Revelation approve.

THE mourning of States and Nations over conspicuous merit departed, is
likewise common and equally commendable. When transcendently useful characters
are removed, the loss must be severely felt, and will be sincerely deplored.
Let the lamentations of both kinds proceed even to an extreme -- palliating
circumstances may induce us to commiserate the extravagance as a pardonable
weakness, rather than blame it as a criminal excess. Corresponding appearances
of the impressions made will be displayed, lively evidences of them will be
exhibited, on every suitable occasion. Should these indications of inward
distress also pass moderate bounds, sympathetic spectators will again find an
adequate apology. Persons dear to us as our own souls are taken forever away.
"The survivors die" -- no testimony of regard seems too great to bestow on
their precious memories. With equal readiness the heart and hand expand to
attest our veneration for the father of his country, for the friend of mankind
called from the land of the living. Superior seize in religious
excellence may give some an extraordinary self-command, which enables them to
control the usual tenderness of humanity, so as to restrain expressions of
grief within sober limits. Such acquisitions will show their reality in an
habitual course of exemplary virtue; where this is wanting, and a steady
attention is paid to the dictates of cool deliberate saving, under sore
bereavements* we perceive not the energy of religious principle, but genuine
proofs of an unfeeling and insensible make. We do well then to imitate the
conduct of the Hebrews mentioned in the text, when a similar occurrence brings
it to our remembrance, and recommends it our adoption.

THE favorite of God and Man for whom they sorrowed, gave early presages of
future eminence, and 'till near the fortieth year of his life in which he fell,
undeviatingly realized their fond expectations. It is no wonder if they wailed
their irreparable loss in unusual strains of woe. To mourn for him was made an
ordinance in Israel to be annually observed, a book of lamentations was
composed for the purpose. When any signal calamity befell them afterward, they
compared their distress to the mourning for Josiah, as the most expressive
representation of its dreadful extremity. -- May no vengeful hand be permitted
to renew the degree and extent of sorrow excited in our Nation by the
melancholy event which we now commemorate.

IT has been observed that the practice of mankind in this respect rests on the
best and soundest-principles. Nature has implanted in our hearts tender
passions, which must therefore have objects adapted to work upon them, and call
forth their operations. Without the last the first would prove unnecessary and
improper. Nor does religion condemn their exercise, or attempt to destroy their
existence, but cherishes and improves them both by precept and example. Peruse
David's lamentation over Saul and Jonathan, whereby you will learn the
sensibilities of a Hero and a Saint under the sore pressure of deep-felt
sorrow. "Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew upon you, neither let
there be rain upon you, nor fields of offerings. -- The beauty of Israel is
slain on the high places; how are the mighty fallen and the weapons of war
perished." Solomon tells us there is a time to weep and a time to mourn; but a
greater than Solomon is here; Jesus wept; he wept at the death of a friend; he
wept over the approaching ruin of Jerusalem; his conduct justifies the
indulgence of private and public affections, permitting both to be raised by
suitable occurrences* While on earth he was a man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief. He died for sinners, and now exalted to glory inconceivable, he is
touched with the feeling of human infirmity. May we be effectually engaged to
rely on Him as our only Savior from the tyranny of sin, and the restorer of
our spiritual freedom.

THE meditations we are engaged in further admonish us to enlarge our views,
that we may realize the vanity of the surrounding scene, with relation to its
present uncertainty and final consummation. Lo mighty Empires rise and fall!
the power of one passes to the hands of another; constant revolutions agitate
our trembling astonished globe; multitudes are busily employed in pulling down
and in building up; myriads of human beings anxiously contrive and ardently
execute, according to the endless variety of parts assigned them, and the
infinite diversity of situations in which they are placed. Soon will the
numberless actors finish the drama to make room for others, 'till the stage be
removed. A few years of rapid flight will lay the whole present generation low;
their successors must share the same fate, and ere long the end will come.
Desolation hastens to overwhelm the most finished productions of nature, and
the most durable monuments of art. Our own much loved country, not long since
the theater of eager and uncertain strife, where freedom's intrepid defenders
contended valiantly in her cause, and established her Independence, must
partake in the universal ruin and sink into nothing. But what becomes of those
virtuous patriots, who resented her wrongs, who vindicated her rights, and
repelled ignominious slavery from her affrighted shores? Must they perish in
like manner, must they be obliterated from the scale of existence, and
extinguished in the common mass of destruction? No -- they awake from the
repose of the grave, they arise out of their own ruins to live again.

WHILE we look forward with solicitude to the dissolution of the elements, and
a triumphant resurrection, our proper business is to act our parts well, to
perform faithfully the duties required in every progressive stage of our
continuance, attending to the distinct calls and claims of each. The obligation
of this hour directs us to examine more fully than we have yet done, the
talents, the qualities and functions of our first of citizens, whose death has
occasioned the present meeting, whose death United America deplores, whose
death, I am almost tempted to add, a widowed world bewails.

WHEN we reflect on the number, ability and zeal of his admirers, on the time
elapsed since his removal, on the elegance, eloquence and sublimity of eulogies
consecrated to his memory, it may be presumed that the (...) is exhausted --
but the theme is inexhaustable! And though a repetition of some things becomes
unavoidable, it must gratify us to join the universal voice by considering the
subject in our own peculiar way, according to our previous conceptions of its
nature and excellence.

THOUGH various appointments civil and military were conferred on him, and
honorably executed by him, notwithstanding his juvenile years, previous to the
defeat of Genesis Braddock, in the year 1755; yet my observations shall commence
with that memorable event, which spread more trepidation and dismay through
America, than the most brilliant victory achieved by our enemies during the
whole revolutionary war. On that inglorious and disgraceful day GEORGE
WASHINGTON acted as a volunteer aid to the British commander, and it is said he
was the only officer on horseback who withdrew from the bloody field without a
wound. More exposed than most, braving danger with that fearless intrepidity
which never forsook him, no hostile weapon prospered, which aimed to injure or
take away his life. This and similar uncommon deliverances from apparently
inevitable PERILS, made a Clergyman of our Church express himself thus in a
printed note on a discourse. The Rev. Samuel Davies, then a citizen of
Virginia, afterward President of New Jersey College.
"As a remarkable instance of a martial spirit, I may point out to the public
that heroic youth Colonel WASHINGTON, whom I cannot but hope providence has
hitherto preserved in so signal a manner for some important service to his
country." How prophetic a hope! how completely realized in the sequel! how
striking the interposition of that Being, who can cover the warrior's head in
the day of battle! But I cite the passage to show you further the expectations
he must have raised, and the estimation in which he must have been held at an
early period, to justify the remark from a very respectable author. These will
inform you sufficiently after what manner he had conducted himself, and how
perfectly the commencement of his effulgent day agreed with its progress and
conclusion.

IT is not necessary to specify the share he afterward bore in the then war,
on retiring from which he formed a most auspicious conjugal union, and pursued
the dignified occupation of a farmer, improving a large estate with commendable
industry and success; fulfilling his engagements with punctilious honor;
inspiring with uncommon respect every description of citizens, avoiding
ostentation and parade, but supporting an elegant hospitality, and displaying a
handsome style of living, suited to the opulence of his circumstances. In this
interval likewise, he accepted the trust of Delegate to the Assembly of
Virginia, and of Magistrate on the Judiciary Bench of his county. How well he
improved the opportunities thereby afforded him to understand civil rights, and
learn to respect them, fully shone through his subsequent behavior on many
tempting and trying occurrencies.

A CRISIS approached which brought him to act in a more conspicuous sphere. It
became necessary for the American people to assert their privileges by an union
of Councils, to denounce encroachments made on them, and expose certain ruinous
principles adopted, which threatened their total subversion. To accomplish
these (...) designs, a Congress was appointed to be held, con^^^ting of
deputies from the thirteen provinces into which they were at that time divided.
And it so happened, without the existence of any prejudice or partiality;
without the discrimination being designed, that native sons of America were
universally selected on the great conjuncture. A review of the appointments
revealed a remarkable fact, which I mention as truly honorable to the American
character. Our future protector attended that august assembly, inferior to none
ever elected to transact our political concerns.

IT soon appeared that a sharper weapon than the pen must be employed -- the
sword was drawn, and entrusted to the hands of GEORGE WASHINGTON, as commander
in chief, by an unanimous vote of Congress, cordially seconded by the warm
approbation of their constituents. Willingly would he have declined the
commission, and preferred any other man who might be supposed qualified to fill
the elevated and enviable office. No such man could be found -- the salvation
of his country called on him to accept the high trust, and he obeyed the call.
For a while his want of military experience was reckoned a disadvantage; other
military characters were therefore looked to for supplying the defect. The
fallacy and folly of these impressions soon yielded under convincing evidences
of the contrary, and he gradually rose to the summit of unbounded confidence.
Civil authorities seemed to depreciate; suspicion, distrust and jealousy
threatened extensive mischief -- but all believed in him as their bond of union
and center of security. While he lived and led our armies, we thought ourselves
safe, if our safety under Providence, was to be accomplished. Severe reverses
transiently tarnished his glory; provoking disappointments deeply wounded the
feelings of his manly breast -- still he bore up with unbending firmness.
Accumulated disasters and unparalleled trials could not shake his confidence.
Terror and consternation seized the thousands of Israel -- yet he remained
unmoved and immovable; never despairing, never depressed, always prepared to
improve every opportunity and make the best of every situation. No dread of
reproach, no impatience for the glare of momentary conquest could tempt him to
hazard the fate of his country, or relinquish those prudent maxims which his
enlightened judgment embraced and confided in for ultimate success. How
vigilant and discerning was he in choosing suitable instruments to retrieve or
conduct affairs through the vast, the extended variety of the hostile scene?
Whose merits did he ever refuse to appreciate; whose glory did he attempt to
diminish; at whose praise did he sicken, though his own voluntary sacrifices and
masterly arrangements laid the foundations of their fame? His mighty soul
disdained emotions from the most hateful, perhaps the most general passion that
disgraces human beings. View him at the head of an undisciplined mutable army,
incompetently officered, suffering intolerable hardships from various sources.
-- Observe him soothing refractory civil functionaries, uniting divided
councils, reconciling discordant interests, conducting correspondencies, whose
diversity, magnitude and perplexity were sufficient to engross the time and
reflections of an individual without other employment. -- Consider him pressed
by all this huge weight of complicated business -- then ask, what civility,
written or verbal, did not he acknowledge? What attention did not he return,
through the whole, even down to the inferior compliment of a common salute? Such
traits afford intelligent observers the clearest insight into the human
character, and enable them to make a just estimate of its real worth. Great
minds alone can attend to what is great and small in their proper place and
connection -- which will not be permitted to make mutual encroachments, nor will
the performance of the one absorb a regard for the other.

WHEN our finally victorious and apparently neglected army were almost ready to
revolt -- when treated in their opinion with injustice and cruelty, some
meditated redress by the terror of their arms -- how tempting a prospect opened
for an ambitious leader to gratify the feverish wishes of his heart, and seize
that prize for which seas of blood have been often shed? Without a pang of
suspense or an instant of hesitation, this leader arrests the rising spirit
with irresistible decision, quells the dangerous tumult, and restores a perfect
calm. To the uninterrupted respect he paid the civil rights of mankind; to the
veneration he invariably showed for the laws, together with-his farewell
address and subsequent personal deportment, we may without offense ascribe in
part a peculiar characteristic in that highly and justly celebrated band. No
army ever restored to their country so large a proportion of orderly,
industrious citizens, who cheerfully resumed the occupations of civil life, and
successfully cultivated the useful arts of peace.

IT is not an article in the creed of a Republican or of a Christian, that the
safety of a country depends on the life and actions of any one man. This was
acknowledged here during the continuance of our Revolutionary War; at the same
time it was ardently prayed -- it became the prayer of America, that we might
not be put to the trial of carrying on that war under the direction of any
other commander. The supplication met a gracious hearing. -- Under his auspices
the important contest concluded in splendour and prosperity; Independence rested
on a solid basis; our nation took rank among Thrones and Dominions under the
sun, and he retired to his farm covered with glory, followed by the sincere
applauses of grateful and admiring millions.

HIS native State, wishing to express the lively sense they entertained of his
transcendent worth and magnificent atchievments, came forward with an offer in
the most delicate manner, which he might have accepted without impeaching his
reputation in the smallest degree. Subordinate commanders accepted similar
compliments for inferior performances, nor did or could the least imputation
attach to their acceptance, in any respect. Had he complied with the proposal,
not the only one made, it would have been followed by others of the same kind;
it would have grown into fashion; we should have beheld rival States contending
for pre-eminence in grateful retributions. But his resolution was, when he
assumed the supreme military command, in his own emphatic words, "to shut his
hand against every pecuniary recompense" -- from which nothing could move him
through the whole of his future public course. -- He had no descendants to
provide for, you may surmise, and therefore insinuate that he had no inducement
to augment his estate -- Say then ye sagacious judges of human nature, whether
thirst and quest of gain exclusively apply to those who have posterity to
aggrandise and enrich, while they reach not hearts unmoved by parental
feelings? The experience and observation of the present day -- the recorded
experience and observation of the days that are past throw contempt upon your
position, and furnish its complete refutation. He that loves silver shall not
be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase, but
constantly covet additional supplies: whereas he whose native grandeur of mind
raises him above the ignoble and sordid attachment, remains contented with his
possessions, and displays the independence of a disinterested spirit, which
holds it more blessed to give than to receive. Conformably to these
observations we represent our now departed benefactor declining emoluments
annexed to his public functions, refusing rewards for supereminent exploits,
patronising designs of public utility, considering the poor with judicious
attention, and completing the benevolent catalogue by the distributions of his
last testament.

THE Government first adopted for the Union proved essentially defective,
inadequate to the purpose of its institution -- a change became indispensably
necessary. A Convention was called to undertake the arduous work, from whose
enlightened labors proceeded our invaluable Federal Constitution. As his
engaging in that service might not prove tedious or severe, and as all the
wisdom of his counsel and all the weight of his authority were necessary to
assist and sanction the proceedings -- his aid was expected -- the late
Commander of our Armies accordingly consented to accept a new civil
appointment* and presided in the Assembly. Having discharged this trust with
faithfulness and ability, we might suppose him excused from every future
employment of a public nature.

A harder task awaited him than any yet attempted. Who shall preside in
introducing the adopted frame; in arranging its departments; in administering
its executive branches; in establishing precedents to regulate its future
operations? Many pens were brandished against it; many shafts were aimed at it,
notwithstanding the venerable sanction it could boast; -- violent opposition
was dreaded; the dissolution of the Union was apprehended. What wisdom of
counsel and weight of authority equal this exigence? Will WASHINGTON the Great
commit himself in a station, where it is impossible but offenses must come?
Will he hazard on so stormy and perilous an ocean a richer treasure than ever
was embarked? How imminent the danger of being wrecked; how incalculable the
loss! Had not he loved his country more than he valued his renown, he would
have reposed under the shade of those laurels which spread over him their
unfading verdure. But personal considerations yielded before public
obligations; and he received from the unanimous decision of his fellow-citizens
the highest office they had power to bestow. High office indeed, of immense
responsibility and uncertain issue! Wonderful Man -- combining such various and
rare talents, and devoting them invariably to the public good!

WHAT competition, what contention, what exertion have been exhibited in Europe
to gain Poland's once elective crown, inferior in consequence to the presidency
of the United States? There the requisite unanimity resulted from fear and
terror, from intrigue and art, from bribery and corruption -- here the union of
choice was unsought and unbought, free and unconstrained -- out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth spoke. The same harmony of suffrage was
renewed, and would have been repeated, had not the secure distinction been
explicitly declined.

IN conducting a civil administration, among a free people especially where the
scene is new and untried, multiplied difficulties will unavoidably occur. Every
citizen has a right to think for himself -- to judge of govermental measures --
to declare his sentiments. -- A great diversity of opinions must unavoidably
prevail -- fault will often be found with what is done, and with what is left
undone, however the case may be. Many appointments are to be made. Applicants
for official honors and emoluments are numerous, earnest and urgent.
Insinuation and address, importunity and misrepresentation will exert their
influence, and mislead in spite of the most upright intentions. It is not
within the compass of limited fagacity to make always the best selection, it is
not an attribute of man to be infallible -- it is not in the nature of things
possible to prevent exceptions and give universal satisfaction. Granting these
several considerations their full force, what judgment would be passed on
president Washington's administration, when he declined the helm. Concerning
David it is said, save in one instance -- which we must und^^^tand in
connection with its concomitants and consequences -- "he did that which was
right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he
commanded him all the days of his life." Perhaps a similar qualified encomium
on our first supreme magistrate would be concurred in even by those who
withheld an approbation of all his measures, with this luminous attestation in
favor of consummate internal rectitude; that at no period of his existence, had
they any reason, or pretended any reason, to question his ardent unabating zeal
to promote the best interest of America.

AFTER he has moved in the highest sphere so long, is it not presumable that
the fruition of it has grown into a fixed habit with him, rendering the
continuance a desirable, an indispensable inherritance? The acquisition of
chief command is the foremost wish of noble minds -- the desire of it is called
their last infirmity. Weak and unfortunate rulers may have been driven into
obscurity by weakness or misfortune -- but "to descend voluntarily from the
supreme to a subordinate station, and to relinquish the possession of power in
order to attain the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be an effort too great for
the human mind." Such is the beautiful reflection of Dr. Robertson, when
mentioning the Abdication of Diocletian and Charles the 5th. However great the
effort is, it has been displayed before our eyes under circumstances rendering
it peculiarly striking and extraordinary. The abdicating Emperors had already
"impaired their constitutions, and brought on the infirmities of old age." The
retiring President retained the full health and strength, the vigor and
activity of a strong body and sound mind, equal to the functions of his
elevation, and fitted to relish the fascinating charms of his grandeur. But
these were not the motives for his consenting to appear at the head of a mighty
nation* When his country could spare his agency, no inducement remained with
him to continue in her service, and he resolved once more, "to pass the
remainder of his days in honorable repose, and place his glory beyond the reach
of fortune."

But will he again put all to risque, if that country's safety requires it?
Will he relinquish beloved retirement in declining years, to encounter the
vicissitudes of doubtful war? When he might have commanded, will he stoop to a
grade which requires to obey? Matchless example of real magnanimity and
inflexible patriotism. Through the whole of his diversified career the applauses
of his fellow citizens were beyond parallel. Wherever he went, acclamations
accompanied him; glowing addresses poured on him from every quarter. Nothing is
more likely to intoxicate the firmest mind, making it inattentive to the
frailty and mutability of humanity. Assailed by these, and knowing he was the
theme of exuberant praise in many different lands, his moderation and
equanimity preserved their influence undiminished, unimpaired -- no assuming
airs of consequence, no displays of self-importance, no indications of
insolence marked a single word of his mouth, or action of his life. With what
humility did he piously acknowledge the interposition of Providence at proper
seasons, and recommend a reliance on Almighty God for national blessings -- How
anxious was he to recognize cooperation and assistance in transactions where
he might have claimed exclusive merit? After passing through a scene of so much
celebrity, what old acquaintance did he forget; of what former friend was he
ashamed; whose society did he decline, among circles that knew him and were
known by him previous to the era of his seductive elevation? This is
Republican, in his life you have -- in his life you had, a living lecture on
Republicanism -- with heartfelt exultation I add that, he died in the
Republican says.

ATTEND the hero and statesman to the shade you find him entirely consistent,
his private deportment augments the luster of his public reputation. His
character, in public and in private, is stained by no vice, disfigured by no
vain affectation, no disgusting peculiarity or pitiable weakness, which have
repeatedly debased the most exalted names. At the feat of his residence you
trace the order and regularity of a camp without its rigor, discovering the
sound clear understanding which will show itself in every walk. His conduct may
be compared to his style in composition, for they bear a strong resemblance of
each other in dignity, uniformity, and propriety. Were I obliged to designate
the most prominent feature in his rich portrait, perhaps my opinion would
select the talent displayed by his writings. Destitute as he was of a learned
education, and untrained in studies favorable to the exercise of the pen, his
literary productions, are of themselves sufficient to secure for their author
an everlasting memorial.

THUS far have we proceeded in our delineation without perceiving any blemish,
to wound our feelings, or make us change the general strain of well-earned
praise. But let no character be proclaimed beyond the reach of danger, till
death has done his work. Many celebrated men have toward the last fallen from
their eminence, and obscured the splendid glory of an illustrious life. Many
have survived their parts, and sunk down under multiplied imbecilities, the
melancholy objects of sympathy and compassion. How deplorable a sight, the
breathing ruins of a great man, how mortifying to human pride his second
infancy! Peradventure some afflictive revolutions await America's favorite Son,
whom we have till now beheld with unspeakable complacency and approbation. No,
the gracious God who gave him being, and distinguished his day with an
uninterrupted flow of prosperity, was pleased to continue his beneficence till
the short illness which laid him low. Do you wish to contemplate the mild
radiance of his setting sun? Alas, that sun is set forever. I am able to
gratify your desire by reading a letter from the Rev. Dr. MUIR, of Alexandria,
written the 19th December, which contains an interesting detail of particulars
respecting the death we unfeignedly deplore.

"I RECEIVED yours last evening, upon my return from attending the remains of
our illustrious neighbor to the tomb -- Friday the 13th, he had been riding
among his farms, the day was damp and cold, he felt a little unwell at bed
time, before morning he was extremely ill. He was unwilling to send for his
physician, Dr. CRAIK, during the night, but supposing bleeding might relieve
him, one of his overseers who had been accustomed to bleed, was called in to do
this office, and Dr. CRAIK was sent for in the morning. He found him sitting
up, but was greatly alarmed at his situation. He bled him a second time, and
called in Dr. Dick, with whom to consult; Dr. Brown, from Port Tobacco had also
been sent for. Dr. Dick bled him a third time. The disorder was the croup. When
Dr. Dick arrived breathing was difficult, and he swallowed with pain, yet he
endeavored to get down whatever medicines were prescribed. He desired Mrs.
Washington who was in the room, to take a certain key and bring him two papers.
He looked over them with care. Take that one, said he, and put it in the fire,
this one is my last will. He spoke little, finding it almost impossible to
articulate. Toward the conclusion of the day he said to the physicians:
"Gentlemen, you have done your duty, let me now die in peace." Then he
undressed and went to bed. He enquired at 9 and 10 the hour. "I die hard said
he to his physicians, but I hope I have nothing to fear." A few minutes before
he expired, he said, my breath grows very short, and at the moment of death
shut his own eyes and mouth, and went off without a groan. These circumstances
show great strength of mind, which even death could not shake. The corpse
retained marks of firmness impressed in the countenance which could not be
observed without astonishment and respect: I supposed you would be gratified by
these circumstances, which I know from the Physicians themselves, and therefore
cannot question their Accuracy."

SUCH was the latter end of GEORGE WASHINGTON, raised up by providence to make
a most distinguished figure on this mortal Theater, determined to render his
country essential advantages, in the most eventful and awful periods of her
history -- advantages far more and greater than any other individual ever
rendered any Nation under Heaven. His country -- defended by his arms, guided
by his counsels, adorned by his accomplishments and immortalised by his fame --
his greatful country, penetrated with a just sense of his transcendent worth,
has dedicated this day to commemorate his virtues, and to detail his services
-- they exhibit to our view not a perfect man, but the greatest and best of men
among the living or the dead.

SHOULD the remembrance of our grand national transactions reach an approaching
world, and reflections on them share in its exalted employments; those virtues
and those services, now consigned to the perishable records of time, will
survive the last flame, and live in the annals of eternity.

Prayer.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, creator and upholder of the universe; preserver
and governor of the world: thy presence fills all places, thy Providence
embraces all nations and ages. Thou rulest in the kingdoms of men, and give
them to whomsoever thou please. In exercising sovereign sway, thou preparest
fit instruments to accomplish thy various designs of pulling down and building
up. Thou impartest of thy spirit to the children of men, in such portions as
are required by the destinies they are ordained to fulfill; counsel is thine and
sound wisdom; thou have understanding, thou art strength. We desire unfeignedly
to bless thee for the illustrious character, whose memory has been this day
honored among us. To thy goodness we owe the rare talents with which he was
endowed, to thy guidance the eminent services he performed, to thy mercy the
happiness and glory of his bright and useful life. In him we acklowledge the
greatest and best of men among the dead or the living, who though dead yet lives
by what he has said, and speaks by what he has done. Render his name precious
to the people of this land till the end of time. Let the remembrance of his
public and private virtues excite others to go and do likewise, according to
their different abilities and opportunities. It has pleased thee to take him
from us by a short and painful disease, advanced in days and full of honor.

WE are silent and adore, humbly hoping that he was not removed in displeasure
against us, and that thou will not with him withdraw thy loving kindness from
our peaceful and prosperous nation. With thee is the residue of the spirit, we
implore a continuance of thy benevolent intentions, and a constant supply of
suitable agents to execute these. We ask the same favors for other states and
countries. Wherever or whenever any people virtuously contend for their just
rights, may a leader be found to espouse their cause, like unto him whom thou
did graciously raise up for us in the hours of our need. Hasten the glorious
period when violence shall be no more heard in any border, wasting or
desolation in any land; when knowledge and virtue and liberty shall universally
prevail, when the kingdom of this world shall become the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, the only mediator through whom our supplications are humbly offered up to
Thee. Our Father who art in Heaven, etc. etc.


