A NARRATIVE OF Mrs. ELIZABETH ANDREWS, CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF HER
CONVERSION, SICKNESS and DEATH, WRITTEN BY HER SURVIVING CONSORT BENAJAH
ANDREWS, AND PUBLISHED AT THE PARTICULAR REQUEST OF A NUMBER OF HER CONNECTIONS
AND FRIENDS.

STOCKBRIDGE: Printed by HEMAN WILLARD, at the Office of HORATIO JONES and Co.
1800.

History of ELIZABETH ANDREWS.
SHE was born, June 28th, 1767, in the town of West-Stockbridge,
(Massachusetts,) of reputable parents. Her father, Mr. LAMBERT BURGHARDT, was
of Dutch extract, and an early settler in the town. ELIZABETH was his fourth
child, and the eldest of five daughters, being the first person born in the
place. The country being new, she had few or no advantages of education. This
disadvantage was, however, in a great measure remedied by her diligent
application, after she came to years of understanding. When about nine years of
age, she was deprived of her mother, after which she paid constant attention
to her younger sisters. -- Her father, however, marrying again, after awhile,
she was in a great measure relieved from this burden. At a suitable age, she
went as an apprentice to the Tayloring business, in which she made a very
decent proficiency. Her occupation calling her abroad, she thereby formed a
more general acquaintance with the world, which, joined with a frank and
generous disposition, rendered her an agreeable member of society. She was
remarked likewise for industry, prudence and economy. Naturally agreeable in
her person, she was equally modest in her deportment and reserved in her
behavior.

IT will not be improper here, to say something of her moral character. -- Her
natural temper was hasty and violent, but she had so far cultivated it as to
appear almost uniformly of a mild and easy disposition. She had a heart to feel
for the distresses of others, though ready to resent any injury offered her.
She was a strict observer of the sabbath and its sacred institutions; and on
these outward moral duties, she rested her hopes of future happiness, though at
times she appeared not fully satisfied with her situation. She, at times
reflected on eternal things, and in conversation, with a sister of mine, was
heard to say that she wished she was a Christian, as she believed they enjoyed
themselves better than any other people.

IN the year 1791, she became my companion. She remained this year, in an easy,
unconcerned state, during which, we had a child bestowed on us, which she
considered as a very great blessing.

SOME time in Autumn, 1792, Mr. OLIVER AIR, then a candidate in the ministry,
was employed to preach among us on probation. He tarried through the winter, in
the course of which he made us several visits. Discoursing frequently with my
wife, he endeavored to convince her of the importance of true religion, and of
being prepared for death. He further observed, that it would be indeed
desirable, if she and her sisters should so live in this world, as hereafter to
meet, and be happy together in Heaven. This observation originated from some
conversation respecting a sister of hers, who had lately become hopefully
converted to the truth.
She was deeply affected with his discourse, and began to view her situation as
truly dangerous. The repeated and weighty arguments which he brought to enforce
the duty of repentance, had thoroughly smitten her heart. Her conviction at
length, however, turned to a spirit of opposition and envy. She was greatly
opposed to the way of salvation as it is pointed out in the Gospel. Her heart
rose against the doctrine of total depravity. She could not endure the idea
that the creature can do nothing meritorious. In the height of her opposition,
she was even led to regard revelation, itself, as a mere human invention.

SHE thus continued her opposition till the latter end of May 1793, when Mr.
AIR was ordained to the pastoral charge of the Church and congregation in this
place. He soon after came to board with us, by which means he had opportunity
of frequently conversing with her on the important doctrines of salvation. He
labored assiduously to convince her of the propriety of the Gospel-plan of
redemption by a mediator, and of the divine sovereignty. -- He told her that
unless she was brought to view things in a very different light, she would most
certainly be damned. She passionately replied, she did not care if she was. He
then told her, that he feared those very words would seal her destruction. She
appeared greatly agitated -- burst into tears, rose up, and left the room.
Struck with her rash and daring reply, he avoided saying any thing further to
her on the subject. But, she finding he had given her over, began to sear that
God would do likewise -- She would frequently open a door for conversation, by
asking him some questions -- but he cautiously avoided giving her any direct
answer. This gave her still greater uneasiness.

OUR Rev. Pastor being occasionally visited by the neighboring ministers, they
would frequently direct their discourse to her, proposing some important
question. She would immediately attack them on the doctrine of divine
sovereignty, and hold up the inconsistency of their preaching "that the
creature can do nothing of himself, and that he would nevertheless be damned,
if he should neglect his salvation." The Rev. Mr. C -- was one with whom she
contended, with the greatest engagedness. He pointed out the danger of her
present situation, and showed her that while she continued to oppose God's law
and government, she was at enmity with him, and consequently He was an enemy to
her. He told her that God had threatened to pour out his wrath upon his enemies
and to execute his vengeance on them that know Him not. She, however,
disregarded all these pious admonitions, and her heart continued to swell with
the most violent and increasing opposition. She remained in this frame of mind
until toward the close of the year, when her health began to decline, and a
settled melancholy gradually succeeded. That state of mind was followed by its
natural consequences: she would frequently observe, that she had not long to
continue in this world; that she was strongly persuaded death would soon enter
her family, and that in all probability she was to be the victim. Having
realized the loss of a kind parent in her tender years, she expressed great
concern and anxiety for her little daughter, who, she imagined was about to be
bereaved of her mother. Although she kept about her daily business, yet she
declined fast; her mind was still gloomy, her nights were restless, and her
sleep was disturbed with dismal and terrific apprehensions. I endeavored to
expel the cloud that hung over her mind, by telling her that her apprehensions
were all to be attributed to her indisposition of body, and a too great
depression of spirits, but I argued in vain; she persisted in the belief that
her end was approaching, and her fears were fully confirmed by an instance of
mortality which happened in our neighborhood. About the first of January, 1794,
Mrs. R -- a distant relation of hers, died. She attended the funeral of the
deceased, was greatly affected, considered it as a special warning, and
appeared to realize more sensibly than ever the terrors of the last enemy. Her
repose was now disturbed with still more awful apprehensions. She would
frequently relate to me her dreams, and never failed to draw from them, some
ominous and unfavorable conclusion. The peculiar circumstances that attended
her, had probably no small influence on her mind, as she frequently observed,
that she should not survive her approaching sickness. On the 26th of the same
month (January) however, she was brought to bed, and survived. During the few
first days she was comfortable; but was soon after seized with violent and
distressing pains, which kept her very weak and low for about a fortnight;
after which, she began again to recover, and in a short time became able to
walk about the house. Her melancholy, notwithstanding, still continued. She
could not persuade herself but that some great and awful event awaited her. Not
long after, she perceived a weakness to affect the two fore-fingers of her
right hand, which, however trifling at first, soon rendered her hand wholly
useless. This alarmed her and increased her fears. One day at the dusk of
evening as she lay on the bed immersed in gloomy apprehensions, she appeared to
have lively views of God's wrath. She thought he was then preparing his thunder
to destroy her -- she rose hastily, came rushing forward to the fire where we
were sitting, and sat down with us, as if to avoid the impending stroke. But
He, from whose presence none can fly; still pursued her, and struck her into a
fit. She shrieked out and fainted. We called a physician, who at first view,
intimated that he thought her dying -- he, however, gave a medicine which had
the desired effect. -- She in a short time revived and expressed herself thus;
"Oh! must I die, and go to hell? how can I bear the torments of hell? how can I
endure eternal burnings." And with such like expressions she continued through
the night, without one moments sleep, though as she afterward told us, she felt
disposed for it, but feared, if she slept, she should wake in hell. This shock
removed the disorder as far up as her shoulder, and left her arm entirely
useless. She remained in a bewildered state, the whole of the succeeding day,
and complained that her mind was much confused. Night came on, and she, being
weary and nearly exhausted, (having a high burning fever,) fell asleep and well
until morning and felt herself greatly refreshed.

THIS day (being the Sabbath, Feb. 16th) was a day of rest to her troubled
soul. A day in which God was pleased, wonderfully to display his power and
mercy in recovering to himself one of his sinful, despairing creatures. When
she awoke her mind appeared calm and composed, but her fears soon returned with
renewed weight. Her convictions were very powerful; she appeared to have lively
views of God's righteous indignation, directed against her. She presented a
truly affecting spectacle, exclaiming that "God had turned his face from her,
and would not hear her prayers." -- On being asked if our minister should
intercede for her, publicly, at the throne of grace; she replied, "it will be
all in vain, it will do no good;" but did not object. When the divine service
of the day was ended, a considerable number of people crowded in to see her, as
her singular case had excited universal attention. It was told her, that an
extraordinary petition had been put up for her, she said, "it would avail
nothing, for God would not have mercy on so vile a wretch as she was, and
although her heart was violently opposed to his sovereignty, yet she was ready to
acknowledge his justice in condemning her." She was in great agony through most
of the day, writhing her body, and discovering the most sensible emotions of
anguish. We could say nothing that would alleviate or comfort her. The
scripture promises, which we repeated to her, served only to heighten the sense
of her guilt and increase her terror. On this occasion we called a new
physician to counsel and advise with our former one. But neither of them could
administer any thing to her relief. Her disorder lay beyond their reach. Our
new physician, being a serious and candid man, endeavored to comfort her. He
held up to her the justice and mercy of God, and the infinite merits of the
divine Mediator. He prudently warned her against giving way to the suggestions
of a disordered imagination, the effects of which, he observed, might prove
fatal, by turowing her into a delirium. On being told there was yet a prospect
of her recovery, the rephed, she did not wish to be restored to health with the
same wicked disposition which she then possessed, lest she should ruin her
family, enhance her guilt, and aggravate her condemnation.

ONE of her sisters, (a professor of religion, before mentioned) being present,
she cried out "dear Sister do pray for me for God will not hear my prayers."
She remained in this condition till toward night. I had occasion for being
absent a short time, and when I returned I sound a very sensible alteration in
her. She was cheerful; a tranquil joy appeared in her countenance. On my coming
to the bedside, she addressed me thus -- "Are you willing to part with me? I
am now willing to part with you and my dear children and all the enjoyments of
this world, for Christ's sake, who, I hope, has redeemed my soul." The peace
and joy which she felt, she was unable to express. At the same time rather
doubting the reality of what she experienced, as being from God; "Oh," said
she, "how is it possible that such a vile wretch as I should become a subject
of God's grace and favor!" A great change, she found, had been wrought in her
mind, though she knew not how it was effected; it appeared as something
wonderful, of which she could give no account. She said, she had been seeking
her own destruction, as she had been actuated wholly by selfish motives; but
that God had joyfully disappointed her. She expressed herself most feelingly of
the divine mercy and condescension of God, in interposing with his Almighty
power to rescue her sinking mind from despair, and her soul from eternal ruin.
And indeed, it was a most astonishing display of divine mercy. She expressed
her wonder that God had not withdrawn his mercy and utterly cast her off. Her
heart and voice were constantly in the most lively exercises of gratitude,
which she continued through the day and evening, until she was nearly exhausted.
Her countenance which had been so lately distorted with pain and anguish, had
become serene and placid. Her tempestuous mind was now calm and cheerful, and
it was with difficulty that we prevailed on her to take a little repose, which
she so much needed. During the remainder of the night, she rested comfortably,
and spent the next day in the most lively and joyful exercises.

SHE now began to reflect with sorrow and deep contrition on her past life, and
acknowledged in presence of Mr. AIR and others, her folly in so rashly and
wickedly opposing the doctrine of God's sovereignty and the depravity of his
creatures. She wondered that God had not taken her at her word and sent her
immediately to destruction. She desired that her confession might be drawn up
and sent to the Rev. Mr. C -- to express her grief and contrition for her
former rash discourse to him; to ask his forgiveness and prayers.

(TUESDAY morning, Feb. 18th) I awoke and found her awake also. I asked her if
she had rested comfortably? She answered, "I have not -- for the Devil has been
lurking about me all night to disturb my peace -- but I despise him for his
meanness. I wonder that any one will have any thing to do with so mean a
fellow." She now found she had to resist the attacks of the Arch enemy; but
through Divine aid, she was enabled to withstand his power.

SHE now gave an account of the exercises of her mind, previous to her being
struck into a fit, as before related, which was as follows: "Whilst on the bed,
in the dusk of the evening I saw, to appearance, the Almighty God directly over
where I lay, clothed in majesty and a flaming countenance. He seemed to be very
angry at me, and ready to thunder out a mixture of his wrath and fiery
indignation upon me; and I, being startled, with surprise and horror at the
awful appearance, instantly rose and fled to the fire, and fat with the family
to avoid the danger. But imagining myself pursued, and finding no way of
escape, my spirits sunk within me and my nature seemed to die." After thus
minutely relating the above, she gave some account of the last struggles of her
mind before she received comfort, which was as follows; "when," said she, "I
had exercised myself in every way I could devise to make God take some notice
of, and show me mercy, but finding all my efforts vain, and to no purpose, I
thought that sentence was already passed on me, and no reprieve was to be had,
but that I must go to immediate destruction. My heart then rose to a spirit of
malice against God and his authority, and since hell was to be my portion I was
determined to go with a stout heart. I therefore set about fortifying myself
with resolution, I thought I could bear the torments of hell as well as others,
and expected soon to join the hellish crew. I also felt great bitterness
against those who were reputed Christians, and even the presence of my sister C
-- (who professed religion) was highly offensive to me.

IN the midst of these exercises, when I thought myself prepared to go to
destruction, a thought struck me that I could not endure the presence of God;
me-thought I could abide the presence of all the damned race, could I but fly
the face of Him, I had so highly offended. The shame I thought I must feel in
reflecting that God would be knowing to my frailties and weakness, operated so
upon my proud heart, as at once to frustrate all my purposes.

WEARY and sunk almost in despair, I resolved to make one more struggle to
obtain Heaven, as if by violence, though in direct opposition to God, when He
was pleased to interpose and bow my stubborn will. I became nothing, and less
than nothing, and He was pleased to pour the light of His countenance into my
benighted soul. Oh! who would not take shame and reproach to themselves, and
lie low in the dust, and set up God as the supreme object of love and adoration
in their hearts." Thus she finished her relation. Her physicians again met in
counsel, and spoke favorably of her disorder. They ordered strict attention to
be paid to her hand and arm, which appeared in danger of perishing. But she
seemed to have little concern about her natural body; she said that her lame
hand would do her turn as well as the other in a short time, and added she
chose rather her right hand should forget its cunning workmanship than she
should forget her God and Redeemer. Her mind was now filled both night and day
with the most lively exercises. She contemplated with great pleasure the
wonders of redeeming love, and the mavelous condescension of a Savior, in
coming into the world to rescue perishing sinners from destruction. Instead of
being disturbed in her sleep as formerly, her mind was filled with the most
pleasant and agreeable prospects. These exercises, which she frequently
related, exhibited a surprising contrast with her former gloomy and desponding
state.

ONE morning after resting quietly she awoke with joy in her countenance, and
immediately related what had passed in her mind, when asleep. She said she had
had an interview with her deceased neighbor Mrs. R -- (who has been before
mentioned, in this relation) that she appeared to her in a ghostly form, in a
beautiful carriage, all glittering with gold, and said she had come for her;
that she Mrs. R -- took her by the hand and aided her into the carriage, which
appeared to be drawn by an invisible hand: that they slew with the greatest
swiftness through the fields of Either, fur rounded with celestial brightness, and
entertained with melodious music and the most ravishing conversation from her
friend, respecting the glories and beauties of the country to which they were
going; and while they were thus flying, as she thought to the regions of
felicity, her companion suddenly disappeared, leaving her alone, and a stranger
to the way, at which she suddenly awoke. The interpretation which she gave of
this dream, was, that she should not long continue in this world; such an
event, however, she observed, was what she had every reason to expect, from the
disorder that attended her. She now appeared to decline rapidly, and for the
most part was confined to the bed. The thoughts of death were constantly in her
mind, and she scarcely spoke of herself, but she mentioned something of the
solemn and interesting scene of dying, which, as it respected her, she viewed
to be near.

ABOUT this time she desired that a letter might be written in her name, to my
mother in Connecticut, and dictated the two following sentences; "When I go
hence I shall leave behind an affectionate companion, your son, and my two dear
little infants, whom I commend to the care of a kind Providence, who is able to
do more for them than I, or all the world beside. I wish you to have a watchful
eye over my dear children, while you remain in this troublesome, transitory
world, and see that they are brought up in the fear of God, their Creator."

PROVIDENCE never more permitted her to see my aged mother, though she lived
for some time after. Her disorder appeared to be of the chronical kind, slow,
but sure and decisive in its effects: she would sometimes appear to be in a
recovering state, but no sooner did we begin to take encouragement, than a
sudden relapse would blast our rising hopes. The effect which this produced on
mind may be worth remarking. When her health at any time, appeared to be on the
decay, she seemed not only cheerful, but animated with the prospect of her
approaching dissolution, to which she appeared to look forward with ardent
expectation. On the other hand, when any flatteding hopes of her recovery
appeared, her spirits sunk, and all her cheerfulness was buried in sorrow and
deep melancholy. Soon after this, she was struck with a paralytic fit, which we
feared, would put an end to her life, and indeed we thought her really dying.
This was very afflictive and distressing and gave her the most ghastly
appearance. This struck the disorder almost through her right side; soon after
the had another of the same kind which lest one hall of her feeble frame
entirely useless. Under all these trials, she appeared submissive and rerigned,
rejoicing in God in the midst of her afflictions.

APPREHENSIVE that her end was night, she imparted to me such advice as she
thought most suitable, respecting myself and our children, and after presenting
some tristing articles of her clothing to her sisters, as tokens of her
affection, "now," said she, "I have set my house in order, and now, by the
assistance of God, I shall be ready to go when called for." -- She observed
that she had been hurrying her business forward as fast as possible, for some
time, previous to her sickness, but that she had misjudged in laying out more
than she was able to accomplish, and acknowledged her folly and madness, in
being more concerned about the affairs of this world than of her soul.

Feb. 22d. At her request, a letter was written to a brother and sister of mine
in Connecticut, expressive of the tenderest concern for their eternal interest.
Being unable to take care of her child, she sent it away to be nursed. The
thought of parting, perhaps never to see it more, brought floods of tears from
her eyes. The idea of leaving her children was a great trial to her. She
observed that, formerly she should have rejoiced to take them along with her,
but that she was now sensible of her great wickedness; that she hoped they
would live, should it be God's will, be subjects of grace and blessings to
society. Her daughter's name she altered from CHARLOTTE to ELIZABETH, to bear
up her own name, and for the same reason, proposed to have her son called after
my name, with the addition of BURGHART, which was done at their baptism,
previous to her death.

Lords day, Feb. 30.] SHE appeared very gloomy and desponding, though she
contented that I should attend meeting. When I returned I found her in tears,
the cause of which she related. The many doubts, fears and temptations, which
perplexed her mind, had almost overcome her. I then repeated to her the words
which had been the subject of our forenoon's discourse, Heb. 12.2. "Looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the throne of God." -- This proved a seasonable cordial to her
wounded spirit; it reminded her that the was to look to Christ as her Redeemer,
support and comfort, under all her afflictions.

SHE continued in a weak and distressed situation till toward the end of
March, having frequent returns of fits, though they grew lighter; she gradually
regained strength, so far as to be able to walk out, and in a measure recovered
the use of speech.

ONE Sabbath day, as she observed the people returning from meeting, she says,
"O, what a blessed opportunity have those who are in health, to go and hear the
word of God, but I fear that many of them improve it to as little advantage,
and make as light of it as I did while in health."

SHE now set apart a day for private fasting, humiliation and prayer, and could
not be persuaded to taste any thing from evening to evening, except medicine;
but said, she had reason to fast and mourn for her past sins, and for every
moment which she did not spend with a view to God's glory.

WE now began to be considerably encouraged, she continued gaining strength,
but she still declared that she should not recover. When a prospect of health
appears, the influence of religion is apt to abate; but it was not so with her;
the impressions made on her mind, when weak, languishing and distressed,
appeared rather to acquire strength with the body, than to lose their force. --
She would constantly inculcate on all around her, the importance of religion,
the necessity of repentance, and the folly and madness of putting off a work of
such infinite moment to a sick bed. The severest trials which she had at
parting with this world, was the idea of leaving her tender offspring without a
mother, exposed to all the ensnaring temptations of the world. Hard, indeed, it
was for her to become reconciled to the thought that she must part with them
forever; fain would she have lived, had it been God's will, for their sakes.
Her attachment to her sisters was too great not to make the idea of a
separation from them particularly interesting and painful. To the ordinary ties
of nature in such a near relation, were added the endearments of a most
friendly and intimate acquaintance from their earliest infancy, as being the
eldest, to her had been committed, in a great measure, their education, which
in an eminent degree, appeared to have mutually inspired maternal tenderness,
on the one hand, and filial love and respect on the other: considerations
which, perhaps, of all others, render the subjects of them the most peculiarly
endearing. She counseled them to assist each other in their journey through
life, and walk as real sisters in the paths of virtue.

ABOUT the middle of April she became able to ride out in a carriage, which she
did frequently, and by the last of the month, she had recovered her strength,
so far as to be able to walk to her father's house, about a quarter of a mile.
The prospect of her recovery now appeared so favorable, that I slattered myself
that she was still to be continued, a comfort, and a blessing to her family;
and observed to her that I thought she was likely to be disappointed, and that
I hoped all her portentous signs would fail. She replied, that she should not
certainly be disappointed, and cautioned me against flattering myself with the
prospect of her recovery, as my disappointment and trial, at our separation
would be the greater.

ONE day as I carried her abroad, we passed within view of the burying place,
"there," said she, "I shall shortly be laid." Nothing could be more strong than
the impression on her mind that she was soon to leave this world; she appeared
to enjoy herself best, when meditating on death, and was unwilling to have her
mind diverted from the melancholy pleasing subject. Having so far recovered as
to be able to read, the perused the scriptures with great attention and
delight. She observed that, when in an unrenewed state, the word of God
appeared dull and uninteresting, but that now she found it a delightsome and
profitable book, full of the most consoling, and animating truths. Her
attachment to reading, became at length, so great, that we found it was
detrimental to her health, and were obliged for a while, to prohibit her
entirely the use of books. About this time she expressed a desire to become a
member of Christ's visible Church, she was accordingly propounded. This, although
she was convinced it was her duty, was nevertheless, a great trial. She
expressed some fear, lest, from a want of self-knowledge, she might be left to
dishonor that cause in which she was about publicly to engage. She manifested a
very feeling sense of the unmerited goodness and mercy of God and appeared to
view herself as an humble dependent creature, and even unworthy to be numbered
with the family of Christ.

May 3.] THIS was a day of peculiar trial, her fits returned, accompanied with
the most agonizing distress and fainting. We were almost ready to despair of
her life. A new physician was called, who prescribed some powerful means, which
had the desired effect. She revived a little, and appeared cheerful. Although her
pain was excessive, yet she manifested patience and resignation; the hand of
the Lord was heavy, yet not a complaint escaped her lips. She said that she
ought cheerfully to accept of all that was laid upon her, as being God's
pleasure, and justly due to her for her disobedience.

SHE remained in a low and distressed situation, till about the 15th of May,
when she was able to ride out again. I carried her to her fathers'; we had not
been long there, when it began to rain. She was very desirous of returning, but
by my entreaties, and those of the family, she was at length prevailed on to
stay. She then observed that she had come to her fathers' house to die. The
weather was rainy for several days, during which time she decayed very
considerably.

Lord's day, May 20.] SHE was taken with a cough attended with raising blood,
which was followed by a continual discharge of ulcerated matter from her lungs.
By this she was deprived of the use of speech for about a week. We now agreed
with her in the opinion that she would not recover. This relieved her from
those anxieties which her physicians and friends had raised in her mind
respecting her recovery. Although she cheerfully submitted to the direction of
her physicians, yet she uniformly declared, that she did it not from any hope
of its being beneficial, but from a sense of duty. We now discontinued the use
of medicine altogether. She continued discharging a nauseous and ulcerated
matter, which was attended with such violent convulsions of body that we
frequently thought her dying. In those turns, she would sometimes observe, "O,
how offensive and loathsome is this body, in which, I once so much delighted.
It has become offensive even to my friends, and is rotting and wasting while I
am yet alive, and robbing the worms of their food."

HER grave clothes were prepared at her request, and brought into her presence.
She was not in the least affected at the fight, but said she delighted in them
more then in any dress she had ever worm and lamented that she had spent so
many of her youthful days in ornamenting her body, which was but a fleeting
shadow, in comparison with the immortal part. Thus she continued, a constant
prey to her disease, expecting every day and hour to be introduced to the
"untried scenes" of another world. Being asked one day, by a minister who came
to see and pray with her, what petition he should put up in her behalf; she
replied, "pray to God for sinners, and that my patience sail not."

Lords day, June 1st.] IN the morning she appeared almost exhausted, having
stepped but poorly through the night. She observed that it was with her in a
measure, as with the Rev. David Brainard, and she could say as he did, that
there natural birth was on the Sabbath, the Sabbath was also the day of her new
birth if she had ever experienced any; and she hoped, if it was God's will,
that this Sabbath might be the day of her death. She often expressed great
anxiety to depart and be with Christ. The day and night following were passed
by her, in the greatest distress.

Monday, June 2d.] Toward night, I had occasion to leave the room a while, and
when I returned I found her in tears; I enquired the cause; she said that she
had heard the people in the other room, say that she was likely to continue two
or three weeks yet, that if this should be the case, she feared her patience
would fail. I asked her if she had ever been impatient or uneasy with her
situation: She answered, that she hoped she bad not been guilty of that
particular sin, though she feared she was not so well reconciled to her trials as
she ought, and prayed fervently that God would support and strengthen her, and
give her patience to wait her appointed time. And although she lingered during
six weeks, for the most part in great distress, yet she was never heard to
complain, or repine at the dealings of God, but on the contrary, often spoke of
his goodness and long-suffering with the most sensible emotions of gratitude.
In all her distress, she was seldom heard to groan, but now and then a deep
sigh forced its way from her heaving breast, which was enough to pierce, even a
heart of stone.

HER anxiety for her children, as has been before observed was great, she
frequently had them brought into her presence and would embrace them with the
most tender affection, commend them to the mercy of God, and express the
extatic joy she should feel, if hereafter, she might meet them in Heaven.
Previous to her conversion, she was very desirous of having our first child
given up in baptism according to the ritual of the Church of England, (she
having been baptized, herself in the same way, when in infancy) but I
remonstrated strongly against it, and kept her from her purpose. She expressed
her gratitude, that she had been prevented from taking what, she now
considered, as a very erroneous measure.

IN this weak and declining state she remained until June 18. During which, her
distress continued with very little intermission to prey upon her, and it could
be perceived that she grew weaker. She frequently discharged large quantities
of putrid matter from her vitals. Her mind was variously exercised; sometimes
she appeared full of joy and animation, at others, almost overwhelmed with a
sense of her vileness. Scarcely could she persuade herself, that where there
was so much sin and remaining corruption in the heart, there could be any
saving grace. She was many times almost ready to despond and think that God
would cast her off forever. So great was her sense of the infinite purity and
justice of God, and of her own unworthiness, that she feared, He would pour out
his wrath upon her, as the vilest of his enemies. She would frequently exclaim,
"O! how is it possible that such a vile wretch as I, should think of going to
Heaven, to live with holy beings, and join that blessed company of Saints and
Angels, who surround the throne of God."

SHE was exceedingly fond of company, especially that of Christians. She
delighted much in discoursing on Heavenly and divine things, and though naturally
reserved in her deportment, (particularly before strangers) yet she now
appeared to throw off all reserve, and to use the utmost freedom in
conversation, and seemed to exert her whole strength in the service of the
Redeemer, endeavoring to convince those around her, of the reality and
importance of eternal things. It seemed as if she realized that she had much to
do and but little time in which to do it, and would frequently observe, that it
appeared to her as though she made no progress in religion, but grew worse and
worse.

ONE day as a Christian friend, an elderly and experienced gentleman came to
see her, she says to him, "Come tell me some Christian feelings, that I may
know how Christians feel." After some conversation had passed between them, he
observed to her, "you will have the advantage of us if you die now, as you will
begin an eternity of happiness before us." After a short pause, she replied "If
it should be God's will that I should land safely, I would not return for a
thousand such worlds as this."

SHE was anxiously concerned respecting her feelings at the last trying scene,
lest the Adversary should throw in her way some troublesome temptations, and
cause her to doubt, and dishonor the cause of religion. "Oh! said she, that God
would send his guardian Angels to defend me from Satan, and conduct me safely
to the mansions of his Heavenly rest."

A DEEP sense of her dependence appeared ever to lie with weight on her mind.
Resting her troubled soul on the merits of the Redeemer, she gave over all
hopes of obtaining eternal life, by any other way than through his mediation.
But, (as has been before observed) her feelings were not at all times the same.
Clouds would often gather and disturb her peace. Doubts and fears would spring
up and threaten her hope. She sometimes seemed ready to despond under these
trials, and even wish for the faith of assurance, that God would reveal to her
the secret counsels of his will. Yet, on reflection, she would retract her rash
desire, and acknowledge that her immortal state was wisely hidden from her. She
confessed she had never done any thing to merit salvation, but if ever she was
saved it must be by free and sovereign grace. Whenever she meditated on the
doctrines of the gospel, and the efficacy of the atonement, her heart found
rest. She expressed an universal regard for her fellow creatures, more
especially for those that belong to the family of Christ, who, she said, seemed
dearer to her than her natural relatives. Nothing was so agreeable to her as
Christian society, she delighted much in the company and conversation of
Christians with which she was often favored.

ONE day, addressing Mr. AIR, she said "little did I think when I first saw
you, that you would so soon be called on to preach my funeral sermon as it now
appears you will."

SHE was again seized with another of that kind of fits to which she had been
subject, her feeble frame was affected with the most violent convulsions. This
made her look forward with terrifying anxiety to the time when she might be
deprived of her reason. Her fit lasted about an hour, but the cramp succeeded,
which threw her body into the most violent contortions. No position in which
she could be placed, afforded her any relief. We were obliged to use the
severest means to prevent her injuring herself. She would frequently cry out
for help, and four persons were employed to attend her. This distressing scene
continued for about twenty-four hours.

NEXT morning being Sabbath, a brother of mine came into the room, when she
observed to him, that she had become an object of disgust, as her countenance
was distorted by recent distress. "O!" said she, "I long to have the time come,
when I shall be relieved from all these distressing feelings and go home to my
Heavenly Father." In the course of the day, she asked me how I thought I should
feel, were I sensible that I was about to die, and appear in the world of
spirits. I told her that she could best answer. She replied, "it is a greater
thing to die than is generally thought;" and turning toward me with an anxious
look, said, "Oh! what dreadful feelings I find within my breast, how justly is
death styled the King of Terrors! the fear and distress, which I feel at the
thought of death, I cannot describe." Toward the close of the day I found she
grew more restless. I asked her if I should read a chapter in the Bible for her
consolation? she said she did not feel sit to hear reading. I then asked her if
I should invite the singers in after meeting to amuse her with singing? she
replied that she felt unfit to hear singing, or any thing that was good; that
she looked upon herself as the worst being in existence, and that God would do
her justice to send her instantly to destruction. I then asked her, if she
doubted the sufficiency of Christ? "Oh, no;" said she, "Christ is
all-sufficient, ready and willing to save, but this wicked heart of mine what a
sink of filth and iniquity it is! I however endeavored to comfort her by
reading a passage in St. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, and remarked that he
found cause to mourn on account of the remains of indwelling corruption,
notwithstanding, he was so eminent a Christian. This seemed, for awhile, to
ease her mind.

A MINISTER from a neighboring town officiated with us this day, and meeting
being out, he came to inquire after her health. I asked her if she would have
him come in and pray with her; she answered, that she would. I then covered her
face lest his appearance, being a stranger, should frighten her. After he came
in she desired to see him, but she was so affected with the interview, that her
cramp returned, and threw her into such violent agitation, that he thought best
to withdraw; but when he was about to leave the room, she, in broken accents
desired him to stop and pray with her. He then asked her if she had any
particular request for him to make at the throne of grace? She replied, "yes,
pray that the clouds of darkness may be dispelled from my mind, and that my
patience may be continued to the end." As he began, she fixed her eyes
attentively on him, and before he had finished his prayer, the cramp had
entirely left her, and her countenance became composed. He then conversed with
her and spoke a few words for her consolation. At her request he told her the
feelings and exercises of a Christian, and recited to her that passage of St.
Paul's Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 7. verse 24th. "O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death!" He observed to her that the
Apostle's wretchedness consisted in the sinful exercises of his heart, and the
in-dwelling sin that still remained, as in this life we are sanctified only in
part. When he had ended his conversation, he retired; and her grief was then
turned into joy. "O, said she, how does my heart rejoice! How I feel the love
of God slow through my whole frame, which warms my very soul. O Jesus how
lovely art thou in my sight!"

BUT her cramp soon returned, and her tongue was so benumbed, that it was with
much difficulty that she spoke. She could only utter a few broken accents,
saying, "peace, peace, O what peace I enjoy, O that I could spend the sew
remaining moments I have to stay in this world, in this peaceful and happy
frame."

SHE remained in this situation for several days, and many times we thought her
dying, and often called in the neighbors to see her expire. Once, in
particular, her breath appeared nearly gone, and her aged Grandmother standing
by, endeavored to close her eyes but she revived a little, and spoke in a low
faltering voice, saying "Pray, Madam, do not close my eyes until I have done
breathing." Thus she continued, expecting soon to be introduced to an endless
state of being, and expressing herself thus, "I am going soon to try my faith;
I shall soon appear before my Judge, there to hear my sentence, I shall soon
know whether I am a servant of Jesus Christ or of Satan. Oh, said she how it
shocks me, to think that my naked soul must appear before God, there to render
an account of all my conduct in life; how can I stand before such a holy being?
But I hope that Christ will appear for me and plead my cause.

June 25th.] THIS day she was much affected with the cramp and fainting turns,
together with a continual discharging of matter from her lungs. It appeared as
if nature had almost done struggling with her disorder, and that her end could
not be far distant. Yet under all these afflictions, she appeared to have the
exercises of humility and resignation. "O," said she, "what reason have I to be
thankful and adore the sovereign mercy and goodness of God, that he has made me
so greatly to differ from many of my fellow creatures, who are as good by
nature as myself, and yet have no prospect of any thing but to plunge into
endless rain as soon as their breath shall cease." In this manner she passed
three days and nights with very little rest and scarcely tasting any food. I
being alone in the room with her was about to call the family. as I thought her
dying. She said to me, "pray do not call them in, I wish not to be disturbed by
company, I hope you are not afraid to have me die alone with you."

AN elderly Christian friend before mentioned, who had frequently visited her
in the course of her confinement, coming in, observed to her in a familiar
manner, "why then you are yet alive; It appears you cannot die when you would."
She replied "Yes, I am still alive, God is able to support me, to endure all
that he is pleased to lay upon me, and will lay no more on me than I deserve."
She now set about self-examination. She found she said, such a sink of sin and
corruption, in her vile heart, that she was almost ready to conclude that she
was not a child of God. She was afraid that her heart, would, after all deceive
her, but rejoiced that God knew her heart, better than she, and relied wholly
on his sovereign mercy. She was often observed to weep, because she could not
live more to God's glory. "O," said she, "how beautiful and lovely does Christ
appear! Infinitely worthy of the highest affection and adoration of all his
creatures." She was fearful that she should lose her senses and be wholly
deprived of reason, as her nervous complaints appeared chiefly to affect her
head; but said, she was sensible, she ought to give herself no anxiety about
that, for God had a right to do with her as he pleased, and desired that he
would treat her in such a manner as would be most for his own glory.

June 28th.] IN the morning she appeared greatly distressed having had no rest
the preceding night, she had turns of fainting and the most agonizing pain.
"This" said she, "is the day of my birth, this day I am twenty-seven years of
age. I am an old sinner. God has permitted me to live, and commit a great deal
of sin, but i hope it is his will that I should this day be with Christ in
glory. She however revived a little, and her speech appeared more easy. She
esteemed it as an indispensable duty, at all times to admonish all, with whom
she had opportunity of conversing. As she had herself experienced the danger of
delay with regard to religion, she exhorted all to secure an interest in the
Savior. She enforced the importance of early piety, and of relying wholly on
the merits of the Redeemer. Even Christians met with her admonitions and
reproofs. She exhorted them to walk orderly before the world, that sinners
might not stumble over them into destruction. She warned them not to let their
hearts deceive them. To beware of building on a sandy foundation. Her relations
and friends were repeatedly and most feelingly exhorted by her, to become
acquainted with the beauties of religion. The cause of religion at large,
seemed to lie near her heart. She prayed earnestly for the success and
prosperity of the Church.

IN the more favorable intervals, when most free from pain, she was frequently
questioned respecting the affairs of her family. She said she submitted all
those things to the judgment and care of her sister E -- (who had lived with us
from the time of our first keeping house) and that she was determined to know
nothing amongst us, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

June 29th.] Her distress still continued. To her ordinary pains, was added a
most violent coughing and discharge of matter from her lungs, as had been the
case some time before.) One of her sisters standing by, while thus exercised
with extreme pain she addressed her as follows: "Dear Sister, we have formerly
expressed a wish that whenever we should be called to leave this world, we
might die with the consumption, it being a lingering disorder; and we should
consequently have opportunity to prepare for death. I have my wish, you now see
me agonizing in extreme pain; but rely on it, a sick bed is a miserable place
to do this important work."

THE cramp in her jaws increased, and affected her with pain almost
insupportable. Her mind appeared to be in a confused state. She was borne down
with the complicated distress, both of body and mind. She said, she had a
craving desire for spiritual food, and hungering and thirsting after holiness.
Her Sister C --, last mentioned, came again into the room, and after conversing
with her a short time on the important subject of religion, she desired her to
desist, and not interrupt her; and after lying in a silent, musing posture for
some time, she broke forth into the most lively strains of joy, "O," said she,
"where am I! how happy do I feel, what a ravishing prospect have I of Jesus."
She appeared to be carried away with the prospect of Heavenly bliss, and her
soul was again filled with the rich bounties of a Heavenly feast. Not
unfrequently, when almost overcome with distress, she would be revived by
religious conversation, and would converse with the greatest cheerfulness and
animation, on the doctrines of divine grace.

SHE began now to have a craving appetite for food, especially for fruits which
were brought her by her friends, and she made the most thankful acknowledgments
for every favor; spoke much of the kindness of her neighbors, and observed that
she did not think it possible for any one, in her situation, to have greater
attention paid them than she had experienced during her sickness. She longed to
haste away and be at rest, and would often enquire what were the last symptoms
of the consumption. On being told, she would compare them with her own
feelings. Not being fully acquainted with the disorder, I had still a secret
hope of her recovery. I applied again to the physician who formerly attended
her. He came, left some cordial medicine and gave directions what to do. But
she was surprised that we should attempt to do any thing more for her, and
said, "it appears as if you are fighting against God, for while he is
determined to take me out of the world you seem determined he shall not."

MANY times, when Ministers and Christian friends came to see and pray with
her, she would express an unwillingness that they should pray for her
continuance in this world. She observed it was painful to her as it appeared to
be contrary to God's will.

MY hopes, however were soon blasted. She had a relapse which it was not
expected she would survive. Her children were brought once more, for her to
see, as we thought for the last time. This was an affecting scene to behold. A
kind mother bidding an affectionate adieu to her beloved offspring -- about to
leave them in a young and helpless condition, in a world of sin and temptation,
exposed to every danger -- not knowing whether she should ever meet them in a
happier. To her, this scene was severe and trying. She embraced them with the
utmost affection, and observed that she was about to leave them in the same
condition in which she herself was left, though in a still more helpless state.
She said that she hoped God would take them under his protection, fit them for
his service, and dispose of them to his glory." She exhorted me to bring them
up in the fear of the Lord, and impress on them the infinite importance of
religion, and whenever their understanding would permit, to remind them of the
tender concern which their dear mother expressed for them in her last moments.

SHE, however revived a little, and appeared comfortable. A sister of mine,
mentioned in the former part of this relation, came from a distance to see her.
They had a joyful and happy interview. They anticipated, with the most pleasing
rapture, their future meeting in Heaven, of which each had good reason to hope.
My sister being in a weak and declining state concluded she should not survive
her long, which proved to be the case, for she died of a childbed sickness a
few months after my companion.

BUT to resume my narrative; her cramp abated considerably, and she conversed
with more ease. She observed that nine persons of her acquaintance, had been
called out of time in the course of her fickness, "How much longer, said she, I
have to continue here, God only knows." Having been at her fathers, ever since
the middle of May, it was proposed to carry her home, on account of its being
more retired, and she being a little revived, cheerfully consented to it. Her
removal was accordingly effected without much difficulty. She appeared pleased
that she had once more got back to the place where her trials commenced. Her
appetite now grew stronger, and we began again to entertain some hopes of her
recovery. Her mind seemed quite composed, and she appeared to enjoy herself
well. Our family was small, Mr. AIR being one of the number. She expessed
great regard for him as he had shown so much concern for her spiritual welfare.
She enjoined it strongly on him to have an eye to her children in case of my
death.

SHE being thirsty, called to a young sister of mine to bring her the glass,
meaning the one which contained her drink, but through misunderstanding the
looking-glass was brought. She took it, and with a smile she says, "You have
made a mistake, but I will see how differently I appear from what I did while
in health. Previous to her sickness she was a very fleshy person and of a
healthy countenance, but was now reduced to a mere skeleton. She was not in the
least surprised at her unfavorable appearance, and signified that she was fit
only for worms.

July 8th] BEING four days previous to her death; the Church convened at my
house, and received her as a member of their body. This filled her with joy and
gratitude to God, that He had continued her life and reason and enabled her
publicly to consecrate herself to his service before she left the world.

July 9th.] THIS day she had another fit, which though severe, as usual, did
not last long, and left her tolerably comfortable. As some of our neighbors
came in to see her, she appeared cheerful and conversed with case. Her youngest
child, which she had never again expected to behold, was bro't home. She seemed
highly gratified to see him once more, and paid great attention to him. She
observed that he was an agreeable child; "But," said she, "by giving him life I
shall be deprived of my own."

Thursday, July 10th.] IN the morning she appeared cheeful, and observed that
she had rested comfortably; and said further, that she did not know but she
should still recover -- that if it were God's will, she believed she could be
reconciled to it as her friends appeared so much to desire it.

DOMESTIC concerns for awhile occupied her attention. She gave some advice
respecting our family, and interested herself so much in the affairs of life
that she appeared as one restored from the dead. It was not long however,
before she observed that she should continue but a short time in this world,
and felt, she said, that she had done wrong in slattering herself with the hope
of recovering. A burying place was by her appointed where she chose to be laid,
A pleasant spot of ground near the meeting house, where she was deposited, and
it has since become a public burying place.
and all that she now desired respecting herself, was, that God would give her
an easy passage and be with her through the dark valley of death, which she had
so long dreaded. But she possessed, in an eminent degree, that hope which is
the soul's sure anchor, which disease cannot impair, nor death destroy.

ON being asked whether she had not a remaining wish to recover, she replied,
"let God's will be done; I wish not to choose for myself, but that he would
choose for me." She passed the day comfortably, though she complained of
wanderings of heart, which she imputed to the unguarded hope, she expressed in
the morning that she might recover, and added, "The Lord has been pleased to
try me both with mercies and judgments; He is merciful, in that he has been
pleased to relieve me in a measure from bodily pain, before I go hence to be
here no more. But Oh, how ready is my heart to wander from God and cleave to
the vanities of time." At night she observed, she had not passed so comfortable
a day, as to her health, for five months past; and we could not but be
flattered with the prospect; but how soon were our hopes blasted. Her appetite
appeared to be good and she ate heartily. But, in the course of the evening,
she complained of a pain in her head; it was of the nervous kind, affecting the
back part of her neck and the upper part of her head. The pain became extreme.
We did every thing in our power for her relief, but to no purpose. Soon after
she was seized with puking, which so affected her vitals, that to appearance,
she ceased breathing. But after remaining in this state, for a short time, Mr.
AIR, who was standing by, examining her, discovered appearance of life, while
her friends stood round weeping and waiting with anxiety for her returning
breath. We applied to her mouth some powerful drops, when she, by degrees
revived, and her senses being probably blunted by the loss of her reason, the
appeared to be in a measure unconscious of her extreme anguish. She continued
in a kind of delirious state through the night.

July 11th] THIS day she lay in a bewildered state, her eyes, for the most part
closed, though she would frequently open and fix them attentively on those around
her; but seldom speaking or answering if spoken to. Death, the fatal messenger
of Heaven, appeared to be at no great distance, and she seemed quietly to wait
his approach. Oh, said she, I hope I shall soon go where there is no more
sighing, nor sorrow nor weeping. Where nothing can disturb my felicity."

The following questions and answers which passed between us, it may not be
improper to insert; she spoke with much difficulty and with a weak and
faltering voice.

Q. HAS your reason been continued?


A. FOR the most of the time it has.


Q. WHY have you not answered when spoken to?


A. ON account of weakness and cramp in my jaws.


Q. HAVE you yet clear views of things respecting the other world?


A. I HAVE, and my mind is in free exercise.


Q. Do you still feel the need of a Savior?


A. O, YES; if any one in this world ever did, I do.


I then observed to her, what unspeakable joy and consolation she must have, as
God had promised to be a friend and father to the needy, and nigh unto those
who put their trust in him. "Well, said she, I am needy, and added in the words
of the Poet,

All the fitness he requires
Is to feel my need of him."
I TOLD her I hoped she had his presence with her. She then cast a wishful look
upwards with joy painted on her countenance, and extended her withered arms as
though she would embrace her desired object, and cried with an elevated voice,
"O, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, come" She then closed her eyes and lay to
appearance, composed. This was the last conversation I had with her; though it
is evident her reason was continued, as she knew her father and others who came
into the room, which she discovered by signs. In this mute and passive state,
she continued through the day, having a high burning fever, and her jaws severely
affected with a hard cramp.

July 12th] IN the morning she was exercised with the same protracted pain,
having had no rest the preceding night. In the afternoon her fever rose very
high; and she began to cough; being (...) up as usual, she was so weak as to be
unable to discharge the matter that affected her vitals. She was immediately
seized with strangling, and gave forth the most piercing sighs, which
admonished us that her end was hastening. These unre^^^^^ng struggles soon
overcame her feeble nature, and about half past 4 o'clock ( Saturday, July 12,
9^) she drew her last breath, and with an expiring groan, bade this world
adieu..

ON the Monday following, her funeral was attended by a large concourse of
people, when a Sermon suitable to the occasion was delivered by the Rev. OLIVER
AIR, from Job. VII.I. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are
not (...) days also like the days of an hireling?

FINIS.

