THE SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE OF REGENERATION CONSIDERED, IN SIX DISCOURSES.

BY CHARLES BACKUS, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN SUMMERS.

PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, FOR OLIVER D. AND I. COOK. 1800.

CONTENTS.
DISCOURSE I. The Nature of Regeneration. Page 5 JOHN iii. 3. JESUS answered,
and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again,
he cannot see the kingdom of God. DISCOURSE II. The Necessity of Regeneration.
Page 33 JOHN iii. 3. JESUS answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
DISCOURSE III. The Agency of the Holy Ghost in Regeneration. Page 59 TITUS iii.
5. Nor by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
DISCOURSE IV. The Agency of the Holy Ghost in Regeneration. Page 87 TITUS iii.
5. Nor by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
DISCOURSE V. The Character of the Regenerate; or true Religion distinguished
from false. Page 115 1 JOHN iv. 7. -- EVERY one that loves is born of God, and
knows God. DISCOURSE VI. The Character of the Regenerate; or true Religion
distinguished from false. Page 147 1 JOHN iv. 7. -- EVERY one that loves is
born of God, and knows God.
Discourses on Regeneration.
DISCOURSE I. The Nature of Regeneration.
JOHN iii. 3. JESUS answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.


THE miracles wrought by Jesus Christ, when he entered on his public ministry,
commanded general attention among the Jews, and engaged them to inquire
concerning his person, and the design of his coming into the world. Nicodemus,
a Pharisee, and a man of high rank in Israel, came to Jesus, by night, to learn
from his mouth the nature of his doctrine and kingdom. The address of this
Jewish ruler was in terms of high respect -- Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher come from God; for no man can do these miracles that thou do, except
God be with him. The Savior answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. He who
is the faithful and true Witness, repeats the word verily, to give greater
weight, and to excite higher attention, to the truth he utters. Let our ears
and our hearts be open, to learn the nature and necessity of the change of
which he discourses in the passage before us.

IT is evident that some change is intended by being born again; and that this,
in whatever it consists, is absolutely necessary for the entrance of any
individual of the human race into the kingdom of God. In the text, man is used
indefinitely; it is as applicable to the Jew as to the Gentile, and to persons
of one nation, age, or rank, as another.

To be born again, must mean something beyond mere external reformation; for if
it did not, Nicodemus would not have expressed his surprise, as we find he did,
at what Christ taught. Not only the Pharisees, but even Pagans, urged the
necessity of breaking off from vice, and becoming pure in outward behavior, to
secure the friendship and blessing of the Deity. However disagreed mankind have
been concerning the nature of virtue, and whatever vices they have patronized
by their doctrines, or recommended by their examples, they have always in their
creeds professed to recommend purity of morals.

THERE is nothing in the text, taken in its connection, to countenance the
opinion of some ancient and modern Christian writers, that the ordinance of
Baptism is the principal thing intended by being born again. A view of the
context will refute this opinion, as well as that of those who extend the new
birth to nothing beyond common morality. Nicodemus says unto him, How can a
man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mother's
womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The
wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can
not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every one that is born
of the spirit. Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?

THE rite of Christian baptism, in which the adult, or the infant, is washed
with water in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
teaches by an address to our senses, the absolute need of an internal change,
or of being regenerated, to qualify for the enjoyment of God: But the
administration of this ordinance does not purify the heart, nor can we
certainly determine that the person baptized, is a subject of that holiness
without which no man shall see the Lord. Baptism is of high importance, and no
one can despise it without bringing great guilt upon himself; but we have no
authority to affirm that every unbaptized person will be eternally lost. After
Christ had risen from the dead, he said unto his apostles, in Mark xvi. 15, 16
-- Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature, he that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be
damned. From these words we can determine that every one who spends his whole
life in unbelief will be damned; but not that every unbaptized person will be
doomed to everlasting misery. We cannot be justified in excluding every
unbaptized person from Heaven, unless it had been inserted in Christ's
declaration, or somewhere else in the scriptures, that "he who believes not,
and is not baptized, shall be for miserable." Some may be deprived of baptism
without any fault of theirs; and others may have such conscientious scruples as
to prevent their receiving this ordinance, and yet may be members of Christ's
mystical body. No unbaptized person can be a member of the visible church,
according to the form under which it appears in the New Testament. To the
baptismal washing Christ probably alludes when he speaks, in the context, of
being born of water.

WERE nothing more meant by being born of water than the baptismal dedication,
why should Nicodemus say, How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter
the second time into his mother's womb and be born? If water baptism be the new
birth taught in the text, how could Nicodemus have remained so ignorant and
perplexed, after Christ had explained its nature? The surprise of this Jewish
ruler remained throughout the conference, and he exclaimed How can these things
be! He well knew that, from the days of Abraham, none had been admitted into
the visible church without submitting to circumcision: And if he supposed that
Christ only meant to change the seal of the covenant, or to put baptism in the
place of circumcision, what could there have been in this so mysterious to his
mind? Besides, as is generally allowed, baptism had long before the coming of
Christ, been administered to Gentile proselytes, on their admission into the
Jewish church. His knowledge of this fact would have rendered baptism yet more
familiar. We do not find in all the New Testament that the use of this
ordinance excited wonder; as it must have done if it had been a practice wholly
without a precedent among the Jews. The priests and the levites whom the Jews
sent to John, to enquire who he was, asked him, Why baptizest thou then, if
thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet! John i. 25.
It is plain that they did not inquire concerning baptism as a rite, but why he
baptized. It seems that they expected the Messiah would baptize when he should
appear.

IF baptism be supposed to be the only regeneration taught in the text, we
shall find ourselves involved in insuperable difficulties, in reconciling it
with the other words which passed between Christ and Nicodemus. In addition to
what has been said, it may be observed, that the new birth which our Lord
inculcates, is attributed to the Holy Ghost as its author: Except a man be born
of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. To be born of the
spirit, is the same thing with the renovation of the heart by the spirit of
God. This change is the effect of a divine operation on the heart. The
necessity of it is derived from man's moral pollution -- That which is born of
the flesh is flesh. Holiness is introduced into the heart of apostate man, only
by the spirit of God -- That which is born of the spirit is spirit. In the
manner of the spirit's operation on the heart there is something which we
cannot comprehend; which operation Christ compares to the blowing of the wind.
But what is there either in the administration of the ordinance of baptism, or
in the practice of common morality, that is mysterious?

THE new birth inculcated in the text, consists in the turning of the heart
from sin to holiness. It is in consequence of this change that any one of the
human race becomes a child of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

BY the phrase, the kingdom of God, in the passage before us, cannot be
primarily meant the visible church, nor the New Testament dispensation; because
many have been in the kingdom of God in these senses, who were his enemies, and
remained so through life. The kingdom of God is here to be understood as
including the state of grace into which the regenerate are brought, in the
present world, and the state of glory prepared for them in the world to come.
In this sense the phrase is often used in the scriptures. Luke vi. 20. And he
lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, blessed are ye poor: for yours
is the kingdom of God. Romans xiv. 17. For the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. xv. 50.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. None can see the kingdom of
God, or enjoy its blessings, except those who are born again.

THE words of Christ in the text, lead us to consider the nature and necessity
of regeneration.

ACCORDING to the method proposed I shall begin with inquiring into the nature
of regeneration. I shall,

1st. INTRODUCE several passages from the scriptures, as a guide in the
interesting subject before us. Deuteronomy. xxx. 6. And the Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Psalm li.
10. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.
Jerem. xxiv. 7. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord;
and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return
unto me with their whole heart. xxxi. 33. But this shall be the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will
put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be
their God, and they shall be my people. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25, 26, 27. Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness,
and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them.

I APPEAL to every candid reader of the scriptures, whether it be possible, by
any fair interpretation, to understand by the foregoing texts less than a
complete change of character, or a new temper of mind. Hence appears the
propriety of Christ's saying to Nicodemus, Art thou a master of Israel, and
know not these things? "Are you a teacher of high rank among the Jews, and
are you so blind, as not to know that the scriptures, which you profess to be
able to explain, abound with the doctrine of the new birth which I am
inculcating? Why do you stumble at the necessity of this change, by a divine
operation, since it is so clearly revealed in the oracles God?"

I WILL now introduce a few texts from the New Testament on the subject before
us. John i. 12, 13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. Which were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
2 Cor. iv. 16. For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. ii. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. iv. 24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. 1 John v. 18. We know that
whosoever is born of God sins not: but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not. Titus iii. 5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

MAY not every one be convinced by this selection of a few passages, out of
many, recorded in the Jewish and Christian scriptures, that an essential change
of heart is effected in regeneration? God circumciseth the heart to love him.
-- He gives the regenerate a heart to know him. -- He puts his law in their
inward parts, and writes it in their heart. -- He gives them a new heart and
a new spirit. -- He puts his spirit within them. -- He causes them to walk
in his statutes. -- They who believe on the name of Jesus Christ, are born not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. --
He has shined in their hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of his glory
in the face of Jesus Christ. -- The regenerate are God's workmanship, created
in Christ Jesus unto good works. They put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. -- They are begotten of God: And
through his mercy they are saved by the washing of regeneration, and renewing
of the Holy Ghost.

FROM the account of this change which has been taken from the word of truth,
it appears that God operateth on the heart by his spirit, previously to its
holy exertions, and that all its exercises are the effects of this divine
operation. God works in the saved both to will and to do. Hence many divines
have, with propriety, made a distinction between regeneration and conversion:
meaning by the first, the energy of the holy spirit in changing the heart; and
by the last, the holy exercises of the heart which follow; such as love,
repentance, faith, and other graces. Certainly the tree must be made good,
before its fruit can be good: And as the unregenerate are wholly without
holiness, it is evident that when it is found in any man, it must be attributed
to the holy spirit, as its author. In conversion men are active, and are as
free in turning to God as in any exercises whatever. The peculiar energy of the
Deity which gives birth to holiness in creatures is as reconcilable with
their freedom, as his energy which extends to the common actions of life. Man
was a moral agent when he was first created. He was not brought into existence
without any character, or with a heart clear from any moral bias, like a piece
of paper which has nothing written upon it. Man was not only innocent, or clear
from sin, but he was positively holy. Eccl. vii. 29. Lo, this only have I
found, that God has made man upright; but they have sought out many
inventions. If the divine power which created man holy at first, did not impair
his freedom as a moral agent, the divine power which creates holiness in the
heart of any individual of Adam's posterity, in any period of his existence,
does not impair his freedom. The objection brought against the doctrine of
regeneration, on the ground of its destroying man's freedom, goes to the denial
of all created holiness, and consequently to a denial that Adam was holy in the
first moment of his existence.

2dly. REGENERATION has its seat in the heart, or the temper of the mind. This
has already been observed, but it deserves a more particular consideration.

ALL men, whether good or bad, are capable of distinguishing between holiness
and sin, and of knowing their duty. This faculty is called The Understanding.
The pleasure or the pain which the mind feels in a review of its actions, is
styled The Conscience. This, in some instances, operates to a high degree, in
the worst of men while in the present life, and will be like a worm that never
dies, to the impenitent in the world to come. A power of choosing or refusing,
is also possessed both by the righteous and the wicked, which is called The
Will. The moral exercises of the mind are according to a certain bias, or
taste, which is called The Heart. As this is holy or sinful, men are holy or
sinful in their volitions. In this bias, or taste, are included The Affections;
which may be summed up in love and hatred. The good man relishes the beauty of
God's moral character, and chooses to serve him. The wicked man has an opposite
relish, and chooses to disobey him.

A MINUTE delineation of the faculties and operations of the human mind, does
not fall within my present design. All will admit a distinction between a
capacity to know what is right, and a disposition either to conform, or not
conform to it. The scriptures proceed on the ground of this distinction, and
that it is admitted by mankind. Under the first head of this general division
of the mind, are included the understanding and the conscience; and under the
last, the moral taste, the will, and the affections. These three last compose
the heart. By keeping in view the definitions just given, my meaning may be
gathered when either of these words occur in the following discourses.

WERE man destitute of a capacity of distinguishing between holiness and sin,
and of voluntary action with respect to them, he could not be a subject of
moral government, he could not be accountable to the supreme Judge, nor would
he have any thing to hope or fear from the retributions of eternity. However
man's reasoning powers may be impaired, or whatever darkness may be thrown upon
them by sin, or however hardened conscience may become by long resisting its
dictates, his general capacity remains. He retains his place in the scale of
being; and will be rewarded, or punished, agreeable to the law of rectitude. He
does not by his revolt lose his relation to God, nor to his neighbor: neither
are his obligations in the least diminished to love the former with all his
heart, and the latter as himself. The transgressor can do nothing which makes
the smallest approach toward the annihilation of his intelligent nature; nor
can he do any thing which will either overthrow, or weaken, the principles on
which God governs his creatures. Sin consists in a wrong disposition, or
temper, of mind. It involves in its nature rebellion against the order which
God has established in the moral world, and could its wishes be accomplished,
Jehovah would cease to sit on the throne of the universe. The unregenerate are
not under the same kind of inability of loving and serving God, as a deaf man
is of hearing sounds, or as a blind man is of discerning colors; but their
inability arises from a heart which is opposed both to the law and the gospel.
Hence we may see that their inability is of a criminal nature, and that the
higher it rises, the more deserving they are of the divine wrath.

THE heart, or the temper of the mind, is changed in regeneration. There is
nothing in this change which resembles the transformation of a plant into a
living thinking creature, or of the beasts of the field into men. The design of
it is to restore the holy temper which was lost by the apostasy. To the
regenerate is imparted a disposition which harmonizes with the place which man
holds in the family of the great Parent and Lord of all. The subjects of the
new birth do not aspire to the rank of angels, nor repine at the lower grade
assigned them by infinite wisdom and goodness. Their great or their small
reasoning powers, their ignorance of the arts and sciences, or their
acquaintance with them, remain as before: their hearts only are immediately
affected by regeneration.

THE unregenerate are sometimes described in scripture as having the
understanding darkened; but this arises from the blindness of their heart. Ephesians.
iv. 18.
Under the influence of a corrupt temper the beauty of holiness is not
discerned. The knowledge, or the understanding, or the light, given in
regeneration, immediately respects the moral state of the mind. The regenerate
emerge from darkness into light by receiving a new heart: they now become the
subjects of divine illumination.

As in the scriptures all the faculties of the soul are considered as receiving
their moral complexion from the heart, depravity is sometimes predicated of
them all. For the same reason a change of heart is represented as setting the
whole soul right, and as extending its influence even to the body. But neither
our corporeal members, nor our essential faculties as moral agents, are the
immediate seat of holiness or sin. They are holy or sinful according to the end
to which they are devoted by the heart. When any are regenerated they glorify
God in their body, and in their spirit. Hence babes in divine knowledge are
preserved from destructive delusions, and are trained up for the kingdom of
glory; while men of the world, of strong mental powers, and high seize in
science, are seen to imbibe most absurd and fatal errors.

THE light imparted by the Holy Ghost in regeneration, does not imply the
discovery of any truth which is not contained in the Bible; but it is designed
to give to the heart a relish for the doctrines, laws, and promises, which are
contained in that holy book. If in the new birth some truth were communicated
which is not to be found in the written word, we should be left without any
standing rule for the trial of the spirits. The change wrought in regeneration,
brings the heart into harmony with the plan of salvation which is revealed in
the sacred volume. The book of God appears in a new light to those who are born
again; not because any new truth is revealed, but because their hearts have a
new relish, and in consequence of this they discover new beauties in the law
and gospel. Now they receive the divine word, not as the word of men, but as
THE WORD OF GOD.

3dly. REGENERATION is an instantaneous change. This is an obvious conclusion
from its consisting in a new heart, or a holy temper, in opposition to the old
man, or to a mind at enmity with God. Among the unregenerate some are openly
vicious, and others maintain external purity in their conduct; some are sunk in
stupidity, and others are filled with fearful apprehensions of the wrath to
come; but whatever variety is to be found among them, they all agree in being
alienated from the life of God. There is no essential alteration of character
in any one of the human race, except he be born again. Between sin and holiness
there can be no medium; since they are directly opposed to each other. There is
no person on the earth who is not either the friend, or the enemy of God. The
words of Christ, in Matthew. xii. 30, place this beyond doubt, He that is not
with me is against me; and he that gathers not with me scatters abroad.
Between the interests of Christ's kingdom and those of Satan's, there is no
communion. Every person in this assembly, or any where on the earth, is either
in the road to heaven, or in the road to hell; and were he this moment to enter
the world of spirits, he would either be received into paradise, or be doomed
to endless misery.

THERE can be no point of time in which one is neither in a renewed, nor an
unrenewed state; and therefore when the new heart is given, it must be given in
an instant. The work of sanctification is carried on progressively in the
hearts of the renewed, and will be continued until it is completed in the
concluding moment of life; but regeneration is the beginning of holiness in the
soul, and admits of no progression. The point of time in which it is effected,
is as indivisible as was that between the Almighty Fiat in the morning of the
creation and the work done -- GOD said let there be light, and there was light.

CHRISTIANITY is not answerable for the abuses which have been made of the
doctrine before us. There is nothing in it which countenances enthusiastic
impulses, or a life of sloth and wickedness. In regeneration men are made
willing to enter into the reasonable service which God requires in his word,
are placed under the dominion of the pure and benevolent spirit of the gospel,
and enter on a life of great vigilance and activity.

IF it be not allowed that regeneration is an instantaneous change, some other
nature must be attributed to it, than that which has now been described. If the
change be gradual; the old man and the new are not very wide apart; or there
must be a middle character produced which no one can describe, and which has no
state assigned to it in the retributions of eternity. If all men, as soon as
they are brought into existence, possess the seeds of virtue as an essential
attribute of their nature, or have them implanted in their hearts by the Holy
Ghost, it will follow that no essential change is necessary to fit any one of
Adam's race for heaven. On this plan the lost have the same general character
with the saved; and the difference between them is to be ascertained by a
certain degree of goodness to which the saved rise, and which the lost either
do not acquire, or do not retain. What is this degree of goodness which
constitutes regeneration? To find it we must draw a line somewhere between
sinless perfection and a state of unregeneracy. What clue have we to guide us?
The regenerate must be thrown into a labyrinth of perplexity, and be left
without means to extricate themselves, if they are to have recourse to nothing
for evidence in favor of their heirship to glory, but a certain degree of
holiness no where described in the word of God. The sacred writings abound with
descriptions of the flesh and the spirit, their opposite natures and fruits;
but they do not afford us any light in determining to what grade actions must
rise or fall, to constitute a holy, or a sinful, character. We cannot account
for the strain in which the scriptures proceed, if holiness and sin be not of
contrary natures, and if there be not an essential difference between the
characters of the righteous and the wicked.

THE more attentively we examine the doctrine of progressive regeneration, the
more fully it will appear that it is built on principles which deny the full
extent of man's depravity, the necessity of an essential change of character;
and which renders the work that passes on the renewed, little, if any thing,
more than a renunciation of the forms of false worship, and a profession of
Christianity, accompanied with a life externally pure. Can this be the essence
of that change which Moses and the prophets, Christ and the apostles, make
necessary to prepare men for the enjoyment of a holy God?

ETERNAL life is promised to the smallest expression of Christian love, even
the giving of a cup of cold water to one in the name of a disciple. How can we
account for the glorious reward which so small an action meets, if it were not
grounded on a principle wholly different from that which gives birth to the
shining actions of many impenitent sinners? The true disciples of Jesus Christ
are renewed in the spirit of their minds, and are prepared to bring forth good
fruit. Hence, in the smallest holy actions they perform, they may collect
evidence that they are members of Christ's mystical body, and that they will be
owned by him when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe.

THE thoughts which have been suggested on the subject to which we have been
attending lead us to remark,

1. THAT the doctrine of regeneration is a plain and consistent doctrine. It is
revealed both in the Old Testament and in the New, and is an essential part of
the plan of salvation which is proclaimed in the gospel. The doctrine involves
no absurdity, or contradiction. It respects nothing in man but his character.
It is this which is changed by the influences of the Holy Ghost. This change
does not impair man's intelligent nature, nor offer the least violence to the
freedom of his will; but inclines him to love and serve God in the present
world, and prepares him for the enjoyment of God in the world to come. If any
will contend that regeneration is to be numbered among the dreams of a
superstitious or a gloomy mind, they betary great ignorance both of God and
themselves.

2. WE may infer that the doctrine of regeneration does not relax the moral
obligations of sinners, nor diminish the propriety of calling on them to repent
and turn unto the Lord.

As has been observed, man does not by his sin drop his intelligent nature, nor
cease to be bound by the divine law, nor to be accountable to the supreme King.
Be the disposition of man's heart what it may, the homage which God requires
of him remains a reasonable service. The subjects of the divine moral
government are as unable to destroy their obligations to obedience, as they are
to annihilate themselves, or to dethrone the Almighty. If nothing more were
required of sinners than they are inclined to do, their rebellion would cease
to be a sin, the moral law would lose its authority, and the salvation of
sinners, if it could be called salvation, would not be of grace, but of debt.

THAT sinners are called upon to repent and turn unto the Lord throughout the
scriptures, can be denied by none who have attended to these writings. Though
the calls of God's word and providence prove ineffectual, as we daily see, the
propriety and reasonableness of the divine commands cannot be questioned.
Impenitent sinners are addressed as rational creatures, as voluntary agents,
and as having an appetite for happiness and an aversion to misery. They may
have a doctrinal belief of what the Lord requires them to renounce, and what
to embrace; and may feel a deep impression of truth on their consciences, while
they refuse to come unto Christ that they may have life. It is declared by the
Savior in the 20th verse of the chapter which contains the text. That every
one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his
deeds should be reproved. Are the wicked not to be exhorted to come to the
light, because they hate it? Are the terms of salvation to be brought down to a
level with the exercises of their rebellious hearts? The impenitent are not
thus excused, nor is such daring presumption encouraged, in the word of God.
Let us attend to a few passages out of the many which might be quoted. Jere.
iv. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Mark i. 14, 15. Now,
after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the
gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the
kingdom of God is at band: repent ye, and believe the gospel. Acts xvii. 30. --
God now commands all men every where to repent. James iv. 8, 9, 10. Draw nigh
to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and
purify your hearts ye double-minded. Be afflicted and mourn, and weep; let your
laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble yourselves in
the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. These few texts are a specimen
of the divine requirements from sinners, and to what temper the promises are
made. By the current language of the lively oracles we must be convinced, if we
attend with candor, that exercises of heart are required of sinners to which
they are wholly opposed; and that if they will contend in the present case,
they contend with God.

THE subject now immediately before us, my friends, is a painful one to the
unreconciled heart. If any one doubt whether his heart be at enmity with God,
let him attend to its exercises in himself when the divine command is in full
view. If there be one now in the hearing of this discourse who is charging God
with being a hard master, be entreated to pause, and reflect on your character
and state with all the solemnity, which becomes a dying accountable creature.
If the wickedness of your heart will justify you in not turning to God now, it
will justify your impenitence hereafter, and will secure you from punishment
when you shall be arraigned at the bar of the Judge of the living and the dead.
Will you dare stand up before him, and plead the enmity of your heart against
him as an excuse for not being reconciled to his government? Tremble at the
thought of maintaining a controversy with God! Throw down the weapons of your
rebellion, and submit yourself to him.

IT is a pleasing sight to the friends of Zion to behold sinners roused from
stupidity, reading the Bible, and anxiously inquiring what they must do to be
saved. There is much more reason to hope that such persons will be brought to
the knowledge of the truth, than those who are secure in their sins, who prefer
any other book to the Book of God, and frequent the house of mirth. But when
sinners are solemnized, and have terrible apprehensions of the wrath to come,
no one ought to attempt to give them relief by assuring them that certain
exercises of the impenitent heart secure to them a promise of being fitted for
heaven. It is dangerous to give such counsel; because it is not warranted by
the word of God, and because it will, if believed, throw the awakened sinner
into a state of carnal security.

O YE sinners, of every description, let not a deceived heart any longer turn
you aside. Do not flatter yourselves with the hope of finding peace while you
remain God's enemies. You must become reconciled to him or you must perish
forever. If you give up yourselves to him, you will, on the one hand,
cheerfully acknowledge your obligations to holiness; and on the other, that
sovereign grace was displayed in bringing you into captivity to the obedience
of Christ. This has been the language of the redeemed of our race from the
beginning to this day. May all our hearts accord with the words of the apostle,
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: For it is God who works
in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. AMEN.

DISCOURSE II. The Necessity of Regeneration.
JOHN iii. 3. JESUS answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.


THE scripture doctrine of regeneration is a stumbling block to many, who have
been educated under the light of the gospel. They neither understand the
nature, nor acknowledge the necessity, of this change; and they exclaim, with
Nicodemus, "How can these things be!" There are others who do not deny this
doctrine, who consider it as a subject rather speculative than useful. God
grant that the words of Christ, in the text, may make a deep impression on all
our minds -- Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God.

HAVING attempted to explain the nature of regeneration in my first discourse,
I proceed in this to consider the necessity of this change.

1st. THE moral depravity of man furnishes proof, that no individual of the
human race can enter into the kingdom of heaven, except he be born again. In
what this depravity consists, or how it affects the mind, has been already
shown. Let us attend for a moment, to the evidence that our moral nature is
depraved.

THAT all mankind are inclined to sin is plain from the history of our race,
from the date of Adam's transgression to the present time. Experience has
abundantly taught that all men, when left to the guidance of their own hearts,
have uniformly and invariably transgressed the divine law, and have not chosen
to retain God in their knowledge. The instances of piety to be found in some
individuals form no objection to the present argument; because all these pious
persons are monuments of divine grace. They who have not been guilty of sin
need no pardon. But no one of the human race has been saved on any other ground
than that of the atonement which has been made by Jesus Christ. He is the
Savior of mankind, neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none
other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. He did not
come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. His plan of salvation
necessarily implies that all mankind have apostatized, and are justly exposed
to everlasting wrath. Those who are saved by him are the most ready to
acknowledge their native propensity to sin. The apostle Paul, in Romans vii.
speaks the language of them all, I know that in me (that is, in my flesh)
dwells no good thing. Real Christians are most full in confessing that they
see depravity every where among mankind, and that they daily feel it in
themselves. If the good opinion which some profess to entertain of the human
character be just, it is very strange that those persons who are the purest in
their walk, should be the most ready to confess the wickedness of the heart.

IF we survey the conduct of mankind from the time of Adam to that of Noah,
from Noah to Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to David, from David to
the coming of Christ, and from the coming of Christ to the present day, we find
facts without number to establish the doctrine of moral depravity. What
impiety, idolatry, profaneness, injustice, rapine, violence, uncleanness, envy,
malice, and other sins, have prevailed on the earth? How large a proportion of
our history is written in characters of blood?

WE cannot account for the wickedness which has been prevalent among mankind
from bad example. An attempt to account for it in this way, is only to remove
the difficulty a step further back. The question immediately arises, "How
became bad examples so common?" Why do we find them not only among the Heathen
nations, but among the descendants of the pious patriarchs? If there be no
corrupt propensity in the heart of man, why are not good examples as common as
bad ones? We cannot avoid judging a tree by its fruit: And hence, if the fruit
be corrupt, the tree must be corrupt.

THAT the heart of man is wholly corrupt is explicitly and fully declared
throughout the inspired writings. Genesis vi. 5. And God saw that the wickedness
of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of
his heart was only evil continually. The force of the argument in support of
human depravity drawn from this text cannot be evaded, by consining this
description to the antediluvians; for it is declared by Jehovah, after the
flood, in Genesis viii. 21. I will not again curse the ground any more for man's
sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. The character
here given of man, is as applicable to the inhabitants of the new world, as to
the inhabitants of the old. It is particularly applied to the former, and
considered as common to men of all ages and nations, from the early period of
life. If we should grant that the inhabitants of the earth do not proceed to
the same enormity of wickedness in the days subsequent to the deluge as in
those which preceded it, still the same general character is ascribed to man --
his heart is evil from his youth.

MORE than a thousand years after the flood, Solomon affirms, in his prayer at
the dedication of the Temple, that there is no man that sins not. I Kings
viii. 46.
He expresses the same sentiment more fully in Ecclesiastes vii. 20. For there
is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not. Paul complained
of a law in his members that warred against the law of his mind and brought him
into captivity to the law of sin. From the remaining corruptions in the hearts
of good men in the present life, we may conclude that there is a native corrupt
propensity in the hearts of all mankind. David in li. Psalm, when confessing
his sin in the matter of Uriah, says in the 5th verse, Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me. After every learned attempt to
explain away the obvious meaning of this passage, it remains as an explicit
declaration of the Psalmist, that he felt fully convinced that he had a sinful
propensity from the dawn of his existence. The native bias of his heart was not
different from that of any other of Adam's descendants: For we read in Prove.
xxvii. 19. As in water face answers to face; so the heart of man to man. The
prophet Jeremiah, in the xvii. chapter of his prophecy, says of the human
heart, without application to any individual, The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked: who can know it? I appeal to you, brethren, who
have studied your hearts, whether you have any doubt of the justice of
Jeremiah's description? And whether in proportion as you have been searching
into yourselves, the words of the prophet have not appeared more and more just
and striking? Can you not say of this passage in particular -- How forcible are
right words?

MY limits will permit me to introduce only a few texts out of the many which
might be cited in this place. I may not omit that remarkable passage which is
contained in Romans iii. beginning at the 9th verse. -- What then? are we
better than they? No, in no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under sin; As it is written, There is none
righteous, no, not one: There is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable; there is none that does good, no, not one. Their throat is an
open sepulcher; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is
under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: Their feet are
swift to shed blood: Destruction and misery are in their way: And the way of
peace have they not known: There is no fear of God before their eyes.

THE words contained in this passage are quoted from several Psalms, and other
places in the Old Testament. Psalm. x. xiv. xxxvi. liii. cxl. Prove. i. Isaiah
lix.
That these words imply a total depravity will not be denied. The only inquiry
now before us is, whether the apostle confines them to a wicked party of the
Israelites, or of any other people, who lived in the times of the Jewish kings
and prophets, or extends them to all mankind of every nation and age. He must
be understood to apply the words in the last sense: For he introduces the
passage with declaring that he had before proved both Jews and Gentiles that
they are all under sin. Jews and Gentiles include all mankind. After the
apostle had mentioned that both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, he
proceeds to confirm this point by uttering himself in the words of the Jewish
scriptures "As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one" -- and
continues to sketch the features of the human heart through the whole passage.
Further to show that the character of the whole human race falls within the
apostle's design, it may be observed that he draws such conclusions from the
premises contained in the words quoted as demonstrate that the depravity
described in them extends to all mankind; verses 19, 20. Now, we know, that
what things soever the law says, it says to them who are under the law; that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.
Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin. The apostle mentions all the
world as becoming guilty before God; which proves the universal extent of the
foregoing description of moral depravity. If the apostle did not design to
extend the depravity he had described to all mankind, how would he conclude
from it, as he does, that no flesh -- no individual of the human race, can be
justified by the deeds of the law. If there were some individuals of Adam's
posterity, or even one, without sin, there would be an exception from the
common way of justification in the sight of God through the atonement -- that
small number of holy persons who never sinned, or that individual who is
spotless, can be justified by the deeds of the law. But the apostle makes no
exception. He says by the deeds of the law shall no flesh, be justified in his
sight. He denies that any exception is to be admitted. He further goes on to
declare in the 23d verse, For all have sinned and come short of the glory of
God. He does not say that a few have sinned, or that a strong corrupt party in
Israel in the times of the kings and prophets, or in any nation or age, have
sinned, but that All have sinned. He represents all mankind as being destitute
of the fear of God, and in the way to ruin. He adds in the 28th, 29th, and
30th. verses, Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the law. Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the
Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: Seeing it is one God which shall justify
the circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

IT being manifest that the passage descriptive of man's depravity in Romans iii.
is to be applied to every individual of the human race, it will follow that all
mankind are, by nature, totally depraved, or that their hearts are wholly
corrupt. However pure any unrenewed persons may be in their outward behavior,
or however engaging in their address, they do nothing which is holy. In this
sense there is none of them that does good, no not one.

IT is not implied in the doctrine of total depravity, that all sinners have an
equal degree of guilt, or that they all commit crimes in the face of the world,
or that they are as bad as they can be; but by total depravity is meant a heart
which is wholly destitute of holiness, and wholly in love with sin. Every
unregenerate person is an enemy to the true character of God; and were he under
no restraint, he would, as temptations occurred, commit either of the crimes
which is found in the catalogue of the works of the flesh. From within, out of
the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,
thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye,
blasphemy, pride, foolishness: All these evil things come from within, and
defile the man. Mark vii. 21, 22, 23.
If we faithfully look into our hearts we shall see in them the seeds of every
sin, and shall be convinced that no one can justly hope for the happiness of
Heaven without passing through the new birth. This change was as necessary for
the agreeable young ruler who came to confer with Christ, in the course of his
public ministry, as it was for Mary Magdalene; and it is equally necessary for
all in every age of the world.

SOME seem to suppose that if mankind be totally depraved, they must cease to
be moral agents. If their objection be valid, it will follow that any degree of
depravity will, as far as it extends, take away man's obligations to serve the
Lord. If the advocates for partial human depravity will not abide by this
consequence, they must give up the present objection. Besides, as has been
shown, moral depravity respects nothing but the heart, or the temper of the
mind; and therefore whether it be partial or total, none of the powers of moral
agency are destroyed.

Do we not find that the worst of men are as voluntary in their actions as the
best? The most vile are much more active in building up the kingdom of
darkness, than Christians are in promoting the kingdom of the Redeerner. The
children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of
light. No one will deny that Satan is totally depraved, and that he has risen
to a much higher degree of wickedness than his children on the earth. Is he
moved like a machine? Is he not a voluntary agent? He is active and unwearied
in accomplishing his infernal designs. He, as a roaring lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour.

FROM the character of man by nature, we may determine that no one can see the
kingdom of God, if he be not turned from sin to holiness, or be born again. The
truth of this will more fully appear by considering,

2dly. THAT none but the pure in heart can enjoy communion with a holy God.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. This is the necessary and immutable
constitution of infinite wisdom and benevolence. God is of purer eyes than to
behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity. The foolish shall not stand in his
sight: he hates all workers of iniquity. Can two walk together except they be
agreed? What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? We cannot have communion with God so long
as we refuse to pay him the homage of our hearts. If we say that we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. I John
i. 6.
Those, and those only, who are born again have fellowship with the Father,
with his Son Jesus Christ, and with the family of the redeemed. None but the
renewed can adopt the language of the pious Psalmist in his address to the Most
High, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire beside thee. Psalm lxxiii. 25.
The unholy have no relish for the employments of the new Jerusalem. There
shall in no wise enter into that holy city any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but they which are written in
the Lamb's book of life. Rev. xxi. 27.
Could the unregenerate with their present character be admitted into the
society of the blessed in paradise, they would find no enjoyment, but would be
in a state of pain. The men of the world, in the present life, discover an
aversion to the circles in which pure and undefiled religion is the theme. How
could they endure the society of the angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect, where every heart is warmed with love, and every mouth is filled with
praise? The wicked could frame a heaven which would suit their taste, and in
which they might dwell with their present temper. They could relish the
pleasures of a Mohammedan paradise; but they have no real desire for the Heaven
in which the glorified saints and the holy angels dwell. Those who have not the
spirit of Christ are not to be numbered among his true followers, and have
neither part nor lot in the blessinge which he will bestow on them who follow
him in the regeneration.

A MERE profession of Christianity will be found in vain in the day when Christ
will render to every one according to the deeds done in the body. Not every one
that says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven. The
obedient only will be accepted in the presence of the Judge. The plea of the
unholy will be of no avail, We have, Lord, eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. On the wicked the Judge will look with an
awful frown when they are arraigned before him, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

LET none flatter themselves with the hope of future happiiness while they
remain impenitent; however fair may be their profession, or however blameless
may be their conduct in the eyes of men. The character of God is holy, and
Heaven is a holy state. We must be born again, or we cannot enjoy communion
with God now, nor dwell at his right hand, where are pleasures forevermore.

THE discourse will be concluded with a few reflections.

1. REGENERATION is a great change. The proud and rebellious heart is brought
into obedience to the divine government, and God is chosen as the portion of
the soul. The subjects of the new birth are called out of darkness into God's
mavelous light. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature: old things are
passed away; behold, all things are become new. 2 Cor. v. 17.
The regenerate are made partakers of the divine nature, the moral image of God
lost by the apostasy is restored to their hearts, and they are brought into his
holy kingdom. God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved
them, even when they were dead in sins, has quickened them together with
Christ, and has raised them up together, and made them to sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. ii. 4, 5, 6.
Heaven is begun in their souls, they have a taste for the things which God
has prepared for them that love him; and he who has begun a good work in them
will perform it until the day when the Savior will appear in all his glory.

ARE there any present who are born of God, you delight in his holy will, and
enjoy communion with him. You do not indulge enmity against him, but love his
character, and cheerfully submit to his dominion. You are convinced that
wisdom's ways are ways of pleasantness, and that all her paths are peace. What
a new face has been put on the word and works of God in the view of your minds?
When God manifests himself to your souls, whether you are in the sanctuary, in
the closet, or in the midst of your worldly business you can say, "It is good
for us to be here." Would you exchange a place in Christ's family for all the
pleasures, the riches, and the honors of the world? A man full of malevolence
does not taste the sweetness of Christian love; a proud man is not charmed with
humility; and an unbeliever is blind to the glory of Jesus Christ. Do you not
admire the pure, the disinterested nature of the divine benevolence? Can you
express in words how glorious the Savior appears? Do you not delight in
contemplating the character and work of Him, whose name is called Wonderful,
Counselor, The mighty God, the everlasting Father, The Prince of peace? Do not
his worth, his beauty and his glory sometimes appear so plain, so excellent and
ravishing, as to impress your minds, for a moment, with a belief that you can
convince the impenitent of their sin and folly, and compel them to come to the
gospel feast? Perhaps you have made the attempt in this season of warmth, and
have been taught by the experiment how unable you are to open the eyes of the
blind. This has served to give you the deeper conviction of your dependence on
sovereign grace, and of the importance of keeping your place at the footstool
of Him who alone can subdue the hearts of the disobedient. Are you not
abundantly convinced that your former obstinacy would have remained, if God,
who is rich in mercy had not made you willing in the day of his power? He has
caused you to flee from the wrath to come, and has made you heirs of the
heavenly inheritance. The Lord has done great things for you: Be thankful unto
him, and bless his holy name.

IT has been inquired, why, if regeneration be so great a change, it is no more
apparent in the subjects of it, to mankind in general? To this it may be
replied, That the unholy are strangers to the exercises of the renewed heart,
and do not enter into the motives by which it is governed. The life of
Christians is hidden with Christ in God; Hence the world knows them not. Men
who are ignorant of the power of godliness, are hable to form very erroneous
opinions with respect to the manner in which real piety is to be expressed.
Some seem to suppose that if any profess a religion which is not as much
edified by gay amusements, or the pursuits of wealth and ambition, as by an
attendance on the worship of God, they must, to act consistently, abandon
temporal concerns, and retire from society. Christians have, in times of
persecution, been compelled to wander in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens
and caves of the earth. But they are forbidden to withdraw from society in
ordinary seasons. Should they do this, they would put themselves out of the way
of letting their light shine before men. Their hearts are not placed on earthly
enjoyments as a portion; and they consent to sacrifice them all, and even life
itself, when they cannot retain them without denying Christ. Diligence in the
management of temporal concerns is enjoined on Christians by the divine law. In
attending to these, they have occasion to mingle with the enemies of their
Lord. They do not choose such for their intimate friends; but in their
occasional intercourse with the wicked, they may keep their garments undefiled,
as Lot did in Sodom, and as Daniel did in the court of Persia. Strangers to
religion may think that since Christians sow and reap, buy and sell, and
transact other worldly business, in common with the rest of mankind, they are
in reality the same. Hence their true character is overlooked, and their
profession is charged with hypocrisy.

AGAIN, those who are born of God soon lose that warmth by which they are at
first distinguished. The careless and the profane who observe this abatement,
suppose that the subjects of it either counterfeited all their former zeal, or
were carried away by an idle dream. Christians are liable to wander from God,
but the decline of their first fervor is no certain evidence of their
backsliding from truth or duty. New converts are soon led to see that they have
overrated their seize, and go into the conflicts of the Christian
warfare; in which they become better acquainted with the divine character and
their own, are more alive unto God, and are better fitted to serve him in the
present world, and to enjoy him in the world to come. While their love is
abounding yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, they may be
thought by the ungodly to have become lukewarm toward the cause of the
Redeemer.

IT is further to be considered that Christians are now in an imperfect state.
They are sanctified but in part, and have much remaining sin. By lapses in
their external behavior they give occasion to the wicked to blaspheme that
worthy name by the which they are called.

AFTER all, it cannot be denied that those Christians who are much improved in
holiness, exhibit in their practice such a fixed purpose of cleaving unto the
Lord, as leads the ungodly to take knowledge of them as having been with Jesus.
Hardened unbelievers look on the disciples of Christ with an evil eye. They
watch for their halting. They are glad to see them stumble. They closely
inspect their behavior, and when they discover a fault they magnify it, and
pass sentence in the severest manner. They scrutinize and they condemn with
this severity, to keep their own consciences quiet while they are serving
diverse lusts and pleasures. Deluded mortals! will the sins of God's people
screen you from guilt? and furnish a plea for your acquittal when you shall be
arraigned at the bar of the Judge of all the earth? If the righteous scarcely
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? To return, bitter and
cruel as may be the enemies of the Cross, they are sometimes compelled to
acknowledge, that Christians manifest a spirit of benevolence and selfdenial
which cannot be found in any other men. Scoffers have their seasons of
relenting, and the monitor in their breast pays homage to the servants of the
Most High God, and confesses them to be the excellent of the earth. These have
a commanding dignity of character given them from above. Soon will they be
publicly distinguished from the wicked, and will shine forth as the sun in the
kingdom of their Father.

2. THE sovereign mercy of God is displayed in regeneration. As the hearts of
the unregenerate are wholly opposed to God, they have no exercises which tend
to holiness: And therefore when any are born again their change must be
attributed to sovereign grace. The unregenerate are dead in trespasses and
sins, they have no latent spark of moral virtue in their hearts: And hence if
any of them be renewed, they must feel that it is by grace they are saved; and
that not of themselves: it is the gift of God. -- That is mavelous grace
which gives to man a heart to comply with the salvation of the gospel, to
which he is by nature wholly opposed. He cannot be the subject of the new
birth, and fail of being deeply impressed with the belief that no flesh can
have cause to glory before God. The apostle says, in his address to the
saints, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that, according as it is
written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. i. 30, 31.


WHEN the sinner is bowed to the divine will, he does not harbor a thought
that he has distinguished himself from the unbelieving and rebellious around
him; but he feels that sovereign grace has interposed for his salvation. God
has mercy on whom he will have mercy. Romans ix. 18.
On what other ground can we account for the large ingathering of souls into
the Redeemer's kingdom on the day of Pentecost? The converts of that memorable
day had lately manifested their approbation of the unjust and cruel sentence
which was executed in the death of Christ. Curiosity, or some worse motive,
drew them together when it was noised abroad that the apostles spoke with other
tongues. But they had not been many hours assembled before they were pricked in
their heart in the hearing of Peter's sermon, and gladly received the gospel
which he preached. What a surprising change took place in them between the
morning and the evening! Not only the conversions in Jerusalem, but those in
Antioch, in Thesalonica, in Corinth, in Ephesus, and in other places, recorded
in the New Testament, proclaim the sovereign mercy of God. In every age of the
church, the saints have breathed the spirit of the Psalmist. Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy
truth's sake. Psalm cxv. 1.


WE have seen persons who were proud of their supposed religion, and whose
words and actions courted applause for their goodness; but we are certain that
they did not learn that spirit in the school of Christ. Spiritual pride is not
from above; it is from beneath, and is a most abominable sin. The children of
God watch against it, and abhor themselves and repent in dust and ashes for
being in any instances ensnared by it. Their hearts breathe after God, and they
give glory to his great name.

THE scripture doctrine of regeneration takes away all ground of glorying in
the flesh. The sovereign mercy of God makes the saved to differ from those
that perish. The sovereign mercy of God is the song of the saints in heaven
this moment, and will be their triumph to eternity. They do not attribute it to
themselves that they are not among the damned. When they cast their eyes across
the gulf which divides heaven from hell, and behold the punishment of the
wicked, they are filled with admiration of the riches of free grace displayed
in rescuing them from the brink of endless misery, and placing them in the
world of everlasting happiness.

3. THE regenerate are under high and peculiar obligations to serve and praise
the Lord. To you he has given a heart to know him. Walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith ye are called. Abound in praise to Him who has brought you up out of
an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set your feet upon a rock, and
established your goings. Walk as children of the light and of the day. Watch
over your thoughts, your words, and your actions; and recommend religion by
holy lives. Improve all your talents for the advancement of that cause to which
your Lord devoted himself in life and in death. Praise God when he appears to
build up Zion. May you ever find such seasons, times of great refreshing to
your souls. Contemplate the worth and glory of the Redeemer's kingdom, and
count nothing dear unto yourselves that you may finish your course with joy.
Rest not in past seize; but, forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, press toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Be weaned from the
present world, and let your conversation be in heaven. If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is
our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. AMEN.

DISCOURSE III. The Agency of the Holy Ghost in Regeneration.
TITUS iii. 5. NOT by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.


THEY who are born of God often call to mind their former character and state.
They will not forget these in any period of their existence. The apostle Paul,
after his conversion, looked back with deep sorrow on his temper and conduct
when he was an enemy to Jesus Christ; and had a lively sense of the riches of
divine grace which had renewed his heart, and brought him into favor with God.
All true Christians imitate him in such reflections. The apostle includes
himself with those to whom he wrote, when he says in the context and in the
text, For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another. But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ
our Savior; that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life.

WHEN any of the children of men are turned unto God they cannot attribute the
change in themselves to any works of their own; but they are wholly indebted to
his mercy for those influences which inclined them to believe to the saving of
their souls. They had performed no holy action before they were wrought upon
from on high. There was nothing in their hearts which moved God to show favor
to them in distinction from others. Their alienation from Him would have
remained, if he had not according to his mercy saved them by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

My design in discoursing from the text is, to consider the Agency of the Holy
Ghost in regeneration.

THE Holy Ghost is one of the persons of the Trinity. He is joined with the
Father and the Son in the instituted form of Christian baptism, and in the
apostolic salutations to the churches; and is called GOD. Acts V. 4.
The men who were employed in penning the scriptures were inspired by him. The
prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. i. 21.
The Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a dove, upon Christ,
immediately after his baptism, and a voice came from Heaven, which said, Thou
art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased. Matthew. iii. 16, 17, Luke iii.
21, 22.
By this descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Son of God he was publicly
consecrated as the Prophet, Priest, and King, of the Church. In allusion to
this he is called the Messiah, or the Christ; each of which titles signifies
The Anointed. The Holy Ghost is styled the Comforter, in the xiv, xv. and xvi.
chapters of John the Evangelist. In the primitive ages of the church the Holy
Ghost conferred a power of speaking with tongues before unknown to the speaker,
a knowledge of future events, and other miraculous gifts. These have, long
since, ceased in the church; and while they were continued, they were wholly
distinct from the renewing or sanctifying influences of the Holy Ghost.
Miraculous gifts were sometimes imparted to wicked men; and when they were
bestowed on good men, as they most generally were, they were of a different
nature from those influences of the spirit which renewed their hearts. If the
Holy Ghost should this moment enable one of this congregation to speak in the
language of China, or acquaint him with an event passing in one of its cities,
neither this ability, nor this knowledge, would prove the person to whom it is
communicated to be a subject of sanctifying grace. The knowledge of a fact, and
the renovation of the heart, are things of a different nature. Hence we could
not determine in favor of a man's piety, if he knew by an immediate revelation
from God what will happen in a future period. Miraculous gifts were of high
importance so long as the canon of scripture remained unfinished. They were not
continued beyond the infancy of the church; and we have no reason to expect
their return. But should they, contrary to the general expectation, be
restored, they would not stand in the place of those influences of the spirit
which change men's hearts and fit them for Heaven. When the seventy returned to
Christ after they had been sent out by him to preach the gospel and to confirm
their mission by miracles, they said unto him Lord, even the devils are subject
unto us through thy name. He replied, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
Heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and
over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto you; but
rather rejoice, because your names are written in Heaven. Luke x. 17 -- 20.
The apostle Paul declares, in 1 Cor. xiii. Though I speak with the tongues of
men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

THE renewing influences of the Holy Ghost are common to all ages of the
church; and were they wholly withdrawn, the work of regeneration would no more
appear among mankind, and Satan would reign in every heart.

THE phrase, renewing of the Holy Ghost, in the text, must refer to his
influences on the hearts of the saved, and to nothing else. To these influences
the apostle attributes the state of salvation into which he and other believers
were brought. If an essential change of heart was necessary to prepare men for
heaven heretofore, it is necessary now; for the human character is the same. As
man is totally depraved he will not return to God, unless he be influenced from
on high, or by the Holy Ghost. We have the same evidence that a man must be
born of the Spirit, as that he must be born again, to see the kingdom of God.
If we consider the texts which speak of the influences of the Spirit of God, as
confined to his miraculous operations, or to his agency during the first ages
of the church, we shall do violence to the inspired writings; and reduce the
kingdom of grace to a level with the kingdom of nature.

THAT the Holy Ghost has a special agency in regeneration may be proved,

1st. FROM the ways in which he operateth on the minds of the saved.

IT is not denied that some are sanctified from the womb. In instances of this
kind we are compelled to acknowledge the immediate agency of the Holy Ghost;
because external means had not been enjoyed. Persons of this description who
have lived long enough to be able to communicate by words their internal
exercises, have been full in acknowledging the doctrine of depravity, and the
absolute need of the influences of the Spirit of God to renew the heart. We
hear the same confession from the mouths of persons apparently renewed in adult
years, who cannot, as is most usual, give a particular account of the time of
their conversion. It is indeed of much higher importance to be able to trace in
ourselves the nature of true religion, than the period of its commencement, or
the order of our exercises. We are to guard in this place against countenancing
the idea, that the transition from an unregenerate to a renewed state, is like
the growth of a plant from a smaller to a larger size. This opinion tends, like
an opiate, to quiet the minds of the secure, and to leave them undisturbed
whilst they put the form of godliness in the place of its power. It cannot be
too deeply impressed on our minds, that there is an essential difference
between the characters of the regenerate and the unregenerate. Hence it
generally happens that Christians are able to give an orderly account of
alarming apprehensions of the wrath to come, and of clear and striking
discoveries of the wickedness of the heart, which preceded their submission to
the divine will, when they beheld, with pleasing wonder, the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ.

THE scriptures do not inform us what degree of doctrinal light, how long a
season of serious thoughtfulness, or what degree of terror, will exist in the
minds of the regenerate previously to their renovation. These are different in
different persons. The interval between the first alarm and conversion, appears
to have been short, in most, if not in all, of those who were renewed under the
ministry of Christ, and that of his apostles. The knowledge and conviction
which are obtained and impressed during what has been called the preparatory
work, are of no small use; in disclosing to sinners their real character, in
teaching them that they must be wholly indebted to sovereign grace for
salvation, and in assisting them in their walk when brought into cordial
submission to the divine will. It has often been remarked that those whose
minds had been most stored with doctrinal knowledge, are, other things being
equal, the freest from imaginary flights during the ardor which young converts
feel, and shine brightest in the school of Christ. But, to whatever seize
the unregenerate may rise, whatever anxiety they may endure, or whatever
exertions they may make, nothing which goes before the new birth can be
considered as a part of that change. Regeneration is a work by itself; and in
it a new heart is given -- a heart to which the unrenewed are strangers. The
special agency of the Holy Ghost in this work, appears from the incidents and
means which have been made effectual to the conversion of sinners. A sew of
these will be mentioned in this place.

DEEP conviction has been known to be fastened on the minds of persons by their
glancing at a few words in the Bible, or some other good book, without any
design to seek for the passage, and far less to reflect with seriousness on any
religious subject. This conviction has been fastened on their consciences, and
they have not been able to shake it off until God has made them willing in the
day of his power. The like effects have been seen to follow the dropping of a
word in conversation, which contained nothing remarkable for pertinence, and
was not uttered with any unusual solemnity. This has been made effectual;
because the time had come in which God had determined to save a soul from
death, to save by such simple means, and to add to the evidence that the
excellency of the power is of Him. This subject of divine grace had perhaps
lived long under an able and faithful preacher of the gospel, and had heard
many weighty and alarming thoughts uttered in religious conversation, but never
till now felt the arrows of the Almighty piercing his soul.

GOD has laid some on a bed of sickness, and has brought them to the borders
of the grave, to give them conviction that there is but a step between them and
eternal misery, and has followed this with the renewing influences of his
Spirit. We have seen however, not a few who have been deeply alarmed with their
danger when death stared them in the face, and abounded with promises of
amendment, who have, on the restoration of health, turned like the dog to his
vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. No promises of
reformation can be relied on which do not spring from a heart that is purified
by faith. We are furnished with so many facts to establish this remark, that we
must be highly criminal if we attribute the real reformations which sometimes
follow dangerous sickness, to any other cause but the gracious influences of
the holy Spirit operating on the heart.

SOME have derived everlasting benefit from the death of their neighbors,
friends, or companions. They have been alarmed, as was the Jailer by the
earthquake which at midnight shook the foundations of the prison, in which Paul
and Silas were confined, burst open its doors, and loosed the chains of the
prisoners. Like the keeper of this prison, they have been brought to believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and their sorrow has been turned into joy.

IT has been observed that sudden and surprising deaths, have not often been
followed with the repentance of those sinners who have been called to witness
the awful events. When one of their companions has been suddenly arrested by
the king of terrors before their eyes, perhaps in the midst of their wine and
profane mirth, they have been filled with consternation for the moment, and
like Belshazzar, the joints of their loins have been loosed, and their knees
have smitten one against another; but no sooner has the corpse of their dead
friend been laid in the grave, and an opportunity has presented for a renewal
of their dissipation, than they have committed the same iniquity with
greediness, and have hastened to fill up the measure of their sins. These
melancholy instances proclaim that madness is in the hearts of the sons of men,
and that the most distracting terrors will not prevail to divorce them from
their lusts. Symptoms of approaching ruin attend such hardened sinners.

IF remarkable, afflictive dispensations of providence were always set home on
the hearts of men -- if repentance always followed, we might be more liable
than we now are to deny the agency of the holy Spirit in creating the new
heart, and to forget that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy.

PARENTS are under high and peculiar obligations to train up their children in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord. They have strong inducements to be
faithful to their offspring; not only from the reverence which is due to the
supreme Law giver, but from the hope that if they do their duty, as far as may
be expected from imperfect creatures, their children will be brought to the
knowledge of the truth. They who know the worth of their own souls cannot be
unconcerned for the souls of others, and especially for the souls of those whom
they have been instrumental in bringing into the world. The birth of a child
will lead the heart of the pious parent to solemn meditation and fervent
prayer. From me has descended an immortal creature; who will either partake of
the everlasting joys of heaven, or endure the endless pains of hell. I give up
my infant unto thee, thou Lord of all. Out of the mouth of this babe may praise
be perfected. May Christ be formed in its heart, that it may be to the praise
of the glory of thy grace. I do not ask for it the riches and honors of the
world, but I ask for it spiritual and eternal blessings. O Lord, cause me daily
to renew the dedication of my self and my child to thee. Make me to feel how
important and solemn is my trust as a parent, and to walk within my house with
a perfect heart.

ABRAHAM said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee! He commanded his
children and his household to keep the way of the Lord. Joshua resolved as for
me and my house, we will serve the Lord. When the pious patriarchs were about
to leave the world, they called their children to the side of their dying beds,
and charged them to be obedient to the laws of Jehovah, and to seek his
blessing. The prayers, resolutions and counsels of the ancient worthies have
been imitated, in some degree, by godly parents in every age of the church. The
success of their labors has not been small. Proverbs xxii. 6. Train up a child
in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not depart from it.

THE peculiar delicacy and tenderness of the female mind, give to mothers great
influence in forming the manners of their offspring. To them also, in most
instances, is committed the immediate care of their children, in that early
period of life in which they are most susceptible of impressions. While the
pious mother beholds the smiles and pretty actions of the babe in her arms, and
while she watches the first dawnings of reason, she cannot forget that it was
born for eternity, nor cease to pray for its immortal welfare. As she looks
round on her little ones she can adopt the language of the apostle, in his
address to the churches of Galatia, with particular application to her
offspring, My little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ
be formed in you. Galat. iv. 19.


THE counsels, the examples, and the prayers, of pious mothers have been
remarkably succeeded. Samuel was the son of his mother's vows -- she promised
before his birth to give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, to be
devoted to his service as a Nazarite. As soon as he was weaned she carried him
up to the house of Eli in Shiloh, where he was educated according to her vow.
He ministered before the Lord when a child, and by his wise and pious conduct
rejoiced the heart of his mother, as she brought him a little coat from year to
year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. Early
the Lord appeared to him in a vision, and put his fidelity to the test in
declaring to Elithe destruction which was about to come upon his family. Samuel
grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the
ground. And all Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, knew that Samuel was
established to be a prophet of the Lord. He continued in this office from
childhood to old age. He judged Israel all the days of his life with great
integrity and firmness, and holds a high rank among the ancient witnesses.
Timothy, a godly minister, knew the scriptures from a child; for which he was
indebted to his mother, whoseexertions were blessed for his everlasting good.
He was the third in succession, in the maternal line, who was numbered among
the friends of the Redeemer. Grace is not hereditary; but the prayers of godly
ancestors are often answered in the bestowment of spiritual blessings on their
posterity. Paul in writing to Timothy says, in 2 Epistle i. 5. When I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy
grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
Dr. Doddridge in his improvement of this passage, in his Family Expositor,
remarks,

Pious women may take encouragment from the success of Lois and Eunice on
Timothy, who proved so excellent and useful a minister; as perhaps some of the
worthiest and most valuable ministers the church of Christ has ever been able
to boast of, have had reason to bless God for those early impressions which
were made upon their minds by the religious instructions of persons in the same
relations.

LET parents abound in fervent prayer for their beloved offspring. They will
receive a glorious reward if their posterity should perish. But God may cause
happy effects to follow in the piety of their descendants, long after the
praying parents have been cut off from the land of the loving. The answer of
prayer may come at a much greater distance than we are apt to look for it.
There is a remarkable anecdote handed down to us, respecting the famous St.
Augustine. He was the son of an eminently pious woman, whose name was Monica,
yet he was in his youth very loose and disorderly. One of his fellow-citizens,
it is said, seeing him pass, reflected upon him with great severity, as a
disgrace to society; but another made answer, that, after all he thought it
impossible that the son of so many prayers should perish. And we know that in
fact, he became in due time one of the most eminent champions for evangelical
truth. There is not the least doubt that many prayers, and especially of this
kind, may have their answer and accomplishment after the believer that offered
them had been many years sleeping in the dust. Dr. Witherspoon's Sermon on the
Religious Education of Children, p. 18, 19.


PIOUS parents will be at the greatest remove from attributing to any of their
counsels or prayers a change in the hearts of their children, should this happy
event take place. They are deeply impressed with the belief, that their labors
will be in vain, if God does not pour his Spirit upon their seed, and his
blessing upon their offspring. Isaiah xliv. 3.


THE truths contained in the scriptures are the ordinary means which God
rendereth effectual to the salvation of men. To open, apply and enforce the
doctrines and duties revealed in the sacred writings, is the great design of a
religious education, and of the gospel ministry. When God has been about to
raise a church to himself in any place, he has sent thither one, or more, of
his servants to proclaim the glad tidings of his grace, and has put his word
into the hands of that people. How shall they believe in him of whom they have
not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? Romans x. 14.
If we long after souls in the bowels of Jesus Christ, we shall improve every
opening in providence to send preachers of the gospel among the Heathen
nations, and to bring them to an acquaintance with that holy Book which
contains the words of eternal life. The attempts of philosophers to enlighten
the world have terminated in covering it with greater darkness. The way of
salvation is revealed only in the gospel. To this we are required to take heed,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place. The scriptures are able to make
us wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. Let us attend
unto the words of the apostle in 1 Cor. i. 21. For after that, in the wisdom of
God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. The grand subject of that preaching which
the wise men of the world have called foolishness, is Jesus Christ and him
crucified. The doctrine of the crucified Savior, confidered in its various
connexions and relations, includes all the truths necessary to be known to
obtain eternal life. The gospel is cordially embraced by all who are saved.
Romans i. 16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and also
to the Greek.

PLAIN, evangelical preaching, is better adapted to convince and awaken the
minds of sinners than any other means. But, pious, instructive, and fervent as
the preacher may be, he will labor with his hearers in vain if God do not take
hold of their hearts by his spirit. The apostle Paul was the most successful
instrument in the propagation of the gospel that has been raised up, in any
age, or country. He was instrumental in gathering many souls into the
Redeemer's kingdom. No one has been more ready than he was, to attribute all
the success of his labors to divine influence: 1 Cor. iii. 6, 7. I have
planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then, neither is he
that planteth any thing, neither he that waters; but God that gives the
increase. The most able, godly, and successful ministers in every period of the
church, have been the most abundant in making the same declaration with the
apostle. They have watched, and they have prayed, that they might not ascribe
to their gifts, to their diligence, or to their zeal, the glory which is due
only to God. He will not suffer his highly favored servants to be exalted above
measure; and hence, to check the aspirings of pride, and to keep them at the
footstool, he has often made them endure some very humbling stroke of his rod.

I HOPE that there are persons present who have felt a divine energy
accompanying a preached gospel. Your hearts in their true deformity have been
laid open to you in the light of divine truth. You are convinced that you need
not look into the conduct of those who are around you to find wickedness; you
behold it in yourselves written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
diamond, and graven upon the table of your heart. You have been made to feel
that the sentence denounced against the wicked is pointed against you, and that
Christ alone can deliver you from the curse of the law. When Christ revealed
himself to the woman of Samaria at Jacob's well, she went into the city and
said to the inhabitants, Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I
did: is not this the Christ? What unspeakable beauty and glory do you behold in
the way of salvation revealed in the gospel? With what commanding yet pleasing
majesty does the word of God appear, when it becomes the savor of life unto
life?

THERE are several passages of scripture in which men are said to be begotten
with the word of truth, or born again, by the word of God. The meaning of these
cannot be that the heart which is totally depraved can be influenced to love a
holy God, merely by holding up before it the light which shines in his word.
If objective light were sufficient to produce an essential change of character,
there could be no room for the agency of the Holy Ghost in the work of
regeneration. The word does not become the power of God unto salvation, only
when it is made effectual by his spirit. The word is improved in the
preparatory work, both to awaken and instruct the mind. It is God's usual way
when he brings an adult person into his kingdom, to make use of the truths
revealed in the scriptures, to give light to the understanding, and conviction
to the conscience, before he changes the heart. But we have no authority to
affirm that the renovation of the heart is the effect of the former light and
conviction; because many are the subjects of these who are never born of God.

MEN are begotten with the word of truth, as it is in view of objects held up
in the scriptures, that holy exercises take place in their minds. The exercises
of the renewed heart are directed toward the God, the law, the Savior, and
the Heaven revealed in the Bible. The sacred volume is full of motives to
holiness. These are felt by the regenerate, and by these are they governed in
their pious walk. They who are born again adopt the language of David, in Psalm
xix, The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the
eyes: The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring forever: the judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold,
yea than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey, and the honeycomb. Moreover
by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great reward.
The word of truth will not appear to any one of our apostate race in such light
and beauty, nor be received with such love and delight, if God do not by his
spirit first breathe on his heart. When Paul preached at Philippi, the Lord
opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the things which were spoken
of the apostle. Had she not been thus influenced by the Holy Ghost, she would
have remained In impenitence and unbelief like many others in the city where
she resided. The hearts of all who are saved are first opened by the spirit of
God, to incline them to receive the truths contained in the written word. -- I
proceed to observe,

2dly. THAT the special agency of the Holy Ghost in the new birth, appears from
the peculiar call which is given to the regenerate.

THE works of nature and providence render mankind inexcusable in their atheism
and wickedness. The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows
his handy work. The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead. Those who live under the light of divine revelation have a
much higher call to love and serve God. To them he has clearly made known his
character and will. Before them are set life and death, in a plain and striking
manner, in the word of truth. Whatever impressions are made on the consciences
of those who die in their sins, by the Holy Ghost, he never takes hold of their
hearts. There is a call of the spirit of God which is effectual in every
instance, and is of a different nature from any one which is given to them that
perish. This is a doctrine plainly revealed in the scriptures. In support of it
a number of passages will be produced; to to which let us give our careful and
serious attention.

THE first passage I shall introduce is recorded in Romans viii. 28, 29, 30. And
we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them
who are THE CALLED according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow he also
did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the
firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did preaestinate, them he
also CALLED; and whom he CALLED, them he also justified; and whom he justified,
them he also glorified. It is manifest from the words of the apostle in this
place that the called are the same with those who love God, the same with those
who are justified, and the same with those who will be glorified: Their calling
must therefore be peculiar to themselves. If we do not grant this, we must
admit that some unregenerate men love God, are justified, and may, with their
present character, be glorified; all which suppositions are false and
antiscriptural. 1 Cor. i. 26. For ye see your CALLING, brethren, bow that not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are CALLED. The
apostle cannot mean that the wise men after the flesh, the mighty, and the
noble, are not called by the preaching of the word. He preached to men of this
description when he stood on Mars' hill in Athens, and he preached to them in
other places. They are externally called by the works and the word of God as
truly as men of the lower ranks in life, and as the saved. He must therefore
mean by the calling in this text, that peculiar inward call which is given to
those who are brought into the kingdom of God. Ephesians. iii. 7. Whereof I was
made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the
effectual working of his power. This effectual working of divine power which
made Paul a Christian and a minister, was something wholly different from any
thing that he was the subject of when he sat at the feet of Gamaliel, when he
was rejoicing in the dying groans of Stephen, or in the beginning of his
journey to Damascus, when he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord. The energy of God's power mentioned in the words just
cited, was that special operation of the Holy Spirit which changed his heart,
and made him a real and a zealous friend to Jesus of Nazareth. Ephesians. iv. 4.
There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are CALLED in one hope of your
CALLING. Believers are the persons here addressed. There is a calling common to
them all -- they have the same hope of heaven. There is nothing in this text
which countenances the idea that the calling of unbelievers is of the same
general nature with that which believers have; but the calling is considered as
peculiar to the latter. 1 Timothy vi. 12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay
hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also CALLED. The calling of Timothy
implies the same with his being made an heir of glory.

AFTER the remarks which have been made on the texts quoted in support of the
peculiar call given to the regenerate, it will be unnecessary to comment on the
following. 2 Timothy i. 9. Who has saved us, and CALLED us with an HOLY
CALLING, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. Heb. iii. 1.
-- Holy brethren, partakers of the HEAVENLY CALLING. Jude i. -- To them that
are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and CALLED.
Rev. xvii. 14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that are with him
are CALLED, and chosen, and faithful.

THE foregoing and similar scripture passages prove, that the regenerate are
the subjects of a call from God of which the unregenerate are not partakers. In
the new birth a call is given by the spirit of God, which is different in kind
from any which is given to those who die in their sins. This peculiar call is
what Calvinistic divines have styled Effectual Calling. It must follow from the
doctrine of total depravity that in regeneration a will is given by the spirit
of God, to which the former will of the subject of this change was wholly
opposed.

ARE there any present who have passed from death unto life, and can clearly
trace the exercises of their own minds which preceded this change, to you I
appeal in particular, in support of the doctrine of sovereign efficacious grace
displayed in regeneration. Did you not when first alarmed with terrible
apprehensions of future misery, strive to banish those fears, by running into
vain company, by business, or in some other way? Did you not exert yourselves
to quiet your consciences by doings which fall essentially short of
reconciliation to God? Did you not contend with him because he would not give
you peace short of unconditional submission to his will? Did you not complain
of him for condemning you for sin, and for requiring of you a holy heart? Did
you not within yourselves cavil at the doctrines of grace, and call God a hard
master? What wicked excuses did you frame to justify your obstinacy in refusing
to turn unto him? What horrid thoughts of the glorious majesty of heaven and
earth did you indulge? You know -- you feel, that if God had not stopped you in
your dreadful career, and silenced your objections by his spirit, you would
have remained his enemies, and have gone on to fit yourselves for everlasting
destruction. You cannot attribute the change of your hearts to any of your
exertions, but you ascribe it to Him who is rich in mercy. The God of all grace
has called you unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus: To Him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. AMEN.

DISCOURSE IV. The Agency of the Holy Ghost in Regeneration.
TITUS iii. 5. Nor by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.


BLESSED be God, that, amidst the abounding wickedness of mankind, a church
has been preserved in the world, and will be continued on the earth to the end
of time. Jesus Christ has received power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as the Father has given him. These are sanctified and
made monuments of divine mercy.

In the last discourse it was shown that the Holy Ghost has a special agency
in regeneration, from the ways in which he operateth on the minds of the saved,
and from the peculiar call which is given to the regenerate. I proceed to
observe,

3dly. THAT the Holy Ghost is given to the regenerate in a peculiar sense. This
appears from what was observed under the last head, but will be more fully
considered in this place, together with the abiding influences of the Holy
Ghost in the hearts of those who are born again.

THE Holy Ghost speaks to all men in the scriptures; but many who are
acquainted with these writings disobey his voice, or resist him. In this sense
are we to understand the words of Stephen, addressed to his murderers, in Acts
vii. 51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. The spirit of God may
impress truth on the consciences of the wicked, as he does in a time of
awakening; but their hearts are not touched by this kind of impression, and
they are as really the enemies of holiness as they were when they were stupid
and thoughtless, and as blind to its beauty. When Christ promised to his
disciples, in John xiv. 16, that he would pray the Father, and that the Father
would give them another Comforter, he added, in the following verse, Even the
Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him. That the unregenerate are involved in moral blindness is
also manifest from 1 Cor. ii. 14. But the natural man receives not the things
of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. Jude, speaking of men who walk
after their ungodly lusts, says, in the 19th verse of his epistle, These are
they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit. If the
unregenerate do not receive the spirit of truth, if the things of the spirit
are foolishness unto them, and if they have not the spirit as a Sanctifier,
they are not the subjects of that kind of influence from him which renews the
heart.

CHRIST says to his disciples, in the forecited John xiv. 17. after declaring
that the world knows not the Spirit of truth -- But ye know him; for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. That the Holy Ghost dwells in the
hearts of believers is evident from many texts recorded in the inspired
writings. 1 Cor. iii. 16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that
the Spirit of God dwells in you? 2 Cor. vi. 16. And what agreement has the
temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. True holiness, or love, is communicated to the hearts of
believers by the Holy Ghost, whereby a foundation is laid for them to enjoy
communion with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. The Holy Ghost
dwells in the hearts of believers by his sanctifying and quickening
influences, keeps alive the holy temper begun in them, and traineth them up
for the heavenly state. To them the apostle says in Ephesians. i. 13, 14. In whom
(i. e. in Christ,) ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the
gospel of your salvation; in whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with that holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance,
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.
No unregenerate man ever was the subject of that kind of influence from the
holy spirit, which is the earnest of the heavenly inheritance, as all are who
are born again.

FROM what has been said we may determine that the Holy Ghost is given to the
regenerate in a peculiar sense. To speak in the words of the late President
Edwards, in his excellent Treatise on Religious Affections, Thus not only the
manner of the relation of the Spirit, who is the Operator, to the subject of
his operations, is different; as the Spirit operates in the saints, as dwelling
in them, as an abiding principle of action, whereas he does not so operate upon
sinners; but the influence and operation itself is different, and the effect
wrought exceeding different. So that not only the persons are called spiritual,
as having the Spirit of God dwelling in them; but these qualifications,
affections and experiences that are wrought in them by the Spirit are also
spiritual, and therein differ vastly in their nature and kind from all that a
natural man is or can be the subject of, while he remains in a natural state;
and also from all that men or devils can be the authors of: It Is a spiritual
work in this high sense; and therefore above all other works is peculiar to the
Spirit of God. Edit. 2d, p. 137, 138.


To argue from the sufficiency of the atonement made by Jesus Christ for the
salvation of all men, that a portion of the influences of the Holy Ghost is put
into the hearts of all men, is an erroneous way of reasoning. By the atonement
a foundation is laid for the salvation of sinners, and in consequence of this
they are placed in a state of trial; but this does not imply that they have any
influences of the spirit operating on their heart, or temper of mind. We cannot
find any where in the scriptures that the holy spirit dwells in the hearts of
any except the regenerate. He is given to them in a peculiar sense, as has been
proved. The atonement is a work without us, and by it is opened a door for our
return to God. But we cannot infer from this that the heart or temper within us
is altered. Impenitent sinners are as really the enemies of God, as if no
atonement had been made. Not one of them will ever return to God if his heart
be not changed by the holy spirit. God lays restraints on the external conduct
of the wicked in their state of probation: If he did not, we do not see how the
church could have been preserved on the earth without a constant series of
miracles; but the restraints under which they are laid does not respect the
temper of their hearts. The impenitent remain opposed to God, and are more
criminal in their rebellion than if Christ had never appeared: John xv. 22. If
I had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin: but now they have no
cloak for their sin.

THE words in John i. 9, applied to Christ, That was the true Light, which
lights every man that comes into the world, have been brought to prove, that
in consequence of the atonement made by him, a portion of the influences of the
Holy Spirit has been put into the heart of every individual of the human race.
In reply it may be observed,

1st. THAT if the Holy Spirit dwell in the hearts of all men, then all men are
the subjects of true holiness in some degree. But according to the scriptures
all men are by nature dead in trespasses and sins, and there is not one of them
while in unregeneracy that does good. The spirit of God may awaken the
consciences of sinners, as he does in the preparatory work, but this is a very
different thing from taking hold of their hearts. When he dwells in the
hearts of any, their temper, or disposition of mind, accords with his holy
nature in some degree; and therefore if he dwell in the hearts of all men, it
must follow of course that all men are the subjects of true holiness. That this
is not the true character of mankind has already been proved.

2dly. IT appears from the two verses next following the text under
consideration, that Christ does not dwell in the hearts of all men by his
spirit, in the same general sense; He was in the world, and the world was made
by him; and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received
him not. By the world is here meant the Gentile world, and by his own, the
Jews, who were Christ's kindred according to the flesh, and were his by
profession. When he came into the world the generality of mankind rejected him,
and have manifested the same temper from that day to the present. This enmity
to the Son of God is wholly unaccountable if there be even a small spark of
holiness implanted in their hearts by the Holy Ghost.

3dly. WHEN Christ is said to lighten every man that comes into the world, the
meaning is, that Christ is the great luminary that holds up moral light
before all men. He is the Word, or the manifester of the Deity to intelligent
creatures. The whole creation is his immediate work, and he upholdeth all
things by the word of his power. In these respects he holds up light before
all mankind. In addition to these means of knowledge, he has given to some the
written word or the holy scriptures. Those who are saved, are divinely
illuminated by his spirit. Thus all the light in the moral creation proceeds
from Christ as the immediate fountain. The text thus explained affords no
countenance to the opinion that all men have a portion of the Holy Spirit put
into their hearts.

THOSE who contend that the Holy Spirit is given to all men in the same general
sense, must hold, as many of them openly do, that the saved make themselves to
differ from them that perish; and that, for instance, God did not impart any
other or different influences of his spirit to Saul of Tarsus in the moment of
his conversion, than he had imparted to Judas Iscariot. However abundant the
advocates of this opinion may be in the use of the phrases Gospel grace, free
grace, etc. and whatever professions they may make of ascribing the whole of
man's salvation to the mercy of God, their scheme of doctrine directly tends to
encourage a proud and self-righteous spirit.

THE text in 1 Cor. xii. 7. But the manifestation of the spirit is given to
every man to profit withal, has been adduced in support of the opinion that the
spirit of God is given to all men in the same general sense.

To determine the meaning of this passage, let us consult the context, beginning
at the 4th verse, Now, there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. And
there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And there are
diversities of operations, but it is the same God which works all in all. But
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to
one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge
by the same spirit; to another faith by the same spirit; to another the gift of
healing by the same spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another
phrophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another diverse kinds of
tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues: But all these works that
one and the self-same spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. It is
plain that the apostle is here discoursing about the gifts and not the graces
of the spirit. These have no necessary connection, as has been before observed.
The spirit of God came upon Balaam, and upon King Saul, and they both
prophesied; but neither of them had any true religion. Numb. xxiv. 2. 1 Samuel x.
10.
When the apostle says that the manifestation of the spirit is given to every
man to profit withal, his meaning is, that whatever miraculous or other gifts,
have been imparted to any member of the Christian church, ought to be improved
for the profit or edification of the whole body. The faith which is mentioned
in the context is of the extraordinary kind, or of a kind which is not common
to believers; as it is enumerated among the other gifts, and represented as not
being possessed by all to whom the spirit is given. Since, therefore the
apostle here confines his discourse to the gifts of the Holy Ghost, no argument
can be drawn from the 7th verse in support of the opinion that the spirit of
God dwells in the hearts of all men.

IN a review of the agency of the Holy Ghost in regeneration, we may learn,

1. MAN'S obstinacy in wickedness. With the works of nature and providence, and
with the book of grace before him, he continues in his rebellion against the
Most High. He refuses to perform the reasonable service required of him by the
great Lord of all; and seeks to find excuses to quiet his conscience in sin,
and to justify himself in his disobedience. He is constantly turning away his
ear from hearing the law; he hates knowledge and does not choose the fear of
the Lord. What counsels and invitations do the ungodly reject? Does not wisdom
cry? and understanding put forth her voice She stands in the top of high
places, by the way in the places of the paths. She cries at the gates, at the
entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors: Unto you, O men, I call; and
my voice is to the sons of men. O ye simple, understand wisdom; and ye fools,
be ye of an understanding heart. Prove. viii. 1 -- 5.
Jehovah spoke to his ancient people Israel by the mouth of the prophet Isaiah,
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool. Isaiah i. 18.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me; and eat
ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. Incline
your ear and come unto me: hear and your soul shall live; and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Isaiah lv. 1 --
3.
With what tenderness and warmth of affection did Jesus Christ address a large
audience at Jerusalem, in the days of his public ministry? John vii. 37. In the
last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. The body of the Jewish nation
remained in unbelief in the midst of all the light displayed by the holy
example, the commanding discourses, and the stupendous miracles of the Son of
God. The same corrupt character has been exhibited by mankind in every age
since sin entered into the world. They know that they must die, and they daily
see their fellow creatures dropping into the grave, but they continue to place
their affections on the world as their supreme good, and to conduct as if the
present state of existence were their final one. They are not disposed to break
off from their sins and to secure an interest in the divine favor, by hearing
of the solemnities of the erernal world and the judgment-day, as proclaimed by
infinite truth. No arguments, no warnings, no persuasions, no entreaties,
addressed to men by the providence and word of God, have ever been sufficient,
of themselves, to prevail with an individual to repent of his sins. Nothing
short of the special influences of the Holy Ghost has, in a single instance,
been effectual to subdue the heart of man, and to reconcile him to God. -- The
scripture doctrine of regeneration holds up human depravity in a glaring light.
Were man's opposition to holiness to be overcome without the renewing
influences of the Spirit of God, he would not be chargeable with his present
madness and folly, nor would his conduct be so astonishing. The heart of the
sons of men is fully set in them to do evil; and will not be inclined to any
thing else under the greatest external light, if God do not change it by his
Spirit. If there were but one such obstinate person to be found on the earth,
how would all the rest of mankind cry out against him as a monster of
wickedness! Is this character the less abominable, because it is the character
of countless millions? When the eyes of the sinner are opened he is filled with
astonishment at himself -- What have I done! -- How have I spent my life! --
What counsels, warnings and invitations have I withstood! -- How justly do I
deserve all the punishment with which sinners are threatened in the Bible! --
God's justice would shine brightly in my destruction! -- If he leave me to
myself, I am undone forever!

2. WE may infer that those are highly criminal who treat with contempt the
agency of the Holy Spirit in preparing men for Heaven. Such persons deny a
doctrine which is plainly taught in the scriptures; and by sure consequence
flatter themselves and others with the belief of possessing desires and
purposes to which they are strangers.

MEN may walk, may till the ground, and may do any of the common actions of
life, without any other influence of the Deity than that which pervades the
universe, and upholds all creatures in existence. By the same influence they
may read the Bible, learn its doctrines, and attend public worship. Their moral
agency is not infringed by their perfect dependence on God. The worst of men
know when they reflect on the operations of their own minds that they act
freely; and that though they dread punishment, they love sin, and are therefore
without excuse in their wickedness. They are with as much propriety commanded
to serve the Lord, as if they were inclined to obey; but they will not serve
him unless their hearts are renewed by the Holy Spirit. If he do not form their
hearts to holiness they will die in their sins. Persons who deny any such
operation have no right knowledge of God, or of themselves; and are in imminent
danger of being given up to believe a lie, and to endless destruction.

THERE is a sin against the Holy Ghost which is never forgiven. Matthew. xii. 31,
32. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. When we consider the
miraculous attestations given by the Holy Ghost to the Christian religion in
its infancy, and the necessity of his renewing influences to maintain a church
on the earth, we may determine that the sin against the Holy Ghost is a crime
of high magnitude. It is not my design to attempt to give a precise definition
of this sin; but it is obvious that it is not committed in secret. The person
who is guilty of it, speaks against the Holy Ghost, or openly blasphemeth.

MY aim in remarking on the public nature of the unpardonable sin, is, to
caution person in distress of mind about their future state against despairing
of mercy, when they have not committed the sin which is unto death. Any sin
however small, is damning if not repented of; but no one ought to consider
himself as certainly given up to ruin, on account of secret transgressions, or
on account of any act of wickedness which does not involve open inveterate
blasphemy against the spirit of God, after having made the fairest profession
of friendship to Christ which can be made by an enemy, and after having been a
subject of the greatest light which is found in an unregenerate man. Let all at
the same time remember, that if they scoff at the power of godliness, and
remain hardened after the work of God in the conversion of sinners, has been
carried on before their eyes, their state is highly alarming. It has been
observed when the spirit of God comes into a congregation to an unusual
degree, that those who continue impenitent, often become in the close of such
seasons more vicious than before; or else they embrace some scheme of sentiment
which encourages them with the hope of future happiness without an essential
change of character.

3. THE agency of the Holy Ghost in regeneration affords great encouragement to
pious ministers, godly parents, and other Christians, to be faithful and
unwearied in counselling and warning the wicked.

IF the servants of God do not succeed in their attempts to lead sinners to
repentance, they will be obedient instruments of God's declarative glory, will
advance the happiness of his holy kingdom, and will be graciously rewarded for
their labors of love. But they may not give up the hope of success on account
of the present obstinacy of those whom they are endeavoring to reclaim. The
instruction and warning which are now without any good effect, may be rendered
effectual in some future period. The God who commands his servants to speak,
is able to give a hearing ear and an understanding heart to any of the children
of men.

WHAT a wonderful alteration is sometimes seen, within a short time, in
families, in neighborhoods, and in large communities! The stupid are awakened,
feel their danger, and with deep solicitude make the inquiry, What must we do
to be saved? They fly to Christ as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows.
They now recall the sermons and the private counsels which they had heard with
indifference; and thankfully acknowledge the Almighty power that has blessed
these means, and has inclined them who once turned a deaf ear, to become
obedient to the wisdom of the just. Now they pay the tribute of gratitude to
those who restrained them by their admonitions, and awed them by their example,
whilst they were alienated from the life of God. But they will not forbear to
confess that they had forever remained blind, and had destroyed themselves, if
infinite mercy had not interposed for their salvation. However evangelical,
enlightening and pungent the preaching had been under which they had lived, and
however faithful and zealous Christian friends had been in their endeavors to
win them to Christ, reclaimed sinners know that GOD, and he only wrought the
change which has guided their feet into the way of peace. His conduct appears
to them very mavelous in blessing the exertions of feeble mortals for the
everlasting good of their souls.

CHRISTIANS of every rank and station in life, so far as they are sanctified,
keep their place at the footstool of the supreme King, speak the words which he
has commanded, perform the duties which he has enjoined, and are willing to
leave the effects of their labors with Him whose counsel shall stand, and who
will do all his pleasure. The majesty of Heaven and earth is highly provoked,
when creatures are dissatisfied with the humble station assigned them, when
they prophesy out of their own hearts, when they refuse implicit obedience to
his will, and when they presume to dictate to him how to direct their
exertions. Let the ministers of the word fix their eyes on the apostolic model,
and place their dependence on the same grace which wrought such wonders in the
infancy of the Christian church. 2 Cor. x. 3, 4, 5. For though we walk in the
flesh, we do not war after the flesh: (For the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) Casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ.

THE laborers in the vineyard are encouraged to continue warning and teaching
every man in all wisdom, and are cautioned against despairing of success. The
kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should
sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up he knows
not how. The word may take root, by the influences of the Holy Spirit, in a
time unthought of by the preacher, and unpromising as appearances had been, he
may reap the fruit of his labors with joy. Let this be remembered by all the
faithful, especially in times of coldness and degeneracy. In the morning let
them sow their feed, and in the evening withhold not their hand. While they are
speaking to the ear, God may speak to the heart.

CHRIST directed his disciples when he sent them out to preach the gospel, that
if the members of any family, or the inhabitants of any city or town, would not
receive them, or hear their words, to depart from those hardened sinners, and
to shake off the dust of their feet as a testimony against them. Instances may
now occur in which the ministers of the gospel are required to depart from
particular places, on account of the treatment they receive from the people.
There may be particular families or persons near them to whom they can have no
access; and any attempt to counsel or warn them would be like casting pearls
before swine. But let none of the servants of the Most High be hasty in
concluding that the door of their usefulness is closed. Let them make
sufficient trial to justify themselves in the sight of God, before they cease
laboring with those who spurn at the messages of divine grace. We cannot, my
brethren, if our hearts be warmed with Christian benevolence, cease to pray for
sinners, though we may feel the effects of their enmity, and their ears may be
shut against us. God may hereafter send his spirit into their hearts, and give
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. The time may come when they
will esteem the followers of the Savior as the excellent of the earth, and
choose them for their companions. Such a change has been seen in every age, to
the joy of the people of God. His arm is not shortened that it cannot save,
neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear.

4. WE may learn from the present subject why the Lord's people have been so
abundant in praying for the effusions of the Holy Spirit, both on themselves,
and on others.

THE love of God is shed abroad in the hearts of believers by the Holy Ghost,
which is given unto them. Romans v. 5.
They live in the spirit. Galat. v. 25.
They are strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner man. Ephesians. iii. 16.
They pray in the Holy Ghost. Jude 20.
The spirit helps their infirmities: for they know not what to pray for as
they ought; but the spirit itself makes intercession for them with groanings
which cannot be uttered. Romans viii. 26.
By the influences of the Holy Spirit on the hearts of believers they are led
to suitable petitions and affections in their prayers; and they sometimes feel
that holy fervor which cannot be expressed in words, but must rest in ardent
breathings of the soul. These ardent breathings cannot be uttered, either by
articulate sounds, or by groanings which strike the ear. If any suppose that by
being overheard in the devotions of the closet, or that by a loud groan in
social prayer, they prove themselves to be the subjects of the ardent
breathings of which the apostle speaks, they are greatly mistaken: For if the
feelings of the devout heart can be fully expressed by a loud groan, they cease
to be unutterable, as truly as if they could be expressed by an articulate
voice.

FROM the influences of the Holy Ghost in forming, supporting, and improving
the new man, we can easily see why the saints have been so abundant in praying
that this divine sanctifier may dwell in them. David prayed unto God, in Psalm
li. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from
me. Christ says to his disciples, in Luke xi. 13. If ye then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly
father give the holy spirit to them that ask him. All the prayers which we find
in the scriptures offered to God by his children, that he would lead them in
the way of truth -- that he would open their eyes to behold wondrous things out
of his law -- that he would help their unbelief -- that he would increase their
faith -- that he would teach them to pray -- that he would evermore give them
the bread of life, and similar favors -- all these petitions involve the
desires of the heart addreffed to the Father of lights, for the sanctifying,
enlighteaning, and quickening influences of the Holy Spirit. Were these wholly
withdrawn from Christians, they would relapse into their former spiritual
death, and would perish. Did not the promises of God secure the final
perseverance of the saints in faith and holiness, they must sit down in despair
of heaven. They are chosen to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth. Of them Christ says, in John x. 27, 28. My sheep hear
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal
life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand.

THE children of God tremble at the thought of the Spirit's withdrawment, and
mourn that they grieve him by their sins. They pray above all things for his
continuance. How often does the saint go to God in earnest supplication, O Lord
leave me not to myself! Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe! -- Uphold me with
thy free Spirit! -- Bow my rebellious will, and bring it into perfect
subjection to thine! Humble me for my pride, my unbelief, my worldliness, and
all my innumerable sins! -- Make me to know the plague of my own heart, and to
feel my dependence on thy grace! Warm this cold heart, by shedding abroad thy
love in it by thy Spirit! Guide me in the way of righteousness! Lead me not
into temptation! Cause me to be steadfast, and unmovable, always abounding in
thy work! O keep me from falling, and may I be presented faultless before the
presence of thy glory with exceeding joy!

THE truly devout pray for others as well as for themselves: They pray for all
men according to the divine command. The cause of Zion lies near their hearts
at all times, and especially when they approach the throne of grace. When
Daniel understood by attending to the prophetic books that the seventy years of
the Jewish captivity in Babylon were nearly ended, he set his face unto the
Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth and
ashes. After acknowledging the justice and truth of God in bringing all the
calamities on the Jews which they had endured, he was importunate in praying
for the restoration of Jerusalem. O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I
beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city
Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of
our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are
about us. Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate,
for the Lord's sake. O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes,
and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do
not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy
great mercies. O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken, and do; defer
not, for thine own sake, O my God; for thy city and thy people are called by
thy name. Danielix. 16 -- 19.
Every one who draws near to God in the spirit of prayer can adopt the
language of the prophet Isaiah, For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and
for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth
as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. Isaiah lxii. 1.
The righteous rejoice in the promises of the outpouring of the spirit, when
the Lord will arise in answer to their prayers and have mercy upon Zion. They
believe that the church cannot be kept alive in the world, if it be not
supported by the sanctifying influences of the Holy Ghost; and that by these
she will triumph over all opposition. Zechariah iv, 6, 7. This is the word of
the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit,
says the Lord of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zeruboabel thou
shall become a plain: and he shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with
shoutings, crying, Grace, grace, unto it.

THE ingathering of the Jews into the church, together with the fullness of the
Gentiles, will be effected by the effusions of the Holy Spirit. That this
glorious day may come is the constant prayer of all Christians, Ye that make
mention of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. AMEN.

DISCOURSE V. The Character of the Regenerate; or true Religion distinguished
from false.
I JOHN iv. 7. -- EVERY one that loves is born of God, and knows God.


HAVING in the foregoing discourses considered the nature, necessity, and
Author of the new birth, I proceed to consider the fruits or effects of this
change. Let us, my brethren, deal impartially with ourselves while we are
attending to the character of the regenerate. May God enlighten our minds by
his spirit, that we may plainly distinguish true religion from false.

IT is declared by the inspired writer in the text, that every one that loves
is born of God, and knows God. This love is considered in the context, as
entering into the nature of the confession -- That Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh; which confession distinguished the spirit of truth from the spirit of
error. That faith in the Son of God which is justifying works by love. Gal.
v. 6.
Every one who is renewed in the spirit of his mind, or knows God, is a
subject of this love.

THE ultimate object of our love is always pleasing to us; and whatever this
be, it determines our character. If our hearts be placed on earthly
possessions, we are governed by the love of the world. If we love the praise of
men more than the praise of God, ambition is the idol which we adore. If
sensual indulgencies be our chief pursuit, we are lovers of sinful pleasure. If
our highest affections be placed on the infinite mind, we are governed by the
love of God. Know ye not, says the apostle, that to whom ye yield yourselves
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness? Romans vi. 16.
We hear the same language from the lips of Jesus Christ, No man can serve to
masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will
hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

LET us, my brethren, make the inquiry in the presence of a holy God, whether
we are devoted to him, and are become the servants of righteousness? Let us
take heed how we hear while we are looking into the nature of that love which
forms the character of those who are born again. If there be any present who
have no desire to search and try their ways, let them know that their state is
most alarming.

EVERY one who has much acquaintance with the scriptures, must have observed
that in them great stress is laid upon holy love, as being the foundation of
true piety. Love in the fulfilling of the law. Romans xiii. 10.
When one of the Jewish doctors asked Christ, "Which is the great commandment
in the law?" the divine teacher replied, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first
and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets. Matthew. xxii. 36 -- 40.
This law Christ perfectly obeyed while he was on the earth, and to redeem
sinners from its curse he died on the cross. The love enjoined by this law
constituted the moral image of God on the heart of man when he was created. The
same moral image is restored in regeneration. Though the law has ceased as a
covenant, it remains as a rule of life. It will forever continue as the
standard of holiness. To this man's heart must be conformed, or he must perish.
The gospel breathes the same spirit with the law. We cannot embrace the gospel
in a saving manner, if we do not love God with all our hearts and our neighbor
as ourselves. It is by this love only that our hearts can become united with
the kingdom and glory of God, and with the real good of our fellow creatures.
Charity, or love, is the bond of perfectness. This makes intelligent beings one
in interest and enjoyment under all circumstances, and forever. This moral
union is involved in the prayer which Christ offered up a little before his
death, for all the members of his mystical body, in every age. John xvii. 20,
21, 22. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
on me through their word that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that
thou have sent me. And the glory which thou gave me I have given them; that
they may be one, even as we are one.

FROM the agreement of the spirit of the law and the gospel, it appears that no
one can be a friend of the latter who is an enemy to the former. If the law be
not holy, just and good, there can be no grace in the gospel. There can be no
grace or mercy, in saving any one from the punishment which is threatened by an
unjust law: He can claim deliverance on the footing of justice.

THE moral law is an object which is pleasing to every pious mind. The apostle
Paul delighted in is after the inward man. Romans vii. 22.
No believer desires justification in the sight of God by the deeds of the law;
because such desire would be inconsistent with his love to the law, and to the
glory of its divine Author. All who are born again heartily action knowledge
that they justly deserve everlasting misery for transgressing the law of God.
This view of themselves prepares the way for them to discern the beauty and
glory of the Mediator.

IN further discoursing from the words of the text, let us attend,

1st. To some of the exercises of Christian love toward God. The regenerate
are conformed to him in heart; they are united with him in love; verse 16th of
the context -- God is love; and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and
God in him.

GOD necessarily delights in the highest good, or the greatest degree of
happiness, that can exist, and chooses a plan for its attainment. He cannot
fail of accomplishing his design; since in him are united infinite knowledge,
power, and wisdom, with infinite love. God declares his glory in the works of
his hand; and in these he delights, as they make known to intelligent
creatures the fountain of goodness which existeth from eternity in him. The
glory of the Lord shall endure forever; the Lord shall rejoice in his works.
Psalm civ. 31.
Creatures are happy when their hearts are placed on the glory, or blessedness,
of the divine mind. When they love God they become members of his holy
intelligent kingdom, and give themselves up to Him who is over all, and is the
sum of being and happiness. The happiness and glory of the kingdom of God are
the same with his own glory: They cannot be separated. Whatever promoteth the
former, promoteth the latter. It is every way best -- it is most for the
happiness of intelligent creatures, that God should make his own glory his
chief end. The happiness found in communion with God is infinitely higher than
can be found in any created good.

THE saint rejoiceth that Jehovah is on the throne of the universe. The
language of his heart is, Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let thy
glory be above all the earth. Psalm lvii. 11.
Bless the Lord, all his works, in all places of his dominion; bless the Lord,
O my soul. Psalm ciii. 22.
If we love God, my brethren, we shall choose to lie at his footstool, and to
be wholly under his dominion. We shall abhor ourselves and repent in dust and
ashes, for our rebellion against the holy and righteous Governor of the
universe. We shall as perfectly approve of the justice which condemns us, as
of the grace which brings salvation to the guilty.

THEY who have the love of God shed abroad in their hearts delight in his mercy
as he caused it to be proclaimed before Moses, Exodus xxxiii. 19. And he said,
I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of
the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy. Christ's followers join with him in the
adoration, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.
Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight. Matthew. xi. 25, 26.
If we love God we shall not complain of his conduct in sending his spirit into
one congregation, and not into another; into one family and not into another;
and into the heart of some one or more of the family, in distinction from the
other members who compose it. We know from the character of Jehovah that he
will, in the kingdom of his grace, as well as in the kingdom of his providence,
do that which infinite love, or a supreme regard to the happiness of his holy
kingdom, requires. The monuments of vindictive wrath can have no just cause of
complaint; because they deserve endless punishment as sinners; nor do they
deserve this the less on account of the mercy shown to others.

THE particular reasons of the difference which God makes between the
character and state of the saved and the lost, are not revealed to us; but if
we love him we shall believe that his conduct in the case before us, is
dictated by that benevolence which seeks the greatest sum of intelligent
happiness. To accomplish this design is worthy of infinite wisdom and love. The
divine sovereignty is an odious doctrine to an unsanctified heart; but when it
is clearly placed before the minds of the friends of God, they will rejoice in
it. They are fully convinced that if God had not shown mercy to them until they
had made themselves to differ from their fellow-sinners, they had eternally
perished: and they believe that it is every way fit, and best for the universe,
that the supreme Ruler should be actuated in his conduct toward all his
creatures, in the present world, and in the world to come, by reasons which are
contained in his infinite wisdom and rectitude.

THE whole character of God is lovely. All who are conformed to it, contemplate
its excellencies with delight, and their hearts are drawn out toward it in
admiration and praise. They breathe the same spirit with the Psalmist, I will
extol thee, my God, O King: and I will bless thy name forever and ever. Every
day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name forever and ever. Great is
the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable. One
generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty
acts. I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous
works. Psalm cxlv. 1 -- 5.


THE regenerate love the Lord Jesus Christ. In him dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily. Col. ii. 9.
In him are displayed the perfections of the Deity before the human mind. No
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
the Father, he has declared him. John i. 18.
The subjects of the new birth love Jesus Christ, as the brightness of the
Father's glory, and the express image of his person. They love him as a holy
Savior, who saves his people from their sins. They love him for his coming
into the world, and for his whole work as Mediator. Christ's sheep hear his
voice in the scriptures, and will not settle down in the belief of doctrines
which are subversive of the gospel. Its self-denying doctrines are food to
their souls. As newborn babes they desire the sincere milk of the word, that
they may grow thereby. Their hearts are open to embrace the truths uttered in
Christ's sermon on the mount, in his other discourses, and in the whole volume
of Inspiration. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the
Father and the Son. 2 Epistle John 9.
Christians delight in beholding the example of their Lord and Master, and
strive to imitate it. They contemplate with peculiar satisfaction, the love,
self-denial, meekness, humility, patience, and all the other virtues which were
displayed in the life of the Son of God. How perfectly devoted was Christ to
the will of Him who sent him, both in his obedience and sufferings? His
disciples cannot, with his example before them, avoid being often filled with
sorrow that they live so much unto themselves. When Christ's death was near at
hand, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come;
glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. I have glorified thee on
the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. John xvii. 1, 4.
The supreme object of Christ's love, is the object on which the hearts of his
followers are placed; and they love him because he sought the glory of his
Father above all things. They give glory to the Son of God for becoming
incarnate, and appearing in this world, to condemn sin in the flesh; that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in them who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. They admire the disinterested benevolence of the
Redeemer, in that though he was rich, yet for the sake of his people he became
poor, that they through his poverty might be rich. To save them he became a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. He was wounded for their transgressions,
he was bruised for their iniquities: the chastisement of their peace was upon
him, and with his stripes they are healed. To make atonement for sinners Christ
was betrayed, he was arrayed in a mock robe, he wore a crown of thorns, he was
buffeted, he was spit upon, he was insulted in his dying moments, and he
expired on the cross. Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it; that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word; that he
might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish. Ephesians. v. 25,
26, 27.
Christians, can you look on the sufferings and death of your Lord with
unaffected hearts?

No favors deserve to be compared with spiritual and everlasting blessings.
These last are of as much higher worth than worldly enjoyments, as the soul is
superior to the body, and as eternity exceeds time. If we have evidence that we
have obtained mercy, we shall give thanks unto the Father, who has made us
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light; who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his dear Son; in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins. Colos. i. 12, 13, 14.
If our many sins are forgiven we shall love Christ with ardent affection; like
the woman who washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of
her head. The knowledge of our hearts will lead us to see our sins in a much
clearer light than we can see the sins of any other person; and hence our
forgiveness will appear to be a wonderful display of divine mercy.

THE love which they who are in Christ feel toward him, is of a wholly
different nature from that of the hypocrite, whose affection arises from no
higher motive than his supposed escape from hell, and security of happiness.
The love of the Christian is of the same nature with the benevolence of the
divine mind which gave birth to the gospel plan of salvation. A church has
been raised up from among men, that the abundant grace might, through the
thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. 2 Cor. iv. 15.
The glory of God in the salvation of sinners, is the supreme object of the
love, the gratitude, the joy, and all the holy exercises of the regenerate. If
their hearts were not placed on this object, they could not have fellowship
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. They rejoice in the wisdom,
power, and grace of God; which can cause enemies to become obedient to his
will, and can make such vile worms of the dust as they are partakers of the
happiness of his holy kingdom, in a way that shall be to the praise of his
glory.

THE love which is the fruit of the spirit lies at the foundation of
evangelical repentance, of trust in God, of submission to his will, and of all
the graces and virtues which form the Christian character. It will outlive
hope, and that faith which is the evidence of things not seen: it will rise to
perfection at the close of the present life, and will never fail. It appears in
its full luster in the heavenly world, and will reign in the hearts of the
redeemed forever.

BEFORE I leave this part of the subject, I would take occasion to observe,
that we cannot determine what particular holy exercises will be first perceived
by those who are born of God. A great variety is found in their experiences in
this respect. Some first perceive a new beauty in the works of nature around
them; and their minds are filled with a pleasing solemn sense of the presence
and glory of God. Others are delighted in contemplating some one of the
attributes of the Deity. Sometimes the attention of the regenerate is first
fixed on the person, or offices of Jesus Christ. Not a few have found their
cavillings stilled for the first time by a view of the rectitude and goodness
of the divine government. Their hearts are charmed with the object before them,
and they are astonished at their past obstinacy and blindness. Most commonly
the first exercises of the new man are in view of some doctrine, or part of the
divine conduct, with which the heart had been most immediately contending. Some
first taste that the Lord is gracious in the channel of some passage of
scripture brought to their minds; and others have no particular part of the
written word in their thoughts, at that time. It often happens that a
considerable length of time passes after the dawning of divine light on the
souls of the regenerate, before they think any thing about their own
conversion. The beauty and the glory which captivate their hearts take off
their attention from themselves. They are heard to say afterward to their
Christian friends, with reference to the happy time when divine truth first
appeared in a new light, We did not inquire whether we should be saved or lost;
but we were swallowed up in contemplating the glory of God. We felt willing to
be in his hand. We rejoiced in his government, and that his holy name will be
magnified for ever.

THE few instances which have been mentioned, may serve as a specimen of the
many which might be adduced to illustrate the variety observable in the
earliest discoveries made to the regenerate. Let the immediate object of their
first and subsequent exercises be what it may, the temper of heart implied in
them is the same in its nature. There is no other difference between the
exercises of the renewed heart than is occasioned by different objects. The
heart that is delighted in contemplating one part of the moral works of God,
will be delighted in contemplating any other part as it comes into view. If we
love one attribute of Jehovah, we love his whole character. If for instance, we
love his mercy, we love his justice and his truth, and every other moral
attribute. If we love his character we shall feel glad that he is possessed of
infinite knowledge and power, and that he cannot fail of accomplishing whatever
he pleases: Hence, we shall find holy enjoyment in viewing the natural
perfections of the Most High. If we cordially embrace Jesus Christ, we shall
delight in the law which he honored by his obedience and death. If we be
friends to the divine government in any particular branch of it, we are friends
to its whole plan. As our minds are limited, we must attend to one thing at a
time; but as there is perfect unity of character and design in God, we shall,
if renewed in the spirit of our minds, be satisfied with any and every part of
either, when it is set before us. All God's children have been made to drink
into one spirit; whatever variety exists in the order of their exercises. They
are all rooted and grounded in love; and they have one God and Father, who is
above all, and through all, and in them all. -- I proceed to consider,

2dly. THE exercises of Christian love toward mankind. John exhorts in the
beginning of the verse which contains the text, Beloved, let us love one
another. The same exhortation is sound in many other places in this epistle.
Though he may have more immediately in view, in the words just quoted, the love
which Christians ought to exercise toward each other, the love of benevolence
toward all mankind is not excluded. Brotherly love cannot exist without this,
and is built upon it. We are commanded to love our neighbor as ourselves. To
enjoin and enforce this love, is the design of the six last commandments in the
decalogue.

IF we love God we shall consider the happiness of our neighbor as being of as
much importance as our own. We cannot have the same consciousness of his joys
and sorrows, as we can of our own; neither is his welfare entrusted to us in
the same sense in which our own is: But as the portion of rational existence
which he possesses bears the same relation to the infinite mind that ours does,
he is equally with us capable of happiness or misery, and it is as much to be
desired that he should be saved, as that we should be saved.

We are strangers to Christian love, if we harbor malice or revenge in our
hearts toward any of our fellow creatures, whatever may be the treatment we
receive at their hands. Christ commands us to love our enemies, to bless them
that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for them that
despitefully use us, and persecute us. Matthew. v. 44.
It is our duty to frown on the workers of iniquity, and cases may occur in
which love to the public good requires that we make exertions to bring them to
suffer for their crimes, even unto death; but we are forbidden to indulge
malice toward them under any circumstances whatever.

JESUS CHRIST was an open and a bold reprover of wickedness in all ranks of
men, from the lowest up to the highest. He was at the same time benevolent
toward them all, he was grieved for the hardness of their hearts, and
earnestly besought them to reform, and to secure everlasting happiness. His
heart was tenderly touched when he looked forward to the miseries which were
about to fall upon the Jews, for their killing the prophets, and stoning the
messengers of the Lord of hosts who had been sent unto them. When he was riding
in triumph to Jerusalem a few days before his death, as he drew near the city,
he wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy
day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hidden from thine
eyes. Luke xix. 41, 42.
When he was dying on the cross, he prayed for his murderers, Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they do.

THE benevolent spirit of the gospel influences all Christ's real disciples to
imitate, in some degree, his meekness and love; who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself
to him that judges righteously. 1 Pet. ii. 23.
Christ says, in Matthew. vi. 15, But if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. He inculcates the same
doctrine in many other places. We cannot pray for ourselves in a manner that
will be accepted of a holy God, if we cannot at the same time forgive our
enemies; and ask mercy for them.

THE children of God look with sorrow and pity upon a wicked and a secure
world; and sometimes almost forget themselves in their concern for others. They
pour out their hearts to God for them in worshipping assemblies, and in their
closets, and when the presence of scoffers requires them to be silent their
supplications are ascending. They rejoice when sinners are converted from the
error of their way, and glorify God that he has granted unto them repentance
unto life.

IF Christians did not love the felicity and glory of God's kingdom above the
happiness of individuals, they would be inconsolable in reflecting on the
misery of any part of the intelligent creation. But as they believe that God
will be glorified, they rest satisfied with his conduct in permitting all the
evil which now exists, or which will exist to eternity. As they feel that sin
in them justly deserves punishment, they know that sin in others justly
deserves punishment: and as they are fully convinced that there is no malice or
cruelty in Him who is love, they cannot doubt but that he acts in character
when he dooms the wicked to endless punishment. There can be no error in the
counsel of infinite knowledge, wisdom, and benevolence. That plan must have
been chosen by the Eternal Mind, which in its operations will effect the
greatest sum of happiness in the universe. I am persuaded, my brethren, that
the more fully and impartially you attend to the subject of future misery, the
more clearly you will discern that you must have recourse to such principles as
have now been hinted, to vindicate the divine goodness in inflicting endless
punishment on the wicked. Hear the united voice of the holy inhabitants of the
new Jerusalem, as they behold vengeance rendered to the enemies of God,
Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God:
For true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore,
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of
his servants at her hand. And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rose up
forever and ever. Rev. xix. 1, 2, 3.


LOVE is delighted in finding kindred souls. A true patriot feels a peculiar
attachment to those who make the welfare of the commonwealth their pursuit, and
who unite with him in detesting the politics and the measures which tend to
disorganize society. The regenerate feel a peculiar friendship toward those
who manifest that their hearts are placed on the kingdom of the Redeemer. The
apostle Paul, in his first epistle to the church of the Thessalonians,
addresseth the brethren, in chap. iv. 9, in the following words, But as
touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye yourselves
are taught of God to love one another. John says, We know that we have passed
from death unto life, because we love the brethren. 1 John iii. 14.
If we love God we shall rejoice in beholding his image in any of the human
race; whether high or low, rich or poor, bond or free. Christians are commanded
to do good unto all men as they have opportunity, especially unto them who are
of the household of faith. Gal. vi. 10.


OUR zeal on this subject will not be according to knowledge if we suppose it
to be impossible to love one as a brother in Christ, if the person so loved be
not a true believer, We cannot indeed regard one as a follower of the Son of
God, if he do not appear, in a judgment of charity, to have his Spirit; but as
we cannot certainly know the heart of another we are liable to be deceived in
our opinion of him. If we feel a complacency in any one on account of his
apparent friendship to Christ, this is a good evidence that we are Christians;
but it is no certain evidence that the person so loved is a real Christian.
Many facts might be adduced, were it necessary, to prove that the apostles, and
others in primitive times, received and treated persons as brethren in the Lord
for a season, who afterward made it manifest by their ungodly conduct that
they were in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Not a few, in
every age, have demonstrated by their conduct that their temporary fair
appearance of piety did not spring from a pure heart. The promise of heaven
which is made to expressions of brotherly love, does not imply that the person
who is the object of it is a member of Christ's mystical body. Matthew. x. 42.
And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, He shall in no
wise lose his reward. We may observe that it is not affirmed that the one to
whom the cup of cold water is given shall have eternal life, as all true
believers will; but the promise is made to him that gives a cup of cold water,
in the name of a disciple. It is promised that he, the donor, shall in no wise
lose his reward. He will be owned, in this very act, by Christ in the day of
Judgment, if the person to whom he ministered should prove to be a hypocrite.

IN avoiding the error into whith some have run in holding to the certain
knowledge of Christians, let us not go into the opposite extreme of allowing no
other test of brotherly love than will perfectly suit the taste of the mere
formalist. The regenerate honor them that fear the Lord, choose them for their
companions, and prize their society far above that of the great and the
honorable of the earth who deny the power of godliness. They who are born of
God bear the burdens of their brethren, and rejoice in their growth in grace.
They seek to unbosom themselves to Christians of higher seize in
knowledge and holiness, and are edified in listening to their counsels and
admonitions. It is an animating thought to the children of God, that they will
soon meet in their heavenly Father's house above, freed from their present
imperfections, and perfectly united in love.

3dly. THE love which is the fruit of the Holy Spirit, influences to a life of
obedience to God's commandments.

LOVE in the heart is an active principle; and is the sum of all that God
requires of man. This leads to a course of behavior which is conformable to
the laws and ordinances of the supreme King. Holy obedience is not founded on
mercenary motives, or slavish fear, but springs from a desire to promote the
declarative glory of God.

GREAT stress is laid on Christian practice in the scriptures: John xiv. 23.
Jesus answered, and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words; and
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. No profession of love is of any worth which is not accompanied with
obedience to the divine will. He professes in vain to know God, who does not
obey his laws. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is
a liar, and the truth is not in him. 1 John ii. 4.
We place no dependence on the highest professions of friendship, when they are
not accompanied with a corresponding behavior. Let a man declare to us with
never so much warmth of expression that he is attached to our person and
interest, we give no credit to his words, if he constantly employs every art,
and adopts every method, in his power, to vilisy our reputation, and to rob us
of all that we hold dear in life. Nor can we look upon one in any other light
than that of an enemy, who can hear us traduced, or see an injury done us,
without manifesting any regret. The absurdity would be not less glaring to
consider persons as the friends and servants of the Most High, who, whatever
professions of love they may make, join in their practice with his open
enemies, in dishonoring his name, and despising his kingdom. Though creatures
can neither defeat, nor disappoint, the supreme Ruler, their rebellion carries
no less guilt in it, than if it could accomplish its wishes. We may add, that
the infinite superiority of the Creator to his creatures, in connection with his
holy character, raises the guilt of sin to a height which exceeds all human
calculation.

HOLY obedience has respect to all God's commandments. If we love him we shall
feel a reverence for his name, when we pronounce it with our lips; not
indulging ourselves in appealing to him to give energy to trifling discourse,
nor in imprecating his vengeance on ourselves, or on others. God's people, in
all ages, have called the sabbath a delight, and have honored him on that day,
by attending on the public ordinances of his appointment. It has been painful
to them to be detained from his house, and the means of instruction, or
quickening, which he has instituted. Prayer is the breath of those who are
born again. They attend to this in their houses and in the sanctuary. They
maintain secret prayer. Love reigning in the heart inclines to the practice of
the various relative and social duties. We cannot be under the government of
this holy principle, and disregard justice, mercy, truth, and the other virtues
which are implied in the love of our neighbor. The knavery, the unmerciful
temper, the backbiting, the falsehood, the covetousness, and the envy which have
appeared in some high professors, have brought great reproach upon
Christianity, and have given occasion to its enemies to blaspheme. If we be
under the influence of the pure and benevolent spirit of the gospel we shall
renounce these, and all other vices, and shall practice the opposite virtues.
In our treatment of our neighbor we shall keep in mind the rule which our
Savior has given to us, in Matthew. vii. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and
the prophets.

WHERE Christian love reigns, an ardent desire is felt to diffuse a spirit of
peace and friendship through families, neighborhoods, communities, and the
whole world of mankind. It restrains the furious and malignant passions. It
excites to a winning and engaging behavior, and that diffusive goodness, which
spreads itself on every side; resembling the gentle yet overflowing stream,
which fertilizes the neighboring fields. It suppresses unchaste desires, and
intemperate indulgencies, and regulates the animal appetites by the standard of
true wisdom. The gospel is every way calculated to make men wise and happy, and
to carry their social nature to its highest perfection.

IF we are the subjects of the new birth, we shall labor to cleanse ourselves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. We shall not take the liberty to pass by some of the commands of God, and
select only a few to be carried into our practice; but we shall regard the
divine authority in all the laws given by the great Head of the church, and
discover by the manner in which we spend life, that none of his injunctions are
grievous to us. We shall unite with the pious Psalmist, in his address unto
Jehovah, Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy name. Order my steps in thy word; and let not any iniquity
have dominion over me. Psalm cxix. 132, 133.


IT is written in 1 John iii. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin;
for his seed remains in him: and he cannot sin, because be is born of God.
These words cannot mean that the regenerate are carried beyond the possibility
of sinning, or that any of them arrive at sinless perfection, in the present
state. Good men have done very evil things. Who can say, I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. xx. 9.
They are secured against committing the unpardonable sin, and against
habitually indulging any sin. As in the infant there are all the members of the
full grown man, so in the children of God there are all parts of the Christian
character in a small degree; and a foundation is laid by the grace of God for
them to come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ. There is no one sin which the Christian allows himself to practice,
nor one lust which he spares, though he sins daily, and even while he is
attending to all the forms of duty. He strives to mortify every sin, and prays
God to discover to him his secret faults. With the apostle he delights in the
law of God after the inward man, and sees at the same time another law in his
members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to
the law of sin, which is in his members.

THERE is something in the state of the Christian while on earth, that is
different from what we can find in any other creature in any world. The
inhabitants of heaven are perfectly holy; the inhabitants of hell are wholly
givenup of God to their sins, and to endure his wrath; the unregenerate in this
world have no holiness in their hearts: But when we look to the Christian, we
find one who has something of holiness, and the remains of sin yet continuing
in him. The old man is crucified, but the new man has not yet prevailed to his
complete removal. Every believer of much age, can say with the apostle -- That
which I do, I allow not, for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that
do I. Romans vii. 15.
Enigmatical as this representation may seem, it is familiar to the experience
of all who have long been in the Christian warfare.

As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are the Lord's ways higher than
our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts. It might appear to us best that
when any are born again, they should in the same instant be wholly freed from
moral evil, and be made as pure as are the saints in heaven. But it is the plan
of infinite wisdom to train up men from a small beginning of holiness, compared
to a grain of mustard seed, for the state of perfect purity and joy. Divine
grace is wonderfully displayed in keeping alive the small degree of holy love
implanted in regeneration. Who but a God of Almighty power could preserve this,
amidst so much remaining corruption, and cause it to grow up to a state of
maturity? Christians by comparing sin and holiness together in themselves, see
their opposite natures in a more striking manner; and are more deeply impressed
with the belief, that their salvation from beginning to end, is effected by the
free and sovereign mercy of God. On the riches of divine grace they daily
meditate. They have begun to dwell on a theme which will appear more and more
mavelous the longer they live. They cannot exhaust the subject -- they will
dwell upon it with admiration and praise to eternity. To the only wise God our
Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. AMEN.

DISCOURSE VI. The Character of the Regenerate; or true Religion distinguished
from false.
I JOHN iv. 7. -- EVERY one that loves is born of God, and knows God.


THE leading exercises of Christian love, and its influence on the temper and
conduct of the regenerate, were considered in the last discourse. In a review
of the subject we are taught,

1. THAT the love which has private or personal happiness for its supreme
object, is essentially different from the love which is the fruit of the Holy
Spirit.

OUR private happiness is of as much worth as that of any other creature who is
possessed of the same degree of intelligent existence; and ought to be prized
and pursued by us in subordination to the glory of God, and the happiness of
his moral kingdom. The only way of securing real happiness to ourselves, is to
feel satisfied with our proper place in the system, and to be governed by that
temper which corresponds with our relations to God and to our rellow-creatures.
Under the dominion of such exercises of heart, we shall, according to our
finite capacity, enjoy all the happiness in the kingdom of God. Hence says the
apostle, when writing to his Christian brethren -- All things are yours;
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come; all are yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is
God's. 1 Cor. iii. 21, 22, 23.


ALL unsanctified men love themselves supremely; and the whole of their
affection toward God is grounded on the belief, or hope, that he will make
them happy. Christ declares in his sermon on the mount, For if ye love them
who love you, what reward have ye? do not even the Publicans the same? Matthew.
v. 46.
Hypocrites may have a high degree of religious joy, of the selfish kind. The
Israelites sang God's praise at the red sea; but soon forgot his works. When
Christ rode in triumph into Jerusalem, a vast crowd of people, cried, saying,
Hosanna to the Son of David; Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord:
Hosanna in the highest. Matthew. xxi. ^.
Within a short time after, they joined in the cry against the benevolent
Savior, Crucify him! Crucify him!

THE malefactor condemned to death by human laws may, when pardoned, be filled
with joy, and may feel warm gratitude toward the magistrate who reprieved him,
without the least abhorrence of the crime which he had committed. He may, as
has sometimes been seen, be more given to deed. of violence than ever. The
greatest sinner may, without a change of heart, be excited to a certain kind of
gratitude toward God, and that to a high degree, from a belief that God has
secured him from the torments of hell, and will make him happy in the eternal
world. This presumptuous hope is often raised by taking hold of a text of
scripture brought to the mind. When Satan perverted a scripture promise, to
tempt Christ to cast himself down from a pinnacle of the temple, the Son of God
resisted the adversary. Christ's followers, by strength derived from him, have
been able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one. But the impenitent
may fall in with a perverted sense of scripture passages, and fatally deceive
themselves. Were a man emboldened to perpetrate some daring crime by pleading
for his support the words, Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and be shall
strengthen thine heart, we should pronounce him guilty of horrid presumption.
The hope of that man is as truly unwarranted who concludes himself to be
delivered from the curse of the law, while he remains in impenitence, because
some text of scripture comes into his mind and he takes comfort from it; such
as Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. We have no authority to
be comforted by any promise made to believers unless we possess their
character. We must be the subjects of evangelical repentance, or we can have no
just evidence that we are forgiven, and are made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. We must first find love to God in our hearts before we can know,
or have the smallest reason to conclude, that we are his children.

IT may here be inquired in what sense the 19th verse of the context is to be
under stood, We love him, because he first loved us. We may learn the meaning
of these words by looking back to the 9th and 10th verses, In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins. God provided a Savior through the infinite love of his benevolent
mind. If he had not done this, and sent his Spirit to operate on the hearts of
the children of men, none of them would have loved him, and have been saved.
The love which is in the hearts of the regenerate is the fruit, or the effect,
of that love which has existed in the divine mind from eternity. Their hearts
are not first drawn out in love to God by believing that God loved them in
particular. God loves his children with the love of complacency; because they
wear his holy image, and place their hearts on his Son Jesus Christ. John xvi.
27. For the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have
believed that I came out from God. It is very obvious that the love of the
Father here expressed, is different from the benevolence which he exercises
toward mankind at large. When any unregenerate persons love God from a belief
that he loves them in the same sense in which he loves his own children, they
believe a falsehood. The regenerate feel a love to God for the excellencies of
his nature. The divine character is the first and the highest object of their
love. When they contemplate the conduct of the Most High in providing a ransom
for them while they were his enemies, they admire his disinterested love, but
they do not believe that he delighted in their character while they were his
enemies. If the hearts of any are first melted into love from the belief that
they shall not perish, their love is selfishness at bottom, and they are far
from the kingdom of God.

SOME have affirmed that sinners love God when they have a full persuasion that
he justifies the ungodly through the atonement; because this faith relieves
their consciences from guilt. This scheme supposes that holy love originates in
selfishness, and that God justifies an impenitent sinner. The exercises of
heart which harmonize with this scheme have no holiness in them, and therefore
cannot be approved by infinite purity. It is true that when any one is
justified on the plan of the gospel, he is ungodly in the eye of the law,
because he falls very far short of its requirements; but it is at the same time
true that justifying faith involves in its nature the same kind of love which
the law requires. The love of God implanted in the hearts of believers is
expreffed in repentance, and in many other ways which had not been possible if
man had not sinned; but the nature of holy love is the same under the covenant
of grace, as under the covenant of works.

ALL false religions, of whatever name, or appearance, are built on a selfish
foundation, and gratify a proud heart. The worst of men, who acknowledge the
existence of a God, are willing to believe that he is too merciful to punish
them, and that all his attributes are pledged to save them from hell. Some
flatter themselves with the hope that if they keep themselves from external
vices, and maintain a decency of behavior, they shall be saved. Others expect
to find favor in the sight of God by a momentary relenting near the close of a
wicked life, and by repairing to the divine mercy when they can no longer enjoy
the pleasures of sin. These persons are actuated by no better motives than Joab
was when he fled unto the tabernacle of the Lord, and caught hold on the horns
of the altar, to escape that death which he had merited by his crimes. Their
presumptuous hope will be as vain as his was, in the day of the Lord's
vengeance. There are others who trust in high flights of religious affections,
arising from a confident belief that they are converted, and shall go to
heaven, while they discover all the bitterness of party zeal, and perhaps are
as destitute of external morality as they are of Christian meekness. Hypocrites
may be willing to deny themselves in many things, for the sake of being made
happy. They may, like the ancient Pharisees, take upon themselves much labor,
and practice great austerities in their religion, to soothe them in their
indulgence of a favorite lust. They may be willing to suffer for a while, from
a belief that they shall receive compensation hereafter; like as the miser may
choose to dress in mean apparel, and to feed on coarse food, for the sake of
increasing his riches. -- Time would fail even to hint at the various courses
that run into the broad road which leads to destruction.

THE Christian gives up himself to God without reserve. He denies himself;
and counts all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus his Lord. He feels that the sufferings which he is called to endure, are
far less than his sins deserve; and believes that his calamities are necessary
in the counsels of the Most High, to promote the glory of his great name, and
the happiness of his kingdom. The Christian rejoiceth in the government of
Jehovah; and is comforted by the divine declarations which promise that the
light and momentary afflictions of time, will work for the faithful a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. He does not, like the hypocrite, think
highly of his services, or his sufferings; but views himself as an unprofitable
servant, and laments that he exercises so little patience under his trials.
The hypocrite places all his religious enjoyment in what he supposes he has
done, or endured, and in what has been done for him. The enjoyment of the
Christian arises from what he discovers in God, and in his holy kingdom. His
love and his joy terminate on an object as much above himself as God is greater
than man.

2. WE may learn from the present subject why Christans have such a deep sense
of the evil of sin.

THEY have come to the light, and by this they behold the deformity of sin. The
hearer they approach to God the more they see their own vileness, and the
stronger is their desire to lie low before him. When Isaiah, in vision, saw the
Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and when he heard the seraphims
crying one to another, saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole
earth is full of his glory, the prophet said, Woe is me! for I am undone;
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. Isaiah vi. 5.
We find abundantly in the scriptures that when God has made a clear discovery
of himself to his children, they have had a very lively sense of the evil of
sin, and have been filled with self-loathing. Their hearts are formed on a
different scale from that of the men of the world. They are prepared to view
sin in as new a light as holiness. They hate sin chiefly because it is
committed against a holy God, and is directly opposed to the benevolent designs
of his kingdom. They feel that sin tends to banish all order, peace and
happiness from the universe; and that they can never sufficiently abhor
themselves for doing the abominable thing which the Lord hates.

WHEN any become renewed in the spirit of their mind, they begin to have godly
sorrow. They look back on the transgressions of past life, and pray, with the
Psalmist, long after he had devoted himself to the service of Jehovah, Remember
not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy
remember thou me, for thy goodness' sake, O Lord. Psalm xxv. 7.
Paul, after his conversion did not forget what he once was, and continued to
condemn himself and to mourn, for his violent and cruel conduct toward the
disciples of Jesus Christ, to his dying day. I am the least of the apostles,
that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of
God. 1 Cor. xv. ^.
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the ministry; who was before a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and injurious. -- This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I
am chief. 1 Timothy i. 12, 13, 15.


IF the religion of the gospel were of a selfish nature, the subject of it
would cease to mourn for his past sins, as soon as he supposed himself to be
pardoned: But since it breaths a disinterested spirit, the penitent will
increase in godly sorrow, as he makes progress in holiness. They who are
justified before God on the ground of the atonement, mourn for sin as it
exposes to the divine wrath; but as their hatred of sin arises from viewing it
on a higher scale than their private happiness, or misery, their hatred of it
must increase as they grow in the knowledge of God. If this be not admitted, it
will follow that the design of Christ in coming into the world to save sinners,
was to render them less deserving of punishment: which would make him a
minister of sin. Are there any of the followers of the Son of God in the
hearing of this discourse, let me ask you whether the sins of your past lives
are not daily before you? Have you not an increasing sense of their
aggravations? Do not your views of a crucified Savior heighten your ideas of
the divine justice in your endless punishment, as much as of the divine mercy
in your salvation? Do you not feel yourselves pressed in spirit to confess your
sins to God, and to ask forgiveness?

THE children of God not only renew their repentance of their sins while they
were his enemies, but they are deeply humbled for their backslidings. In how
many ways do they dishonor God? If the iniquities which they commit were marked
against them, they would have the most dreadful punishment of any of the human
race. They sin against clearer light than others, and against such
manifestations of the divine love as were never known by the wicked. The saints
have sometimes fallen into scandalous sins, whereby they have brought great
reproach on the religion which they profess, in the eyes of a scossing world.
When they have been brought to a proper sense of what they have done, they have
prayed with David, in Psalm li. after his sin in the matter of Uriah, Have
mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; according unto the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly
from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknouledge my
transgressions; and my sin is ever before me. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that thou might be justified when
thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. The same spirit runs through
this Psalm. None can read it with an unaffected heart, when they feel lively
sorrow on account of their backslidings. When Christ turned and looked upon
Peter after he had thrice denied him, the heart of that disciple was deeply
wounded, as he recalled the warnings which he had received a few hours before
from his Lord, and as he reflected how awfully he had fallen; he would no
longer continue in his wickedness, but went out, and wept bitterly.

THE present sorrow of God's people is necessary, to imbitter sin to them, to
increase their watchfulness, to teach them their dependence on sovereign mercy,
and to prepare them for the world of perfect holiness and joy.

3. THE subject to which we have been attending, points out the way in which
the children of God are to get evidence, that they belong to his family.

WOULD you, brethren, be satisfied that you are new creatures, be under the
lively influence of Christian love. Remember the words recorded in 1 John iii.
18 -- 21. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but
in deed, and in truth. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall
assure our hearts before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than
our heart, and knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God. Attend to the rules of trial laid down in the
13th and 18th verses of the context, Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. There is no fear in love; but
perfect love casts out fear: because fear has torment. He that fears is
not made perfect in love. By the indwelling of the Holy Spirit in the hearts of
the regenerate, they become the subjects of a filial fear of God. The fear
which is cast out is that slavish fear which operates on the minds of the
wicked, when their consciences are awake, and they tremble, and seek to hide
themselves from the presence of the Lord; as did our first parents, on the day
of their apostasy, when they heard his voice in the garden. If you find the
present influence of a childlike fear of God on your hearts, you have present
evidence that you are born again. No one is cheered by Christian hope while in
a slothful frame. Divine consolation is found only in a season of diligence in
performing the duties of the heavenly calling. Brethren, give diligence to make
your calling and election sure. Add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue,
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to
patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness, charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you
that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2 Peter i.


THE self-examination enjoined in the scriptures, implies a present approach
unto God, while the heart is compared with his word. If you find that you love
his character as there drawn, you will have a witness in yourselves that you
believe on his Son. None but hypocrites can feel satisfied with past
seize. They may be confident that their state is good, even while they
confess that their hearts are cold in religion. Christians cannot feel any
assurance of hope, while they continue in a careless frame. In this state they
will derive no comfort, by adverting to any test of gracious sincerity which is
to be found in the Bible.

GOD'S children will be recovered from their lapses, because he has promised
to keep them by his power, through faith, unto salvation; but they will enjoy
no peace until they retread the steps by which they wandered from truth, or
duty. When they turn to folly, the Lord will visit their transgressions with
the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; but when they return by repentance
from their backslidings, he will make them to hear joy and gladness; that the
bones which he has broken may rejoice. The Lord's people in returning unto him
will find their hope to brighten: and in such revivals they can look back with
pleasure on the past days in which they enjoyed the light of his countenance;
and their hope will be strengthened by the retrospect.

CHRISTIANS, you are not to make comfort, but conformity to God, the first and
highest object of your pursuit. Now bow yourselves before God -- now humbly and
penitently seek his favor -- and now delight in the honor of his name, and in
the happiness of his kingdom, and you will find that peace in your souls which
is evidential of your adoption. When you draw the nearest to God you will think
the least of your personal happiness; yet in these seasons there will be the
highest proof that you are heirs of heaven. In the happy moments when you enjoy
sweet communion with your heavenly Father, you will find that you can say with
Thomas, My Lord, and my God! When you are conscious of such exercises of heart
toward him, what other evidence do you need that you belong to his family? Can
you wish for a secret whisper from above, to tell you that your names are
written in the Lamb's book of life? or that a holy angel should be sent from
before the throne of God, to give you this information? Impulses and
suggestions are, at best, but a part of the wood, hay, and stubble, which will
be burnt up in the day of the Lord. They are delusory and dangerous. They
expose persons to be carried about with every wind of doctrine, and to be led
astray by every artfulimpostor. Those who are much influenced by impulses and
suggestions, either are ignorant of the nature of godliness, or have little
knowledge of its doctrines. Brethren, grow in conformity to God's holy nature
and will, and you will have satisfactory proof that you are his children. Would
you know the joy of God's salvation, wander not from his commandments. An able
writer on Experimental Religion Shepard.
observes, It is heaven to cleave to him in every command; it is death to
depart from any command; Hereby know we that we are in him. If it were possible
to ask of the angels, how they know they are not devils, they would answer, the
Lord's will is ours. So here, how do you know you have not the nature of
devils, and so in the state of devils, bound there 'till the judgment of the
great day? Because God has changed our vile natures, and made our wills like
unto his glorious will.

THE apostle speaks of the Witness of the Spirit, in Romans viii. 16. The
spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.
By this cannot be meant, that the Holy Ghost makes an immediate declaration to
the believer's mind that he shall be saved. The witness is mediate -- it is
through the medium of the holy temper implanted, that the testimony is given.
None except believers will be saved. The spirit of God cannot contradict this.
If he did he would speak an opposite language to the minds of men, from that
which he speaks in the scriptures. The heart must be renewed, before any can
have it witnessed to their consciences by the Holy Spirit, that they are the
children of God. The witness of the spirit, in the verse quoted, is the same
with that which is mentioned in the two verses next preceding, For as many as
are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. When Christians are fully convinced
that they can, with a filial temper, draw nigh to God, they have evidence that
the Holy Ghost has renewed their hearts. Would you know whether you love your
earthly friends, you must have recourse to your temper and conduct toward
them. Would you know whether you are the friends of God, and consequently
whether you are heirs of glory, look into your hearts and lives, and inquire
whether you feel and act like Christians. As far as you find conformity to God,
so far you have cause to conclude that you are members of his holy kingdom. --
In this place we may see why Christians have so little evidence of their
effectual calling. They have but a small degree of boliness, and therefore can
expect but a small degree of assurance.

WE read of the full assurance of hope, Heb. vi. II.
and the full assurance of faith. Heb. x. 22.
We are not to understand by either of these expressions, that there is a
promise that the hope of any believer will be so strong, as in no instance to
be weakened by doubt. The foundation of Christian faith and hope is immovable;
but the hope of Christians with respect to their building on this foundation,
may be, and often is, shaken. There is nothing said in the scriptures which
implies that they are secured from this. The hope of those Christians has been
brightest who have been cast into the furnace of affliction, or who have been
called to seal their faith with their blood. If you are looking for the
assurance of faith, and to have it abide in your hearts, you will be
disappointed if it be not your first and constant labor, to devote yourselves
wholly to God, and if your private happiness do not appear very small in your
eyes, when compared to the glory of his name and kingdom. Firmly resolve in the
strength of the Lord, that whether you live, or die, you will live and die unto
him. Let your daily practice correspond with this dedication, and you will have
comfortable evidence, if not the full assurance of hope, that you will receive
a crown of life.

WE may discover consummate wisdom and goodness in the plan of divine grace.
The comfort of Christians depends on their living near to God. It appears every
way best that they should be in trouble after becoming lukewarm, or worldly;
and that their enjoyment should be no greater than their conformity. They are
not prepared for high and uninterrupted consolation in the present world. They
will have as clear evidence of their title to the tree of life, as they are
fitted to receive; and this evidence will, in most instances, be proportioned
to their sanctification. There are some exceptions from the general rule last
mentioned. I will notice the principal ones.

THERE are some Christians whose assurance falls below their sanctification, in
consequence of wrong doctrinal conceptions. They may suppose that the full
assurance of hope is not attainable; or they may blend imaginary notions with
their faith; or they may believe that if assurance be once obtained, it must be
permanent. Such mistakes as these will operate against discerning the evidence,
which they otherwise might, in favor of their gracious sincerity.

SOME Christians have less assurance than others of the same degree of
holiness, by reason of melancholy, or temptations. Their views are clouded by
these things, and they are ready to conclude that they have never put on the
new man. When pious persons are inclined, either from a particular mental cast,
or the glooms which arise from bodily disorders, to dwell wholly on the dark
side of things, they are peculiarly exposed to the fiery darts of Satan; and to
be driven to the borders of despair. While Christian friends think favorably of
their state, the unhappy persons will admit no consolation. They are much to be
pitied, and great skill is requisite in the treatment of them. Christian
tenderness and wisdom are to be employed, in attempting to prevent the bruised
reed from being broken, and the smoking flax from being quenched. Those
Christians who have been thrown into great darkness, have sometimes emerged
from it into very clear light, and have been made highly useful in comforting
others.

THOUGH Christians are actuated by a common spirit, a great variety is to be
seen in the outward expressions of their love. Hence, each one has his
particular cross to take up, when he commences a follower of the Son of God.
Religion will operate on persons very much according to their particular turn
of mind. They will, when under its influence, other things being equal, put on
different appearances, as they are constitutionally inclined to be cheerful, or
gloomy; bold, or timid; confident, or doubtful; warm, or sedate. It is
important to attend to this variety of tempers, to avoid censoriousness, and
for the sake of being prepared both to receive, and to administer, suitable
brotherly admonition. While every charitable allowance is to be made on the
ground which has been mentioned, it is to be remembered that holy love will
incline persons of whatever mental complexion, to purity of heart and life, and
to be friends to the decency and order required by the gospel. When the
passions become boisterous, the mind is in a very unfit state for serious
reflection. After the sinner is alarmed, his mind is in the best state to
attend to divine truth when it is solemnized by a deep and steady conviction of
the nature and evil of sin, and of the necessity of being reconciled to God. If
public teachers make it their chief aim to address the passions, they are
either ignorant of the structure of the human mind, or they are striving to
promote some interest very different from the conversion of souls to God. The
revival of Religion in many towns in NEW ENGLAND, in 1798, and 1799, has been
uncommonly free from bodily distortions and outcries. It is not to be supposed
that all the visible converts are real ones, but this religious appearance has
been very promising. They who have professed to be the subjects of this work,
have, in general, avoided opening their internal exercises in promiscuous
collections. The telling of experiences has not been the business of those
religious meetings in which persons of various characters are drawn together.
Mr. Edwards, speaking of persons publishing their own experiences, without
regard to time, place, occasion, or company, as was much practiced in the
revival of 1741, and 1742, observes -- I must confess, this is a practice that
appears to me attended with many inconveniences, yea, big with mischiess. The
abundant trial of this method lately made, and the large experience we have had
of the evil consequences of it, is enough to put all sober and judiciout people
forever out of conceit of it. -- Not that I condemn, but greatly approve of
persons speaking sometimes of their religious experiences in private
conversation, to proper persons and on proper occasions, with modesty and
discretion, when the glory of God, and the benefit or just satisfaction of
others require it of them. Humble inquity concerning the qualifications
requisite to a complete standing, and full communion, in the visible Christian
church, first published in 1749. Edit. 1. p. 134, 135. The subjects of the late
work in New England, have freely opened the exercises of their minds to their
teachers, and other Christian friends; and have very generally avoided the
error which Mr. Edwards exposes. They have not been confident of their
conversion; and have been inquisitive to learn the distinguishing nature of
real piety. They have been disposed to make the Bible their study; in which
they have been not a little assisted by making some portion of scripture the
theme of the discourse in religious conferences. They have not appeared forward
in professing religion; nor have they been willing to refrain from it. They, in
general, maintain sobriety in their lives. I am sensible that their future
persevering holy walk, will afford the best evidence of their gracious
sincerity. Let them remember this.




SOMETIMES Christians of high improvements in holiness, and who enjoy
proportionable assurance, are so intent in looking on the corruptions of their
hearts, that it seems to them for a season, hardly possible that they should
be the subjects of saving knowledge. He who is mourning for his sins, in the
exercise of godly sorrow, may exclaim, I fear that my will was never bowed to
the divine will! Is it possible that such a finner as I am can belong to the
family of the Redeemer! I have not a word to say against the justice of God, if
he send me to hell! O Lord, thy government is perfect! May thy great and holy
name be magnified forever! I ask forgiveness for Christ's sake, because thou
can glorify thyself in pardoning the chief of sinners through his atoning
blood! Should I be saved, what a wonderful monument of thy rich and sovereign
grace shall I be! Under what infinite obligation shall I be, to eternity, to
unite in the song, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing! Do you
not, brethren, find peace following those seasons when you can thus confess to
God, and thus lift up your hearts to him? Can you not adopt the language of his
people, in ancient days, The Lord is my portion, says my soul; therefore will
I hope in him? Lament. iii. 24.


YE followers of Jesus Christ, remember his dying charge, Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation. The longer you live, the more you will be
impressed with the importance of taking unto you the whole armor of God, that
ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.
Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the
breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace: Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God: Praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance and supplication for all saints. Ephesians. vi. 13 -- 18.
While you are supplicating for the whole of Christ's family on the earth, pray
fervently for his ministers in particular, that utterance may be given unto
them, that they may open their mouths boldly, to make known the mystery of the
gospel. Arise, and trim your lamps; let them always shine brightly, and give a
clear light in midst of the darkness of the present world. Be ready at all
times for the coming of your Lord and Master. Acquaint yourselves abundantly
with the doctrines of the Bible. Study this holy book with diligence and
prayer. Guard against an unsteady, wavering temper; and indulge not a vain
curiosity in listening to the endless variety of opinions. With a humble, a
meek, and a devout temper, search the scriptures to discover what form of
worship God requires; and when you are satisfied, run not from denomination to
denomination; either because there are things amiss in the people of your own,
or because you may have a good opinion of some individuals who belong to other
denominations of Christians. Your growth in grace, and your influence, will be
greatly obstructed, if you are actuated by a temper which is either capricious,
or trifling, especially in a matter which relates to the God whom you openly
profess to love and adore. Unbelievers will be strengthened in their rejection
of the gospel, if they discover in you an unstable mind; and they will fortify
themselves in that strong hold of Satan to which many fly for refuge at the
present time, viz. That faith has no certain foundation: or that any creed is
made good by believing it. Brethren, you all abhor this infidel sentiment. You
know that no such lesson was ever taught in the school of Christ. As you love
him, and the souls of sinners, beware of doing any thing which tends to
strengthen the hands of the wicked, and to make the kingdom of your Lord appear
contemptible in the eyes of his enemies. Be faithful in your respective places,
in promoting the cause of the Redeemer. Let it lie near your hearts; and
withhold no exertions in your power, and shrink from no sufferings, for its
advancement. Be ever ready to perform the offices which Christian benevolence
dictates, to all your fellow mortals, as opportunities present. Feel for the
flock of God. -- Be kind to its members. -- Rejoice in their consolation. --
Recall them when wandering. -- Comfort them in their sorrows. -- Relieve their
wants according to your ability. -- Feed the hungry and clothe the naked: And
make it manifest by your whole conduct that your treasure is in heaven.

GOD has called you to glory and virtue: Be obedient to his will in all
things. Practice all the duties which are included in love to God and our
neighbor. I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world: but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good,
and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Romans xii. 1.2.
The more you abound in the fruits of righteousness, the more easy and pleasant
will be your labor, and the brighter will be the evidence that you are under
the dominion of that holy love, which forms the character of those who are born
of God. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that
ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. Romans xv. 13.


4. HAVING considered the nature, necessity, Author, and fruits of
Regeneration, let us in concluding the subject, contemplate for a moment, the
happiness of the heavenly state -- of that kingdom of glory which is the final
portion of all who are born of God.

THE rest which remains for the people of God, is very imperfectly understood
by them in the present life. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done
away. When I was a child I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought
as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now we see
through a glass darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then
shall I know even as also I am known. 1 Cor. xiii. 9 -- 12.
The difference between the saints on earth, and the saints in glory, is very
great. The former cannot view the kingdom of God in the same clear light, as do
the spirits of just men made perfect. There is a small beginning of heaven in
the heart of every one who has passed through the new birth. He has chosen the
Lord for his portion, and he desires the enjoyment of him above all things. He
has had a foretaste of the heavenly inheritance, and while in the earthly
house of this tabernacle he sometimes groans, earnestly desiring to be clothed
upon with his house which is from heaven. Doubtful as the Christian may be of
his own state, there is implanted within him a holy love which prefers being
present with the Lord to a continuance in the flesh.

THE death of believers is an inlet to everlasting joys. When the soul is
dislodged from the body their eyes are instantly opened upon the world of
glory. Now they are delivered from sin and sorrow, and they behold Christ
without the medium of faith. Now they realize the, formance of his gracious
words, In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have
told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye
may be also. John xiv. 2, 3.
In the heavenly mansions, the saints are before the throne of God, and serve
him day and night in his temple: and he that sits on the throne shall dwell
among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall
the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, who is in the midst of the
throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters:
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Rev. vii. 15, 16, 17.


WHEN any from our world are received into heaven, they associate with the
glorified saints and the holy angels. Within a short time, my Christian
friends, you will pass through death, and will be welcomed to paradise by the
angels, who are ministering spirits to the heirs of salvation. You will soon
dwell in the same society with Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Samuel,
David, Isaiah, Daniel, Peter, James, John, Paul, and all the other holy
patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, and all the saints who have departed this
life from the beginning of time. What ravishing enjoyments must be found, in
uniting with the holy throng above, in praising God forever? They are all of
one heart toward Him who sits on the throne. They are all perfectly
satisfied with the places assigned them in the kingdom of their heavenly
Father. One on a lower seat does not look up to one on a higher, with envy; nor
does one on a higher seat look down to one on a lower, with contempt. In
heaven, the happiness of one is the happiness of the other, the happiness of
each is the happiness of the whole, and the happiness of the whole is the
happiness of each. They are all under the full dominion of holy love. This
fixes their hearts on God, and draws them to each other by a bond which is
never to be dissolved. Look up to heaven, and behold a perfect society. Can you
look forward to it, and not feel a desire to go, at the time which infinite
wisdom has appointed, and join with the worshippers in the new Jerusalem, and
mingle souls with them to eternity? They feel to themselves as nothing in the
presence of Jehovah, and they rejoice in the plan of his government which has
been unfolding from the first moment of created existence. They are filled with
joy in view of the glory and blessedness of God's holy kingdom. They shout,
Alleluia! in beholding Him who is seated on the throne of the universe,
triumphing over all the subtilty and malice of earth and hell, and rendering
them subservient to the designs of his infinite love.

THE glorified saints have something peculiar in the strain of their praise.
They have experienced the riches of divine grace, in delivering them from the
guilt and dominion of sin. With what raptures of joy do they sing as it were a
new song before the throne! How do they admire, adore and praise Him who has
glorified his great name in their salvation! who snatched them from the brink
of hell, conducted them through a land of darkness, and a vale of tears, and
made them monuments of his everlasting mercy!

THE inhabitants of the heavenly world rest not day and night, saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come. -- Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have created
all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Rev. iv. 8, 11.
The saints stand before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
robes, and palms in their hands, and cry with a loud voice, saying, Salvation
to our God who sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. The angels join
their voices, saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving,
and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God forever and ever. Amen. Rev.
vii. 9, 10, 12.


How great will be the joy and triumph of the redeemed at the second coming of
Jesus Christ! The Lord himself will descend from heaven, with a shout, with the
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: And believers who are alive,
with those who had slept in the dust of the earth, will be caught up together
in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. They will receive bodies fashioned
like unto Christ's glorious body, will be placed at his right hand when he
sits on the throne of Judgment in presence of the affembled universe, and
will hear the sentence from his mouth, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

OF what worth is the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
Judge will give unto all them that love his appearing! Let your hearts glow
with a holy warmth who are following Christ in the regeneration. To what glory
are you born! Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it does not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him;
for we shall see him as he is. 1 John iii. 2.
He who testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly; Amen. Even so,
come, Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.


