JOEL BARLOW TO HIS FELLOW CITIZENS, OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
A LETTER On the system of policy hitherto pursued by their Government.
Paris 4 March, 1799. FELLOW CITIZENS,
SINCE your commercial intercourse with this country has been suspended, and
the produce of your labor arrives at market by a double voyage, as it used to
do when we were British Colonies, I rarely see an American News-Paper. It was
only yesterday, that a writing, said to be a Letter from me to a member of
Congress, dated in march 1798, came into my hands. I have it in a Boston Paper,
called the Sentinel; and, by some observations of the editor, I perceive that
the authorship, a circumstance very trifling in itself, has, occasioned doubts
and disputes. The general tradition, that it is mine, has been questioned by
some persons who express a tenderness for my reputation; for which I will
certainly thank them, whenever they will convince me of the morality of their
motives. Both opinions in this case are partly right, and both partly wrong.
Truth lies between, as it often does in questions of more consequence than the
present.

I did write a Letter to a member of Congress in march 1798, to which the
publication in question bears a strong resemblance. Indeed the political cast
and general complexion of my Letter are easily recognized in this; but every
part of it is mutilated and distorted more or less. There is not a paragraph
without some omissions, additions, or changes, which in some places give a
bitterness to party ivective which I did not mean; in others, destroy all
meaning, and render me unintelligible; and in others, vulgarise the style,
vitiate the grammar, and make the phrasealogy ridiculous.

I know not by what means, nor for what purpose this Letter has been
intercepted, metamorphosed, and published. I pretend not to say there was any
intention of doing an injury to me or to my friends. The hasty manner in which
a copy may be supposed to have been taken, if done by stealth, and the number
of presses and hands of ignorant editors which it has probably passed through,
might perhaps be sufficient to account for the variations, were it not that
they are uniformly against me, -- that is, against that calmness of temper,
dignity of manner, purity of language, and delicacy of political or personal
animadversion, which I wish to preserve. The Letter was written in great haste,
addressed to a very particular friend, and confided to a channel of conveyance
which I thought uncommonly safe. It may be supposed therefore to have been
penned with a carelessness and freedom which would admit of corrections or
alterations in favor of method and moderation. And there is reason to suppose
that some at least of the alterations it has undergone would have been on that
side, had they been the effect of chance, or even of ignorance.

But the substantial character of the Letter, so far as it respects my opinions
on the system of policy pursued by our Executive toward France and England,
during the period to which it relates, must answer for itself. Though I always
reserve to myself the right of changing my opinions, as every man who is not
omniscient must often have occasion to do; yet on this subject I have not
changed them during the last year. It is my belief that it would cost you
dearer even now to settle your dispute with France, than it would have done
(had your negociations been properly managed) at the time I wrote that Letter.
How much you have unfortunately suffered from the piracies carried on under the
French laws since that period, you can doubtless determine better than I; and
what will be the final expense of the negotiation, those only will be able to
decide who shall live to see it.

Thus much for the sentiments originally contained in that Letter. I will now
rectify one or two mistakes, which I have observed in the American papers,
relative to the circumstances under which it was written.

First: it is supposed by some, who do not reflect on the chronology of dates,
that I was apprized of the attempts which had been made here to extort from our
commissioners a bribe to individuals, and a promise of a loan to the
government. They imagine that I wrote under this impression, and consequently
approved the measure. I believe that not the most distant hint of either of
these base attempts was known, or whispered (beyond the circle of those persons
mentioned in the dispatches) until their publication in Philadelphia* which
happened to be on the same day, that my Letter was dated in Paris. The printed
dispatches arrived here in May; and no man in America could feel a greater
indignation than I did, at the piece of villainy therein detailed; though I am
far from thinking that a proper use was made of the circumstance, either before
or after it was communicated to the American government. I had no knowledge
that even a loan was asked for, or contemplated to be asked for on the part of
France. It was my opinion that it was the policy of the American government,
under circumstances then existing, to offer a loan; and a small one would have
been sufficient. One fourth part of the sum you have since lost by plunder
would have been acceptable, and might have been loaned consistently with that
honor and national independence which I wish to see you maintain. The
dispatches of general Pinckney, alluded to in my Letter, were not those of the
three commissioners, as supposed by the Sentinel, but were dated the year
before, and were the fruits of his former embassy.

Secondly: had that Letter been designed for publication, I should not have
left it open to criticism in another point more remarkable than the one above
noticed. In reviewing the errors of the American government, I there made no
mention of those of the French; and it has been concluded, from this omission,
that I approved the conduct of the latter; -- that I saw nothing wrong in that
monstrous system of piracy and plunder exercised toward neutrals; -- indeed, I
am supposed to have relished all the horrors that have attended this tremendons
revolution. God forbid that I should lose my senses to such a degree! I have
not only disapproved the innumerable acts of injustice and violence committed
under the order of the 2d of march 1797, and the law of the 18th of January
1798, but I have uniformly remonstrated, with as much force as an individual of
little influence could do, against that order and that law, and against the
general current of resentment which has marked the measures of this government
toward that of the United States, ever since the ratification of the British
treaty. This resentment has appeared to me far greater than the occasion would
justify; and I have not failed to enforce this opinion wherever I thought it
could be usefully done. But Paris is the place where it is proper to point out
for correction the errors of the French government; and Philadelphia, those of
the American. My friend was in Philadelphia. My Letter was written with the
simple hope of doing some immediate good; not with a design of transmitting
history to future ages. Where then would have been the use of swelling it with
a list of blunders which might have been discovered on this side of the
question? blunders, or crimes if you please, which no man of candor will deny;
but on which his silence ought not to be construed into approbation. You might
as well say that I believe in the doctrines of Mahomed, because I do not go out
of my way to refute them.

We are so constituted and circumscribed in our powers of action, that most of
the good or ill which we do in the world is the result of circumstances not
always in our power to control. Whoever will give himself the trouble of
obtaining a competent knowledge of the French revolution, so as to be able to
judge with intelligence, and weigh the infinite complication of difficulties
and incentives to ungovernable passions that have lain in the way of its
leaders, must indeed be shocked at their follies and their faults; but he will
find more occasion to ask why they have committed so few, than why they have
committed so many. A state of political insanity is not at all inconsistent
with the situation in which they have been placed by the irresistible force of
circumstances. And there are cases in which we ought to applaud men for the
mischiefs they have not done, as well as to search excuses for those they have
brought about.

I am sensible that, in your view, the wrongs committed by the French toward
the United States are less excusable than those toward other nations. You form
this opinion, not so much from national prejudice, as from a consciousness of
the purity of your own intentions in your conduct toward this republic; from
having felt a general friendship to her cause, and not perceiving a sufficient
ground of complaint on which her resentment can be founded. But you are not to
learn that jealousy is one of the strongest and blindest of the human passions;
and I believe you will be convinced that the facts hinted at in my Letter,
viewed through the mist of jealousy that had constantly surrounded the leaders
in the revolution, could not fail of producing essects similar to what we now
deplore.

No! my fellow citizens: I have too high a sense of justice and the rights of
nations, to sanction maritime plunder from any quarter, or even to approve the
least restriction on trade. A perfect liberty of commerce is among the most
indubitable rights of man; and it is the best policy of nations. The
establishment of this principle alone, with proper measures to preserve it,
would have a powerful tendency, if not an infallible effect, to maintain a
perpetual peace between countries separated by the ocean. The opposers of this
branch of liberty, who do it from reflection, are not only the enemies of
America, but they are the abettors of injustice, and the foes of humanity. They
strive to perpetuate a system of war, of public devastation, private rapine,
fraud, and cruelty, which disturb the tranquillity of states, discourage honest
industry, and blacken the character of man. Those who oppose it through
ignorance, and at the same time aspire to the task of administering the
government of a free people, ought to be sent back to school, and there taught
the rudiments of the science which solicits their ambition*

Possessing these opinions, and seeing America move nearer to this principle
than any other nation, how is it possible that I could approve the blind policy
of European plunder, or look with indifference on the tyranny of the seas? From
the time when your first vessel was taken by the English, at the beginning of
the present war, I expected to see some of your great men in power come forward
with something luminous on the rights of nations relative to trade. From the
reputed wisdom of America I expected to see Europe at last enlightened on a
subject of so much importance to the human race. In addition to the freedom of
your constitution, I considered you as possessing two singular advantages for
the attainment of this great object. 1st. Nature had placed a wide ocean
between you and those nations to which your commercial intercourse extended.
And you had not, or ought not to have any other political intercourse abroad,
but what relates to commerce. 2d From the nature of your trade and the constant
result of your accounts current, you are always indebted to those nations in
sums amounting from 15 to 30 millions of dollars. This state of your accounts
was not confined to England, It extended (before the present war) to those
other countries whose manufactures you were in the habit of importing; and to
France and Holland in as high a proportion, compared with their manufactures
imported, as to England.

The first of these advantages, being a sufficient bulwark against attacks by
land, secured you from the political squabbles of Europe; leaving you
vulnerable only in your commerce, The second furnished you, in your commerce
itself, with a most powerful weapon of defense. The English began to plunder
you in the year 1793, in a manner totally unprovoked, and without even a
pretext. Here was an occasion which called for the talents of your leaders, and
invited them to use with dexterity this weapon, which was the most legitimate,
the most pacific, and the most effectual that was ever put into the hands of
any government. But instead of this, an embassy is dispatched to London, to
resign this precious weapon, the only infallible one you had, into the hands of
the British king; and this for no other reason than for fear that a future
Congress and another Executive might use it. Your situation, though new to you,
was not difficult nor delicate; it required a declaration of neutrality, a
solemn declaration and definition of the rights of neutrality, and a
notification of your intention that all property taken unjustly from your
citizens by any Power at war should be compensated by (...) much property of
the subjects of that Power (...) within your jurisdiction, whether in the
public funds or in the hands of private debtors. There is nothing unjust or
immoral in this mode of proceeding. The aggression would be on the part of the
foreign Power; you compensate your own citizen, and leave that Power to
compensate hers; and if she does not do it, the injustice is on her side, both
as first aggressor and final delinquent. If she makes the compensation she will
not be likely to repeat the offense* because it would be an expensive business;
if she refuses compensation, she will soon be brought to reason by the clamours
of her suffering subjects. England, in such cases, would not fail to do you
justice; and that on the only principle you can count upon with certainty from
any foreign nation, an attention to her own interest.

Let it not be said that such a system of policy would prevent our merchants
from obtaining sufficient credits abroad for all the useful purposes of
commerce. Or if any person is really of that opinion, I desire him to visit
Manchester and Birmingham, and see whether he can pass through those towns
without being struck with the wonderful facility of obtaining credit; and
without being besieged for orders by rival houses on almost any terms. Let him
then travel in Germany, or in any part of Europe, and observe the quantity of
riders for English manufacturing houses, who are hawking their samples of
goods, and offers of credit, in every corner of the continent.

I am sensible that I might strengthen this part of my argument, in the minds
of some readers, by adopting a prevaling opinion, that the facility of
obtaining private credits abroad is of no service to our country. But I do not
adopt this opinion. I believe that such credits are of service; and that the
English trade in particular is highly beneficial to the United States, in an
aggricultural and economical point of view; but more especially as furnishing a
ready instrument in the hands of American debtors, to be held up by our
government in terror to one of the most quarrelsome States of Europe.

But it is said to be dishonorable to resort to the sequestration of private
properly as a compensation for public wrongs. Alas, when are we, poor children
of feudality, to obtain proper ideas of honor, or of any other of the moral
sentiments! What can be more honorable in a government than to prevent the
occasion of wars, protect the works of peace, encourage honest industry, and
induce foreign Powers to hold a steady check on the licentiousness of private
violence, sea robbery, murders; and other cruelties, which attend the
consciousness of maritime superiority in some of the nations of Europe? Such
being the object, and this object being at least an honorable one, Let us
examine the means here proposed, and compare them with those which are commonly
resorted to; for which we find plenty of precedents, and therefore have not
been told that they are dishonorable. After spoliations have been committed on
the property of individuals, and you have made sufficient and ineffectual
remonstrances to the government of the offending party* I suppose none will
deny that it would be honorable to fit out armed vessels and make reprisals on
the property of the nation that has committed the violence. But what is this
but sequestring private property? The only difference in the two cases is, that
the latter is attended with great expense to yourselves, leads to battles,
homicides, cruelties, and a surplusage of plunder, which generally bring on a
war; whereas the former is a calm, unexpensive proceeding, which gives you your
compensation by weight and measure, excites no ill blood, and can never, of
itself, become a pretext for a continuance of hostile measures on either side.
Take another comparison: it is not uncommon to lay embargoes, and to sequester
embargoed property, to compensate for injuries sustained. This indeed is
attended with less expense, and less bullying and battling, than reprisals made
at sea; and therefore it may be thought not quite so honorable; but it is
allowed. And what is the difference between this mode and the one of
sequestring debts? In both cases the property is bona side brought to your
country and entrusted to your care, with a full understanding that you will
perform the part of faithful agents, pay for what you buy, and restore the rest
to its owners. Why, I will tell you what is the difference: in the case of
embargo, the ships at least are subjected to great and useless damage; the
crews are left in idleness and vice; the vessels rot; and the cargoes are
exposed either to perish, or to be sold at a forced sale; and it will often
happen that at least three quarters of the value of the property detained is
clearly lost to all parties: while in the seizure of debts, there is no loss,
and no extraordinary expense.

But there is another objection which I must undertake to answer. It is said
that to sequester the property of a foreigner in the public funds would injure
the credit of the United States. I comprehend the argument perfectly well: it
means their borrowing credit. As to their credit for moral honesty, political
economy, national dignity, good sense, and that steady pursuit of pacific
principles which inspires respect and confidence abroad, and the love and
veneration of their own citizens, -- this sort of credit would be greatly
benefited by such a system, if it were solemnly declared as a principle of
neutrality, and impartially executed whenever occasion should require. But a
credit in the mercantile sense of the word, or a facility of making loans,
deserves a farther consideration. It is, in my opinion, an instrument too
dangerous to be trusted in the hands, I will not say of any executive
government, but even a legislative body. I have examined pretty fully in a
former publication Advice to the Privileged Orders, chap. 5. where the funding
system is discussed.
the advantages and disadvantages of such a credit in the policy of a free
republic generally; without applying it to my own country in particular. The
disadvantages are terrible beyond description; and I will only add here, that I
wish to see no such credit habitually in the government of the United States. I
acknowledge that there are cases in which it might be highly beneficial; and so
there are cases where an unlimited arbitrary power might be advantageously
concentred for a moment in one man. But no prospect of such a case, though
possible, has been or ought to be thought sufficient to induce you to provide
for it in your constitution. If you had been convinced, therefore, that the
power you have delegated to congress of borrowing money on the credit of the
United States was as dangerous as it would be to delegate the power of creating
a dictator, you doubtless would not have inserted such a clause in your
constitution, without some modification or restriction, which would not have
been difficult to apply to so tremendous an instrument of innovation and abuse.
Though great mischiefs have already been done by the exercise of this power,
thus indiscreetly trusted out of your hands, yet it is not impossible to arrest
the evil where it is; and in my opinion you ought to attempt it without farther
delay. Otherwise it will inevitably go on increasing to a degree which no man
will pretend to calculate, and no friend to his country can think of but with
horror. Annex to your constitution an amendment to this effect: That in future
no assumption or obligation for the payment of money shall be made or
authorized, by the Congress, the Executive, or any other officer of the United
States, so as to be binding on the people thereof, except in case of actual
invasion; and then for the sole purpose of immediate defense against such
invasion.

Experience has certainly taught us by this time, what theory unhappily did
not, that a few detached citizens, however virtuous in other respects, cannot
be safely trusted with the fates of nations, and the happiness of future ages,
in a business attended with so many temptations, as that of thrusting the hand
into the long and open purse of posterity. The giddiness of power, the violence
of passion, the multiform solicitations of artful speculators, will almost
necessarily drive them headlong to sell our future earnings, and entail slavery
on mankind; when it can be done by the simple act of voting; and when the
responsibility is not to us who sent them, but to generations not yet in being.

Look back through ten years of your history, and examine, if you can with
patience; the rise, progress, and present state of your national debt. See with
what wanton prodigality it has been hunted up from every corner and in every
shape, assumed, funded, and saddled upon you. You were told ten years ago, and
with such effrontery as appeared to gain your belief, that if you would have
the goodness to fund the proposed debt, with all its accumulations, it would be
very easily lessened and very soon extinguished; that the rate of interest in
America would soon fall from six to five, and then to four per cent, and you
were flattered with the idea that you would speedily be able to make new loans
at these latter rates, to purchase in the old capital; and by that means so
diminish the annual call for money, as to be able by a surplusage of revenue to
sink the whole debt in a short time. You have now had ten years of peace since
this arrangement; eight of which were years of such uncalculated prosperity as
was never before experienced by any nation, and was astonishing even to
yourselves, During this time, how have the prospects, held out in your finding
scheme, been realised? Your debt has been constantly increasing; and your
government is now borrowing money, or trying to borrow it, at eight per cent;
and for no other object, as I can discern, but to augment the blessings of a
national debt. As to the rate of interest offered, it is a matter of very
little importance in my view of the subject. I wish the money were not to be
found at twenty per cent; or rather, I wish the government of the United
States, were unable to borrow a dollar at any interest whatever, and were
always to continue so, except in case of war and invasion.

Your funding system, considered as to the circumstances and prospects under
which it was adopted, is doubtless one of the most memorable pieces of
imbecility and impudence that ever was imposed upon a nation. The scheme when
presented to Congress, and the report on public credit that accompanied it,
have indeed procured extraordinary honors to their authors in America; but
they would have done no remarkable credit to any clerk employed at seventy five
pounds a year in the fiscal department in London. They contain no ideas that
are new, or luminous, or analogous to your situation. All is a dead routine of
expedient, familiar to every corrupt government in Europe, whose only object is
to find present money by any means whatever. And all the merit there is (...)
the scheme, is the novelty of applying an old and desperate remedy where there
was no disease; or rather of creating a disease, in order to apply it to the
remedy. The debt thus accumulated, and still accumulating by the constant
solicitude of those who raised it up, has indeed finally assumed the appearance
of an incurable disease; or at least its state has become so alarming as to
require your most serious consideration and immediate exertion, to arrest it,
if possible, where it is, and try to get it under.

The actual state of things with you, if not desperate, is at least disquieting
to the friends of liberty. When I see the American Executive advertising to
borrow money at eight per cent, what do I see but a youthful, free, and
flourishing nation advertising itself for sale! I see an infant Hercules, after
having strangled the serpents in his cradle, and risen on his feet with an
indication of future force destined to free the world from violence, tie
himself for life to the apronstrings of the same Juno who had brought the
serpents to devour him. Your leaders attach you to England, not only by
commercial treaties, which ought to humble you in your own eyes, as much as
they disgrace you in the eyes of the world, but by seeking precedents in every
thing among the worst of her follies; things indeed that scarcely pass for
follies in her, since the weakness, or wickedness, consists chiefly in applying
them to a country where they do not belong, and for which they never could have
been invented. Your physicians have gone to a decrepid, intemperate old man,
and borrowed his strong cordials, his bandages and gouty velvet shoes, to
administer them with cruel empiricism to a sturdy plow-boy.

France is at this time unable to obtain a credit, or to borrow money on any
terms, even from her own citizens, As a friend to France I rejoice at it. She
now spends about thirty millions sterling a year; if she could borrow with the
same fatal facility as England, she would spend at least sixty millions. What
will be her financial situation or policy at the end of the war, I cannot tell.
Her dept will doubtless be enormous, and in a very depreciated state. I hope
she will have more jusstice than to follow our example in funding it, in all
its undistinguished forms and accumulated size. I would rather see it cut up
into paper money, given out to the creditors, and then set afloat, collected
and burnt, in the course of three years, by the operation of one specific and
adequate tax. I do not pretend that this would be the most just or politic
method that could be devised; but I am certain it would be less unjust, and
less impolitic, than to increase it ten fold, by raising it at once from ten
per cent to a hundred, and fixing it on the nation forever at the highest rate
of interest known in the country. A middle course may doubtless be found, which
would do less injustice than either of these extremes. I think too there was
such a middle course, to be discovered in America; and I think it would have
been discovered, had there been no speculators in congress, or about the
treasury. Whenever your eyes shall cease to be dazzled with men, and you will
fix them on measures, you will doubtless adopt the same opinion.

But in answer to what I had suggested relative to the best mode of defense
against the insults of Europe, it will be said that you have settled your
dispute with England, without resorting to it; and, what is more, you have
stipulated that you never will resort to it. Have you ever calculated the real
expense, past, present, and to come, of settling that dispute in the manner in
which you have done it? It has cost you, 1st a sacrifice of character, perhaps
irretrievable, in the disgrace of having injured your old friend in her
distress, aided your most inv^rate enemy, and abandoned the strong hold which
the nature of things had given you, and in which you always would have been
able to defend yourselves against them both, with perfect dignity and
independence. You seem to have forgotten that different nations, as well as
different animals, have different means of defense, with which nature and
circumstances have respectively endowed them. England is defended almost
entirely by a maritime force, without deeming it necessary to fortify her
towns, or keep on foot any considerable army by land. Austria depends wholly
upon her land troops and her fortifications. The Pope, though for many ages the
most powerful monarch in Europe, depended on no physical force by land or sea,
but altogether on a moral force, or church policy. Now if either of the latter
Powers had said to England: lay aside your navy: it is dishonorable to make use
of wooden walls and floating batteries: you ought to allow your enemy to land
in your country when he pleases, and then trust to your bayonete or your
prayer book for defense, -- is it probable that England would have been
persuaded by that argument; to set fire to her ships? The defense of the United
States lay in the peculiar nature of their commerce. You had an invincible
bulwark in the debts you were constantly owing and renewing with all the
nations that had it in their power to menace your repose. But the first nation
that takes it in her held to insult you, comes and tells you that your mode of
defense is dishonorable, that you must not use it, but give it up by compact.
And, although it was more sure, more peaceable, more natural and less expensive
than any other that could be imagined, you immediately resign it into her hands.

2 Your manner of settling that dispute has brought on a rupture with France,
which has already cost, in private plunder and public preparation for war, at
least 60 millions of dollars. And it is not yet certain how much higher these
losses will rise, before the business is terminated.

3. The most frightful and most incalculable expense, is one which is only yet
beginning to begin: it is that terrible scourge of maritime nations, a military
navy. I beg you to contemplate for a moment the abyss that your leaders are
digging under your feet in the naval system now organising with so much
address. You will then listen at your leisure to that swarm of speculators, who
live upon your losses, and are now clamoring in favor of this system with as
much affectation of patriotism, as if your salvation, instead of theirs,
depended upon it. I will only observe that it has been the ruin of every nation
that has hitherto adopted it; and that it must be so from its nature. It is the
siphon put in suction, which never can stop, or moderate its action, till all
that feeds it is exhausted. I purpose, on another occasion, to examine the
naval system of Europe; and to show that it has been and must be ruinous, even
to those nations which had more plausible reasons for adopting it than we can
have.


To assist in dragging you into this business, you have been told (I think in
one of those oracles delivered to both houses of Congress) that there is no
example among mankind of a commercial marine, without a military marine to
support it. The fact is not so; and if it were, that is no reason why it should
continue to be so. The republics of Ragusa, Hamburgh, Lubeck, and Bremen, are
among the oldest governments of Europe; and they are in a high degree
navigating States; that is, they have each of them a large commercial marine,
and have had for many ages, without any military marine. Some of my readers
will smile when they perceive that I am going to compare any of those little
sovereigns with the great and independent republic of the United States. I
shall do it only in one point; and there is one point in which the comparison
is very striking, and I think applicable to the present subject. None of the
neighboring Powers thinks proper to attack the commerce of those
sovereignties, because the interest of other neighboring Powers is concerned
in its independence. In like manner, the Power of St. James's (if our commerce
were kept on its natural footing of self-defence) would not think proper to
attack it, because the Power of Liverpool, Bermingham, Sheffield, Manchester,
London, and other commercial towns, which contain our creditors and
stockholders, would oppose it for the strongest of all reasons, and with
indubitable effect. The power of the Hague would be restrained, for the same
reason, by the Power of Amsterdam; the Power of Paris, by that of Bordeaux,
Nantz, and St. Domingo; and so of the rest. I make no exception in the argument
on account of the present deplorable rupture with France, because this rupture
never would have happened, if we had not first resigned our armor to England;
and because the necessary energies and violent convulsions of the revolution
have concentrated for a moment all possible powers within the walls of Paris;
so that the voice of the commercial towns, the colonies, and the true interests
of the nation, are not heard. But this is a crisis, so far as it respects
France, which cannot be repeated; and so far as it respects the provocation on
our part; I hope it never will.

Our essential character is that of an agricultural people; and, happily for
us, the vast quantities of our vacant lands, which call for culture, and demand
a population equal to half Europe, will preserve us in this condition for ages
to come. Our consumption of European manufactures must therefore continue, and
even increase. The rate of interest, during this period, will necessarily be
higher in America than in Europe. Of consequence, the mass of private debts,
habitually due from our merchants to those of the manufacturing nations, will
not diminish, but probably increase, at least for many years; perhaps as long
as a military marine will be suffered to exist in any country. There could be
no fear therefore that this our national defense would fail us, as long as the
present system of European policy should continue; and we might at least
furnish an example, if we could not find one, of maintaining a commercial,
without a military marine. And I cannot but hope that there are persons now
living who will see the day when not a cannon shall be allowed to be carried to
sea, at least on the Atlantic and the European seas.

But the navy system with you is like the funding system. When once the funding
scheme was adopted as a principle by your speculating legislators, it was
necessary to create a debt to support it. For as the system could not live
without the debt; and as they were determined to have the former, they must of
course raise up the latter. In like manner, the rage for a navy, which the same
politicians have been kindling and puffing for some years, is at last wrought
into a system. They have created a new ministerial department, adorned with all
the pomp of patronage, and ready to contribute its part in the splendour of the
Executive, and the growth of the public debt. They have now at least one
argument for building a fleet; for what is a marine minister, without a marine?
And what is a navy, without ships? These two systems, whatever may have been
the intention of their authors, are certainly calculated for the destruction of
liberty in the United States. And they will not fail of their effect,* unless
they are checked in their present career.

No one will deny that a great change is taking place in the state of society
in Europe, both as to the interior government of nations, and their exterior
and reciprocal intercourse. The rapid progress of thought, set loose from the
shackles of precedent, and following the career of revolution that now shakes
the political world, must necessarily lead to a new order of things. We all
agree likewise, at least all who reflect, that the Law of Nations is
exceedingly vicious and unreasonable in many respects; especially in what
concerns the rights of war and peace relative to commerce. It gives too much
favor and encouragement to a state of war, and subjects to too many
inconveniences and vexations the inhabitants of such countries as choose to
remain in peace. It is evident that these unnatural regulations were made for
kings, and not for people. They are founded on the principle that a state of
war is the chief solicitude of those who govern: and the great object to be
encouraged and secured. This is the origin of those exceptions in the articles
of free transportation, which have risen to an enormous list, called contraband
of war; it likewise gave rise to the practice of searching neutral vessels for
enemy's goods; of subjecting them to extraordinary and unnecessary rules of
proof, to establish the property; and many other ingenious vexations; as if we
must make apologies for wishing to live in peace, and for being producers,
instead of destroyers, of the aliments of human life.

No pacific nation can certainly be satisfied with this state of things; as it
evidently prefers violence and rapine to the honest pursuits of industry. Some
of the Powers of Europe, sensible of these wrongs, have united their efforts
with those of the friends of liberty, in attempting, for many years past, to
change the Law of Nations in this respect; to emancipate neutral commerce from
the tyranny of contraband, and screen it from the seizures and vexations
incident to* the prevailing system. America once joined them in these views,
and adopted the amelioration, as far as possible, in her early treaties in
Europe; till her government chose to sacrifice them to a more favorite project,
and threw them into the general hecatomb of rights and principles, buried in
the British treaty.

If these revolutions in Europe should terminate in favor of general interior
liberty, which is altogether probable, they must necessarily extend to exterior
or commercial liberty. The Law of Nations must undergo a revision; and it must
be settled on a general basis of peace and honesty, instead of violence and
rapine. It would indeed have been glorious in the United States, who had given
the first example to the world of interior and domestic liberty (in which they
have now so many imitators) to have been also the first in asserting, desining,
and maintaining the exterior liberty of trade, and those rules of national
intercourse which must finally be resorted to, as the basis of a pacific
system. Your geographical situation as relative to Europe, not only called for
such a measure, but would have ensured its success.

But while we regret that so singular an opportunity of doing so much good as
has been slighted and thrown away* it becomes us to consider how much of the
error is still capable of being retrieved, and what will be the proper moment
and the best method of attempting it. What are the measures that America ought
to take, to secure her own liberty; establish a permanent and equal
independence from every foreign Power; command the respect and gain the
confidence of all mankind; and induce the commercial nations to adopt a general
plan of pacific intercourse, which will perpetuate itself, and better the
condition of society? It is possible that these enquiries may be the subject of
another Letter which I may address to you, my fellow citizens, whose interest I
will never cease to cherish. I am your brother by the close and complicated
ties of blood, of early sympathies, common dangers, and common triumphs; and
your happiness is naturally and habitually nearer to my heart than that of any
other nation; though my general philanthropy leads me to pity the condition of
every injured people, and to censure, if I cannot restrain, those who lead them
into error*

Some of you who have blamed me for the severity of my remarks on the conduct
of your Executive. It is because you have made them gods, that you are offended
with me for finding them but men. I never doubted the patriotism of your
principal leaders; that is, so far as patriotism consists in good intentions.
But I doubt the patriotism of those who lead your leaders. I see immense
fortunes made by your funding legislators, out of the public funds which they
funded for themselves. I see the most perfidious measures proposed, adopted,
and persisted in, for hurling you from the exalted station which enabled you to
give commercial law to the governments of Europe; and for crouching you under
the pelican wing of the worst of those governments. I see the treaty that
consummates this business, ratified in a gust of passion, a moment of personal
resentment at an intercepted letter written by an officious French Minister
which happened to speak of the western insurrection. And when the indignation
of France, though excited by repeated provocation, rises with symptoms of
extravagant fury, and threatens an unjustifiable measure of revenge, I see no
prudent or manly attempts on your part, to allay the storm and prevent a
rupture; but prevarication about facts is given for explanation; and gasconade
at home keeps time with humiliation abroad. Then comes the flood of piracy and
plunder let loose upon your property; a scene of wickedness which no man can
abominate more than myself, and no man has endeavored more to prevent or
mitigate. But when I trace these deplorable effects to their proper and
indubitable causes, I cannot confine my animadversions to this side of the
Atlantic. Though you may choose to deify your first magistrates, the original
authors of these calamities, -- though you enshrine them in the temple of
infallibility, fence them round with sedition laws, and intoxicate them with
addresses, birth-day-odes, and bacchanalian toasts, -- I see in them some of
the frailties of men; and I will not join the chorus of adoration.

With respect to men, I am of no party; I am a republican in theory and
practice; notwithstanding the disgrace into which that principle seems to be
falling in America. I consider it as my unalienable right, as well as my
indispensable duty, to render a service to you wherever I find occasion. And
when such service has led me to notice what I thought wrong in the
administration of your government; I have always done it: and in such a manner
as I thought would be most likely to lead to a correction of the abuse. And I
shall not relinquish this right, nor neglect this duty, whoever may be the men,
and whatever the party, to whom you may choose to delegate your powers.

Among my endeavors to serve you, as a volunteer in the cause of humanity,
there is none which I have had more at heart than that of preventing a war
between you and France, and of bringing about a reconciliation on terms
honorable and advantageous to each I have no doubt but that both governments
desire it; but whether they do or not, as long as I deem it for the interest of
both nations, and there remains any hope of success, I will not slacken my
exertions. I do not believe in the modern doctrine of your cabinet, that it is
a crime in a private citizen to serve his country, or even to call in question
the infallibility of its administration. And I know no man in America who did
believe it, as long as he remained a private citizen. I am confident, and you
may be in time, that the labors of myself and a few other men, not
commissioned for the purpose, have hitherto prevented a war. But how long this
will continue to be the case, I cannot pretend to say.

I have been animated in these exertions, not only by the desire of diminishing
present evils, and of sparing the blood and treasure of the present generation,
but of preventing the cause of liberty from falling into disgrace by the
quarrels of the two republics, and of disappointing the tyrants of the world,
who anticipate this sort of triumph to their own cause. Perhaps I deceive
myself; but I cannot yet renounce the belief that the principle of free
representative government is so manifestly preferable to the principle of
monarchy, that it will soon be adopted and brought into general practice among
the nations of Europe. I believe that if France has not yet reduced to
practice, the liberty she has vindicated in theory; both civil and commercial,
it is owing to a prolongation of revolutionary measures -- necessitated state
of Europe, and not to a forgetfulness of principle. She has not yet taken
measures to establish the liberty of the seas, because she has not yet arrived
at that state of tranquillity which will enable her to look beyond present
exegincies, to plans of permanent improvement. The same apology will not apply
to the United States. You have had one period, and a pretty long one, of
unexampled prosperity and repose; during which your government appears to have
done little for America but increase her debt, and nothing for Europe but
imitate her follies.

I was indeed in hopes that advantage would be taken of the elevated ground on
which you stood to lay the foundation of an edifice that should promise, at
least one day, to afford a shelter to the human race. I expected to see you
propose a basis for a Law of Nations, to be established in reason, justice, and
the principles of peace. And I flattered myself that when France should come to
her senses, and rest from her military labors, we might see the two greatest
republics on earth, not only enjoying liberty themselves, but recommending it
to others, by removing the occasion of wars. But if you really have no talents
among you of a higher nature than what is necessary to copy precedents from old
monarchies, I pity you, and call upon you to pity me. It is time to despair of
the perfectability of human society, and make up our minds to return to
slavery, monarchy, and perpetual war.

JOEL BARLOW.

A second Letter from the same writer, will appear shortly.

PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED, (...) OFFICE, March 8, 1800.


