ADDRESS TO THE People of the United States: WITH AN EPITOME AND VINDICATION OF
THE PUBLIC LIFE AND CHARACTER OF THOMAS JEFFERSON.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JAMES CAREY, No. 109, N. SIXTH-STREET. 1800.

To the People of the United States.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
AUSPICIOUS to the best hopes of Americans, for the universal success of
Republican liberty, the revolving year, 1800, presents you with the periodical
right of suffrage in the election of a President of the U. States.

The magnitude of this right, and the deep interests it involves for the fate
and happiness of our common country, demand your immediate, vigilant, unceasing
and deliberate attention. Impartial, firm and independent, it remains with you
to vindicate the rights of Republican liberty, and to crown with success the
noblest and fairest experiment the world has ever yet seen, attempted by
freemen, to establish self-government.

The probationary period of ten years, since the institution of a foederal
government, affords much ground to hope and fear, amidst that continued
concussion of nations which still agitates the European world, and threatens to
involve our western hemisphere in its ruinous vortex. Your sacrifices for peace
and the virtuous efforts of your republican sons, have, hitherto preserved you
from the fatal curse and calamity of war.

Pursuing, with misled confidence, the measures of men, whose hostility to the
fundamental principles of your government, conceived the only hope of success,
amidst scenes of war and confusion, you have been placed, more than once, on
the precipice of destruction. Seceding from the principles avowed to the world
as the basis of your republican institutions, the pillars of aristocracy have
arisen, and in the direlection of American truths, the world has been
astonished at your retrograde turn and rapid advance to monarchy.

A review of past events will but present the painful spectacle of political
apostasy, amidst the wreck of principle: and the creation of systems equally
subversive of liberty, peace and happiness -- Suffice it to say, that new and
unheard of doctrines have been advanced, precedents established, and laws
enacted, which go to sap the very foundations of public liberty -- Hence have
we seen, in the abandonment of constitutional truth and principle, constructive
treason avowed, and the right of trial by jury of the vicinage exploded in our
courts of justice, whilst our legislative acts have begotten new and arbitrary
principles of alienism and sedition, with an extended and boundless system of
common law, adopted by a foreign nation, and never yet incorporated into any
American code. And our executive functionaries have not been slothful in
pursuing, under color of law, persecutions and proscriptions of personal
disqualifications for political opinions, and restraints on the liberty of the
press -- Or in promoting, by every faculty they possessed, systems of extended
influence and wasteful expenditure, to the creation of heavy and oppressive
public burdens, in numerous and unnecessary appointments to office, a standing
army, a permanent navy, augmentation of public debt, loans at excessive and
exorbitant interest, and finally, additional and aggravated impost duties,
excises, salt tax and land tax.

But, fellow-citizens, if in addition to this dark catalogue of public evils,
you are told from he mouth of the now President of the U. S. that "REPUBLICAN
GOVERNMENT MAY BE INTERPRETED TO MEAN ANY THING;" that "THE BRITISH
CONSTITUTION IS, IN THE STRICTEST SENSE, A REPUBLIC;" that "AN HEREDITARY
PRESIDENT AND SENATE FOR LIFE, CAN ALONE SECURE YOU HAPPINESS;" and that in the
conflict of political opinions which prevail in our country, "IT IS ADMISSIBLE
FOR ONE FACTION TO SEIZE THE PERSONS OF THEIR OPPONENTS AND TRANSFER THEM
WITHIN THE LINES OF AN INVADING ENEMY;" -- When and where will you look for
relief?

Heaven has wisely ordered, that on your own virtuous efforts alone, shall it
depend, to disavow the principles, revoke the measures, and discard the men,
that have thus afflicted you. Happy, in the possession of a citizen, to whom,
under God, America is principally indebted for that share of political
well-being she now enjoys -- JEFFERSON, mild, amiable, and philanthropic,
refined in manners as enlightened in mind, the philosopher of the world, whose
name adds luster to our national character, and as a legislator and statesman,
stands second to no man's -- Jefferson, yet lives. On him then concentre your
present views and your future hopes.

Illustrious by an active life, of great and consistent efforts to promote the
universal establishment of republican liberty, and the permanent happiness of
the great family of mankind, he will neither disappoint your hopes nor defeat
your wishes. Look into his past life, examine all his conduct, and if you can
discover one instance of political apostasy, or the direlection of a republican
principle, then withhold from him your confidence and your suffrages.

Neither suffer yourselves to be deceived by the calumnious efforts of
electioneering partisans, the real enemies of America, to depreciate the moral
and political character of the man whose name should be dear to every
republican heart. It is through the turpitude of those enemies, that the pure
virtues and pre-eminent talents of Jefferson stand reflected, with undiminished
luster, and present him to the world as the friend and benefactor of the human
race. See the testimony of the venerable judge Pendleton, president of the
Virginia convention, as recorded in the debates of that convention, pages 100
and 101, on the question for adopting the foederal constitution, who speaks in
the following emphatic words: I know and highly respect the great abilities of
Mr. Jefferson -- Providence has, for the happiness of mankind, accompanied
those abilities with a disposition to make use of them for the good of his
fellow-beings. Honorable testimonial of an aged and veteran statesman, who
could contemplate with pleasure the support and patronage he had yielded to the
youthful virtues and rising talents of Jefferson, in early life -- a
testimonial as honorable to him that gave, as to him that received it.

But resting on the same high and respected authority of judge Pendleton, see
what he further says in the same debate, in reply to the artful insinuation
then made, that Mr. Jefferson, who was at that time absent as minister of the
United States in France, had written sentiments hostile to the adoption of the
foederal constitution, and advising its rejection. -- I have seen, says Mr.
Pendleton, the letter in which Mr. Jefferson has written his opinion upon this
subject -- It appears that he is possessed of that constitution, and has in his
mind the idea of amending it -- He has in his mind the very question of
subsequent or previous amendments, which is now under consideration. His
sentiments on this subject are as follow: 'I wish with all my soul that the
first nine conventions may accept the new constitution, because it will secure
to us the good it contains, which I think great and important. I wish the four
latest, whichever they be, may refuse to accede to it, 'till amendments are
secured.' -- He then enumerates the amendments which he wishes to be secured,
and adds -- 'We must take care however that neither this, nor any other
objection to the form, produce a schism in our union. That would be an
incurable evil; because friends falling out never cordially reunite.' Are these
sentiments, (asks Mr. Pendleton) in favor of those who wish to prevent its
adoption by previous amendment? He wishes the first nine states to adopt it --
What are his reasons? Because it will secure to us the good it contains, which
he thinks great and important, and he wishes the other four may refuse it,
because he thinks it will tend to obtain necessary amendments -- But he would
not wish that a schism should take place in the union on any consideration. If
then we are to be influenced by his opinion at all, we will ratify it, and
secure thereby the good it contains.

Republican citizens of America, will you believe it, and shall the groundless
calumny yet find currency in our land, that Jefferson is an antifederalist and
enemy to the constitution of the U. States? Reflect, and ask yourselves,
whether, if in the prophetic spirit that dictated his remarks on the
constitution, as before quoted, the convention of four states had refused to
accede to it, until amendments were obtained, you would probably now have cause
to regret the existence in your country of an alien and sedition law, of the
lately adopted doctrine of constructive treason, and above all, of the ruinous
and disgraceful treaty with Great Britain?

Equally repulsive to the malign suggestion that Mr. Jefferson is an enemy to
religion, the public records of his native state, present to the world in the
statute book of their laws, the celebrated act "for establishing religious
freedom" -- drawn by the pen, and offered to the assembly of Virginia, by the
hand of their enlightened and illustrious fellow-citizen: Read, ye fanatics,
bigots, and religious hypocrites, of whatsoever clime or country ye be -- and
you, base calumniators, whose efforts to traduce are the involuntary tribute of
envy to a character more pure and perfect than your own, read, learn, and
practice the RELIGION OF JEFFERSON, as displayed in the sublime truths and
inspired language of HIS ever memorable "Act for establishing religious
freedom," thus: --

"WELL aware that Almighty God has created the mind free; that all attempts to
influence it by temporal punishments or burdens, or by civil incapacitations,
tend only to beget habits of hypocrisy and meanness, and are a departure from
the plan of the Holy Author of our religion, who being Lord both of body and
mind, yet chose not to propagate it by coercions on either, as was in his
Almighty power to do; that the impious presumption of legislators and rulers,
civil as well as ecclesiastical, who, being themselves but fallible and
uninspired men, have assumed dominion over the faith of others, setting up
their own opinions and modes of thinking as the only true and infallible, and
as such endeavoring to impose them on others, has established and maintained
false religions over the greatest part of the world, and through all time; that
to compel a man to furnish contributions of money for the propagation of
opinions which he disbelieves, is sinful and tyrannical; that even the forcing
him to support this or that teacher of his own religious persuasion, is
depriving him of the comfortable liberty of giving his contributions to the
particular pastor, whose morals he would make his pattern, and whose powers he
feels most persuasive to righteousness, and is withdrawing from the ministry
those temporary rewards, which proceeding from an approbation of their personal
conduct, are an additional incitement to earnest and unremitting labors for
the instruction of mankind; that our civil rights have no dependence on our
religious opinions, more than our opinions in physics or geometry; that
therefore the proscribing any citizen as unworthy the public confidence, by
laying upon him an incapacity of being called to offices of trust and
emolument, unless he profess or renounce this or that religious opinion, is
depriving him injuriously of those privileges and advantages, to which, in
common with his fellow-citizens, he has a natural right; that it tends also to
corrupt the principles of that very religion it is meant to encourage, by
bribing with a monopoly of worldly honors and emoluments, those who will
externally profess and conform to it; that though indeed these are criminal who
do not withstand such temptation, yet neither are those innocent who lay the
bait in their way; that to suffer the civil magistrate to intrude his powers
into the field of opinion, and to restrain the profession or propagation of
principles on supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous fallacy, which
at once destroys all religious liberty, because he being of course judge of
that tendency, will make his opinions. the rule of judgment, and approve or
condemn the sentiments of others only as they shall square with or differ from
his own; that it is time enough for the rightful purposes of civil government,
for its officers to interfere when principles break out into overt acts
against, peace and good order; and finally, that truth is great, and will
prevail if left to herself: that she is the proper and sufficient antagonist to
error, and has nothing to fear from the conflict, unless by human interposition
disarmed of her natural weapons, free argument and debate, errors ceasing to be
dangerous when it is permitted freely to contradict them:

" Be it therefore enacted by the General Assembly -- That no man shall be
compelled to frequent or support any religious worship, place, or ministry
whatsoever, nor shall be enforced, restrained, molested or burdened in his body
or goods, nor shall otherwise suffer on account of his religions opinions or
belief; but that all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to maintain,
their opinions in matters of religion, and that the same shall in no wise
diminish, enlarge, or affect their civil capacities.

"And though we well know that this assembly, elected by the people for the
ordinary purposes of legislation only, have no power to restrain the acts of
succeeding assemblies, constituted with powers equal to our own, and that
therefore to declare this act to be irrevocable, would be of no effect in law;
yet we are free to declare, and do declare, that the rights hereby asserted,
are of the natural rights of mankind, and that if any act shall be hereafter
passed to repeal the present, or to narrow its operation, such act will be an
infringement of natural right."

Further, if the opponents of Mr. Jefferson require additional proof of the
ardent piety and religious fervor of his mind, let them read in his "Notes on
Virginia," page 237, his reflections on the subject of slavery, expressive of
his wishes for a gradual emancipation, which are concluded by the following
pious apostrophe. Can the liberties of a nation be thought secure when we have
removed their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the people that
these liberties are of the gift of God? That they are not to be violated but
with his wrath? Indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is
just: that his justice cannot sleep forever: that considering numbers, nature
and natural means only, a revolution of the wheel of fortune, an exchange of
situation is among possible events: that it may become probable by supernatural
interference! The Almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such
a contest. -- But it is impossible to be temperate and to pursue this subject
through the various considerations of policy, of morals, of history, natural
and civil. We must be contented to hope they will force their way into every
one's mind. I think a change already perceptible since the origin of the
present [American] revolution. The spirit of the master is abating, that of the
slave rising from the dust; his condition mollifying, the way I hope preparing,
under the auspices of heaven, for a total emancipation, and that this is
disposed in the order of events, to be with the consent of the masters, rather
than by their extirpation.

Again, in the same Notes, page 240, evincing his anxiety to cultivate a spirit
of genuine virtue in the public mind, as the sure preservative of republican
liberty, he expresses a no less exalted sentiment of the cultivators of the
soil, the yeomanry of our country, than a just confidence in the order of
providence to perpetuate, through them, the sacred flame of moral and religious
virtue.

Those, says Jefferson, who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God;
if ever he had a chosen people, whose breasts he has made his peculiar deposit
for substantial and genuine virtue. It is the focus in which he keeps alive
that sacred fire, which otherwise might escape from the face of the earth.
Corruption of morals in the mass of cultivators is a phenomenon of which no age
nor nation has furnished an example. It is the mark set on those, who not
looking up to heaven, to their own soil and industry as does the husbandman,
for their subsistence, depend for it on the casualties and caprice of
customers. Dependence begets subservience and venality, suffocates the germ of
virtue, and prepares fit tools for the designs of ambition. -- It is the
manners and spirit of a people which preserve a republic in vigor. A
degeneracy in these is a canker which soon eats to the heart of its laws and
constitution.

But is there not yet another accusation produced by the calumniators of this
good man, which the recorded testimonial of his country's approbation, also
refutes? Namely, that while he was governor of Virginia, in the year 1781,
during Arnold's invasion of that state, he shamefully fled before a handful of
light horse, and left the capital of the state, Richmond, to be pillaged and
plundered by the enemy. If indeed it were true that Mr. Jefferson had been thus
timid and faithless to his public trust. no man will believe that the
Legislature of Virginia were ignorant of the circumstances, or unmindful of his
conduct. -- Accordingly it will be found in the proceedings of the Virginia
Legislature of the 12th of December, 1781, that that assembly, having all the
circumstances of Mr. Jefferson's conduct before them and within their
knowledge, respecting that invasion, unanimously resolved, That the thanks of
the General Assembly be given to Thomas Jefferson, Esquire for his attentive
administration of the powers of the Executive, whilst in office.

In addition, if the unanimous testimony of the Legislature be not, in the
opinion of his calumniators, most conclusive, it will be seen in the Gazette of
the United States, published at Philadelphia, by John Fenno, that on the 26th
of October, 1796, when the same groundless calumny was brought forward in that
gazette, against Mr. Jefferson, for the same purpose that it is (...) used, a
gentleman, who then gave his name to the printer, and who had been an officer
in the army and an eye witness of all Mr. Jefferson's conduct during the
invasion of Virginia, in the year 1781, published in that gazette the following
testimonial of that conduct, which was never either answered or controverted;
to wit,

MR. FENNO,
I observe some shameful mistatements of the writer in your Gazette under the
signature of Phocion, respecting the conduct of Mr. Jefferson, while governor
of Virginia, in the year 1781, and having been personally present, in actual
service, through all the active scenes of that year, from its commencement and
before, until after the termination of the siege of York, I can state what that
conduct really was, with more truth and certainty than either Phocion or his
friend Charles Simms, neither of whom appear to know much about what they have
written, and were, to my knowledge, neither of them in Virginia at the period
referred to. First, then it is not true that "Mr. Jefferson abandoned his trust
at the moment of invasion." -- Arnold's invasion took place in January, 1781:
Mr. Jefferson remained in his station through the whole period of that
invasion. Cornwallis's invasion took place in April, 1781, and he continued to
advance into the country until the beginning of June, when he commenced his
retreat before the marquis Fayette, into the lower country, on the seaboard;
the marquis having taken the command about two months before. Mr. Jefferson did
not resign at all, or abandon his station; he remained in office until after
Cornwallis's retreat, and until the time for which he was constitutionally
elected had expired; to wit, the 12th of June, 1781. Before he left this
office, however, Mr. Jefferson demanded of the Legislature, a full enquiry into
the conduct of the Executive for the last twelve months; which was accordingly
granted by their resolution of the 12th of June, 1781; and the 26th of November
following appointed for the enquiry -- being a period of near six months
allowed to bring forward any charges or proofs against Mr. Jefferson. -- On the
26th of December, 1781, the Assembly proceeded to take up the enquiry at large,
on the report of a committee of their own body; and having first voted that no
charge or accusation whatever appeared against Mr. Jefferson, and that there
never was any cause for the enquiry but some vague and groundless rumors, they
passed the resolution of the 12th December, 1781, already published in your
paper (Mr. Fenno), and which if Phocion's candor will permit him again to
read, he will find not merely an acknowledgment of Mr. Jefferson's ability and
integrity, and altogether silent on the want of firmness, but containing an
unanimous and express vote of thanks for his attentive administration of the
powers of the Executive, whilst in office.

Secondly, Mr. Fenno, it is not true that Mr. Jefferson at any time fled before
a few light horsemen, and shamefully abandoned his trust, or, as suggested by
Charles Simms, contributed by his conduct to the loss and distress which
accrued to the state, in the destruction of public records and vouchers for
general expenditure. -- Let facts speak: In four days from the arrival of
Arnold's fleet, he proceeded 150 miles up James river, and landed his troops
within 24 miles of Richmond, the night before his march to that place: all the
militia of the state, which could be armed, being then out under the command of
general Nelson, in the neighborhood of Williamsburg, and no defense at hand
for the security of Richmond but about 200 half-armed militia, under the
command of baron Steuben, who could do nothing more than cover the removal of
the records and military stores across James river, from Richmond to
Manchester, and secure the boats and batteaus on the Manchester side, to
prevent the enemy's passing. The writer of this remained in Richmond with the
last detachment of militia that passed the river with records and stores, and
until the enemy, about 9 o'clock in the morning, had entered the lower part of
the town and began to flank it with their light horse, he saw Mr. Jefferson as
active as man could be, as well the night before as that morning, issuing his
orders and using every exertion to remove the records and stores. He afterward
saw him at Westham, five miles above Richmond, where Arnold pushed a detachment
to destroy the stores at that place, and which, through Mr. Jefferson's
exertions, were almost entirely saved. The next day, when the enemy evacuated
Richmond, the first man the writer of this saw, as he entered the town, was Mr.
Jefferson. Let a candid public then determine whether conduct like this, to
which the writer hereof was an eye witness, manifested want of firmness or an
abandonment of trust. The situation of the state was at that time peculiarly
distressing; the whole quota of its continental troops were then acting in
South Carolina; many thousand stand of arms had been supplied for the defense
of North Carolina, and Arnold's invasion found the state almost totally
defenseless. The state of things was little better a few months afterward,
when Cornwallis's invasion happened, and the marquis Fayette took the command;
since it is well known that through the whole of that campaign the marquis
could never muster more than three or four thousand militia, badly armed, in
aid of the few continental troops that were detached from the northern army, to
Virginia. Such was the deplorable situation both of the state and continent,
for want of arms. In respect to Tarleton's sudden march to Charlotteville,
during that campaign, in order to surprise the governor and assembly, it will
be remembered, that the marquis's army was inferior to Cornwallis's, and had
few or no cavalry attached to it; that at Charlotteville there was not even a
single company of militia, and that Tarlton made a rapid march, of about 60
miles through the country, at the head of about 500 cavalry. The writer of this
was also present at Charlotteville at the time, and saw Mr. Jefferson and his
Executive Council attending their duty at that place, with the Assembly: it
will not be pretended then, under the circumstances stated, that Mr. Jefferson
fled before a few light horsemen, and shamefully abandoned his trust, as
shamefully asserted by Phocion.

But, Mr. Fenno, why do the enemies of Mr. Jefferson cavil alone at his
honorable acquittal by the Assembly of Virginia, from groundless and unfounded
charges? they well know that at the end of that very year, his brave and
gallant successor in office, general Nelson, was subjected to public accusation
and impeachment before the Assembly, for supposed misconduct in office, and
honorably acquitted by the same body, in the same precise manner, and with an
unanimous vote of thanks, as in the case of Mr. Jefferson. No proof appeared
against either; the accusation in each was declared to be groundless, and the
honorable reputation of both stand or fall by the verdict of the same body. I
leave it with a candid public to form their own reflections.

26th October, 1796. A SUBSCRIBER.


There yet remain two other calumnies against the much-abused character of Mr.
Jefferson, which require notice. They were both suggested in the year 1792, on
the eve of a presidential election, and again in the year 1796, on a similar
occasion, and are now revived; to wit, 1st, That when minister of the United
States to France, in the year 1787, he made a dishonorable proposition to
Congress, respecting a transfer of the debt due by the United States to France,
to a Dutch company. 2dly, That he was a debtor to British merchants before the
revolutionary war, and pursued measures to defraud his creditors.


Unhappily for his calumniators, both these charges have been proved to be
perfectly groundless, and to have originated only in the wickedness and malice
of his enemies.

The first charge was published in the year 1792, in Fenno's Gazette, and
given, as believed, from the treasury department of the United States, on whose
books Mr. Jefferson's letter to Congress respecting the French debt, was
recorded. The then head of that department was roundly accused, in the public
prints of that year, with misrepresentation and the breach of an official duty,
in causing or permitting to be published from the treasury books, for the
purpose of aiding the calumny against Mr. Jefferson, a mutilated copy of his
letter to Congress, leaving out two entire paragraphs of it, and changing the
sense of the part published, by substituting words not in the original. This
accusation was evaded, but never disproved before the public, and it remains a
solemn and incontrovertible truth, that the letter was published, so mutilated.

The facts in relation to that letter are briefly these: Mr Jefferson informs
congress, that an offer had been made by a speculating Dutch company to the
French court, to purchase the American debt due to that nation, at a discount
of six or eight million of livres; to which offer, when communicated by the
French minister, to Mr. Jefferson, for his approbation, he replied that he had
no power to approve or disapprove; to the agent of the Dutch company, who made
the same application, he returned a similar answer; and in his letter to
congress, presuming that the Dutch agent would make application to that body,
he states the reflection, how far, if congress apprehend any future danger of
the punctuality of payment, it might be advisable to transfer the discontents
arising from that source, from the French court, whose friendship we ought to
cultivate, to the breasts of a private company of adventuring speculators, who
foreseeing the possible delays of payment, had calculated the probable loss,
and were willing to encounter the hazard.

Two other paragraphs follow; to wit, "That in his (Mr. Jefferson's) opinion,
however, the honor and credit of the United States may be preserved inviolate:
that the French debt may be discharged without discount or loss to that nation,
and the stipulations of the United States be complied with, to all its
creditors. And he then suggests to congress the mode of doing it.

The enemies of Mr. Jefferson published this letter, leaving out the two last
paragraphs, and changing the sense of the first in the manner that has been
stated.

On the whole letter a single reflection is submitted, Whether in any instance
of public conduct Mr. Jefferson could have more justly appreciated the duty of
a public minister, or more happily combined it with the conscientious and moral
sense of public and private integrity?

The second charge, "That Mr. Jefferson was a debtor to British merchants,
before the revolutionary war, and pursued measures to defraud his creditors,"
is refuted and disproved, in a manner highly honorable to Mr. Jefferson's
reputation, by a publication of the 5th of April last, made in Philadelphia, by
a gentleman who took particular pains to investigate the subject; and is as
follows:

ACCOUNT OF MR. JEFFERSON'S BRITISH DEBTS.
It is the fate of every man whose virtue and talents have elevated him in
society, to excite the envy and hatred of many; among persons thus disposed,
some are imperceptibly carried into error, others are designedly criminal. --
The steady industry displayed by the assailants of virtue exceeds infinitely
that of its defenders; and unfortunately, the meditated injury has its full
effect before the person accused is aware of it, and instead of parrying the
blow he has the wound to heal. In this situation of things, so rare is
benevolence to be found amongst us, so little interest do we generally take in
the welfare of our fellow-men, that we are apt to imagine we have discharged
our duty when we declare our belief of the innocence of the accused, and
content ourselves under the self-approbation, that we have done nothing to
injure the feelings of the sufferer.

The evils to society which we permit to remain, without our utmost exertions
to remove, may answer well enough with people who are negatively good, or who
believe that virtue consists in abstaining from evil: I think differently: and
thinking as I do, will never permit the people to be duped by false accusations
levelled against their most meritorious and deserving servants. If in the
charges, which, from my best judgment, I am obliged to make against public
characters, I pass into error, the principle which governs me, ought also to
draw forth an advocate for truth and virtue, on the opposite side of the
question.

For some time past, a great clamor has been made through the United States,
respecting debts due from Mr. Jefferson, to British merchants: I have taken
some trouble to inform myself upon this subject, and I confess, that although I
did not believe the charge to be correct, as to the idea which it was intended
to convey of that gentleman's honor; I had no conception, that his enemies
would be driven to attack him upon a subject, which, if fairly examined, would
add so considerably to the luster of his character.

In the year 1774, before a shilling of paper money had been issued, Mr.
Jefferson sold about five thousand acres of land in Cumberland and Bedford
counties, to pay his proportion of a debt due from the estate of Mr. Wayles to
Farrel and Jones. He offered the bonds to their agent immediately, who refused
to take them. The money was paid to Mr. Jefferson in 1779 and 1780, and he
carried it to the treasury of Virginia, as the laws pressed on all to do, who
owed money to British subjects; declaring that the public would pay it over,
dollar for dollar. This delusion soon passed away, and it became evident, that
the public neither could nor ought to pay according to the nominal value. The
reader will perceive the loss which Mr. Jefferson sustained, and that if he had
been disposed to quibble, no event could have afforded him a more plausible
pretext: But it appears that this gentleman considered himself still answerable
to Farrel and Jones, and therefore settled with their agent otherwise.

The next debt in succession, was one due to Kippen and company, for whom Mr.
Lyle, of Manchester, was agent. I called upon that gentleman for information
respecting Mr. Jefferson's conduct in the settlement of this claim, who assured
me that it was strictly honorable. Mr. Lyle told me that as soon as the Vice
President returned from his mission to France, he waited upon him, and made
immediate arrangements for payment, deducting the 8 years war interest.

Concerning the war interest, I think the annexed letter from Mr. Jefferson,
will be quite satisfactory. But exclusive of his particular situation, and the
losses which he sustained, probably from his conspicuous services during the
revolutionary contest; I know of not a solitary instance in which the eight
years interest has been paid, if objected to by the defendant's counsel; and I
fancy it was the opinion of the federal judges assembled in Philadelphia, that
the war interest ought to be deducted, if a special reason for avoiding it
could be assigned -- and surely no reason could be assigned with more forcible
propriety, than that the British themselves had destroyed the means. But, to my
mind, there is the best evidence of the equity of withholding the eight years
interest; the juries have uniformly deducted it, although the counsel for the
plaintiff has often assigned peculiar and strong reasons, springing from the
manner in which the debt originated, why it should be allowed.

The following letter from Mr. Jefferson, while in Paris, is now submitted to
the public. It was not procured from him, but having been produced in court by
Jones's agent, in another case, was by the counsel of that agent heartily and
honorably read in court as an act of justice to Mr. Jefferson; get thus into
the press, and has since been used by the advocates for the payment of British
debts, and by them, very much complimented. We add, from unquestionable
authority, that soon after Mr. Jefferson's return from France, arrangements
were made with the agent of Farrel and Jones, and a deposit placed in his
hands, to the amount of the claim against Mr. Jefferson.


Paris, January 5, 1787. Sirs,
When I had the pleasure of seeing you in London, I mentioned to you that the
affairs of Mr. Wayles's estate, were left to be ultimately settled by Mr.
Eppes, the only acting executor; that I have left in his hands also, and in
those of a Mr. Lewis, the part of Mr. Wayles's estate which came to me,
together with my own: that they were first to clear off some debts which had
been necessarily contracted during the war, and would after that apply the
whole profits to the payment of my part of Mr. Wayles's debt to you, and to a
debt of mine to Kippen and company of Glasgow. -- Being anxious to begin the
payment of these two debts, and finding that it would be too long postponed if
the residuary ones were to be paid merely from the annual profits of the
estate; a number of slaves have been sold, and I have lately received
information from Messrs. Eppes and Lewis, that the proceeds of that sale, with
the profits of the estate to the end of 1781. would pay off the whole of the
residuary debts. -- As we are now, therefore, clear of embarrassment to pursue
our principal object; I am desirous of arranging with you, such just and
practicable conditions, as will ascertain to you, the terms at which you will
receive my part of your debt, and give me the satisfaction of knowing that you
are contented. -- What the laws of Virginia are, or may be, will in no wise
influence my conduct. -- Substantial justice is my object, as decided by
reason, and not by authority or compulsion.

The first question which arises, is, as to the article of interest. For all
the time preceding the war and all subsequent to it, I think it reasonable that
interest should be paid; but equally unreasonable during the war. Interest is a
compensation for the use of money. -- Your money in my hands, is in the form of
lands and negroes. From these during the war, no use, no profits, could be
derived. Tobacco is the article they produce; that only can be turned into
money at a foreign market. But the moment it went out of our ports for that
purpose, it was captured either by the king's ships, or by those of
individuals. The consequence was, that tobacco worth from twenty to thirty
shillings the hundred, sold generally in Virginia, during the war, for five
shillings -- this price it is known will not maintain the labourer and pay his
taxes. There was no surplus of profit then to pay an interest. In the mean
while we stood insurers of the lives of the laborers, and of the ultimate
issue of the war. He who attempted during the war to remit either his principal
or interest, must have expected to remit three times, to make one payment;
because it is supposed, that two out of three parts of the shipments were
taken. It was not possible then for the debtor, to derive any profit from the
money which might enable him to pay an interest, nor yet to get rid of the
principal by remitting it to his creditor. With respect to creditors in Great
Britain, they turned their attention to privateering, and arming the vessels
they had before employed in trading with us; they captured on the seas, not
only the produce of the farms of their debtors, but of those of the whole
state. They thus paid themselves by capture more than their annual interest;
and we lost more. Some merchants indeed did not engage in privateering; these
lost their interest, but we did not gain it; it fell into the hands of their
countrymen. It cannot therefore be demanded of us. As between these merchants
and their debtors, it is the case where, a loss being incurred, each party may
justificably endeavor to shift it from himself; each has an equal right to
avoid it; one party can never expect the other to yield a thing, to which he
has as good a right as the demander: we even think, he has a better right than
the demander in the present instance. This loss has been occasioned by the
fault of the nation which was creditor. Our right to avoid it then stands on
less exceptionable ground than theirs. But it will be said, that each party
thought the other the aggressor -- in these disputes, there is but one umpire,
and that has decided the question, where the world in general thought the right
lay.

Besides these reasons in favor of the general mass of debtors, I have some
peculiar to my own case. In the year 1776, before a shilling of paper money was
issued I sold lands to the amount of L. 4,200, in order to pay these two debts.
I offered the bonds of the purchasers to your agent, Mr. Evans, if he would
acquit me, and accept of the purchasers as debtors, in my place. They were as
sure as myself; had he done it, these debts being turned over to you, would
have been saved to you by the treaty of peace. But he declined it. Great sums
of paper money were afterward issued; this depreciated, and payment was made
me in this money, when it was but a shadow. Our laws do not entitle their own
fellow citizens to require re-payment in these cases, though the treaty
authorizes the British creditor to do it. Here then I lost the principal and
interest once. -- Again, Lord Cornwallis encamped ten days on an estate of mine
at Elk Island, having his headquarters in my house. He burned all the tobacco
houses and barns on the farm, with the produce of the former year in them; he
burnt all the enclosures, and wasted the fields in which the crop of that year
was growing (it was in the month of June): he killed or carried off every
living animal, cutting the throats of those which were too young for service.
Of the slaves, he carried away thirty. The useless and barbarous injury he did
me in that instance, was more than would have paid your debt, principal and
interest: Thus I lost it a second time. Still I will lay my shoulders
assiduously to the payment of it a third time; in doing this, however, I think
yourself will be of opinion, I am authorized, in justice, to clear it of every
article not demandable in strict right: of this nature I consider interest
during the war.

Another question is, as to the paper money I deposited in the treasury of
Virginia, toward the discharge of this debt. I before observed, that I had
sold lands to the amount of L. 4,200 before a shilling of paper money was
emitted, with a view to pay this debt. I received this money in depreciated
paper. The state was then calling on those who owed money to British subjects
to bring it into the treasury, engaging to pay a like sum to the creditor at
the end of the war. I carried the identical money therefore to the treasury,
where it was applied, as all the money of the same description was, to the
support of the war. Subsequent events have been such, that the state cannot,
and ought not to pay the same nominal sum in gold or silver, which they
received in paper: nor is it certain what they will do. My intention being, and
having always been, that whatever the state decides, you shall receive my part
of your debt fully. I am ready to remove all difficulty arising from this
deposit, to take back to myself the demand against the state, and to consider
the deposit as originally made for myself, and not for you.

These two articles of interest and paper money, being thus settled, I would
propose to divide the clear proceeds of the estate (in which there are from
eighty to one hundred laboring slaves) between yourself and Kippen and Co.
two-thirds to you, and one-third to them; and that the crop of this present
year, 1787, shall constitute the first payment. That crop, you know, cannot be
got to the warehouse completely till May, of the next year; and I suppose that
three months more will be little enough to send it to Europe, or to sell it in
Virginia, and remit the money -- so that I could not safely answer for placing
the proceeds in your hands, till the month of August; and annually every August
afterward, till the debt shall be paid. It will always be my interest, and my
wish, to get it to you as much sooner as possible, and probably a part of it
may always be paid some months sooner. If the assigning the profits, in general
terms, may seem to you too vague, I am willing to six the annual payment at a
certain sum. But that I may not fall short of my engagement, I shall name it
somewhat less than I suppose may be counted on. I shall six your part at four
hundred pounds sterling annually; and as you know our crops of tobacco to be
uncertain, I should reserve a right, if they fell short one year, to make it up
the ensuing one, without being supposed to have failed in my engagements -- but
every other year, at least, all arrearages shall be fully paid up.

My part of this debt of Mr. Wayles's estate being one-third. I should require
that in proportion as I pay my third, I shall stand discharged as to the other
two-thirds; so that the payment of every hundred pounds shall discharge me as
to three hundred of the undivided debt. -- The other gentlemen have equal means
of paying, equal desires, and more skill in such affairs. Their parts of the
debt, therefore, are at least as sure as mine, and my great object is, in case
of any accident to myself, not to leave my family involved with any matters
whatever.

I do not know what the balance of this debt is; the last account current I
saw, was before the war, making the whole balance, principal and interest,
somewhat about nine thousand pounds; and after this, there were upwards of four
hundred hogsheads of tobacco, and some payments in money, to be credited. --
However, this settlement can admit of no difficulty: and in the mean time the
payments may proceed, without affecting the right of either party to have a
just settlement.

Upon the whole, then, I propose, that, on your part, you relinquish the claim
to interest during the war; say from the commencement of hostilities, April 19,
1775, to their cessation, April 19, 1783, being exactly eight years: and that
in proportion as I pay my third, I shall be acquitted as to the other
two-thirds. On my part, I take on myself the loss of the paper money deposited
in the treasury. I agree to pay interest previous and subsequent to the war,
and oblige myself to remit to you, for that and the principal four hundred
pounds sterling annually, till my third of the whole debt shall be fully paid;
and I will begin these payments in August of the next year. If you think proper
to accede to these propositions, be so good ad to say so, at the foot of a copy
of this letter. On my receipt of that, I will send (...) acknowledgment of it,
which will render this present letter obligatory on me; in which case, you may
count on my faithful execution of this undertaking.

I have the honor to be, With great respect, Sir, Your most obedient And most
humble servant, THOMAS JEFFERSON.


It will be observed, that the preceding letter is dated at Paris, in 1787: Mr.
Jones, to whom it is addressed, awaited Mr. Jefferson's return to America, and
authorized his agent to settle with him there. Immediately after his arrival in
Virginia, in the fall of 1789, he procured a meeting with the agent and the
gentlemen interested, and an amicable settlement was made in writing, on the
principles of the letter. -- Mr. Jefferson immediatdly sold property again to
the whole amount of the debt, and in the course of the first and second years
delivered over the obligations received for it to the agent, who took on
himself the collection of the money; so that now it is seven or eight years
since he has paid up this debt. From the foregoing facts it appears that Mr.
Jefferson, before the present government existed, before he could have known
that it was thought of, and at a time when there was no power to compel him to
payment on account of Mr. Wayles's debts to British merchants, made a voluntary
offer of settlement, on the most favorable terms which they have obtained
under the judicial system of the United States. The claim under the payment
into the treasury of Virginia, was so well founded, that it received the
sanction of a circuit court there, although that decision was afterward
reversed by the supreme court. -- Every body who attended on the court, will
recollect the impressive argument of Mr. Marshall (now in Congress), in support
of the decision of the circuit court, and it will ever remain a doubt whether
it ought not to have been affirmed. It is highly honorable to Mr. Jefferson,
to have waved a legal defense, which was complete at the time (as the courts of
Virginia were sovereign), so specious in its general merits, and, as it
respected himself, rendered perfectly just, by the sacrifice of as much
property as was sufficient to pay the debt. It is enough to say, that no
British creditor, even where payment could not be alleged, has ever obtained
more from the federal courts than Mr. Jefferson voluntarily paid. -- There was
another claim made by the agent of the same house, of Farrell and Jones,
against the executors of Mr. Wayles and another, for a cargo of about L. 4,000
value, to be sold on commission, on account of the consignees: Mr. Wayles
assisted in the sale, but died soon after; and the whole collection survived to
the other consignee; who received it, wasted it, and died a bankrupt: the agent
thought he would try the chance of recovering the money from the executors of
Mr. Wayles, though they had not received it: but on the hearing, eleven of the
jury determined at once against their liability, but the twelfth dissenting,
the case was laid over to the next federal court; when a second jury concurred
unanimously with the eleven of the first, gave a verdict for the executors, and
agreeably to the opinions of judge Iredell, who had presided at one hearing,
and of judge Patterson, at the other. General Marshall, and judge Washington,
then of the bar, were the council for the executors. Palpably unfounded as this
claim was, the trumpet of calumny, swelled it, when it suited a particular
purpose, from one-third of L. 4,000 to L. 40,000; and from a groundless claim,
to an unquestionable debt, which was to swallow up Mr. Jefferson's fortune!

HAVING NOW, fellow citizens, reviewed in their order, the whole of the
combined calumnies which the political enemies of Mr. Jefferson have produced
against him, and exposed their falsehood and malice, it would be doing equal
injustice to you, and to the honorable reputation of this distinguished native
citizen of America, not to present to your view, an Epitome of his public life
and services, and thereby possess you with a fuller knowledge of the laborious
efforts and eminent usefulness, by which he has so greatly contributed to
promote the best good of our common country and the general happiness of man:
It will moreover afford the most effectual antidote to all the poisonous
effusions of slander, and enable you to judge for yourselves, uninfluenced by
party considerations, whether a life hitherto so zealously and successfully
devoted to the pursuit and accomplishment of so many great and good principles
for the common benefit of mankind, shall by your suffrages to him, be rendered
more eminently useful to America, in the all important office and character of
Chief Magistrate and President of the United States.

THOMAS JEFFERSON
Was born in the year 1743, in the County of Albemarle in Virginia, where he
now resides. His father was a reputable landholder of that County, and gave
this, his eldest son, a college education at the university of William and
Mary, in the city of Williamsburg. After passing his degrees, being designed
for the bar, Mr. Jefferson commenced a student at law, under the guidance of
George With, now the venerable judge and sole chancellor of Virginia.

In 1766, Mr. Jefferson came to the bar of the supreme court of his native
state, and continued to practice therein with great success and reputation,
until the commencement of the American revolution in 1775, and the consequent
occlusion of the courts of justice: during this period of active practice, the
industrious mind of Jefferson found time to digest the first volume of Reports
of Adjudged Cases in the Supreme Courts of Virginia, which were ever exhibited
in that state, and, to this day, are admitted authority in those courts,
remaining a monument of his early labors and useful talents.

In 1774, when all America were roused into action by the aggravated wrongs of
the British government, Mr. Jefferson stepped forward a bold and able champion
of his country's rights, and published his much admired pamphlet, "A Summary
View of the Rights of British America," addressed to the King, which brought
forward against the author, threats of prosecution for treason, by lord
Dunmore, then governor of Virginia; threats which produced no other effect on
the independent mind of Jefferson, than publicly to avow himself the author,
prepared to meet all consequences.

About this time Mr. Jefferson married the daughter of Mr. Wayles an eminent
counselor at law, and continued to enjoy uninterrupted domestic felicity in
the society of one of the most amiable of women, until the year 1780, when by
her death he became the mourner of her virtues, and the guardian of their two
daughters and surviving issue, to whose education and settlement in life, and
the service of his country, he has ever since faithfully devoted himself, still
remaining a widower.

In the year 1775, Mr. Jefferson was elected a member of the Virginia
Convention, and on the 4th of August, in the same year, one of the members to
represent the state, then colony, of Virginia, in Congress.

In that memorable year 1776, the natal year of American emancipation from
British tyranny, and of the independence and sovereignty of the United States,
Mr. Jefferson was one of a committee of five, to wit, Thomas Jefferson, John
Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman and R. R. Livingston; appointed by
Congress to draught the Declaration of Independence, and it was from the pen
and enlightened mind of Jefferson, first named of the committee, that that
glorious instrument proceeded, which was reported by the committee, and
unanimously adopted by Congress, entitled, "The Declaration of Independence,
etc." An instrument which, so long as the records of time shall endure, will
perpetuate the fame of its author, and preserve, in the American mind, forever
and inseparable, the names of Independence and Jefferson.

In the same year, 1776, the ardent mind of Jefferson, eagerly pursuing the
glorious principles of the revolution, and foreseeing that so long as the
corruptions of British systems existed, we were independent in name not in
fact, produced for the adoption of the legislature of his native state, the
four following important acts, to wit;

1st. An act for establishing religious freedom, published in this essay. 2. An
act to regulate descents, to prevent estates entail and the rights of
primogeniture. 3. An act for the apportionment of crimes and punishments. 4th.
An act to establish public schools.
The influence of these acts upon the relative principles they embrace will be
universally seen and felt by those who prize civil liberty as a primary
blessing, and regard the preservation of it as among the first behests of God
to man -- whilst systems of universal toleration in matters of religion; for an
equal distribution of property, and in subversion of the aristocratic and
unnatural principle of entail and primogeniture right; for ameliorating the
sanguinary code of criminal law; and for extending to the poorest class of our
citizens, the benefits of education at public expense, will be viewed as the
emanations of a great and good mind, zealously endeavoring to promote the
happiness and improve the condition of his fellow beings.

Equally evincive of watchful regard to the rights of his countrymen, was the
scheme and suggestion made by Mr. Jefferson for the formation and adoption of
the Constitution of Virginia, in the same year, for prefixing thereto A Bill of
Rights, declaratory of the natural and unalienable rights of man," which was
accordingly done.

In the year 1778, Mr. Jefferson being then a member of the Virginia
Legislature, presented to that body the act "to prevent the importation of
slaves," which was enacted into a law in the month of October in the same year,
and was shortly after followed by another act "to authorize manumissions,"
being the commencement of a system of gradual emancipation, also proposed by
him.

In the year 1779, Mr. Jefferson, at the age of 36, was chosen governor of
Virginia, and continued in that office until June 1781 -- during which the
state experienced three invasions, and was also brought into a critical state
of collision respecting its boundary lines with two neighboring states,
North Carolina and Pennsylvania. His conduct in that station amidst the jarring
conflicts and trying difficulties of foreign invasion and domestic disquietude,
was such, as secured to him, 6 months after he left the office, and upon the
fullest public enquiry, the unanimous vote of thanks of the Legislature,
consisting of 180 members, "for his attentive administration of the powers of
the executive whilst in office."

It was during the same year, 1781, amidst the cares of government and scenes
of private affliction, that Mr. Jefferson prepared his celebrated work,
afterward published in France, and which he modestly styled "Notes on
Virginia." In this work, so justly admired by all the learned world, for its
philosophical research, ingenious theory, and able disquisition, equally
evidencing an enlarged, liberal and pious mind, the author, in a superior style
of eloquence, boldly attacks and fully refutes the fallacious theories of Mr.
Buffon and the Abbe Kaynal, which tend to disparage the animal and its species,
both man and beast, of the American world, and reduce them to a scale smaller
than those of Europe; vindicating with truth and intelligence the equal
distribution of nature's blessings to America.

In the year 1783, Mr. Jefferson was again appointed to a seat in Congress from
his native state, and in the following year, on the 7th of May, was nominated
by that honorable body minister plenipotentiary of the United States to the
Court of France, as the successor of our illustrious Franklin, whither he
embarked early in the same year, and remained absent from the United States, in
the execution of the duties of that important trust, until the month of
October, 1789, when he returned home by permission of the then president,
Washington, who, upon being elected to the chief magistracy of the foederal
government, immediately destined Mr. Jefferson to fill the next most honorable
and confidential station in the executive government, near his own person.

During his mission to France, Mr. Jefferson with that peculiar address,
intelligence and attention to promote the essential interests of the United
States, which directs all his conduct, obtained from the French king, an
arrette, highly beneficial to the American commerce, for the free admission,
exempt from the customary foreign duties, of oil, fish and whalebone, the
product of the American fisheries, into certain ports, and for the sale of
American built ships in all the ports of France -- benefits, which our Eastern
brethren continued to reap the peculiar advantage of, until the commencement of
the revolutionary convulsions which have agitated that nation.

About the same period also, Mr. Jefferson, in conjunction with our immortal
Franklin, negociated with a minister from the court of Prussia, then at the
Hague, that celebrated treaty known by the name of "The Prussian treaty," in
which an astonished world has, for the first time, seen a public avowal and
positive provision by treaty, between two sovereign and independent nations,
for the establishment of those two great and glorious principles, promotive of
universal peace and happiness, to wit, 1st. "That free ships shall make free
goods:" and 2d. "That privateering in time of war be abolished;" principles
which it were to be wished could be rendered universal and eternal. Mr. Adams,
now president of the United States, was one of the commission for negociating
this treaty, and on its completion, it was sent over to London, where Mr. Adams
then resided as minister of the United States, for his signature. It is greatly
to be regretted that Mr. Adams could not be content to retain to himself a
share of the glory which reflects on the authors of this celebrated treaty.
But, unhappily for our country, since he became president of the United States,
we have seen him nominate his son John Quincy Adams, as minister to the court
of Prussia, for the express purpose, as declared, of renewing the treaty with
that nation, which having been limited to continue in force for ten years only,
had expired. Accordingly another treaty has been made by his son with Prussia,
which has been approved by a majority of the Senate and ratified by the
president, but which, instead of renewing and continuing the old treaty, is in
itself a new one, expressly abandoning and renouncing the two inestimable
principles, 1st. "That free ships make free goods;" and 2d. "That privateering
in time of war be abolished;" principles which, it appears, from the
correspondence accompanying the negotiation, laid before the senate of the
United States by the president, the wise and enlightened ministers of the
Prussian monarch, were brought, with great difficulty and reluctance, to
abandon, on the earnest solicitation and reiterated demand of the American
negociator, under the suggestion that the maritime powers, particularly
Great Britain, would never sanction or permit them.

In the year 1789, Mr. Jefferson being returned to the United States, and
appointed by president Washington, secretary to the department of state,
immediately entered on the arduous duties of that important station, having
previously stipulated with the president, that in consideration of the many
years absence from his family and estate, he might be permitted, at the
expiration of the constitutional term for which the president was elected, to
retire from the public service.

The first result of the labors of Mr. Jefferson in the department of state,
were exhibited to Congress in the following reports, to wit;

1st. A report, on the the fisheries of the United States. 2d. A report, on
coins, weights and measures. 3d. A report, on the waste and unappropriated
lands of the United States. 4th. A report, on the privileges and restrictions
on the commerce of the United States in foreign countries.
Each of these reports displayed the usual accuracy, information, and
intelligence of the writer.

But it was reserved for a more critical and delicate period in the affairs of
the United States, that the preeminent talents of the American secretary should
become most conspicuous, and interestingly useful to his country: The
non-execution of the treaty of peace with the United States, on the part of
Great Britain, her detention of our Western posts, and the attendant
spoliations on our commerce, both by Great Britain and France, then at war with
each other, added to the intrigues of the minister of the latter, Genet, all
conduced to a situation difficult and perplexing. Besides which, Spain
continued to withhold from us the free navigation of the Missisippi, so
essential to all Western America. In this state of things, the just confidence,
which, the discriminating mind of Washington, had reposed in Mr. Jefferson, was
amply repaid, by that promptness, zeal and ability, with which the American
secretary, contributed by his labors, to relieve the executive from
embarrassment. Through a series of masterly and unequalled diplomatique
correspondence, which he maintained, at the same time, with the respective
ministers of Great Britain and France, namely Hammond and Genet, he traversed
and rebutted their respective causes of charge and complaint against the United
States, and having fully proved the various aggressions and infractions of
treaty on the part of their respective governments, pointed to the means for
preserving the honor and maintaining the rights of his own country, whilst
alike superior to the intrigues of Great Britain or of France, he fully
manifested that he held no particular attachment to any foreign nation, but was
equally prepared, with the decision, firmness and intelligence of a true
American, to oppose and resist the aggressions of all. The recall of Genet, and
appointment of his successor, with the subsequent proceedings between the
United States and France, the appointment of Mr. Jay, his treaty with
Great Britain and the recall of Mr. Hammond, appointment of Mr. Liston, and
subsequent proceedings with Great Britain, are all well known. In respect to
Spain, the labors of Mr. Jefferson, were more immediately effective and
complete. Having possessed the commissioners of the United States then at
Madrid, negociating a treaty with the court of Spain, with the most ample and
pointed instructions, and also of the form and provisions of a treaty,
predicated on the basis of the free navigation of the Missisippi, it remained
only for Mr. Thomas Pinckney, then minister from the United States at London,
under special instruction from the president, and appointed envoy for that
purpose, to repair to Madrid, and seizing the favorable moment for effecting
it, to accomplish this desirable work. This was accordingly done, with equal
promptness and decision on his part, and jointly to that, and the labors of
the American secretary in the cabinet, are the United States indebted for the
most liberal, honorable, and beneficial treaty, they have ever yet entered
into with a foreign nation. -- Here the review of the public life and labors
of Mr. Jefferson ceases.

About this time, having, at the pressing entreaty of the then president,
Washington, remained one year longer at the head of the department of state,
than he had before stipulated to do, he resigned his office, and retired with
the warmest thanks and regret of the president, Washington, to his estate at
Monticello, in Albemarle County, Virginia, where he continued for upwards of
two years uninterruptedly to enjoy the sweets of domestic ease, and a respite
from the fatigues of public life, following with avidity his favorite pursuits
of philosophical research and agricultural improvement, until the voice of his
country again summoned him to the more active scenes of public duty, and placed
him in nomination for the presidential chair, as the successor of Washington.
The issue of that election is well known, and but for a false return in one
state, and the suppression of a return in another, Mr. Jefferson would have
been declared president, as the returns however stood before Congress, it
appeared that he had 68 votes, and Mr. Adams 71, consequently the latter was
declared president, and the former vice president of the United States.

In the month of January, 1797, Mr. Jefferson was elected president of the
American Philosophical Society, held at Philadelphia, as successor of the great
and virtuous Rittenhouse, who was the immediate successor of our immortal
Franklin, the founder of that society.

And now, for the second time, the voice of his country has placed Mr.
Jefferson in nomination for the presidential chair.

Fellow Citizens of the United States;
In the foregoing address you are presented with two very opposite characters
of Mr. Jefferson:

The first, written by the pen of his enemies, conceived in malignity and
malevolence, under the powerful influence of party feeling and political
resentment, exhibits him to you as the worst of men, an enemy to his God, an
enemy to his country, an enemy to the human race. It derives a momentary
support from the basest fabrications and wickedest falsehoods. It cannot long
deceive, since it fully betrays the jealousy, fear and anger of its authors;
jealousy, of his unrivalled talents; fear, that on his elevation to the
presidency, every germ of monarchy and aristocracy in our country will
dissipate at the electrical touch of his republican virtues; and anger, that
notwithstanding all their detractious efforts, he continues to possess the
unshaken and undiminished confidence of the great body of the American people.

The latter character of Mr. Jefferson, is drawn not by the partial hand of a
friend, nor under the influence of political or party prejudices: there is no
need of fabrication, falsehood or deception. You see it in the faithful and
unerring record of his many great and virtuous deeds; in the public usefulness
and eminent services of a well spent life; in the numerous testimonials of his
country's approbation, and, by the universal suffrage of the foreign world, in
their acknowledged tributes of respect and esteem for the talents of his head
and the virtues of his heart. Its leading features present to you a man of
pure, ardent and unaffected piety; of sincere and genuine virtue; of an
enlightened mind and superior wisdom; the adorer of our God; the patriot of his
country; and the friend and benefactor of the whole human race.

And such fellow citizens, is the TRUE and REAL character of THOMAS JEFFERSON,
unaided by artificial colorings or the false varnish of deceptive flattery.

Pennsylvania, July, 1800. AMERICANUS.


