AN ORATION ON THE EXTENT AND POWER OF POLITICAL DELUSION. DELIVERED IN
NEW HAVEN, ON THE EVENING PRECEDING THE PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT, September, 1800.

BY ABRAHAM BISHOP.

THE SECOND EDITION.

REPUBLICANS! Ye have to contend against principalities and powers, and the
rulers of the darkness of this world, and spiritual wickedness in high places
with the prince of the power of the the air at the head of them: -- Therefore,
let your loins be girt about, and your lamps trimmed and burning. NEWARK:
PRINTED BY PENNINGTON AND GOULD M,DCCC.

PREFACE.
IF our government has pursued the course dictated by the spirit of our
revolution; if good government requires the subjugation of one half of the
community; if republicans have deserved the lashes and contempt which have been
most liberally dealt to them in this State for eleven years; or if the spirit
of persecution has subsided: -- Then the writer of these pages has been
extremely unfortunate in the choice of his subject.

But Intolerance, with its hydra heads, still roams about the State and no
mercy is shown to those who doubt the wisdom of the present administration. The
efforts of an individual are seeble when opposed to the phalanx which stand
prepared to crush, in its infancy, freedom of enquiry and discussion. If these
sentiments, claiming no high parentage, should sail of gaining the patronage of
numbers in the State, they will be unable to endure even through the short
period which generally bounds the existence of such ephemeral productions.

These pages present the corner-stones of an AMERICAN PALACE and the dark vaul^
where are to be entombed, in eternal sleep, the liberties and hope^ of this and
future generations. The foundation of a MONARCAY is already laid in 6 per cent.
3 per cent. and deferred Stock, in millions of civil l^st and indirect
taxation. Indirect taxation was since (...) the old Congress. The ^^^or of all
Free States.
The aristocracies already formed are to be the pillars of this magnificent
building. The glory of this latter house is to transcend that of the edifice of
freedom, which, erected on the ruins of palaces, lately presented a massy
colonnade of human bones. Wh^^ infant in his nurse's arms is to be the
progenitor of an illustrious race of AMERICA MONARCHS is yet unknown.

Are such suggestions to be lightly regarded when it is now known that a number
of men, who have been our political leaders, were holding their meetings in the
year 1787 to contrive ways and means for the establishment of what they termed,
A Confederated Monarchy? When we read the speech of General Hamilton in the
Federal Convention, and now find him at the head of our army? When we hear our
leading men avow that this country can never be governed without an Hereditary
Monarch? When we see the appropriate plans of Monarchy adopted by
administration? When we read the federal papers filled with reflections on
liberty and republicanism and with praises of Monarchical government? When
Fenno, the mouth-piece of the f^deral party has just published a scheme of a
Federated, Presidential* Monarchical Aristocracy?

In the following pages I have endeavored to represent t^uly the tendency of
the leading measures of our government, and even if one half of my positions
and conclusions be just, a Monarchy is decidedly before us. The men now in
place have been the contrivers or advocates of these measures. If the people
approve the means and the end, they will doubtless continue the instruments in
operation: otherwise a new election will open to republicans a new and most
desirable prospect.

Our southern brethren wonder that Connecticut, once the garden of liberty,
should now appear to be the hot-bed of aristocracy -- that Connecticut,
internally the most democratic State in the union or in the world -- a State
where the opinions of the people have governed for more than a century; where
government is less expensive and engetic than in any other State; and were
distinction of rank is hardly known, should be attached to expensive, ^ergetic
and aristocratic measures, tending to humble the people land to create odious
distinctions: But the people of Connecticut have not deserved to ^ose the
confidence of republicans: They are radically attached to the principles of
1776, and to the declaration of independence and are mortal foes to hereditary
mo^^^chy; but by certain operations of federal policy (as will be seen in the
appendix) the people have no opportunity to express their opinions on federal
men and measures.

If atheism and modern philosophy prevailed in the State, there might be some
fear of the final prevalence of aristocracy; but there is not an athe^^ in the
state nor a single modern philosopher among the republican party; Deism is not
prevalent, yet there are deists in both parties, whose infidelity has
originated from causes wholly unconnected with politics. It has been suspected
that some of the leading clergy wish to combine Church and State; but the body
of the clergy, though they have preached Robison and circulated Barruel rather
freely, have good intentions, and as fast as they shall discover the tendency
of our measures to be against religion, they will become good republicans. In
the state are some hypocrites, who carry their religion to mark and (...)
willing to pay for it in public offices and honors; yet the number of these is
small and will probably decrease.

For eleven years freedom of the press and of opinion have been restrained;
federal measures have been presented to the people highly colored and
embellished with cuts; -- an habitual confidence in the state-representation
has been extended to the federal representation; after the exertions of the
revolutionary war, the people habitually industrions, retired to their farms
and occupations, and the calm, which naturally succeeds the turbulence of war,
superindured by federal opiates, has hitherto preserved them in a state of
peaceful submission to the constituted authorities.

But a season has now arrived when "a little more sleep, a little more slumber,
a little more solding of the hands to sleep," and they assuredly wake to a
state of political ruin, more dreadful to freemen than the ruins of empires.
Our people are now rapidly declaring themselves on the republican side; The
tendency of measures has roused them, and we shall finally prove to the world,
that as Connecticut was among the first to assert, she will be among the last
to resign, the blessings of equal government and the inestimable rights of man.

POLITICAL DELUSION.
ON the eve of a day set apart for a literary feast of fat things, I have
adjudged that a plain dish would be most acceptable. Indeed, had it been
assigned to me to speak to you of Greece and Rome; of the inexhaustible
treasures of Hebrew, Greek and Arabic, or to have discussed the height and
diameter of the antediluvians, or to have explained the cause why a black man
is not a white man, or why an elm tree does not bear apricots: you must have
sat here in silence, and the spirit would never have moved me to address you.
Avoiding literary discussion, I have selected as the theme of this occasion,
THE EXTENT AND POWER OF POLITICAL DELUSION.

The character of delusion is most strongly marked at its first appearance in
our world, when Satan ( cidevant that old serpent, now called "the arch
jacobin" See Mr. Lee's Sermon, preached at Colebrook, July 4,1800.
) practiced his deceit on our federal mother, saying to her, "For God does know
that in the day ye eat thereof, then shall your eyes be opened and ye shall be
as gods knowing good and evil." In the work of deceit, Satan has in all ages
been uniform; he begins by quoting the knowledge of God in proof of that which
is false; he wishes to persuade men to do that which they ought to avoid; he
promises them good, and they suffer evil; those, who follow his advice, find
the earth cursed for their sakes; thorns and thistles spring up in place of
fruits and flowers; by the sweat of their faces they eat their bread, till they
return to the ground: and as for Satan, sooner or later he appears to those,
whom he has deceived, literally cursed above all cattle. I shall now leave
Satan to that class of men, whose professional business is to detect his
delusions, with this remark, that I doubt much whether they have rightly
understood his political character.

The agents of delusion are, the great, the wise, rich and mighty men of the
world. These, acting with powers of substitution, are very sagacious in
choosing, and ^^ccessful in securing, fit instruments for their purposes.
Delusion prepares his prime agents with charming outsides, engaging manners,
powerful address, and inexhaustible argument. He furnishes them with an
accurate knowledge of the heart, and opens all the avenues to the passions.

The means of delusion are, uniformly the walking in a vain show, hypocrisy
assuming the garb of religion, pride of meekness, knavery of honesty, ambition
of patriotism. As a full assumption of character is necessary to success, and
as delusion naturally over-acts, you find the greatest impostors in our world
to have appeared more holy, meek, honest and patriotic than other men.

The object of delusion is, to gain the wealth, honors and favors of men by
cheap, false and insidious means.

The subjects of delusion are, the laboring and subordinate people throughout
the world. Their toil goes to support the splendour, luxury and vices of the
deluders, or their blood flows to satiate lawless ambition. Nearly the whole of
Africa, and a considerable part of Asia, are subject to the delusions of
Europe: slaves in immense troops must sweat under a scorching sun to bear or
follow the palanquin of a lordly master: slaves by ship-loads must be dragged
from their homes to serve imperious tyrants: immense multitudes must be bowing
to stocks and stones, or kneeling before images and lighted tapers, to gratify
the zeal of impostors.

The end of delusion is, the elevation of the deluders to a condition of power,
splendour and infallibility, and the reduction of the deluded from knowledge to
ignorance, from freedom to slavery, from wealth to want, from present enjoyment
to a destitution of all things, and from future hopes to ceaseless doubt.

Having defined my subject, I shall exclude from discussion all ancient
delusions, from a persuasion that to us the present moment, the present
character of man, the present form and pressure of the times are infinitely
more interesting than all the past.

I might here entertain you with some of the light skirmishes of delusion in
the ordinary walks of life; but have preferred to lead you at once into the
political field, where he brings into general action all his forces, and
displays all his character.

Having no leisure to make long porches, or to take by house-row the measures
of our government, I shall lead you at once into the commercial system --
which, like a common ^^all, gives you access to all the rooms of the federal
building.

When republicans The terms "republican and democrat," are used synonomously
throughout: because the men who maintain the principles of 1776, are
characterised by one or the other of these names in different parts of the
country.
complain of a Navy, of diplomatic corpse, of Algerine tribute, or British
treaty, the uniform reply of the agents of delusion is, "all these things are
necessary to commerce, and commerce is the hand maid of industry; abridge our
political arrangements, say they, and all your well-earned produce would
perish; your ship-timber and ships would be of no value; your seamen would
become towns-poor; your rope walks go to decay, and your merchants become
bankrupt!"

Now every well informed merchant knows that there is not one word of truth in
all this; yet, as Delusion has forged the story for his benefit, he is disposed
not to discredit it, and when such a plausible kind of things get a currency,
they will pass like a well counterfeited bill, till by accident the deceit is
discovered, by which time the counterfeiter has gained all his ends. Every
reflecting man knows that if the most worthless produce in the world will
attract our vessels to the most distant ports, laden with the staples of this
country, then these staples would, from their intrinsic and unfailing value,
together with the profits of the carrying trade, invite the merchants of those
ports to come and purchase of us. At our own doors we can make better bargains
than abroad; we lose nothing by dangers of sea, wastage, casualties or
bankruptcy; we receive every thing at full weight and gauge, and our articles
are put off in the best possible order without any diminution.

Now, if with free ports and commerce thus conducted, our merchants could not
live, then they live now merely by virtue of certain advantages tendered to
them by the government, every one of which takes a million of dollars out of
your pockets in order to enable you to gain half a million in another way. If
the carrying trade is valuable, and we retaining this trade by political
arrangements secure it to our merchants, and yet Spain, Holland and
Great Britain are willing to exchange their manufactures in their own ports for
our produce, then surely our produce would be in high demand, and an object of
supreme competition, if government would suffer the carrying trade to operate
as a premium in favor of our market.

The fundamental proposition, viz. that separate from the present system, our
articles would not be in market is pointedly denied, and if this is false, the
whole superstructure falls.

The real object is diametrically opposite to the ostensible one. The
agricultural interest, instead of being helped is vitally attacked. This
charming commercial system, so sedulously and artfully addressed to the
yeomanry of our country, is a system of indebtedness and eventual bankruptcy.
Confining the carrying trade to ourselves, opens an infinite field of credit to
the merchant. Millions of property, belonging to the farmers, must constantly
be in the hands of the merchants; for if the avails of our procedure are to
come from all quarters of the globe, there must be an average credit given by
the farmers till the returns can be made. This draws on to the water an immense
quantity of property, and interests the farmers strongly in the success of the
merchants whom they have trusted. This property on the water is within fiscal
purview and control. Government has purposes to answer. The merchant is
indirectly the collector of a great portion of the revenue. The merchant can
lend ships and cargoes to government. The merchant can plan long, circuitous
and hazardous voyages, apparently at his own risque; but really at the risque
of the farmer; for all losses must eventfully fall on those who trust. These
arrangement leading great capitals in trade, great bankruptcies and great
fortunes. They fill the sea with vessels and sailors, valuable auxiliaries and
reverberators to a naval system. This last being calculated to protect the
merchants, secures their perpetual attachment, and they freely advocate the
extraordinary expenses of an armament. Their influence is thrown directly in
the scale opposed to the farmer, and government has thereby secured a number of
capitalists to whom resort may be had in the day when grinding runs low at the
treasury.

Before the adoption of this system, silver and gold moved according to the
laws of industry; but now banks are introduced, giving to paper a forced and
unnatural circulation, taking the command of the medium of all business from
the agricultural interest, Money ought to represent industry: the farmer's
dollars earned by labor do represent it: bank bills do not. It is hard on the
farmer, that the man who earns nothing through the year, should be able with an
indorsed note to raise in an hour, double the annual avails of his farm, and to
glut the market with money at the very moment when the farmer is ready to bring
his dollars to market. Directors of banks can make money scarce or plenty as
they please: but though banks are ruinous to the farmers, they are necessary to
a forced commerce.
and yielding it wholly to the commercial.

It is no wonder that in the complexity of this policy, the farmer is lost in
the midst of paper bills, boundless credit, crowded harbors, princely estates,
and made to cry out? O! the depth of the wisdom of administration! little
dreaming that he has in fact paid and is paying annually the whole profits of
the carrying trade, the whole of the Algerine tribute, the expense of all
commercial treaties -- of all the consuls abroad -- the amount of all the
losses by sea -- of all bad markets, and of all navy expenses -- that the
money, which he pays suffers many sweatings before it gets to the treasury, and
that what he does not pay is placed on interest, and that the land from which
he raises this produce, which excites such a fatherly care of government, is
pledged for the payment of principal and interest, and that his children may
always see the date and amount of the mortgage by calling on the surveyors of
the revenue. Little short of miracle can redeem men from such masterly strokes
of delusion.

This mercantile system leads up an appearance of immense prosperity, the
reality of which is craftily ascribed to government; but individuals appear to
the world most thrifty, when they are thriftily expending the price of their
mortgaged estates: nations appear most busy and thriving in seasons of the
greatest expense and public dissipation: for such occasions draw all the money
into view and give it a rapid circulation. When a dollar changed owners once in
a week it counted only for a dollar; but when by the magic power of a forced
commerce it changes owners an hundred times in a week it counts for an hundred
dollars. If all the property of a town like this were to be transported every
day through all the streets, there would be great commotion and a great show of
business and wealth, and the gaping world might admire the thrift of the place,
and might lend money on the credit of it. Just like such a farce is that of the
great public prosperity now enjoyed. The people are not more industrious than
they were before the revolution: they are certainly more extravagant, mortages
abound more on the records -- including public and private indebtedness, there
never was a season before this when the people were so deeply involved. Burn
all your paper-bills, and your paper evidences of debt, public and private,
worlds full of which would not add one cent to the real worth of any country,
or collect the debts evidenced by these papers, and which now lie as a heavy
weight on the houses, lands and industry of the people, and this delusive
vision of prosperity would vanish: but this delusion answers the political
purposes of unsettling the public mind, of destroying frigid ideas of economy
and of making tolerable many public projections, which otherwise would be
detested.

This commercial system presents to the world an immense tonnage, which not
only fortifies the appearance of prosperity; but affords employment to a
numerous class of men on land, who must feel grateful for a system which yields
them wealth; and it employs a number of masters and mates, who must kiss the
hand which feeds them; and sailors, who are most valuable astringents in the
ingredient of power, and may answer for lining to wooden walls; and delusion
whispers that by these things all the money is saved among ourselves. Though
this is among Delusion's weak tricks, yet it is too often successful. It has
been well said that it will cost two ducats to keep one in prison. To the man
who is able to pay for money, it matters not whether that which is to fill his
coffers be now in his own town, or in Madrid or Canton: his industry will draw
it from the ends of the earth. If we lived on an isthmus or an island, the
suggestion of saving the money might be more plausible; but living in a country
of immense extent, capable of employing more than ten times its number of
inhabitants, capable of infinite internal defense, and of keeping tributary to
us all nations so long as natural or artificial wants shall be known in the
world, it is an idle suggestion -- and the time will come, when it will be hard
to make the readers of history believe that Americans in the infancy of
society, of settlement and agriculture, did seriously undertake to fight their
way through nations, whom they could not buy nor bribe, to carry the
necessaries of life to the men of those nations who were perishing for the want
of them, and then with a return-cargo of far less useful produce to fight their
way home again -- and that all this was done with the full and free consent of
the men who raised the exports, and who could have sold them without hazard for
a better price at their own doors.

Commerce, aided by banks, draws property into the hands of men without the
medium of industry. Such men not knowing the earning of money are adventurous
and extravagant. They become embarrassed -- and nearly one half of the people
in our populous cities are running after the other half in consequence of this
embarrassment. The debtor walks quick when he is avoiding his credtior. The
creditor moves quick after him -- The bankrupt sells rapidly his stock on hand
-- The vendue-rooms receive the refuse. These are domestic scenes of
prosperity! On the water we are losing ships and cargoes, and lives, and to
foreign courts are dancing attendance or paying tribute for these privileges.

On this commercial subject delusion is strong; it presents imaginary
advantages, demonstrable on paper, but false in fact, and these can be
presented in every variety and succession, Impressions are easily made: loss or
gain equally stimulate the spirit of adventure. Commerce draws into its vortex
one class of men after another, and when the farming interest yields decidedly
to this fascinating system but a few years elapse before commerce commands all
the wealth of the country. A navy becomes necessary, and the same necessity
which last year led up sloops of war, this year leads up frigates and the next
ships of the line: sloops can only beat off gun-boats; frigates and ships can
only meet equal guns; the principle of power demands that we be the most
powerful; increased debt and taxes are inevitable; the enormous expense of
supporting a navy There never was any want of pretenses for subjugating a
people. If it be true that our articles are so useless that other nations will
not come after them, and we must have a navy to protect trade, be it so! Let us
only know that we cannot live and be governed without the systems which we
sought against, and we will give up freedom and have glory, strength, wealth
and m^narchy in place of it.
justifies other eno^mous expenses. When a national debt is beyond redemption,
the addition of a few millions is of little moment; it lightens the burden of
the present generation; they and their taskmasters will soon be out of the
region of murmuring. The next generation will open their eyes on a bright sun
-- fertile country -- splendid cities -- national debt -- and though they may
wonder for a time at the artificial evils of society; yet they will surely have
philosophy enough to compose themselves under calamities which they cannot
avoid, and to consider it as the lot of man that the evil shall be set over
against the good, that man may literally find nothing after him. In that day
the principles of our revolution will be either forgotten, or considered as the
ravings of visionaries; the systems of great nations will be adopted in their
extent. In that day will be no murmuring democrats, no deadly disorganizers:
government will move strong, as did the Church of Rome. when the tortures of
the Inquisition could supply the place of convincing argument, and the thunders
of heaven be hurled at pleasure on the devoted heads of heretics.

Ask the merchants, can you support commerce and pay the expenses of its
protection? They will readily answer, no. Then it is clear that commerce is not
paying for itself; the people are paying for it more than it is worth; but the
system of naval defense secures the mercantile interest; the clergy are gained
by the confidence reposed in them, and the smiles which they get for their
influence; the army and government printers, and collectors, and officers of
all descriptions are secured by the treasury; and to support all these
establishments, you the people of the United States, have been paying more than
20,000 dollars a day ever since the new government has been in operation; that
is, in eleven years you have paid more than eighty three millions of dollars,
and in the present year it is costing you more than 1,700 dollars an hour to
support the public burdens. It goes from you in cents and small change, and the
return of expenditures is in gross millions. The President's salary and the
compensation to members of congress, so often complained of, form but a very
small part of the bill. The interest of the national debt is a standing dish.
The federal city, begun on a system rivalling in expense and magnificence
ancient Babylon, has been a fink for your money. The military establishment and
navy are immensely expensive. See Appendix.
Your great men abroad need some pocket money. The Dey of Algiers can account
for 24.000 dollars a year, beside the frigate Crescent and some extras. Should
you get involved in war, imperious necessity would demand new loans. Your
houses and lands are apprized; you have paid one ground-rent for them, and they
will be good security for any additional debt. The present system of measures
will lead to war. You cannot keep a navy long afloat without receiving insults,
or provoking hostilities. You cannot mix with foreign courts and avoid foreign
policy. When causes of discontent increase, ministers have found it their
interest to engage directly in war. During the season of war the minister has
an army and navy at command -- war requires expense, hushes clamor, and veils
in mystery all cabinet measures. I shall now open to you the appropriate
delusions of the WAR SYSTEM.

War presents to all the country a commission to seize and carry to legal
adjudication the commercial property of an adverse nation. War opens all the
floodgates of the human passions. War calls into the employment of government
an immense multitude. Contractors through all the mechanical arts pronounce a
blessing on war. -- The grazier adores the administration. The legions attached
to admiralty courts, insurers, dealers in stock, bankrupts, and to all men to
whom change of times must be for the better, bless the government. The
capitalist who has long kept his money for the public, blesses the occasion,
and over them all the chaplain pronounces an hearty amen. In the midst of all,
the straggling patriots, unwilling to be outdone by their brethren, bring their
offerings of rags to the treasury, and from the midst of expense and national
dissipation forth comes the government immensely rich in all the magnificence
of paper.

Though delusion has played this farce a thousand times over and has always
successfully compassed the means, it has never concealed the end. That end is
uniformly the degrading of morals and religion -- derangement of business --
increase of national debt, leading to a long train of public burdens --
decrease of private and social happiness, and a certain sinking of the people
beneath the civil, military and naval functionaries of this mighty farce.

The tribes of Africa fight, because Europeans will buy their prisoners.
Cabinets wage wars, because by them they are sure of their object, which is to
exalt themselves and to humble those who are beneath them. This has always been
the case and always will be, so long as the people give the reins out of their
own hands, so long as they bestow more power on government than is absolutely
necessary, so long as they suffer themselves and their opinions to be despised.
Wars have been the means by which these cabinets have effected their purposes.
The great, wise and rich men well understand the art of inflaming the public
mind and generally present at the outset the delusive bubble of national glory,
a thing in which nine tenths of society have no kind of interest; but which
well managed turns into crowns and diamonds in the hands of the blowers.
Courtiers tell slaves that liberty is in danger, or that infidels abound and
the church is in hazard, or of plots at home or invasions and insults abroad.
Courtier's waiters echo the alarm. Court-telegraphs spread the sound. --
Court-casuists find it typisied in the pentateuch. War is decided on; armies
are raised; the legions, who depend on war for support, are all in motion; the
papers are full of news; public curiosity is on the stretch. The cabinet, which
in time of peace was occupied only in the means of internal order, has now to
consult the balances of foreign governments -- to receive letters weighing five
ounces in ships of 500 tons sailing in ballast -- is thronged with expresses;
great scenes are opening; the naval armament, which but for this had been laid
up in dry docks, and the army, which in time of peace was in no estimation,
rise into importance; prize masters arrive with the ill-gotten wealth of honest
adventurers. The country abounds with proof prints of admirals and generals and
naval engagements, forts stormed and all the dignified array of carnage and
desolation.

Here delusion opens batteries, which are never silenced till liberty and
public happiness are gone forever; for a war system is fatal to them both.

When courtiers tell you that such a system can alone preserve peace, fly or
sight the delusion. Mark you that the man who learns the art of fencing in his
youth is seldom contented with having received his lessons, you will hear of
him in a duel. An army or a navy well officered and manned is always restless
in a sta^e of peace; war must and will be had at some rate. After a few years
of war and a few bullet-holes through admirals' hats and some flesh-wounds and
broken limbs, the bill for services becomes greater than can be paid with
money; honors, stars and ribbons or pensions must go toward an instalment. A
nation which makes greatness its polestar can never be free; beneath national
greatness sink individual greatness, honor, wealth and freedom. But though
history, experience and reasoning confirm these ideas; yet all-powerful
delusion has been able to make the people of every nation lend a helping hand
in putting on their own setters and rivetting their own chains, and in this
service delusion always employs men too great to speak the truth, and yet too
powerful to be doubted. Their statements are believed -- their projects adopted
-- their ends answered and the deluded subjects of all this artifice are left
to passive obedience through life, and to entail a condition of unequalified
non-resistance to a ruined posterity.

To this delusive war-system are we indebted at the present time for the
redundance of national gasconade. When the pompous statesman safe in the
cabinet, insults the brave men of all nations and cries (...) arms! when
boasting words comes from great generals, who never saw service but on a
parade-day, and whose whole courage lies in the seal which graces their
fair-wea^her commissions, depend upon it that some poor deluded men are to
bleed. When by accident or force one of our infant navy succeeds in capturing
the adverse vessel, straight we are told that the sun-shines not on a people,
who bids as fair as we do to be a great maritime nation. Just like the boy,
who, because he has caught a tame rabbit, imagines that he is to be a mighty
sportsman. Why are not the people told that several of the maritime powers of
Europe have in every year discovered inflances of prowess superior to ours: The
British navy contains now and then as brave a man as Truxton, and it is hopeful
that all our revolutionary courage is not pent up in any single man.
that their ships are larger, stronger and better manned, and that at least a
century must elapse, and 100,000 lives of Americans be lost, beside the
after-bills of wounding and dismemberment, before we can expect to be on a
footing with the most powerful nation -- and that this footing must always be
sustained by an enormous expense of blood and treasure -- that naval glory is
at best uncertain -- that privates must bleed by thousands for the glory of
admirals, commodores and post-captains, and that the only glory to which the
sailor or marine can arrive, is to have his name published in the papers, and
against it, "thigh badly fractured, since amputated and likely to recover," and
in a few months after published again, "bravely fighting in the main-top, cut
in two by a chain shot," Hail, Columbia, happy land!
and just under it, "we are happy to announce that though not quite succes^ful
this time: yet the admiral and officers are in high spirits, and having put
into Jamaica to resit, Putting into St. Kitts to resit decayed appetites, has
exposed many of our vessels to capture and payment of salvage; for the
entertainments of that modern Capua have often closed seasonably to enable our
armed vessels to atchieve a re-capture to the great emolument of the protectors
of our commerce, and the glory of our marine service.
intend to look at them again." Delusion, these are thy trophies!

But admiral Harvey has said that our 44 gun frigates were 74's in disguise!
well, perhaps, he had heard that they cost as much as 74's, or that under the
guise of these frigates was concealed a plan of an immense navy, the expense of
which would eternize our national debt and ensure a perpetuity of energetic
government. But our ships are not only strong as mountains, they are swift as
eagles, captain Tryon says so himself: and not only strong and swift, but so
full of courage "that men are run through the body for looking pale," says
lieutenant Sterret. -- Surely all these things might have been omened from the
success attending their launching.

The sun rises with unusual splendour, and strange to tell, it rises in the
east! The birds chaunt their matin songs. Out bounces from his bed that wonder
of all wonders -- once a boat-builder, afterward a ship-wright, now a federal
navy architect. Formerly a ship-wright might have built a ship merely by virtue
of his skill; but now if it be not constructed by federal axes, adzes and
mallets, wielded by federal hands, it will certainly sink. Straight collect
from all quarters the ingenious men, who by force of iron bolts and cramps have
been able to keep wood together, and all those laborers who conveyed the
timber and plank from where it grew to where it did not grow. Soon all the
country is collected; the adjacent houses and senses are lined with beauty and
strength; old Neptune with his trident walks forty miles up a river to see the
show; every heart palpitates in unison, and prayers are sent up for success.
With admirable skill every thing has been prepared, and with an easy graceful
motion the ship glides on to the bosom of the waters, which receive the present
from the earth with humble gratitude. At this moment the fish throughout the
ocean thrill with rapture, and the ships of hostile nations feel a shock
evincive of their danger; the attending throng fill the an with shouts; the
little hills on every side rejoice, and the mountains echo the scene. If any
should doubt the accuracy of this picture of a launch, let them compare it with
the Boston original.


Surely after such a launch, a ship ought to be stronger, and swifter, and
fuller of brave men than all the other ships on the ocean. A few more such
delightful launches will launch this country from liberty to slavery, from a
republican to a monarchical government. The great distinctions, enormous
expenses, and cruel wars, which navies lead up, are all calculated to destroy a
condition of equal rights, and to sacrifice private competence and social
happiness on the altar of national greatness. Now, if all this scenery of
gasconade was a mere sport, no harm might follow from it. There might be some
expense about it, and nations might consider us cowardly, just as we consider
an individual cowardly who is always boasting of his own courage; but even in
this miserable work, delusion is playing a deep game. All this boasting
actually amuses the people, and by degrees they get habituated to an idea that
a powerful navy is a very respectable thing, as well as a good defense to
commerce. To the tune of "hearts of goak are our ships, hearts of oak are our
men," Captain Truxto^ writes to the Secretary about our (naval) thunder, and a
toast was given at the eastward, "The mountains where sleep the future tbunders
of America." I say, "may their sleep be the sleep of death." But why cannot
these people say powder and saltpetre? Our cannon are loaded with powder and
ball; not (...) is thunder and lightning.
have thousands of brave British seamen danced into eternity, and the wealth,
freedom and private independence of the nation have not long survived them.

I am aware that the frigate John Adams, and the brig Pickering, may like the
Royal George, and the Pitt-East-India-man, make certain names immortal as plank
and spikes -- and the Merrimack, the Connecticut and the Philadelphia gun-boats
may attach the people of certain districts to the success of the navy; yet,
though these are very pleasant things, a republican will hardly be reconciled
to them while he regards even the naming of the ships as among the hair-strokes
of delusion.

The army has not been favored with occasions capable of exciting any very
pompous encomiums -- but it is in proof before the public, that the
inspector-general, while a clerk in a compting house, accepted a challenge
which was sent to his master, and behaved bravely, though he did not fight.
This proves conclusively that he is the bravest man in the world, and that
Buonaparte, Moreau, and Massena ought to hide their diminished heads; but if
government did not know of this compting-house story at the time of appointing
him, I am unable to assign the reason of his being placed over the heads of
experienced patriot generals born in our own country. But the army, though they
did not fight, stood their ground boldly in their cantonments -- Buonaparte and
his army, whom they were raised to crush, being less than 8000 miles distant
from them through the diameter of the earth. To democratic eye there was no
prospect of his visiting us, except he perforated the earth with his army, and
like Baron Trenck watched an occasion to unearth himself: yet had he arrived,
they would doubtless have given him a warm reception: but for a short time only
were they kept in the field: the French did not arrive: the army was disbanded.
I have thus turned my periods much as they did theirs. Some have said that this
army was raised to ensure the success of certain measures, or to influence
elections, or to keep the democrats in awe, or to enable general Hamilton to
exemplify his declaration, that our constitution was a mere temporary
expedient, and that this country could never be governed without an hereditary
monarch: these speculations I wave in order to remark to you,

That however plausible may be the arguments of delusion on the subject of an
army, a country can never be free unless they depend for protection on the body
of the people, whose rusty gun-barrels can send certain death from a distance
to every bird or beast fleeting through the air or on the earth. These are the
men who will always fight bravely for their altars and their homes; but how
absurd is it to rely for defense on men, who care not for altars, and who have
no homes! The only earthly objection to reliance on the body of the people is,
that with arms in their hands they might repel domestic aggressions.

If the present state of things shall continue, you will soon be told that
bright gun-barrels are more respectable than rusty ones, and that our own guns
made by federalists at 13 dollars, are surer of their aim than foreign guns of
equal quality bought at 6, and that thus all the money is saved. Here delusion
generally conceals one argument, viz. "that domestic contracts strengthen the
men in place."
Soon it will be polite to level your piece at your enemy only breast high, and
not to take aim, following the exmaple of the British soldiery; for if you take
aim, say they, it is murder; but if you fire away at random 30 rounds of his
majesty's powder, and one of them takes full effect, why the man is dead! but
he had a fair chance for his life. Soon it will be deemed scandalous for a man
to be fighting in his country's defense behind a tree or a stone wall. No! he
must join the standard, be dressed in uniform, and if mortally wounded, must
languish sweetly into eternity under the notes of drums and trumpets.
Thundering noises must drown the cries of your brethren and children in the
agonies of death. -- No father to watch the symptoms of decaying life! No
mother to drop a tear over a dying son! No sister to stretch out the hand of
faithful affection, and to soften the pillow in the moment of dissolving nature!

These are scenes of standing armies. Should our nation ever advance so far, as
after having presented a government wholly variant in detail from that which
was contemplated by the people; should one party violently hold to itself all
power, and oppress the other party; should they discover a want of confidence
in the people, and even that they despise their opinions; should they take the
people's money to buy guns, and bayonets, and slaves to keep them under, rest
assured that the more intelligent among the oppressed will rouse, they will
remonstrate loudly, they will continue to remonstrate till they are imprisoned:
then it power should be extended to the taking of life, they will employ the
precious remnant of days between sentence and execution to prepare lessons
which posterity shall read with admiration, when their oppressors shall be laid
in inglorious dust.

Every attempt to place the defense of the country on other ground than on that
of the bravery and integrity of the people: every attempt to create great
distinctions of rank; all acts of intolerance in the ruling party; all
expressions of contempt on public opinion, are so many approaches to that
dreadful order of things. In this country you can never make a host of great
men without a host of little ones: these last cannot be produced without
oppression. The people may bear oppressions gradually and to a certain point;
but if the impetuosity of the lordlings shall push it beyond that point, the
people whom they now call federal, and who have been such merely by an honest
misplaced confidence, will find themselves betrayed, and though not among the
first, will be found among the firmest avengers of their wrongs.

In the delusions of the commercial and army systems, I have presented two very
powerful aristocracies; both deriving strength, emolument and exclusive
privileges from the government; both operating with immense force in favor of
national greatness, and against the interests of the body of the people.

Of the funding system I can only say as of the great fire in London, it is past
without recall; it is an awful calamity; it has ruined thousands, but this
system has also led up an aristocracy more numerous than the farmers-general in
France, more powerful than all others, because it combines the men of wealth,
and give efficiency to all the rest.

These aristocracies sink the people. They can stand alone against kings or
presidents and courts; but when the great rich, wise and mighty among their
brethren can be drawn, through an extended system of favor, to operate against
them, they are in imminent danger -- and to crown this danger, delusion
associates with principalities and powers, those who profess to be officers of
a kingdom not of this world; they pray and preach for measures; they, in their
most sacred services, offer incense to the great talents, tried patriotism, and
celestial virtues of the mighty men in place; they baptize your children, and
follow the remains of your friends to the grave, and they take your weak
moments to persuade you that the president and his party are as a munition of
rocks to the church.

We have heard that the national religion of England has been held in
requisition to support the government, and that the Romish religion has been
employed to the same effect in all Catholic countries. Their test acts, oaths
and inquisitions have been so many state-engines to subordinate mankind to the
great and little tyrants, who for centuries have held society in bondage; but
surely the good sense of Americans is ready to repel the first attempts to bind
us with ecclesiastical fetters, and to say to the clergy, "your business is to
teach the gospel; the sheep will never thrive, if the shepherd, instead of
leading them to green pastures, is to be constantly alarming them with the cry
of wolves." Make your people good christians, and they will be valuable
subjects.


How much, think you, has religion been benefited by sermons, intended to show
that Satan and Cain were jacobins? How much by sermons in which every deistical
argument has been presented with its greatest force as being a part of the
republican creed? Is this, men of God, following the precept, "feed my sheep,
feed my lambs?" -- The people, instead of being alarmed lest religion should
suffer under a new administration, ought to be infinitely solicitous to wrest
the protection of it from those who are using it as a state engine. The kingdom
of heaven now suffers political violence. Think you that the bishop of
Ephesus, if now with us, would have left the care of souls to ascertain the
number of votes which his favorites could get for a seat in Congress? Would
Paul of Tarsus have preached to an anxious listening audience on the propriety
of sending envoys? I ask these questions seriously, because on this subject the
people feel seriously, and because here delusion is playing a most cruel game.

Have you not read that the head of the church will sustain his own cause, and
that this cause will never be perfected, till wars and rumors of wars shall
cease from under the whole heaven? The Captain of salvation is not so weak as
to need an army and navy and a majority in Congress to support his cause. The
systems of enmity, pride, vice and abandonment, which characterise all modern
governments are hostile to religion. The precept of the Prince of Peace to his
followers is, "Put up thy sword into the sheath."
The Savior would be ill received in levees, in fields of battle, or on board
of hostile ships. He takes no delight in the flowing robes and masquerade dress
of the lords spiritual. The morals of courts and camps never rise up before his
throne as sweet incense. Courts and camps have in all modern ages been the
hot-beds of immorality, the nurseries of infidelity. That religion, which you
so highly value, is suffering a gradual, certain and painful extermination by
the very means which affect to support it. While every nerve is stretched to
obtain wealth and greatness, that cause, which began in poverty and thrives
best in the shades and retirements of life must mourn. Our great political
arrangements are like so many armaments against religion; Christianity has
suffered more by attempts to unite Church and State, than by all the deistical
writings.
yet the men who oppose them are denounced as atheists, and no proof of their
atheism is required but their opposition to federal measures.

I shall not in this place pursue further this article of elerical delusion;
This article is designed to extend just so far as the observation of every
intelligent man would carry it; viz. to that class of clergy, who improperly
improve religion to serve political purposes.
but my respect for well-starched banns and fashionable surplices will never
restrain me from presenting it to your marked disapprobation.

In the profession of the law delusion has secured to government an aristocracy
highly intelligent and operative; and to these is entrusted the ladder of
promotion, which they hold with as much power and claim of prescription as the
Pope holds the keys of St. Peter; and in these northern states you find lawyers
on every round of it, ascending and descending as were the angels of God in the
vision of Jacob: though the two classes of characters are upon very different
business. Though in this profession the habits of acquiring property and the
indiscriminate defense of right and wrong might seem to disqualify for the
business of legislation; yet delusion has impressed it upon the people, that
those who talk fluently must be knowing -- and that through much debating
comes truth: hence these men are the first in market for congress and the
offices of government -- and excellent stuff for transportation to foreign
courts; and it has been lately discovered that a thorough knowledge of the law
will qualify a man Mr. Dexter.
to be secretary of the war department.

All these aristocracies and measures which I have noticed correspond exactly
with the systems of monarchical government. At the end of eleven years, the
American nation (formerly called the United States) have with great industry
got into a good state of preparation for an hereditary monarch. Mr. Lyman tells
us that 'the ruling party is united in their object though divided as to the
means -- the first is for bold strokes, the last for address and reasoning.' We
will not run in debt to this defunct federalist for a definition of this
object. It cannot be a republican government; that the people have long prayed
for in vain. It cannot be to get more money out of the people; for you,
federalists, are now sunk up to your necks in their pockets. It cannot be to
send more ambassadors and consuls abroad; for they have already glutted every
market. It is not to fund more debt; all claims have been de^uged with the
liberality of government. Why the object is to crush opposition: these two
segments of federalism, after having made arrangements obnoxious to one half of
the country, are to crush that half, and then the first chapter is completed;
but they are united in another object, viz. an energetic, aristocratic,
monarchic government, which can move without control; both parts are united to
subjugate the republicans, and now call for a few years more to complete the
work. If it be true, as some say, that a new administration could not change
the present system, then I agree with the advocates of present measures, that
we ought to have an hereditary monarch. Our aristocracies need a monarch to
keep them in check, and our plans need a monarch to direct them and slaves to
pay for them. -- These plans and republicanism cannot live together.


My evidence of the existence of such an intention on the one part, (which must
be the intention of the other if they are united) might result from the
declaration of general Hamilton already quoted, or from a declaration of
President Adams to the same effect; That the people will not be happy till
their chief magistrate is hereditary.
for these men know precisely what the leaders are seeking: but I choose to
rely for proof on the complexion of federal measures already submitted. We have
a sure key to the feelings of the federal party in their joy at the supposed
capture of Moreau's army; their triumphs on the success of Nelson; their
exultation at the infamous and perjured story of Barbaczy, that the Directory
had caused the murder of their own envoys at Rastadt; their strong affection
for Suwarrow; their zeal for the success of the British arms and for the
humiliation of republicans in France, Holland and Ireland. Everything abroad
which looked like the downfall of freedom was published and echoed here with
triumph.

If personal declarations, public acts, and federal papers can be relied on, we
have a strong party in this country, who wish for a season when congress shall
be opened with a speech from the throne to my lords and gentlemen: they wish to
have the papers announce that the princess royal was at the theater -- that the
young prince had fallen from his horse, and received a slight contusion in the
joint of one of his fingers, which had been declared by one of his majesty's
surgeons not to be mortal -- that the carriage of the gentleman unsher of the
black rod had been broken down, but without accident; or they wish to hear of
brilliant levees and splendid drawing-rooms, and if any insane man should
happen to shoot at the precious royal pageant, they would have all the bulbous
marquisses and bedizened earls, with the whole bevy of dukes, viscounts and
lords run to see who should first gain the senate house, and announce in faint
and almost breathless accents to the lords temporal and spiritual, the knights
of the woolsack, "my lords, the king has been shot at!" This shooting and
stabbing of kings is a useless business. Brutus stabbed Caesar; Caesar fell;
but the spirit of domination survived. Ravilla^ and Damiens aimed their daggers
at kings. Charlotte Cord stabbed Ma^at; but their daggers could not
assassinate pride in the human heart. If the next tyrant succeeds with equal
powers, in vain has the dagger been steeped in blood. Abridge the powers of
rulers, and you gain the object which no deadly weapon can reach.
Just God, and have not thousands, yea millions of his subjects not only been
shot at, but shot and killed for his cause? Have not the decks of his ships of
war been paid over with the blood of dying agonizing man? My lords, the king
has been shot at! Thousands fell in battle "The poor beatle, which we tread
upon, in corporal sufferance, feels a pang as great as when a giant dies."
to gain him his crown, tens of thousands to support his dignity; millions have
endured hardships and death to supply the splendors of his throne, and the
artificial wants of the sycophants who surround it -- My lords, the king has
been shot at! By the politics of that king, thousands of families have been
deprived of their head and support -- mourning, lamentation and woe have been
heard in every part of his dominion -- the East and West Indies, and the United
States have been made so many fields of blood; even the ocean has been swelled
with the blood of murdered man -- carnage on the continent has furnished only
the interludes of royal cruelty; while the cries and tears of widows and
orphans, of sacked towns and a convulsed world, which dared not be expressed on
earth, have risen up in memorial before God: My lords, the king has been short
at! And if all the kings and emperors of the earth, with all their minions
could be shot and deposited in one grave, all the republicans throughout the
earth might collect and say, "The Lord has taken away, and blessed be the name
of the Lord;" and all the royalists might assemble about the grave and howl and
lament saying, here lies all that was mortal of his Turkish majesty, who was
once called "shadow of God, brother to the sun and moon, disposer of all
earthly crowns!" Here lies mixing with common earth, the desender of the faith
with his most christian majesty! Here lies the Emperor of Ruslia, with the
kings of Spain and Denmark! and the king of the Romans, with the king of the
Goths and Vandals, the great prince of Findland! with the knights of the star
and garter, and the red eagle, and the golden lion! Here lie disregarded the
keys of St. Peter, with cardinals bonnets and golden crosses! Here lie the
generalissimo's and admiralissimo's of our world!

Was man made but a little lower than the angels, and yet has he sunk so low as
to stoop to such slavish mockery?

Sleep on ye, who when alive, by your delusions, made the earth one great
aceldama, the resurrection will wake you to lessons, which you never learnt nor
taught on earth.

Having discussed the artful means, and dreadful end of political delusion, I
shall now mark to you in distinct characters the AGENTS OF DELUSION. A question
is often proposed, how is it possible that our greatest and most pious men
should betray us? I answer, because you have every thing to lose, and they
every thing to gain. Who under the ancient government of France deluded the
people, and held them in vassalage? The greatest men, the most pious men! Who
hold in subjection the people of Russia, Germany and Poland? The greatest and
most pious men! Who in England delude the people with dreams of national
prosperity in the midst of national bankruptcy? The lords spiritual and
temporal! Who have been filling the world with desolating wars for many
centuries? The dignitaries of church and state: men, whose elevated births or
talents have raised them to elevated stations, and given them an immense
influence over the people. Wealth and talents are like the mines of Peru to
crowned heads: they know well how to seek, alchymize and improve their
treasures. The tendency of all governments is toward monarchy: discrimination
of rank is among the first objects. When the leaders have compassed this, the
body of the people sink into a stupid mass, to be thereafter ranked as in the
first class of cattle to be driven to the military slaughter-houses, o^ to be
shipped abroad for foreign consumption, or to be dragging about their hated
lives at homes, subject to the lash and command of imperious lords, raised from
nothing by the power of delusion practiced on themselves.

Greatness and littleness are only ideas of comparison: the base of the
mountain is in the depth of the valley; the base of great men is in the
lowness, poverty, ignorance and humility of the people. Pride stimulates the
knowing to be great: power furnishes the means. When they would enslave the
people, they present to them pictures of liberty; when they would impoverish
them, they present pictures of wealth; when they would lead them to war, they
present pictures of peace and security. Delusion can never succeed by
exhibiting unadorned fact. Even the powers of reason and eloquence, which may
be turned to infinite good, are often devoted to the production of infinite
evil. When the British treaty was in discussion, had the cool reason of the
country been addressed, that instrument had never been ratified; but when an
eloquent statesman. Mr. Ames.
pushing beyond this cold region, addressed the passions of the country,
alarmed the farmer with fears of danger, and roused the merchant by hopes of
indemnity, he gained attention; when he presented on the sea coast "vast losses
uncompensated; on the frontier, Indian war; on our territory, actual
encroachment; national discord and abasement," he wrought strong impressions;
but when fathers were called to witness the cornfieldsd fattened with the blood
of their sons, and mothers to hear the war-whoop waking the sleep of the
cradie, he became irresi^stible, and to the tune of such harmonious songs the
people of every country are in danger of dancing away their rights. When every
measure fatal to liberty can be made to appear conducive to it, there is need
of infinite vigilance. Our great men are ready enough to preach to us peace and
safety, even while they are leading us into systems, which will ensure to the
earth a drenching of human blood through all generations, and will waft us to
the sound of the war-whoop from all the military nations of the earth.

These great men, who are to gain by every system injurious to freedom and
equal government, are the best informed men in society. They are well versed in
languages and history, and political science, and are able to say more and
argue better on the wrong side of the question than the people are on either
side of it. In all governments they are retained in favor of measures, if not
by offices and bribes, yet by hopes of office, of emolument, of honors and
influence. All their hopes are pledged on a perfect understanding of every part
of the subject. Their passions combine with their interests to make them
eagle-eyed and diligent to know what the people will bear -- to watch the fit
moment -- to attack the weak side and to make entry wherever they find a loose
clap-board. Such men harangued the country at the opening of our government, by
telling them "that the people would be sovereign -- that the poor would be
favored -- that the agricultural interests would be held sacred and especially
that taxes would be light." But when a heavy debt was created, oftensibly from
motives of justice to the soldiers, though few had any interest in it, the air
was filled with protestations of gratitude and honesty. The people were
indignant; but these artful men silenced the rising murmurs. Delusion fat alost
and smiled at the subtility of her sons.

These men can prove conclusively that a national debt is a blessing or a
curse; that an army destroys or cherishes freedom; that the friends of
government are the guardian angels of liberty, and that the opposers are a part
of Satan's chosen legion. They can prove that the people virtually choose
electors, when the men, chosen to designate the manner of the people's
choosing, say The constitution of the U. S. declares, that each state shall
appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof shall direct, a number of
electors. etc. by the word stete is meant the people of the state. The word
legislature cannot be mistaken -- a plain man would expect that our legislature
would appoint some mode for the people to choose; but he might expect in vain.
Neither the people not the legislature will choose them. A few wise men in the
legislature will choose them and they will cause the weak men (if any such
should be sound in the pr^cinct, of that house) to vote according to orders,
that they are the people and will choose for themselves. They can prove that
counselors See appendix.
and members of Congress, chosen by men who never saw nor knew them, are more
cautiously and judiciously chosen, than if their constituents were their own
neighbors; because in the last case partiality or passion might influence,
which never could be the case when they know nothing about them. Here reference
is had to the state's voting at large (instead of voting by districts.
They can prove that the country grows rich in proportion to the taxes paid;
just as a trench grows wide in proportion to the lands taken from it.

Subtle arguments, well directed and eloquently enforced, sometimes lead men
astray on questions of mere right and wrong. Shall we then wonder that men
should be deluded on subjects far more complicated?

The end to be answered by these arguments is immense; it compasses all the
objects at which delusion has been aiming ever since it appeared in Eden. Do
you see any worldly motives in these eloquent patriots? Have you never known
that a director of a bank wishes for a large capital subject to his
arbitrament? that a judge is pleased with an extension of his jurisdiction?
that a general is anxious for an increase of the army establishment? and that a
sea-captain likes an addition of tonnage and guns to the ship which he is to
command? These men, who talk thus persuasively to you either are, or expect to
be, sharers of the power which they wish you to delegate, or trustees of the
confidence which they wish you to repose, or managers of the money which they
wish you to pay. Hence their zeal: hence their persuasive eloquence! If you
seem to doubt them, they will ask, are not we of you? are not our interests the
same as yours? They are indeed of you: so is the oak, which shades all the
smaller trees and draws its nourishment from their roots, a part of the grove.
They are of you: they tread the earth which you cultivate; they feed on the
luxuries which your industry supplies, and if an earthquake should swallow the
country, they must condescend to sink with you; but by circumstances of
fortune, birth, or superior bestowments of mind, or better education, they have
ceased to be as you; their political condition is immensely variant from yours:
they are to govern, you are to be governed. They are well-born, you are
base-horn!

Who are the men constantly praising the measures of government? Those great,
well-born! all interested in the subject of their praises; all craftsmen, who
live by making images for the worshippers of the great goddess, or those really
base-born men, who have been in the habit of following these great men
faithfully as hounds do the horn. These wise, pious leaders are crafty enough
to speak to their followers truly and rationally on common subjects, and by
this they gain their confidence; like the retailer, who wishing to get cent.
per cent. profit on articles not well understood, will sell his pins and
needles for less than prime cost. Multitudes of men, whose rights are daily
abridging, follow on in admiration of government. They are made to believe that
religion is attacked, or that the French are coming upon us, or that the
democrats are raising an army, or that the rays of presidential favor, after
melting down all the great men above them, may finally honor them with a
scorching. A great temptation with the base-born is, that by thus doing, they
keep the track of the great, dignified and wealthy; exactly the company which
despises them, and which they ought to avoid. If among these base-born should
be any abstract philosophers, who seeing that great beasts devour little ones,
and great fish the smaller, and are willing to devote themselves by hecatombs
to the rapacity and gluttony of these great men, I wish them many consolations
as they are experiencing the work of mastication and digestion. Surely devoured
they will be; provided their learned, pious, juggling leaders should serve
them, as such men have served their followers in every age of the world.

The uniform language of these great men, is, "a little more patience, a little
more money, in a short time sunbeams will be in abundance." yet never was such
a promise realised. When delusion is detected, and disappointment succeeds, it
sometimes happens, that an heroic patriot dares to say as Tell Hero of the
revolution in Switzerland, anno 1300^^^
to Gresler, "Tyrant, this arrow is for thy heart" -- but it is stupid to bear
and suffer voluntarily, or like Carthusians to beat ourselves, till exexcessive
pain stimulates to vengeance on the system. A free people would always continue
free, if they were as vigilant as their rusers; but a dormant acquiescence will
forever land them in servitude. Single man is depraved; uncontrouled he would
be intolerable. Men placed together without restraint, and made strong with
power and money will usurp.

But say these great men, "It is impossible for the men in power to usurp: our
government is well surrounded by a constitutional fence." I ask, what avails a
fence against a herd of deer? That constitution The republican interest is
firmly attached to the constitution: part of them from a persuasion of its
excellence; the rest from a belief that it is necessary to our political
existence and that an attempt to alter or substitute another in its place would
he hazardous.
is perhaps as well wrought as language would admit: but language is very
elastic. The men, whose interest it is to stretch it to the extent, are, or
have made themselves judges of it. They know well the force and power of every
word -- the east, west, north and south of every semi-colon, and can extract
power from every dash of asterism. They have mostly been practitioners in this
work and understand it as the engineer does the force of his ordnance.

That constitution delegated powers calculated for the contingencies of
centuries; but it is a singular fact that all those contingencies have occurred
in the course of eleven years of peace, and that these great men actually
proceeded, under the power of raising armies expressly confined to Congress, to
provide that an army of 80,000 men might be raised at the pleasure of the
President. As well might they have said 800,000, or have lest the number wholly
indefinite, or they might have made a general law that the President of the
United States should always exercise the functions of the legislature under
this article. -- They might have gone further, and enacted laws which, like the
collects of the Roman ritual, would have answered all purposes and then have
ordained that the president might bring into operation those laws, whenever he
judged best, and then have adjourned without day. These great men made a
sedition act, which however constitutional in terms, was unconstitutionally and
basely directed toward placing one class of our citizens at the feet of the
other. They made an alien act which was a very ingenious thing; but it would
not go! and finally, having exhauste their other powers, they raised a battery
against the remonstrances of the people, manned by a committee of privileges
See p^n^^ dings of the Senate in the case of Du^ne.
and began to work secretly under the general clause, empowering them to make
all laws which should be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the
foregoing powers and all other powers vested by the constitution in the
government of the United States, or in any department thereof.' This, as they
were about to work it, was to operate as a wide open gate out of this lot which
was so well fenced. They even attempted to take from the state legislatures the
power which these last had wrested from people, of choosing electors. The
machinery of this bill was perfect, but it would not go.

Well, say these great men, the constitution is not yet violated: and let me
say, on your vague principles, it never can be violated: but the constitution
is in fact violated, whenever an act is passed without the motives or causes,
which that constitution contemplated as the basis of such act: for example, the
constitution says, you may borrow money on the credit of the United States; may
coin money; raise and support armies; provide and maintain a navy; appoint
ambassadors;" now if money is unnecessarily borrowed, or coined at great
expense and without occasion; war declared; armies raised and navies provided
without just cause; if ambassadors are sent abroad to see whether water is
fluid, what are the expenses of living abroad, and what a wicked world we live
in, surely in all these cases the constitution is violated; for the power is
exercised under circumstances which will not warrant its exercise. Even if the
constitution had said, "do whatever your hands find to do with all your might;"
yet this would not have sanctioned the enaction of one useless, oppressive or
intolerant law, nor have justified the waste of a cent of public money, nor the
imposition of one unnecessary tax.

It is de^usion's self which is constantly crying to you that the constitution
is your sacred bulwark, and that it is yet inviolate. You, the people, must be
the bulwark of that constitution or it will never preserve your rights: your
sentiments, your actions, your very ^ouls must animate that constitution and
give life and effect to its language. When the spirit of the people is lulled
by the lost zephyrs of delusion into security in the lap of the constitution --
when it relies on inanimate paper for security of rights, that people is in the
first stage of slavery. Of what avail think you was the magna charta of Great
Britain to the millions who have been pressed into naval or military service;
to the authors and printers, who have perished in dungeons, or to the tens of
thousands, who for asserting some privileges under the magna charta of the
great God, have been transported to Botany Bay or suffered on a gibbet at home?
yet this magna charta. this precious boon of a king, benignantly restoring to
the people one half of their rights, has been kept literally inviolate.

In a free government the rulers must resign their pride, vanity and avarice,
and in consideration of the trust reposed in them must make sacrifices in order
to yield to the people the blessings of a republic: but our rulers are not
tempered to such bargains: they like the money, the power, the titles and
distinctions; but avoiding the sacrifices, are pushing hard to have the
substance of aristocratic government under the form of a republic. Hence their
constant demands for energy to crush opposition; but the seeds of opposition
are sown in the cabinet.

There is a stout hardy race of men in this country, who fought and paid for a
republic. They have learned tactics which will enable them to out-general your
obliqe maneuvers. They don't reason logically as your great men do; but they
have learned to speak in language which kings and courtiers are obliged to
understand -- and should there be any very loud call for additional energies,
nothing but respect for the laws will restrain them from speaking that
language. They are even now insulted with all the arguments which have been
used in favor of energetic governments ever since the days of Pharaoh: but
every one knew long before our revolution that an energetic government could be
supported: it is a piece of unfailing machinery invented many centuries ago and
consists in governing as much, in collecting as many taxes, and in employing as
much force as the governed will bear without revolt. The patriarchal government
of slaves is energetie; it goes to the ^^most verge of endurance. Peter the
Great, who civilized lus subjects, suspending them by thousands over the Wolga
in the most cruel tortures. was an energetic prince. The late Frederick
practiced all the tacties of energy. Henry 4th and Lewis 14th were energetic.
Nearly all the nations of Europe are groaning under the blessings of an
energetic government, and whenever the cry for energy with us overpowers the
cry of the people for freedom, we cease to have the government for which we
bled. Should a season ever arrive, when no opinions are respected, except those
which in courtly orations and sermons, or in addresses Though the intersetence
of the people in matters of government has been tho's dangerous; yet addresses
in favor of measures have been graciously received and answered. When the
president has passed a city, the mayor and aldermen are impressed -- and have
the honor -- and cannot express themselves, and the president receives with
great gratitude -- and wishes them great increase of such seelings and tells
them how importaut they are to the union, etc. A sew more such addresses and
responses! and your righto are not worth a cent per man.
or responses to addresses servilely adulate the measures of government, that
season will be a dark morning to a dismal day for Americans: rights once given
up are never restored; principles once deserted never return.

Monarchy and republicanism part at this point; the first in fists on unity and
energy; the last on such a division of power that it cannot be dangerous. With
such division no laws can be made and no plans projected, except they be of
general and obvious utility. There will be, then, no national greatness,
destroying like a mighty monster every portion of social happiness; no men
whose salaries shall absorb the earnings of hundreds. If it be said we can have
no peace nor wealth, except we command it by force: no respectability except we
conform to the policy and manners of other courts; then take that course with
all its splendors. It Is not the course of a republic.

Delusion is ready to whisper, these are all idle vagaries; but they are not
the vagaries of modern philosophy, all the subjugated people of the earth have
found them to be solemn, humbling, dreadful realities. Nothing can prevent
their establishment here but the united and persevering efforts of those who
are destined to be deluded.

Having presented a course of delusions under the head of these great men; you
may be ready to ask, if these men are dangerous, how shall we get rid of them?
I answer, that these great and dangerous men, whose feelings and interests are
always opposed to equal rights generally compose about one tenth of society.
You have no other means to extricate yourselves; but by passing over that part
of the nine tenths whom they have secured by favors or deluded by their
enchantments, and to choose from the remainder the firmest and most
intelligent. What cries one and another, will you leave our men of abilities
and put in the base-born to govern us? Be composed gentlemen, the base-born
support the government and suppose you should just let them have a peep through
the keyhole of the treasury door; they may see what will amuse them. -- But
you may be comforted, these great men are made of very flexible materials, and
as soon as they find power to be decidedly on the other side of the equation,
they will be after it; and perhaps some of these base born may prove themselves
to be better than they appear; you will recollect that the citizens of this
country are like trees all set out together: but through the influence of a
system of favor one part of them have been nursed and watered and the earth
about them enriched. They have had all the nourishment of the ground, the
others have been neglected: not only so, but the language to them has been "be
ye accursed, let no fruit grow on ye forever." Are we to wonder that all
passers by admire the thrift and flourishing state of the first, and are
disposed to say that the last ought to be cut down and gathered into bundles?

It Is a real mistortune to the nine-tenths of society, that the other tenth
should be opposed to them; but never let it be forgotten, that the argument
drawn from the coincidence of great and wise and holy politicians in public
measures, is of all others the most alarming. These are the only men whom you
have to fear. If some are apparently more holy than their neighbors, then if
they meddle with your politics they are most capable of deceiving you; their
holiness may recommend them to heaven; but is no guarantee for their political
rectitude. This class, however, are generally set on by other great men: not by
those who are great because they are rich; for these are the tools of another
set who are the knowing ones. In Athens those who became too great and
influential suffered ostracism; but in this country we ought to have prudence
enough to prevent any man or class of men from deserving such an honorable
banishment.

For my own part I am willing to be governed by men greater, wiser and richer
than myself: but have no opinion of having men so great that their altitude
must be taken by a quadrant and their width by a four-rod chain. Through
excessive indulgence we have already a number of men too great for a republic.
How arrives it that these great men are so very fit to govern? Internal
government is designed to control inordinate passions; great men are most
proud, avaricious and tyrannical? Will you then select these to curb pride,
avarice and tyranny? Republican society is to protect the weak against the
strong; but if the strong are to have all the power, the weak will be
oppressed. But says one and another, what will become of our great men? My
answer is, that they always had address enough to work their own passages. The
great host of mankind the nine-tenths are those, which a republican government
ought to concern itself about, and if this is faithfully attended to, the other
tenth will still gain such a portion of power and money as will make them
useful instead of dangerous. They are the very men for your purposes whenever
you have reduced them to the standard, weight and measure of the people.

I am well aware of the great convenience which many of you find in keeping
close to these knowing men, in gathering the crumbs which fall from the tables
of the rich; and in sailing under the lee of the ecclesiastical convoy ships;
but you are taking a bad road; it is a broad road; it is the broad road:
thousands have paid turnpike toll on it before you were born -- and if you
follow it, it may lead you to wealth and honors; it may ruin your country, but
will certainly land you where it has landed all your predecessors.

Having little confidence in addressing placemen, court sycophants, and those
who expect the wages of hirelings, I turn to the last general head of political
delusion, which is the subject of ELECTIONS TO OFFICE.

If the career of delusion could be stopped at the end of every two or four
years, and the people could be left to exercise free and unbiassed elections,
all the evils proposed to you might be remedied; but delusion reserves his
greatest strength and subtlety for these occasions, which in their turn demand
from me an accumulated force of discussion.

Let me first present to you the delusions which have attended past elections.
Formerly the people of this country had sense enough to originate and organize
government, and by their intelligence and energies to keep it in operation;
now, by force of federal opiates, they have just sense enough to choose the
wisest and greatest men; but as soon as the choice is over, they sink into a
torpid state, and thus remain for two years, till the trump of a new election
wakes them to new life and energy; but even then they have been so long dormant
that sometimes the crew of a ship must be murdered; this murder must be
registered in sermons for the edification of political saints: the men must
continue bona side dead, till the, election is closed -- miracles must be
wrought at the bottom of meal tubs -- the Indian tribes must be all in motion
to in vade the frontiers -- mighty ships, with mighty men in them must be
traversing the ocean on mighty, portentous and unaccountable errands -- the
whole political stage must be veiled in darkness and mystery; clouds, tempests
and coruscations must mask the sky: and in the midst of all this scenery,
Satan, with his infernal host, must be advancing to take his long lease of the
earth, and to make princes and nobles of those infernal opposers of religion
and good government, whom all friends of order are called on to keep out of
place. All this, in modern days, is necessary to wake the people to a
recollection that the men, whom they chose last are the fittest candidates for
another election. But mark how ineffectual are all these causes to produce the
wished effect, till joining the wonderworking host, the clergy (and as Cowper,
to aid his verse, so I, my prose, ^^th awe profound, repeat the sacred name,
the clergy) heralds of the prince of peace, ambassadors of him who disclaimed
for himself and his followers the honors of men; the clergy, preachers of the
word of life deign for some days to wave their sacerdotal functions, to descend
from their high seats, made venerable by the respect of the people for
religion, and as they advance to join and influence the throng, you may hear a
shout from every quarter, THE CHURCH IS IN DANGER! This completes the scenery,
and lethargy starts into life and vigor. As this moment, by the light of those
great moral luminaries Robinson These are the writers who undertook to prove
that the French revolution originated in philosophism and infidelity. Delusion
blessed them for veiling the true couse, which every American knew to have been
the excessive oppression of that people under their ancient government.
and Barruel, and by the aid of Rushlight, Peter Porcupine.
are discovered in all their deformity the atheistical opposers of funding
systems, those delightful downy pillows, on which have slept in everlasting
repose the rights of man: the abandoned enemies of splendid American courts, of
diplomatic legions, of foreign tribute. As this vision is passing, the people
are called on to look at those disinterested men, who, regardless of private
interest, have sacrificed years to their service, and who wish to serve them
again only to show their zeal to the death. The election being satisfactorily
closed, the people, like the birds, whom they represent, fly to their hiding
places to wait for a biennial resurrection.

Let no one imagine that I would represent the clergy as acting out of their
sphere in all this scenery; for is it not said unto them, "Go ye into all the
world and preach politics unto every creature. When men oppose ye, call them
enemies of God, and trample them under your fe^t. Appoint fasts unto the Lord,
and when the people are assembled, say to them that the Lord reigns on the
earth in the midst of men of power and wealth; that he delights in the proud,
even in those who are lofty; that he will exalt the vain, and lay in the dust
those who are humble in his sight; that the great men are gods; but that the
little men are like the chaff, which he drives before the wind; that in the
day of his power he will shine mightily on those who are in power, and that he
will make the people under them like the hay, and the stubble, and the
sweepings of the threshing floo^." And when these mighty men shall say unto
you, the church is in danger, then shall ye cry mightily unto the people, and
say "the church is in danger," When the clergy are denouncing the insideli^y of
Jefferson and M'Kean, ask them to exhibit the piety and orthodoxy of Charles
Cotesworth Pinckney and James Ross! See Mr. Lewis' cration delivered in
New Haven, July, 1799.


and when my people hear this, they shall gird on each his armor, and ye shall
lead my people, and ye shall say unto them, "Though these mighty men be
blasphemers, and though they are often seen in the seat where Satan dwells,
yet for righteousness sake, they live and lie, and though apparently the
disciples of Satan, will in the end betray him," and the people shall hear you
and shall fear you, and they shall say unto these mighty men, "ye have taken
our cloaks, yet ye are cold; ye have taken our purses, yet ye are poor; ye have
mortgaged our houses and our lands, yet ye are destitute: behold what remains
to us, take of all that which seems to ye meet; for though ye be called our
servants, yet we are servants unto you, and will serve you -- we and our wives
and our children."

Hail mighty delusion, these are thy handy works!

Fortunately for us, most of these delusions have lost their effect. Robinson
and Barruel can deceive no more. The seventeen philosophitical work-^^ops of
Satan, have never been found: not one illuminatus, major or minor has been
discovered in America, though their names have been published, and though their
existence here is as clearly proved as was their existence in Europe. The
cannibal's progress and bloody buoy, have destroyed each other; the political
prayers sent up on former occasions have never reached the tops of the
steeples, nor have they brought one blessing down: the pantomimical sermons
which have graced political sabbaths are laughed at: the suggestions about
Jefferson's atheism are despised, since many who make them are found to be men,
who would sell all the temples and altars in the country for twelve frigates:
the monstrous noise about ancient wickedness and infidelity is abated, since
mankind have reflected that the sins of the antideluvians are not particularly
chargeable on democrats. The terrible outery about French atheism has met a
similar fate, and the charges of French cruelty sink out of sight before the
characteristic crimes of Britain, which fashion obliges us to read on the
anniversaries of independence in the monumental act of our country, murders,
and robberies on sea -- plots and insurrections on land have all lost their
effect -- and all the little tricks of delusion, such as the prophecy of a
remarkable boy in Vermont, about the great evils which this country might
expect from the reign of democracy, together with Nelson's belts, Suwarrow's
bonnets, Dan. Harrison and Moses Seymour's letters Two letters published in the
Litchfield paper to influence the choice of representatives, and re-published
in many of the federal papers for weeks after the object of them had been
defe^^ed by the choice of M^ssrs, Kirby and Wel^h.
are flying on the wings of oblivion into the realms of Erebus.

Better than this, the federal party By a light breeze raised in the city of
New York -- fanned by an able patriot, the ashes were blown from the coals of
1776; republicanism ^oused to (...) expiring rights from the convulsions which
awaited them. Delasion took the al^rm!
is divided. Porcupine is gone, Fenno resigned, M'Henry missing, Pickering
dismissed -- great confusion in the cabinet: Sedgwick, Harper, Lyman, and Co,
taking leave of their constituents and publishing letters of advice, which are
to fail down the stream of time as jolly-boats to the advice of Washington.

Lately our chief executive was the rock on which the storm might beat: then he
was supposed to second the views of a party; then he was said to be the
champion of a durable system, the unerring pilot of the political ship: now
that party regard him as a frail sand-mole, over which washes every wave -- of
weak measures, a timid partizan; of a crazy ship, a blind pilot. Now they wish
for some young energetic leader, who will bear no foreign insults, who will
have wooden walls and regiments in abundance. The party referred to complain
that Mr. Adams was capticious and ungovernable in the cabinet. They wish for a
president, who instead of being the ^ilo^ shall be the rudder of the ship which
they may s^^er at pleasure. Mr. Adams' firmness and integrity will always be
respected, even by those who have not been partial to the measures of his
administration.


In this confused state of the leading party, it is difficult to calculate in
what form delusion is to attack you. Whether the diplomatic corpse abroad are to
operate, or whether sermons on a new construction are to be served up, is yet a
matter of doubt. I shall, however, venture to present you some of the probable
delusions and certain obstructions which are to operate against your exercise
of free election.

Look at once on the aristocracies which I have named to you, consider their
wealth, their force, their subtlety, the immense interests which they have at
stake, remember that these furnish the men, who in the definition of my subject
were styled the prime agents of delusion, who know the heart and the avenues to
the passions, and who can place before you with strong impressions every
conceivable motive of hope and fear. -- Your treasury, supplied with your own
money is to operate against your freedom of election. See the host of your
brethren, who depend on that treasury. Tens of thousands of men in our country
live on the people: but independent of them and their weight and influence is
found mostly in the governing scale. If the first officers lose their election,
the subordinate ones may lose their offices and emoluments: therefore every new
election has exactly all their influence, and generally that of all their
connections to balance against an impartial issue, and by all that influence
which is incalculably, ^reat and increasing, those in place have a chance of
re-election superior to those not in place. This idea opens to you the
inducement which the higher officers have to lead up a funding system, an army,
a navy, federal city, valuation tax. -- All these things lead to new
appointments in abundance, to a system of favor, Had the constitution vested
appointments in a committee to be chanced every tw^ years, some evils now
experienced would have been avoided; perhaps an amendm^^^ on this part would be
full as valuable as an amendment aimed at the person of A^^^rt Gallatin.
which engages a host of expectants in addition to the successful candidates,
and whenever these offices amount sufficiently to create a moral certainty of
re-election, Elections would be we^^^ ^^^ed if officers of government could be
excl^ded (...) ^^^ing. Their votes (...) cannot be ^^^ti^l.
the government ceases to be republican: you may then call it an oligarchy or a
monarchy; to the people it matters not what it is.

But these great men and privileged orders do not oppose to you their single
votes; they have about them a host of sycophants or dependants, who must vote
according to orders: but not to this false influence alone is delusion
confined. The characters, principles and feelings of those who are opposed to
present men and measures are to be torn in pieces. The election ball is not
well opened till the republicans are bleeding at every pore. The 4th of July
occasions, which you imagined yourselves to have earned, have been wrested from
you, and they have been perverted into days for chastising the enemies of
administration by the odious characters of illuminatists, disorganizers and
atheists; but as our native tribes when they are torturing a prisoner, suffer
him, in the interval of his torments to sit and smoke or eat with them; so have
these federal gentlemen, after a public wounding of you in every part, suffered
you to dine with them, to toast men, whom you regard as despoilers of your
rights and to join them in copious libations to principles and measures which
you hold in abhorrence, and the penalty for your neglecting or refusing to do
and suffer the whole measure of ^orment has been to hold you up as a hissing
and a bye-word, as jacobins, anarchists and fit companions for infernal
spirits. Such has been part of the system of tyranny which even before our own
eyes has been acted repeatedly on the memorable anniversaries of our
independence. Happy would it be were this confined to the great cities; but our
government has led up a number of little aristocracies no bigger than pea-brush
in our small towns -- where either priest, or lawyer, or federal officers, or
modern whigs and their associates must, like their superiors, be lording it
over the poor convicted democrats.

A great art on these public occasions has been to paint up a certain character
in every deformity of vice, then to rob the infernal wardrobe to dress him,
then to present this a democrat, disorganizer, jacobin and satanist. Their
creed is to be as monstrous as their appearance, they are made to believe
things incredible, to practice things horrid, and to meditate mischiefs
infinite. There say they, ladies and gentlemen, is a republican, and this is
republicanism. Then to show the power of contrast, you have presented, a
charming, amiable, divine character, dressed in celestial robes, believing,
practicing and contriving all which is good and deserving. This say they, is a
federalist, and this is federalism. They then proceed to muster up all the
infernal actions of all the bad men in the world, and set them up as the
admiration of these infernals. They make them look complacently at blasphemy,
smile at murder, and fall into a broad laugh at atheism. They then assign to
them as companions all the wretches, who have in every age disgraced humanity,
and on the other side, all the good actions throughout the world -- all men
famous for piety, goodness and science are presented as the objects of love and
esteem for their celestials. They claim all holy men of every age as
federalists. Then to crown the work, they send these infernal jacobins to the
infernal world and translate the federalists to a state of glory.

Nearly every one who hears me knows this picture to be taken from the life --
every one knows it to be sheer, palp^ble abusive delusion, combining the basest
of means with the m^st abandoned of ends. There is a great host of intelligent
republicans in this country; not one of whom wishes for the abolition of
religion and government; not one of w^om approves any of the unjustifiable
measures of F^ance.

But delusion knows that many men fear to be on the ^eak side; therefore these
occasions are sometimes improved to show that there are few or no d^^^crats in
these northern states. I shall show the fallacy of this by two flier traverses.

First, go about the country and ask the people, do you like Mr. Adams, Mr.
Pickering, etc? they don't know. -- Do you like the constitution? yes. Do you
like the funding system, federal city, foreign intercourse, stampact, army,
navy -- no, decidedly not one of them. But ask them whether they intend to vote
for federal me^ -- they will answer yes, certainly for we are told that all the
democrats are athe^sts and would pull down all religion and government. Now
surely a federalist must be ashamed that men, thoroughly republicans at heart,
should be obliged to make war on their feelings, principles and liberties under
the influence of such a false, barefaced delusion. The man, who told them
this, knew it to be false: he never saw any man in his senses, who wished to
destroy all religion, and surely he never believed that great exertions would
be made by men to get into place, if their object was not other than to tear
down the edifice of government and to bury themselves in its ruins. Multitudes
of rational men are for destroying that kind of religion, which is made a
football or stalking horse and which operates only to dishonor God and ruin
man; but the world at large are well disposed to have due homage paid to the
source of being, though they may differ about the forms, in which that can be
most acceptably rendered.

But let us try another traverse. From the whole number of reputed federalists
deduct those, who depend directly or indirectly on government for support --
deduct the expectants of federal office: these surely are not impartial judge,
then deduct the great host of men who are marked like a box of glass, with a
keep this side up, who would be pleased with any government under a dey, bey,
monarch, grand duke, grand seignior, or viceroy, provided they could share the
power of it: men who praise all preachers, serve all great men, and are
lacquies to every thing but truth and honesly -- then deduct the great number
of men who are wholly uninformed on the subject of government and who are
federal merely because they are hauled about by a federal windlass -- then
deduct the men in advanced life, who have seen many changes and have been
deluded in them all and who calculate that in any government things will be as
bad as the men in power can make them.

After these deductions you may look round for federalists, you will not see
men as trees walking. Separate those who follow for the loaves and fishes, with
those who habitually follow the multitude, from the sincere admirers of present
men and measures, and the result would present the conclusions which your minds
ought to admit.

But say these deluders, suppose there are a few democrats, see who they are, a
poor ragged, noisy company! but to these rags you owe your robes: these men
have been taxed severely to support a government which gloried in depriving
them of the means. When a federal tax-gatherer appeared, they could not, as you
could, resort to federal purses; but cast your eyes southward and you will see
some men with whole clothes, correct morals and unquestionable intelligence,
daring to oppose strength of argument and thunder of eloquence to your motley
garbled system of European politics.

We poor ragged democrats in these truly federal northern states, who read the
lying Be, Aurora and Mercury, and dare not touch the Spectator, the Sentinel
nor the Connecticut Courant, ^est the splendour of truth should destroy our
eyesight: we who meet in barns to settle the nation, pray that our littleness
may save us from the crushing power of your federal highnesses. We consess that
for our sins we deserve to have an everlasting debt fixed upon us, due to men
who despise the services for which the debt was contracted. We deserve to be
kept under by an army and navy. We deserve to be made the victim of
constructive treason, and have no claim to be afterward treated as the
monuments of presidential mercy. Jails, fines, and gallowses ought to be our
portion. We deserve even in the midst of suffering, to be jeered and laughed at
by our tormentors; to be traduced in the newspapers of federal truth, and to be
ranked in fast and election-sermons among infernal spirits. We deserve to be
wholly cut off from all hope of Presidential favor and the blessings of
society. Though some of us fought and bled for the revolution, yet we have
fallen from our first estate into all the guilt and pollution of democracy, and
had it not been for the sparing mercy of our true liege lords, we should long
since have been cut off from our homes, and had our portions appointed among
the democrats of a wretched world. Have mercy upon us! Have mercy upon us! ye
well-sed, well-dressed, chariot-rolling, caucus-keeping, levee-revelling
federalists; for we are poor, and wretched, and ignorant, and miserable.

I should hope that such a humble confession might save the poor handful of
northern democrats from the mighty power of the northern federalists, and that
these gentlemen would turn their attention to the banks of the Hudson, Delaware
and Potomac, where they may find as ^ouch ability, integrity and eloquence as
they can afford to meet; but if we must be persecuted, we shall probably
increase, and perhaps in eight years more there may be some of our number, who
can discern the difference between a government of equal rights, and a
government, where inequality and distinction of rank form the most prominent
feature.

Now let me seriously ask my brethren, the retailers of words and gestures on
those anniversaries -- Do you not know at least twenty democrats The names of
Jefferson, Burr, Madison, Monroe, Baldwin, Dickinson, Priestly, Gallatin and
Samuel Adams, are too mighty for the attacks of ephemerals. Those might have
ranked among the great, wise and mighty men, had they possessed the contempt
for the people which characterises the agents of delusion.
in the United States, who possesses far more accurate and extensive knowledge
on the subject of politics than you do? who have as large families and as much
property to protect as you have, and whose reasonings and conclusions on the
state of our country are likely to be full as ingenious and pertinent as yours?
If you are ignorant of this, you ought to read. -- Well have you any power of
attorney from these men to abuse them? have you a patent for the exclusive use
of all the opprobrious terms in the language? or do you claim to be key-keepers
to that world, whither you have so often sent the democrats? how comes it that
every orator on such occasions is able to call before him all the great, and
brave, and wise men of ancient and modern days, of this and all other
countries, and to catechize and curse them? There is something mighty farcical
in all this business. It is to be wished that these gentlemen would keep their
curses for domestic consumption. Here it may be interesting to notice for a
moment some of the strange stimulating logic dished up on such occasions --
such as, that Voltaire was an atheist -- that Voltaire was a Frenchman -- that
all democrats are attached to the French, therefore, that all Frenchmen and
democrats are atheists. Now this is good reasoning, but it renders no reason
why I should pay an extra tax. But Rousseau, D'Alembert, and Diderot were
infidels, and the masons in Europe have become faithless. This strengthens the
argument; still the connection between all this and my money is wholly
invisible: but perfidious France is murdering the honest Germans and Russians,
and the Dutch have treated shamefully the Duke of York, and the Egyptians are
in danger of a revolution; all this is very important. It proves that the
measures of our government are perfectly right, and that there is no occasion
for looking at home. But the Indians have stolen a horse! By all means raise an
additional regiment. But Truxton has taken the Insurgent and we are now masters
of the ocean! Make the forests ring with your axes, fill the sea with ships;
put your liberties afloat, sailing will season them as it does liquors. But a
foreigner infests your national councils. Amend your constitution. But a
foreigner is at the head of your armies! Delusion commands silence. But a
howling atheist who has crept into the third story of the federal building, is
proclaiming that my neighbors opinions will not pick my pocket nor break my
leg! See Appendix.
This shows the importance of associating religion with government.

Not less delusive than the orations are the toasts on those days. It is well
known that if you set up any thing and pray for it, and preach for it, and
toast it, the thing becomes of consequence. But voluntary effusions will not
answer: committees must be appointed, and they give you 1 st, the president, 16
cheers, three guns. Federalism used almost to fail in expression. He was Adams
and liberty, he was the rock, the pilot, in short, every thing but a parish
steeple; not a word about the Vice President! Next, millions for defense, but
not a cent for tribute. Federalists rise; make the air ring, cannons make your
speeches, and if any growling jacobin should damp the general joy by speaking
of a tribute to the Dey of Algiers, blow him into the air. Then "confusion to
the democrats;" nine cheers. Now when one class of citizens begins to exercise
the other, the chances in favor of harmony and unanimity are wholly
incalculable. Again, " The American fair, their frowns on democrats, and their
exclusive smiles on federalists. There my good friends, your toasts wont help
you; those smiles are to be merited; not won by toasting.

I have introduced this little specimen of toasts to swell the list of delusive
arts which are practiced to render palatable the measures of administaation,
and to give force to a remark, that on the side of government have been
prayers, sermons, orations, toasts, offices, influence and treasury, and
against the republicans, alien and sedition laws exclusion from office, abuse
in and out of congress, reviling in newspapers, and yet with all this, at the
end of 11 years, if the officers of government could be chosen under a new
census, there is a moral certainty of a great majority in favor of the
democratic candidatos. This shows in a strong point of view how little the
administration has bottomed itself on the confidence of the people; the only
basis on which a republic can rest.

When delusion has given command to attack the democrats on the score of their
attachment to the cause of France, the stage, the desk and the press have been
alike at his service. Falsehood has borrowed the hundred tongues of fame, and
each tongue has had full employ in detailing the enormities of the French, and
in representing these enormities as the objects of affection with the
republicans; but they have shrunk from the distinction between the cause of
struggling freedom and the enormities in^^parable from a revolution.

To render such base delusions contemptible, let me call to your view the
tottering chrones of Europe; the exliausted finances of royal tyrants: se^
where ^^ud^lism and vandalism had overspread kingdom, sunk in the calm of
despotism, shrouded in the might of slavish delusion: see freedom like the
lightning of the heavens bursting from the midst of darkness in rapid and
tremendous flathes; by this light see freemen mounting to the top of the waves
in the "tempestuous sea of liberty." -- Want with patience, this sea will soon
be quieted; that lightning will soon be succeeded by the day of freedom. Let
not the convulsions which attend unparallelled struggle for freedom alarm you,
who witnessed the spasms of our partial revolution. If with excess of pair and
strong cryings the blood returns into the veins of a man in a state of
rescuscitation, shall we wonder at the strong convulsions and inexpressible
agonies which nations experience, when freedom, that vital fluid of society,
after a suspension of 900 years, is again made to flow freely in its veins?
Writers may tell you of the cruelties and excesses of the French revolution;
British writers told the same of us when we contended against them. Summon up
the faults of the best of men you may fill a page; those of the worst of men
might employ a pamphlet: those of nations in a state of peace would require
volumes, and in a state of war, if their enemies are to be their biographers,
the world would hardly contain a catalogue of their crimes.

Lies, told about the French in English, Hamburg, Russian and German papers for
months, all concentrated in one federal paper, present a most horrid character
of that people. This concentration, even for years, is condensed into a
cannibal's progress, and the picture becomes monstrous indeed. Suppose that all
the true accounts of murders, robberies, extraordinary reptiles, duels,
sentences of courts and executions in America for one year, were to be
republished with only the common exaggerations of a second impression: then to
these should be added, by those who are fond of the mavelous, many wonderful
prodigies of fraud and cruelty, monstrous beast and reptiles, calculated to
impress the reader with horror; then to these should be added all the
commentaries, which in the course of that year had been made on these
publications, by the decided and rancorous enemies of the people, government,
climate, and manners of America; then that the whole should be published in the
compass of a pocket volume by an editor keenly determined to ruin our
character; then that this should be read by a man resolved to believe the worst
of us; pray what would be his impressions? Why he would consider America as the
offscouring of the earth, as a den of cruelty, and as a refuge for wild beasts
and hideous reptiles. Just as good have been your means of intelligence about
France. Not one person, who had any reputation of friendship for that nation
has addressed you on the subject. Hence it has been thought regular for every
royalist to deal out his curses on France, and to conjure up Satan to make up
his dificiency of language to abuse them, and having sent them on a journey to
the infernal world, the next task was to send after them all who retained a
belief, that though many of their measures were indefensible on cool rational
principles; that though in their mighty convulsions and tremendous wars they
had sometimes been excessive, yet that their cause was good, and that the lord
reigned and guided the storm.

On this subject of elections delusion always raises a great cry about the ins
and outs and it is said by the ins, that the outs wish to be in. This is always
said by the same class of men; but how can it be true in the present case; for,
according to their own statement, the public officers retire poor, and the
others could do better at home. Now one or the other side of this proposition
must be true. If then theirs be true, that there are constant outgoings of
disinterestedness and patriotism, why so unwilling that others should share the
burden? Is it because they would not govern as well as you? Suffer me to say,
you are miserable judges on this point, and your modesty ought to preclude the
suggestion. But suppose there are immense advantages attached to the ins, such
as the holding as tenants in common all the power in the country, distributing
all the money, all the offices, living on the best, keeping the first company,
forming important connections, and providing for friends. And speculating in
land-warrants.
"If, says the venerable Petatiah Webster, the ins do not know how to
appreciate such advantages, I pity not them so much as the fools who send
them." The six dollars a day, or four or five, or twenty five thousand dollars
a year, form the smallest item in the account. Will you say, "we have
responsibility to balance these extras?" Tell of the responsibility of ninepins
and rattle boxes! pray where is your ability to respond it by your
mismanagem^^^ (...) ^ak^ millions of money from the people, or wa^^^ thousands
of lives in a useless quarrel. Open your purses and see whether you have small
change to pay for principles dearly assumed, but idly sacrificed; for expected
blessings, through your means, turned into curses, founded on interminable
interest; for rational freedom, turned by your delusive measures, into slavery
unchangeable. Will you say that your characters are to pay the bill? Alas!
while the scrutiny is making they will vanish. This responsibility is all a
delusion. The ins have privileges in abundance, and it was once said that in a
free government, these should be in rotation. Will you say that all mankind are
alike, and in similar situations will equally betray? A merchant turns out of
employ the man who is ruining him. He never waits to phi^osophise and say, "Why
all men are knaves. This man has almost in ^ed ^^e, and I may as well become
bankrupt through his means as through another's."
Be it so, when the people let the power go out of their own hands they will
always be betrayed. Take away the sovereignty of the people, which always rests
in unbiassed elections, and all the rest is not worth contending for. Take this
away and it is of no moment to the people who is president or vice president --
who are senators and members, or who are the heads of departments; for when
that is gone, all the rest will sooner or later go; but it is of infinite moment
to the people to know and feel that if the elected do not conform they shall
not be re-elected. This forms a responsibility, which once established, might
preserve a free republic forever, and this maxim is the corner stone of
republicanism, This is the rock, founded on which, a building would stand
strong in the day of the floods and winds. Republicanism may bid defiance to
delusion, whenever the people shall have firmness and weight enough to balance
president, vice president, senators, representatives, heads of departments,
diplomatic corpse, army, navy, together with all the subordinate agents which
new measures place it in the power of rulers to appoint and support independent
of them.

Another electioneering delusion is, "that the Aurora, and other republican
papers are full of lies, and the conclusion is to be that the federal papers
are ^^dl^ of truths!" He^e let me ask how many times did the federal papers
drown, shoot, or massacre Buonaparte, while in Egypt? How often was Suwarrow
victorious when he was flying before the French? How often was Morean's army
defeated by the humane conqueror of Ismael? How often was Holland taken by the
Duke of York? How often has rebellion been completely quelled in Ireland? How
many illumina^s have been found in this country? How often has Mr. Ross been
governor of Pennsylvania? How completely did Mr. Monroe sail of his election to
the chair in Virginia? What great federal concussions have been wrought in
North Carolina? What plots in the South? And finally, when nearly all the
federal papers in the last year published the success of the federal ticket in
New York, and added that democracy would never again raise its head there: I
ask how true was it? The federal papers tell you that all New England is
federal; and even the same Boston papers, which announce 20,000 votes in favor
of the democratic ticket, proclaims the integral federalism of that state; but
unfortunately, the federalists came in such throngs, and so darkened their air,
that 20,000 of them got benighted and voted for Gerry. Dolusion, these are thy
weak tricks!

Well, say these deluders, let the democrats have their way, they will appoint
a president who will turn out all the old tried officers, and put a set of men
in their place, who would annihilate the funding system, and bring confusion
out of order; then goes national character: for these men have no idea of
honesty or public faith; but these democrats, who best know their own
calculations, profess that a president of their choice would probably retain in
place all men who had served faithfully. As to their principles, he will well
calculate to find them in a bundle with their interests, and in a few weeks
they would draw well in republican geers. The funding system would be
annihilated as fast as means to discharge it could be procured. These would
result from savings by calling home the diplomatic corpse and ships of war; by
retrenching offices at home, salaries and unnecessary bestowments, and by the
avails of our immense western territory, and no laws would be made to prevent
the citizens of other countries from coming to assist us in the reduction of
it. Probably a new administration would stop the building of the federal city
where it now is, and leave its unfinished walls as a monument to future
generations of the magnificient plans See Appendix.
of men, who once undertook to be the rulers of a free people, and that those
who are hereafter to lament on another subject may here practice their notes of
sorrow, and say, "federal Babylon is fallen," is fallen! that great city, which
in the ordinary course of things, would have been the refuge of every hateful
bird, and the receptacle of the abominations of the whole earth. The system of
a new administration would be less directed to federal greatness than the
present: our militia would be made strong; unlimited confidence would be placed
in the people, and our constitution would be fi^^nly supported. Now I believe
that such would be the course of a new administration, yet it is possible that
they might seize a creditor and drag him to prison instead (...) his debtor:
they might hang the witnesses in a cause, instead of the condemned ou^prit:
they might fell the country, and themselves and families at auction: might
declare war against their own characters and principles, and like true
harlequins, bite their own heads off. These things are full a^ probable as any
of the electioneering delusion dealt out to you.

Having, under three general heads, exhibited the prominent features of
political delusion, suffer me to apply the subject in an address to the nine
tenths of society.

When you see, my brethren, the most despotic and tyrannical administrations in
the world defended by the ablest pens, bravest armies, and most shining
abilities, you surely will not believe that a combination of all these in our
own, is a conclusive argument of its goodness. Men have written and spoken like
angels, and fought like bloodhounds in defense of despotism and tyranny.

I have pointed to you the line which distinguishes you, the people, from that
class of men whose interests are opposed to those of the people, by naming to
you the act^ which mark this distinction. Not more opposed to religion are the
world, the flesh and the devil, than are the subtlety, avarice and pride of the
one tenth to the rights of the nine tenths in society.

Newly initiated politicians, and anniversary orators, having just learnt the
delightful machinery of energetic government, are apt to wonder how a people,
who enjoy the sun and moon and tides according to Straffords almanac, and
whose lands produce in plenty, can wish for another system of measures; but
it is not by authority of the United States that the heavenly bodies revolve;
not by reason of the interest of our court in the court of heaven, that we have
spring and autumn, heat and light, fine crops and abundant markets. The praises
of administration have been sung from one end of the continent to the other.
Amused by this, your exertions hitherto have been devoted solely to the
promotion of this one tenth, to the neglect of yourselves: It is a noticeable
fact, that no sooner does a member of congress resign, than the people are very
anxious to find some honorable place for him to rest in after the excessive
fatigue of federal legislation -- and for this purpose, the people of
Connecticut generally place him at the council board.
they have taken rank with the mighty men of the earth; while you, hewers of
wood and drawers of water, have been "crouching down between two burdens." It Is
true you have as yet no titles of nobility; but who cares for titles of
nobility, provided you do not give with it wealth and influence? What would be
a duke in England, if he had no property, nor credit, nor a seat in the house
of lords? Fill a man with wealth and power, and he is in fact a peer of the
realm. The nature of things is not changed by names; an eagle would not cease
to be gold, though you should politely call it a York sixpence, no would a
cent experience the mighty power of a transmutation of metals, though you
should call it an eagle. The man, who can hold a supreme court in his cabin,
and sentence men to death, from which there can be no appeal nor reprieve, and
hang them by dozens to the yard-arm for offenses, which in civil society might
have cost them a fine of seven dollars, can never respect the people. The man,
who can gain an appetite for breakfast by seeing 100 la^hes severely bestowed
on half a score of soldiers for speaking lightly of some upstart adjutant, some
privileged cousin of some influential man, can never respect the people.
Martial and naval laws are fatal to freedom, and ought never to be in force,
except at the m^^^^ of actual invasion. A man, attached to the distinctions of
being and blessedness between the admiral and sailor, the general and soldier,
can never contemplate a condition of equal rights without contempt. He sees the
soldier and sailor taken from the nine tenths of society, submitting to
humiliations abhorrent to the cause, for which he professed to enlist, and
hence concludes that the class of men from whom they were taken, deserve
nothing but lashes and contempt.

The luxuriant courtier, who must have his pease and salmon before the frost
has left the earth, or the ice the rivers, and who loathes the fight of
vegetable or animal food in the season of it; who rides in a gig with half a
dozen lacqueys behind him; who curses every taverner, excommunicates every
cook, and kicks over the table, because his eggs were not brought to him in a
pre-existent state, can never have any opinion of the plebians, who are toiling
to furnish the means of his splendour.

The man who, raised by the people from twenty-five and fifty cent habits to a
sucrative establishment; from a plain to a sumptuous table: from a laborious
profession to the brilliant region of levees and courts; from the company of
farmers to the society of foreign ministers: and from obscure life to the top
ridge of the federal moutain, must look down on the people. No shade-wilted
belle ever looked with more scorn on the ruddy milk-maid, than does such an
elevated Proteus on his fog benighted constituents. He looks up and sees some
still greater beings about him; but wisely calculates that the same power,
which raised him from nothing, can make a man-mountain of him. Feeling that
more power would be welcome to himself, he endeavors to fill all his superiors
with as much power as possible. Charged with this mighty project, he forgets
all sense of connection, and is full as likely to appoint a lieutenant general
and inspector general without an army as with. He is for making his
fourth-proof and common-proof sea-commanders by the pompous title of
vice-admirals and admirals, even without a navy; and in all this dream forgets
that at home he left an abundance of generals, who led numerous flocks and
herds, and that the uncut navies of his native state were full of admirals with
axes on their shoulders. These are generals and admirals, whom Americans will
always revere.
But full of his immense project, he writes long letters to his constituents of
things passing strange and wondrous pitiful -- "how that the honor of America
would not suffer her to send to a foreign court, men whom that court could with
honor receive, and how those good men, after ploughing much water found
themselves, as they expected, ill received, and how they came back again, and
how much they had been assailed by the rear guard of the alphabet, and how
every nation has a right to send such men abroad as they please, The X, Y, Z,
busine's, excited much agitation. Of its merits I am ignorant: but am persu^^ed
that if any attempt shall be made to excite the people in consequence of any
result of the present unission -- the consequences will be unpleasant.
and concludes by telling the people that they must be mad, and must put
cockades in their hats, and be mad for many days, and must have great talks,
and raise an army of officers, and make out a valuation, on which the most
loyal state in the union, should have the honor of paying a tax a year earlier
than the rest, and how the people trust the reins of government wholly in the
hands of the constituted authorities, for that trouble some times are coming."

As all this appears to come from one of our own flesh and blood, it appears
highly plausible, and is readily swallowed; but it never occurs, till all is
over, that this same man, though once of us, is now translated into another
state of being, that he has new hopes, new objects, more enlarged conceptions:
that instead of being our representative, he has become a representative of the
United States. It never occurs that this man's greatness is mightily enhanced,
if he can be a master-workman in the shop, where all these generals, and
admirals, and envoys, and officers, commissions, and taxes are turned out. It
never occurs that all which he pays of the expense of this business will be
only some decimals of the units, which we pay him over what his services are
worth.

Now if the contempt of these great men for the nine-tenths of society were
all, it might be borne; but immense sums must be levied by them in order to
support their splendour, and their schemes of greatness. I have avoided to speak
to you of unaccounted for millions; but HAVE PRESENTED SYSTEMS BY WHICH THE
WEALTH OF THE WORLD IS TO BE WASTED, AND THE BLOOD OF MILLIONS IS TO FLOW; yet
it may be well for you to know that the support of your government now amounts
to 42,000 dollars a day See Appendix.
-- that this expense has been, and is increasing, and that in the last session
it was found impossible to provide ways and means to raise the 15 millions of
dollars for the expenses of the present year. The secretary proposed a stamp
duty on transfers of real estate. The committee of ways and means proposed a
national lottery, which might annually raise from 100 to 150 thousand dollars,
and the same committee reported the expediency of impowering the president to
borrow 3,500,000 dollars for the service of the present year. Large loans are
convenient sops for a greedy sinking fund -- when public resources fail, and
public good requires some object to be compassed too abandoned to justify a tax
or a subscription -- a Jottery is often proposed, and in the scheme immense
advantages are offered to the purchaser: no less than one chance in 25,000 to
draw the highest prize. And old soldier would be shot at for one cent, if his
chance of being killed was no greater than one in 25,000; but worse than bad
chances, the sinews of industry must be cut in the purchaser: relying on dame
fortune he must quit dame industry; for they keep their lodgers at different
hotels. Scarcely two and a half blanks to a prize! and why should not fortune
deluge a man for this once when before she had never dropped on him a particle of
her dew? But the fortunate adventurer must resign 15 per cent. in order to
entitle him to a draw-back of 15 per cent in his chance for ruin; and the
woe-worn disappointed blank-holders are taught to wait for another scheme and
better stars.

All this bears in front the marks of delusion, and it is far better to be thus
deluded than to have money raised upon us by indirect means. When my tax-master
fears to present me his bill, lest I should ask the whys and wherefores, he
contrives in some artful way to pick my pockets. He knows that I have passions,
propensities and wants. These he taxes in the articles which contribute to my
supply or indulgence. He sees that streams of wealth are flowing into the
Treasury through the medium of sugar-hogsheads and tea-chests. I feel that my
resources are expending: he cheers me up with "fear not, the hairs of your head
are all numbered," to which I might well reply, "yes, and all the pence in my
pocket." But lotteries draw money from the credulous; indirect taxes from the
voluptuary: imperious necessity demands a stamp and valuation tax: all will not
ward off the dreaded crisis: though in an individual the lending of money at 8
per cent. (...) a crime. denominated by statute corrupt and usurious and
meriting a forfeiture of the whole sum loaned; yet the exigencies of government
drive them to procure the commission of this crime. Then comes the moment for
sovereign delusion to open all its batteries, the wounds of a bleeding country!
just healing under the metallic tractors of Grenville, opened afresh by
exterminating France: a country, impoverished by too copious emanations of
gratitude toward the revolutionary army and overpowered by sensibility toward
the Dey of Algiers, for suffering us to exchange the most valuable productions
of the earth for the wine, oil and fruits of the Mediterranean; a most
benevolent country, wishing to be on speaking and hand-shaking terms with every
power in Europe, and obliged for that end to send abroad ship loads of
diplomacy; a most equitable country, suffering the irruptions of lawless
savages, and the plots of seditious jacobins -- must have an army; must have a
fleet. A warlike attitude commands peace, and a peaceful conduct provokes wars;
exertions must be made: posterity must not be burdened with taxes. All this is
closed with a flattering statement of the financial condition of our country
and a few round periods showing the prosperity of our country as flowing from
the greatess quantity of wisdom, prudence and patriotism that was ever made
into one compost since the creation of the would. We are often advised to
compos^^re under-any real or supposed grievances; because other nations are
suffering more. As well might you compose a man under the scourge of the lash
by telling him that others are writhing under the tortures of the inquisition,
or a man severely afllicted by the gou^, that others are sustain in the ago
^ie^ of a ^^putation. However excellent may appear the system of public
measures to those who are basking in the sunshine of power, it is certain that
the Democrats have not been on beds of roses.


Surely the nine-tenths of our people have too much g^o^ sense and firmness, to
sacrifice their polit^cal all to such false cr^tifices

Most of the delusions which I have named to you will be practiced on you at
the approaching Presidential election, and then delusion ever busy and
inventive, will assume new and potent forms proportioned to the immense
importance of that occasion. Some candidates will be proposed to you whose
whole system consists of the delusions which I have explained: but was our
revolution archieved? did the great God guide the storm in order to land as in
the harbor of peace and freedom, and yet is the whole scene to be clouded with
the bursting of crakers and raising of sky-rockets? Republicans be awake -- the
day is more important than any day of your revolution. Now republicanism dies
or lives forever. Your candidate is a tried patriot and statesman. It is not
the atheist Jefferson; not the infamous discoverer of a staddard of weights and
measures by the vibrations of a pendulum; not the base author of the letter to
Mazzei. Federalists need not apprehend that such a man is to be held up; but
your candidate is Jefferson, president of the philosophical society, who in all
his communications to them has spoken reverently of the wisdom and goodness of
God; See Appendix
the man who in his writings has spoken reverently of christian religion, and
has for years supported at his own expense, a preacher of the gospel; a man of
unquestionable morality both in theory and practice -- amiable in private life
-- holding the second office in your government by the free suffrages of the
people -- the ingenious discoverer of a perfect standard of weights and
measures, and the man who in public as well as private has dared to speak
truths galling to federal ears -- has dared to say that we had men who
preferred the calm of despotism to the tempestuous sea of liberty -- that we
had an aristocratic, monarchic, Britannic faction in this country. Knowing
accurately the power of delusion, he ventured to predict, that after the war
there would be a relapse of spirit in the people; that abuses would creep in
and would continue till a crisis, when by the energy of the people our rights
would revive or till they should expire in a convulsion, and herein he
predicted this very day. Our spirit has declined; gross abuses have crept in;
we have a powerful aristocratic monarchic Britannic faction; but by a due
exertion of your constitutional right of election, your rights may yet revive,
and the man who predicted this, lives to receive the testimony of your respect
and confidence, the withholding of which may lead you to the sad catastrophe of
seeing your dearly earned rights literally expire in a convulsion. However you
may be agitated on the subject of religion, rest assured that you are not to
depend on any administration of government for the prosperity of Zion. You will
not, like the people of England, expect that examples of piety, issues of grace
and streams of salvation are to flow from his most sacred majesty and the
titled slaves which compose a luxurious court. The chariot wheels of salvation
are far different from the chariot wheels which are to be rolling round the
streets of the federal city with loads of domestic and imported infidelity.

Finally, republicans, be strong: though they, who are opposed to you may say,
"we are called legion; for we are many, fear not their numbers." Though they
may offer you all the kingdoms of the world in consideration of your
submission; though they may say, "follow us and ye shall be as gods," heed them
not; their business is to delude you. Singular as it may seem, though you have
been called infidels, yet you have to combat systems destructive to religion;
though you have been called jacobins, yet you have to contend for that equal
rational freedom which no jacobin ever sought. Though you have been called
infernals, yet you have the same enemies to^ight which the ancient church had:
you have principalities and powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this
(...) and spiritual wickedness in high places with the prince of the power of
the air See Appendix.
at the head of them. Though a government which you equally obtained and equally
support, has been directed both in language and laws against your feelings,
liberties and rights; yet you have waited peaceably; though impatiently for the
day of your constitutional deliverance. Soon will your prison doors be set
open; the day to redeem yourselves from great and little tyrants is at hand. If
you have firmness to meet the crisis and faithfully to act your parts in it you
may shout, for your redemption is at the doors.

But if in any of you present, delusion has wrought its perfect work, if you
have bowed the knee to the political Baal: if you are slavishly devoted to the
self-stiled friends of order and good government, then bid an eternal adieu to
the freedom, which you never merited; prepare your necks for the yoke, hail
Issachar as your venerated ancestor, say to delusion "thou art our father," and
to funding system, federal city, foreign intercourse, army, navy, "ye are our
brethren and sisters."

THE END.
APPENDIX.
NATIONAL DEBT.
1. The Amount of Public Debt is thus stated by the Secretary of the Treasury.

On the first of January, 1790.
Dolls. Cts. Foreign, domestic and assumed debt, 72,237,301 97 On the 1st of
January, 1791, 76,781,953 14 On the 1st of January, 1800, 79,403,820 30

2. The Committee of Ways and Means acting on the same subject, Present the
total debt, January 1, 1790, at 71,305,559 64 January 1, 1791, at 74,185,596 82
January 1, 1800, at 70,212,519 16

The first statement shows an increase of the debt according to the secretary.

The second statement shows a decrease of the debt according to the committee.

Though Congress did not act on the report of the committee; yet an impression
of a decrease of the debt has been left to influence the public mind during the
recess of Congress. To prevent any undue impression, Mr. Gallatin has published
a view of the public debt, receipts and expenditures, the result of which is as
follow:

3. Debt. January 1, 1800, 79,202,631 15 January 1, 1790, 69,740,366 27 Nominal
increase of debt from 1790 to 1800, 9,462 264 88 From the amount of increase he
deducts all the funds actually acquired by government, and which may possibly
be applied toward the reduction of the debt, 3,243,071 32 6,219,193 56 To this
add debts due to U. S. and cash, etc. 438,125 88 Leaving for true amount of
increase, 6,657,319 44

RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES. From the opening of the Government in 1789, to Jan.
1,1800.
RECEIPTS.
Dolls. Cts. From Balances due, 302,667 13 Loans, 25,775,795 56 Bank Stock,
1,384,260 Lands, 100,339 84 Revenue, 54,242,213 54 Sundries, 1,127,092 76
Profit on Exchange, 414,319 78 Total 83,346,688 61

EXPENDITURES.
Dolls. Cts. Subscription to Bank, 2,000,000 Part of Principal of debt,
20,654,847 30 Interest of debt, 27,559,430 35 Civil List, 4,265,415 34
Miscellaneous, 2,059,211 61 Military Establishment, 14,988,404 31 Navy,
6,298,016 53 Foreign Intercourse, 2,810,539 66 Cash in Treasury, etc. 2,710,823
51 83,346,688 61

This last article of expenditure, viz. cash on hand, is estimated in the
former calculation, as applicable toward the reduction of debt.

EXPENDITURES For the service of the year 1800, as calculated by the Secretary
of the Treasury
Dolls. Cts. For the Civil List, 562,275 95 Annuities and Grants, 953 33 Mint
Establishment, 13,300 Foreign Intercourse, 92,000 Dolls. Cts. An appropriation
for ditto, 40,000 Expenses of certain Treaties, 244,000 Annuity to Algiers,
24,000 Valuation of Houses and Lands, 215,000 Military Establishment, 4,067,200
Annuities to Indians, 11,000 Navy Establishment, 2,482,953 99 Military
Pensions, 93,000 Cannon, Arms, etc. 260,000 Appropriation, etc. 744,202 12
Light-Houses, etc. 98,240 3 Miscellaneous, 34,000 Toward six 74 gun ships,
1,300,000 For various Demands, 200,000 Estimated amount of Expenditures, for
1800. 15,393,034 11

REVENUES Within the year 1800, according to the Secretary's estimate.
Dolls. Cts. From Duties on Imports and Tonage. 7,000,000 Stills, Sales at
Auction, Licenses, Carriages and Stamps, 800,000 Valuation Tax on Houses and
Lands, 1,200,000 Postages, 36,000 Fees, Dividends, etc. 265,258 51 Estimated
Amount of Revenue for 1800, 9,301,258 51 Moneys now in Treasury, which may be
applied, 1,000,000 Balance to be provided for, 5,091,775 60 6,091,775 60
15,393,034 11

The committee reported some deductions from the amount of expenditures on
account of the suspension of enlistments, and of navy building, and of moneys
in the treasury; but this last article was noticed in the secretary's report,
and if by any sudden spasm of economy a little should be saved: yet the
probability is that expense under some of the heads may accumulate beyond the
amount of calculations, made at a season when it was sound necessary to compose
the public mind on the subject of national debt and expenditures. Whether the
sum should exceed, or fall short of, 15 millions of dollars, yet the foregoing
lists will show the objects of national expenditure for the current year.

ALGERINE TRIBUTE.
As this subject has excited much attention, I present the following statement
from Mr. Gallatin's late publication.

The C^st of the Treaty was, Dolls. Cts. To be paid the Dey, 180,000 The Dey's
Family, 60,000 Department of Treasury, 40,000 Officers from the chief Aga to
the two cooks, 65,000 Redemption of 100 Captives, 180,000 Per Centage on the
Captives, 27,000 Other expenses not enumerated, 90,000 Naval stores stipulated
at fifty-seven thousand dollars, cost 124,413 Freight of the same to Algiers,
50,000 816,413 Frigate Crescent, and some additional expense for delays of
payment. 117,727 Loss arising from sale of six percent. Stock. 152,185 59
Contingencies, 45,064 44 Total expense of the Treaty, 1,131,391 3 To this add
annuity for four years (at actual cost) 288,483 26 Extraordinary Extortions,
80,115 ^1 Making in all 1,500,000

MILLIONS FOR DEFENSE; BUT NOT A CENT FOR TRIBUTE!

BRITISH TREATY.
Dolls. Cts. To Mr. Jay for his outfit to make the treaty, 18,000 For his
passage to Europe, 3,708 51 To pay incidental expenses, 10,000 To pay in
negociating the treaty, 5,000 To get papers of captures, 16,012 83 52,721 34

Abstract of Official Emoluments and Expenditures of certain Officers of the
Customs in the United States, from 1st January, 1799, to 1st December, 1799.
Districts. 1 Names of Officers. 2 Emoluments. 3 Expenditures. 4. Balance in
favor of Officers. Dollars Cts. Dollars Cts. Dollars Cts. Portsmouth, Those.
Martin, 2,462 88 625 55 1,837 33 Salem, Joseph Hiller, 4,969 11 1,448 69 3,620
42 Boston, Benj. Lincoln, 11,634 52 4,878 76 6,755 86 James Lovell, 4,044 56
Those. Melvill, 2,679 60 New London, Jed. Huntington, 3,757 29 136 67 3,620 62
New Haven, David Austin, 2,009 26 588 9 1,421 17 Middleton, C. Whittelsey,
2,913 90 139 79 2,744 11 New York, Joshua Sands, 15,336 46 10,838 16 4,498 30
Richard Rogers, 4,963 67 John Lesher 3,915 74 Philadelphia, George Latimer,
13,834 45 7,315 41 6,519 4 Baltimore, Robt. Purviance, 16,346 79 7,661 83 8,734
99 Charleston S.C. James Simonds, 17,135 51 7,877 83 9,257 67

The 2d column shows what we pay to these Officers; the 3d what they charge to
the U. S. for clerkhire, stationary, office rent and fuel, and other official
expenses; and the 4th shows what they acknowledge to have received as a not
balance for their personal services in the course of eleven months.

I might add the expenditures of the Mint and the Fedetal City, but enough has
been presented to show that ^^conomy does not characterize our financial
operations and federal plans.

COUNSELORS AND MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
( See reference in page 28.)

In Connecticut these officers are chosen by the state at large, not by
districts. In both classes nominations are first made, and the men nominated
are generally unknown to the freemen: So true is this that if the name of
George Penrose or Henry H. Child's were set in the list, they would stand a good
chance of being within the first 18 for Congress or the first 20 for Council,
though these men do not live in the state. But for the sake of giving
permanency to these offices, the names of those who have been in office are
generally at the head of the list, and have a far greater chance of gaining the
nomination than those near the foot of it. When the votes for counselors are
counted, if the senior counselor of the last year should be found to have the
least number within the first 20, yet he will be returned to the freemen as
first in nomination: whereas he ought to be the last. Place him last and it
would be next to a miracle if he should be appointed. Place him first and he
will surely be re-elected. If the house of representatives attempt to alter
this they are always negatived by the council. -- The council thus permanently
fixed, are associated with the corporation of Yale college, which is generally
composed of intelligent ministers of the gospel. This combination of Church and
State furnishes a column of influence which has been hitherto used in favor of
the men in place. The right of the people to choose electors has been taken
from them. Their right to have the man returned as first in nomination whom
they placed first has been taken from them; Multitudes of freemen have ceased
to attend freemen's meetings, from a persuasion that with their best exertions,
they will be unable to effect any thing; and it really is not important for
them to re-assert their rights of election, till they have resolved to break
the enchantments and banish the delusions which encompass them.

THOMAS JEFFERSON.
THIS distinguished citizen is an eminent instance of integrity of character.
From early life he has been conspicuous. For years he has sustained all manner
of attacks. Now a candidate for the Presidency, all these attacks are
concentrated in the single object of proving him to be an inside, or an
atheist. Some reliance has been placed on flying reports of what he has said;
but these are not making any impression. The whole is put in issue on the
contents of his book, published in 1781, entitled 'Notes on Virginia.'

The following extract is given in order to enable the reader to judge for
himself.

FIRST IMPRESSION, PAGE 292.
"The error seems not sufficiently eradicated, that the operations of the mind,
as well as the acts of the body, are subject to the coercion of the laws. But
our rulers can have authority over such natural rights only as we have
submitted to them. The rights of conscience we never submitted, we could not
submit. We are answerable for them to our God. The legitimate powers of
government extend to such acts only as are injurious to others. But it does me
no injury for my neighbor to say there are twenty gods, or no god. It neither
picks my pocket nor breaks my leg. If it be said his testimony in a court of
justice, cannot be relied on, reject it then, and be the stigma on him.
Constraint may make him worse, by making him a hypocrite, but it will never
make him a truer man. It may fix him obstinately in his errors, but will not
cure them. Reason and free enquiry are the only effectual agents against error.
Give a loose to them, they will support the true religion by bringing every
false one to their tribunal, to the test of their investigation. They are the
natural enemies of error, and of error only. Had not the Roman government
permitted free enquiry, christianity could never have been introduced. Had not
free enquiry been indulged, at the era of the reformation, the corruptions of
christianity could not have been purged away. If it be restrained now, the
present corruptions will be protected and new ones encouraged. Was the
government to prescribe to us our medicine and diet, our bodies would be in
such keeping as our souls are now. -- Thus in France the emetic was once
forbidden as a medicine, and the potatoe as an article of food. Government is
just as infallible too when it fixes systems in physics. -- Galileo was sent to
the inquisition for affirming that the earth was a sphere: the government had
declared it to be as flat as a trencher, and Galileo was obliged to abjure his
error. This error, however, at length prevailed, the earth became a globe, and
Descartes declared it was whirled round its axis by a vortex. The government in
which he lived was wise enough to see that this was no question of civil
jurisdiction, or we should all have been involved by authority in vortices. In
fact, the vortices have been exploded, and the Newtonian principle of
gravitation is now more firmly established on the basis of reason, than it
would be were the government to step in and made it an article of necessary
faith. Reason and experiment have been indulged, and error has fled before
them. It is error alone which needs the support of government. Truth can stand
by itself. Subject opinion to coercion: whom will you make your inquisitors?
Fallible men: men governed by bad passions, by private as well as public
reasons. And why subject it to coercion? To produce uniformity. But is
uniformity of opinion desirable? No more than of face and stature. Introduce
the bed of Procrustes then, and as there is danger that the large men may beat
the small, make us all of a size, by lopping the former and stretching the
latter. Difference of opinion is advantageous in religion. The several sects
perform the office of a Censor morum over each other. Is uniformity attainable?
Millions of innocent men, women and children, since the introduction of
christianity, have been burnt, cortured, fined, imprisoned: yet we have not
advanced one inch toward uniformity, What has been the effect of coercion? To
make one half the world fools, and the other half hypocrites. To support
roguery and error all over the earth. Let us reflect that it is inhabited by a
thousand millions of people. That these profess, probably, a thousand different
systems of religion. That ours is but one of that thousand. That if there be
but one right, and ours that one, we should wish to see the 999 wandering,
s^cts gathered into the fold of truth. But against such a majority we cannot
effect this by (...). R^^^^ and persuasion are the only practicable
instruments. To make way for these, free enquiry must be ind^^ed: and how ^^n
we wish others to indulge it when we refuse it ourselves. -- But every State,
says an inquisitor, has established some religion. No two, say I, have
established the same. Is this a proof of the infallibility of establishments?
Our sister States of Pennsylvania and New York, however, have long subsisted
without any establishment at all. The experiment was new and doubtful when they
made it. It has answered beyond conception. They flourish infinitely. Religion
is well supported; of various kinds indeed, but all good enough; all sufficient
to preserve peace and order: or if a sect arises whose tenets would subvert
morals, good sense has fair play, and reasons and laughs it out of doors,
without suffering the State to be troubled with it. They do not hang more
malefactors than we do. They are not more disturbed with religious dissentions.
On the contrary, their harmony is unparalleled, and can be ascribed to nothing
but their unbounded tolerance, because there is no other circumstance in which
they differ from every nation on earth. They have made the happy discovery that
the way to silence religious disputes, is to take no notice of them. Let us too
give this experiment fair play, and get rid, while we may, of those tyrannical
laws. It is true we are as yet secured against them by the spirit of the times.
I doubt whether the people of this country would suffer an execution for
heresy, or a three years imprisonment for not comprehending the mysteries of
the trinity. But is the spirit of the people an infallible, a permanent
reliance? Is it government? Is this the kind of protection we receive in return
for the rights we give up? Besides, the spirit of the times may alter, will
alter. Our rulers will become corrupt, our people careless. A single zealot may
commence persecutor, and better men be his victims. It can never be too often
repeated, that the time for fixing every essential right on a legal basis is
while our rulers are honest, and ourselves united. From the conclusion of this
war we shall be going down hill. It will not then be necessary to resort every
moment to the people for support. They will be forgotten therefore, and their
rights disregarded. They will forget themselves, but in the sole faculty of
making money, and will never think of uniting to effect a due respect for their
rights. The sha^cles, herefore, which shall not be knocked off at the
conclusion of this war will remain on us lon^, will be made hea^er a^^^^ ^^^^er
till our rights shall revive, or expire in a convulsi^^.

PAGE 3.
"Can the liberties of a nation be t^^^ht s^^^e when we have removed their only
firm b^sis, a^^^^^^ on in the minds of the people that these lib^^^ies (...)
(...) God? That they are not to be viol^t^^ (...) ^^th? Indeed I tremble for my
country, when I (...) fl^^^th. (...) that his justice cannot sleep forever, etc.

Is this the language of an ath^ist?


