AN EULOGY ON THE LATE General George Washington, WHO DIED, SATURDAY, 14 th
DECEMBER, 1799.

DELIVERED AT ROWLEY, SECOND PARISH, FEBRUARY 22, 1800.

BY ISAAC BRAMAN, A. M. MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL IN THAT PLACE.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

HAVERHILL. FROM THE PRESS or SETH H. MOORE.

AS it is not expected, that the following EULOGY will circulate much, without
the bounds of this parish, no apology is made for publishing it, except to
gratify the request of a kind and affectionate people, to whom it is dedicated,
together with the best wishes of the

AUTHOR.

AN Eulogy, etc.
BRETHREN AND FRIENDS,
THE occasion on which we are assembled, is both mournful and glorious. It
cannot fail to excite the different and opposite emotions of joy and sorrow in
the breast of every true American. This day gave birth to that illustrious
hero, patriot, sage, who in war was our host; in peace our father and friend --
the guardian genius of our liberties civil and sacred; the political savior of
his country. This day, a WASHINGTON was born! It has long been celebrated by a
grateful people, as a day peculiarly auspicious to our country; a day, when
kind Heaven, pitying the abject and servile condition of our American Israel,
gave us a second Moses, who should, (under God) be our future deliverer from
the bondage and tyranny of haughty Britain. As such, it ought ever to be
remembered with religious gratitude and praise, to the great Ruler of nations,
who sets up one and pulls down another; who crusheth the proud tyrants of
the earth; and has, in his governing Providence, raised us to such eminence
among the nations of the world.

But alas! how changed the scene! Columbia's boast, the friend of man, the
ornament of the human race, the great, the illustrious WASHINGTON is no more!
For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, has taken away from us, the stay and
the staff -- the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge -- and the prudent,
and the Ancient -- the honorable man, and the Counselor -- and the eloquent
orator. This is the man whose death we deplore. The professed design of our
meeting is, "publicly to testify our grief" for this melancholy Providence. God
grant that we may be suitably affected with it, that we may feel this stroke of
his rod, and receive correction.

Tho the expressions of sorrow with many, may be carried to an unpardonable
excess, and wear the aspect of idolatry to a fellow creature, yet there is a
manifest propriety, that when the father either of a family, or of a country,
is removed by death, the children should appear in the habiliments and attitude
of mourning. WASHINGTON was our father and friend; he is gone. Gratitude and
decency require that we should pay suitable respect to his memory. It is a
duty, sanctioned by reason, and also by custom, from time immemorial. The holy
scriptures relate various instances of the kind, with seeming approbation.
"When Moses died in the land of Moab (we are told) that all the children of
Israel mourned and wept for him, thirty days, in the plains of Moab. Also, when
all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron, thirty
days, even all the house of Israel. And when Samuel died, all Israel lamented
him." The distinguished moral and patriotic virtues of these men, rendered them
eminently serviceable to their country. Their loss was severely felt by every
friend to virtue, to religion, and their country's weal. Hence, they were long
lamented, and intombed in the memory of an affectionate people. And shall our
beloved WASHINGTON, who has been instrumental of equal or greater good in a
political view, than some of them, be soon forgotten? Forbid it, Heaven! Tho he
be dead as to his mortal part, he lives in our memories; his example lives; his
virtues live and shall, while eternal ages roll. Our children's children and
generations yet unborn, we trust, will experience the glorious effects of his
labors and exploits. All who tread Columbia's happy ground, and breathe the air
of genuine freedom; or who read the history, or hear the same of him, who brake
the yoke of despotism from our necks, and taught America to be free, if a drop
of virtuous blood flow in their veins, if they have any claim to benevolence,
or the common feelings of men, will rise up and call him blessed.

Can we better answer the design of our meeting at this time, than to employ a
few moments in contemplating the leading traits in the character of our
departed friend; and while we feel grateful to the Father of mercies, for the
bestowment and long continuance of so rich a blessing, humble ourselves under
this frown of his Providence, in taking him away?

At an early period of life, did he begin his career of public services, and
not until the late period of almost "threescore years and ten" were his labors
finished; when he was released by the angel of death. At the age of little more
than twenty two, when youth in general, but just begin to assume the rank and
title of men, young WASHINGTON was chief Colonel of a regiment. As we were then
subject to our parent Britain, and engaged with her in a war against our mutual
foes, the French and Indians, it was our hero's lot to fight under the banner
of the English Commander. When General Braddock was defeated, at the banks of
the Monongahela, and lost the greater part of his army, Colonel WASHINGTON
discovered so much martial skill and bravery, both in the battle, and in
collecting and conducting the retreat of the few who survived, as led many
judicious men to prognosticate his future greatness; And, it was then generally
believed, that had he had the command of the army, instead of being repulsed,
he would have gained a victory. After the close of that war, he served his
country in various respectable offices, such as Justice of the Peace, Judge of
the Court, etc;.; which he filled with peculiar dignity and unshaken fidelity.

Here we leave him until a new scene opens, when he is to take a more
conspicuous part upon the theater of public action.

In consequence of the violent and oppressive measures adopted, by the
imperious parliament of Great Britain, respecting her colonies here, by which,
as well as by diverse base and insidious arts, she endeavored to reduce them to
a state of slavery; after frequent prayers, entreaties, and remonstrances, were
addressed to the throne, to no purpose; after every milder attempt for a
redress of grievances proved abortive, America, as the last resort, has
recourse to arms. A leader is wanted to conduct her forth to battle. The public
eye is immediately directed to WASHINGTON, who is appointed, by Congress, to
the chief command of the American Armies. Inconceivable were the hardships he
experienced, during a long and bloody war, which he bore with unparalleled
firmness and equanimity of mind.

At the head of troops, raw and undisciplined, at first, deemed as rebels risen
up against their lawful sovereign, himself under the weight of a proscription,
thereby exposed to the bloody dagger of every midnight assassin, as well as to
open enemies of his own country, who might slay him with the hope not only of
impunity but of reward; he was called to attack a regular and powerful foe,
experienced in the art of war, accustomed to victory, and fighting under the
auspices of a distinguished monarch, who might inspire them with courage and
zeal for the combat. Under all these disadvantages, an eye of reason could see
but a very faint prospect of success; a peradventure, or an if perhaps the
enemy might by the interposition of kind Providence, be obliged to withdraw,
and America be saved from ruin. How peculiar must have been the feelings of our
hero in this very critical situation, to reflect, that he must actually conquer
or die! For in his condition, to be vanquished, was inevitable death. But far
from being intimidated by this awful consideration, under the weight of which,
the spirits of many worthy men would have sunk, trusting (as we believe) in the
God of armies, who saves neither by few nor by many, putting his life in his
hand, he bid defiance to every danger, and boldly marched against the enemies
of his beloved country.

Being frequenly repulsed, at the beginning (as might reasonably be expected,
by a superior force) with the loss of many valuable lives, and others captured,
among whom were officers of distinction, and loosing especially (in the year
1776) several garrisons of men and military stores at the White Plains, so
called, finding himself reduced to a feeble state for aggression or
self-defence, he was obliged to retreat in a long and tedious route, of ninety
miles, through the Jersies, to the river Delaware. His army was greatly
diminished; the time of service for the most of them was expired; and the few
that remained were brought to the greatest extremities for food and clothing.
The number was finally reduced to seventeen hundred, At a later period of the
war, he had but 1500 effective troops.
and closely pursued by the enemy. Many citizens, and those too of distinction,
daily revolted to the royal standard. In this situation, our General was under
the most alarming apprehensions for his own personal safety, as well as for the
fate of his country, which seemed destined to inevitable ruin. Who, but a
WASHINGTON, could have retained the calm possession of his mind in this dark
and gloomy day! His reply to Colonel Reed, who answered in the language of
discouragement respecting any support from the inhabitants of Pennsylvania,
fully shows the unruffled state of his soul, when surrounded with dangers, and
plunged in the depths of adversity. "My neck, says he, (stroking it with his
hand) does not feel as tho it was made for a halter. We must retire to Augusta
County in Virginia. Numbers will be obliged to repair to us for safety; and me
must try what we can do in carrying on a predatory war; and, if overpowered, we
must cross the Alleghany Mountains, etc;."

But soon, kind Heaven interposed, and fought for our American Israel. The army
was greatly augmented by order of Congress, as well as by volunteers of almost
all description of men who came in great numbers, to join them. And although there
were difficulties innumerable to encounter, yet through the skill and bravery of
our General, under the smiles of a merciful Providence, diverse advantages were
gained over the enemy; and affairs, for a while, seemed to wear a more
favorable aspect.

It is not our design, however, to give a history of the revolutionary war. Our
business is to notice some of the excellent virtues and qualifications of the
supreme commander. With what incomparable fortitude did he sustain martial
toils and dangers! How faithfully did he fulfill the important trust committed
to him, when endowed with full power from Congress to appoint officers -- " to
reform and new modle the military arrangements" -- and in fine to dispose of
the persons and properties of his fellow-citizens, (when exigencies required
it,) almost according to his pleasure! With matchless skill he managed the
maneuvers of war, so as to avoid an engagement, unless he could do it on equal
or advantageous ground, but improving every opportunity to worry and harrass
the enemy, and obstruct their progress.

He experienced a frequent shift of fortune; sometimes prosperous -- at others,
in a situation the most desperate, when in his own opinion, nothing but the
stupidity and infatuation of the enemy could prevent his ruin.

In addition to the hazards of war, he had the mortification to find various
attempts, in Congress, to displace him from office, or to raise another over
him. But Providence had designed him as the deliverer of his country, and the
divine purposes were not to be frustrated. His behavior, on this and other
trying occasions, was such as spoke at once the greatness of his soul and his
humble trust and dependence on that Being, who rules in the affairs of men, and
disposes them according to his pleasure.

Tho, in the course of the war, he obtained several victories which were far
from inconsiderable ones, and some of them brilliant; it was not the number and
splendour of these which so highly distinguished his fame as a General, but the
wisdom and prudence he discovered in determining when it might be expedient to
engage the foe, when to forbear; and his faithfulness always to follow the
determinations of his judgment, in matters of such moment. By his wisdom,
prudence, and fidelity, and expertness in the art of war, by the blessing of
the God of war, he carried us through a long and painful struggle for liberty --
wholly defeated the designs of Britain to enslave us -- and secured our peace,
liberty, and independence. Having accomplished the important business, for
which he was called to the command of our armies, he resigned his commission to
the power that gave it, and again mingling with his fellowcitizens, retired to
enjoy the sweets of domestic tranquillity.

But tho the independence of the United States was acknowledged, by the Court
of Britain, and they were left to the calm possession of their rights, they yet
found themselves in a very unhappy situation, with respect to maintaining that
liberty and independence, for which they had fought and bled. The articles of
confederation, which were framed in the time of war, and well answered their
design, when the states were united together, from principles of self-defence
against an invading foe; were found utterly inadequate to the purpose, in a
time of peace and security from foreign danger. A new mode of government is
formed; a Congress, consisting of members from the several states, is elected,
and WASHINGTON, the man of war, is called to preside in the Cabinet of the
Nation.

Here his wisdom, patriotism, and virtue, shone with distinguished luster.
Unawed by popular clamor, and the threats of aspiring demagogues, on the one
hand, or by the complaints of those who might wish for too rigid an
administration, on the other, he stood firm and unshaken, amid political
tumults and commotions, like a mighty rock amid the dashing waves of the sea.
Actuated by no party spirit, and detesting the idea of foreign influence, he
made the peace and welfare of his country his object, which he was ever
concerned to promote.

While, with a scrupulous faith, he observed the treaties and engagements with
foreign powers, his idea was that America ought not to put confidence in any
other nation further, than it was for the interest of that nation to befriend
her. Upon this principle, he thought it unreasonable that we should continue
our gratitude to France, after we had made her full compensation for her
services, and especially when she had actually become our enemy. All
obligations to her for past services are now cancelled, and it is treasonable
to talk of gratitude to our country's foe. It was his wish, however, to observe
a neutral position toward all the contending powers of Europe, and he issued
his proclamation for that purpose.

The measure was highly approved by the supreme legislature, as well as by the
most judicious and enlightened of their constituents. To this policy, which he
had adopted, and which he supposed both expedient and just, he strictly adhered
in spite of all the efforts of foreign intruders, or of the turbulent and
seditious at home. The event fully justified the measure, and proved the wisdom
and prudence of adopting it. In consequence hereof, America has enjoyed peace
with all its concomitant blessings, while in Europe the ear was grated with the
horrid din of arms -- the streets flowed with human blood -- and every breast
was filled with consternation and terror.

AMERICANS! It is owing to the labors of your faithful WASHINGTON, accompanied
with the blessing of Heaven, that war, with all its horrors and direful
effects, is not now experienced in our land. Yea, let us look further back and
say, to his faithful services, under God, we are indebted for our liberty and
independence; for our very existence as a nation. But for him, you might have
still been under the yoke of bondage to a foreign nation, or bound with fetters
of iron. Long ere this day, your children might have been torn from your arms
-- your wives from your bosoms, and sacrificed to the rage, or brutality of
monsters, in human form. It becomes you then, this day, gratefully to remember
that he carried you through a long and bloody war; for you, he was in perils, not
only among open enemies, but in perils among false brethren; for you, he fought
and bled; defeated the murderous designs of your enemies -- and gave you a
respectable rank among the nations of the earth. And tho, excessively fond of
domestic retirement, he hesitated not at the unanimous call of his country, to
sacrifice every partial desire to the general good. Behold him placed at the
head of a free and enlightened nation! Which event excited joy in every breast;
and gladened every countenance. Twice, by the unanimous suffrages of the
people, he was called to the presidential chair. The third time, he was excused
at his own pressing desire, which he was pleased to think perfectly consistent
with duty, and a regard for the public welfare.

Short was his enjoyment of the pleasures accompanying a rural and domestic
life. A diabolical phrensy seizes a foreign power; unreasonable complaints are
made of injustice and partiality; our commerce is obstructed; hostilities are
actually committed upon our seamen; war is threatened under the specious
pretense of retaliation for injuries, which in fact never existed. His country
calls, and WASHINGTON again steps forth from his loved retirement, into public
action. He is appointed General and Commander in chief of all the armies
raised, or to be raised, for the service of the United States. The main object
was to repel the expected invasions of our apostate allies; a potent and
insidious nation. He accepted the appointment with that profound humility,
modesty, and diffidence, with which he had accepted every other; which are
generally indications of real worth; and the usual concomitants of a truly
great and good man. His letter to the President, on the important occasion,
breathes a spirit of genuine love to his country; of indignation at the
infamous conduct of its enemies; and entire confidence in the administrations
of our government.

It has been said, that our beloved WASHINGTON was not a patriot; that he was
not a true friend to the country that gave him birth, and in whose immediate
service, he spent the most of his life. Now, if there where no sin in aspersing
the character of the greatest and best of men, I would not hazard the assertion
under the price of my own reputation, that he, who served his country in
various important stations for more than forty years, who for a considerable
and the most distinguished part of which, would accept no compensation, and
whose manifest probity and uprightness of conduct, during this long period were
unparelleled by any of similar circumstances in the annals of time; I would not
for my honors sake risque the assertion, that this venerable character was not
a friend to his country and its welfare. Let the shameful and ill-grounded
suspicion be forever banished from the breast of Americans. If our illustrious
friend did not possess true patriotism, the sublime virtue exists no where, but
in a dreaming imagination. Who is a patriot, but one who loves his country? Who
loves his country, but he who improves all opportunities to do her good? Who
has ever done this, if WASHINGTON has not? He has spent his life and strength
in her service, without any considerable reward but that of fame. Ungrateful is
the wretch, who by slander and reproach, would deprive him of this small
pittance. His heart must be harder than adamant; his tongue is set on fire of
Hell.

Tho great minds are not easily moved with trifling occurrences, yet they
undoubtedly have feeling, as well as any of us. The arrows of slander must
affect them in a very sensible manner, especially when coming from those in
whose service they are employed, and from whom, they might reasonably expect
the most unfeigned friendship and purest affection. "O, (methinks I hear him
say) it was not an avowed enemy that thus reproached me; then I could have
borne it, neither was it he that professedly hated me, that did magnify himself
against me; then I would have hid myself from him; but it was thou, mine
acquaintance -- my countryman -- we took sweet counsel together -- we fought
and bled together for self-defence against our mutual foes. We enjoy the same
soil and priviliges -- our interest is one and the same. To plot your ruin
would be to effect my own. To seek the injury of my fellow-citizens, (were my
benevolent heart capable of such wickedness,) I must first become an enemy to
myself. But I appeal to yourselves -- I appeal to every impartial mind whether
in my own nation or elsewhere -- I appeal to the tribunal of my own breast; nay
further, I appeal to the tribunal of Heaven, which takes cognizance of all
human thoughts and actions, whether I have not always sought the best interests
of my country. A zeal for your safety and happiness influenced me, at first, to
put my life in my hand, and engage in the horrors of war against an implacable
enemy; not knowing whether I should be called literally to spill my blood in
the unhappy contest. But, a merciful God has spared me, that I might be further
serviceable to you. Thus, I have waded through seas of blood, exposed to every
danger, enduring incredible hardships for your sakes; and have ever endeavored
to act the part of a tender parent toward you. I am now grown gray in your
service; and were it necessary, would freely sacrifice my life for your good.
Then, be not so uncandid as to think me your enemy; nor ungratefully pierce
that heart with the shafts of calumny, which has ever been engaged to promote
your best interest."

But what do we say? We had almost forgotten that our venerable friend is far
beyond the reach of calumny, and the reproaches of ungrateful men. He is gone,
we trust, where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at
rest. How shall we suitably improve this righteous Providence of God, in
depriving us of one of the greatest and best of men, at this critical period,
when his presence is so much needed to give stability to our union; energy to
our government; courage to our armies; and terror to our foes? Let us
gratefully record the divine goodness in the bestowment of one, who has long
been to us a tender father and faithful friend; and humble ourselves under the
solemn consideration, that for our sins, he has in judgment taken him away.
This is the rod of God's anger, wherewith he often punishes a froward people in
this world. Blessings which are ungratefully received and misimproved are often
withdrawn, at a time, when they are greatly needed. The stroke of his rod upon
us, at this time, is heavy, but it must be borne; -- yea, the consideration
that we are guilty, and that God has a right to punish us, should induce us
patiently to submit. This does not exclude a realizing sense of our loss, or a
public manifestation of our grief on the account of it. On such an occasion as
this, not to mourn, would argue insensibility indeed, if not the blackest
ingratitude! But how shall we mourn in such a manner as to excite the
compassion of our God, and gain the approbation of our own minds? It is the
observation of a great poet, He mourns the dead who lives as they desire. --
Dr. Young.

Let us then pause for a moment, and consider what was probably the wish of our
departed friend respecting us. I verily believe, my brethren, that his heart's
desire and daily prayer, for us was, not only that we might faithfully
discharge the duties we owe to our country and to one another, but that we
might reverence religion, and serve the God of our fathers with singleness of
heart. What else was the language of his own conduct? He was professedly a
believer in our holy religion, and although he was not, by profession, a preacher
of it, he hesitated not, on what he judged suitable occasions, to inculcate
piety and virtue, both as our duty, and as the "great pillars of human
happiness." In his address to the first Congress, under the new Constitution,
he most devoutly acknowledges the supreme government of the great Jehovah, with
our entire dependence on his ruling Providence, and obligations to him for all
blessings of whatever nature or kind. It is asserted, by his intimate
acquaintance, that in his private life, he was pious and exemplary; that he was
constant in his closet devotions, and particularly in times of difficulty and
danger, he failed not to ask counsel at the throne of grace. Nor did he neglect
the public worship of his Maker and christian sacraments, as the manner of too
many is.

O, how would the vicious and profane -- the wicked of every class shudder, and
shrink into nothing, in the presence of such a character! How gladly then will
they call upon the rocks and mountains to fall on them, and to hide them from
the presence of that tremendous Being, who is infinitely holy; whose eye
penetrates all disguises; in whose sight the very angels are impure -- and
whose word makes all Heaven, Earth, and Hell to tremble!

Let us, as a suitable improvement of the death of our worthy friend, strive to
imitate his sublime virtues, public and private, according to our several
capacities and spheres of action; especially his fervent piety, which is
necessary for persons in the meanest station, as well as in the highest. Let
his holy example live in our memories; and his moral and patriotic; virtues be
deeply imprinted in our hearts.

His death, it is said, was agreeable to the tenor of his life. He was
unterrified at its awful approach, and bore it with entire submission to the
will of Heaven. How does this solemn event, and the manner of it, teach us both
the power of religion, and the vanity and insufficiency of human wisdom and
greatness to ward off the fatal arrow! How does it admonish us "not to put our
trust in Princes, in whom there is no help; for their breath goes forth; they
return to their earth; in that very day their thoughts perish." Hereby also, we
are admonished that we are mortal beings. For if the greatest, the wisest, and
best of men, die, certainly we can expect "no discharge in that war." We must
all follow our beloved WASHINGTON, through the dreary (...) or yea, we must meet
him at the bar of our (...) judge and answer for the manner in which we
received and improved him as a merciful gift of Heaven. How greatly then, are
we concerned, yet to improve by his precept and excellent example! Then may we
expect not only (...) meet death with the same fortitude and comfort, (...) to
meet him with confidence and hope, on that all decisive day, when God shall
render to meet him, and to each of us according to our works. O sinners, of
every description! Seriously (...) the excellent character and peaceful death
(...) great and good man, and you will, at least find in your hearts to make
this prayer, "Let me die the death of the righteous, and let myself end be like
his."

FINIS.



