A DISSERTATION UPON ORATORY; AND PHILOLOGICAL INQUIRY INTO THE BEAUTIES AND
DEFECTS OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE; WITH THOUGHTS ON PREACHING, AND PULPIT
ELOQUENCE.

BY THE REV. W. BEST, A. M. COLUMBIA COLLEGE, AND LATE OF TRINITY COLLEGE,
DUBLIN.

ANTIQUOS (...) FONTES. Hor. CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, Printed by T. D.
BOWEN. 1800.

PRINCIPAL ERRATA.
Page 5, line 2; and p. 86, l. 18; for in, read enforce. 7. l. 3, for in, r.
imperfection 14, l. 1, for rs, r inspires. 17, l. 9, for Hy, r, Hieroglyphics.
17, l, 9, for ra, r. Assyria. 18, l, last, for sum, r. consumamate. 27, l. 20.
for ffets, r. effects. 29. l. 15, for id, r. indolence. 31, l. 1, for that and,
r. and that 38, l. 12, for ton, r. disquisition. 41, l. 5, for an, r.
geminentur 43, note, for er, r. Grammar 46, line 14, for pueren, read
pruriency. Page 49, l. 6, for oun, r. pronunciation. 51, l. 20, for rant, r.
abhor rent. 53, l. 6, for pa, r. Olympi. 58 l. 10, for Tu, r. Teutonic 60, l.
6, pace a comma after egregie, and no point after verbum. 68. l. 7. for prin,
r. painting. 69. l. 10, for ache, r. squeaks. 79, l. 9, for pe, r. soporiferous
80, l. 18, for er, r. impostor. 84. l. 5, for an, r. chargcable 88, l. 11, for
on, r. conteinplatiou.
A DISSERTATION UPON ORATORY, AND Philological Inquiry, etc. etc.
IN the infancy of Society, before the darkness of barbarism has been
dissipated, every study, the final end of which is intellectual improvement, is
either unknown or contemned: But when refinement begins to dawn, then by
degrees men form a relish for the more exalted studies, and, as their
opportunities permit them, exchange corporeal occupation and sensual pleasure,
for more enlightened labors and refined delights.

BUT of all the intellectual studies, there are none which receive a later or
slighter attention than those of Oratory and Philology; yet perhaps none which
require more early and judicious care. If the signification of words be
indeterminate, our knowledge of the things signified by them must necessarily
be confused. If our language be defective, our metaphysics may be incompatible,
our logic incongruous, and our very morality unintelligible, if not even
absurd. And these are Sciences of themselves sufficiently involved in darkness,
not to need any additional perplexity from the ambiguity or contradiction of
language. But the attainment of perspicuity is not the sole advantage accruing
from a critical study of language; but the beauty of expression and the cogency
of argument are derived in a considerable degree from the same source. It not
only serves to elucidate our Ideas, it directs, it improves, it inforces them.
In fine, Liberty receives no less support, than Literature does energy and
ornament from forcible and elegant language. If men therefore wish to discourse
intelligibly, much more, if they aspire to impress conviction, or impart
delight, they should not remain unacquainted with the instruments by which
these effects are produced. Hence Oratory and Philology ever engaged the
attention of those who have been solicitous and able to please and to persuade;
and to minds susceptible of every elegant impression and open to every
refinement of taste, any attempt to advance this knowledge can (I should
suppose) neither be unacceptable nor unuseful.

THE English language labors under peculiar defects and enjoys peculiar
excellencies. To have these defects and excellencies (at least some of the most
remarkable of them) placed before our Eyes must be useful, inasmuch as it will
suggest the means of avoiding those blemishes which disgrace a style, of
adopting those beauties which enhance it, of tranferring from foreign languages
those graces wherein our own may seem to be deficient, and of neglecting such
innovations as have been created through ignorance or caprice, and are unallied
to propriety of speech or the genius of our tongue.

We shall consider it under the heads of Simplicity, Energy, Copiousness and
grace, and endcavor to call forth into view, some of the principal beauties and
defects, by impartially comparing it with those of Greece and Rome. Should I
fail in this attempt, I must hope for indulgence; should I err, for correction.

THE subject is important, delicate and extensive. It would be vain therefore
to hope that I shall escape inperfection: It is sufficient for me that I shall
offer hints upon which superior abilities may improve.

THE cultivation of Oratory is particularly incumbent upon the rising youth of
America. The influence of the revolution will give efficacy to their exertions,
since where Liberty is established Oratory will flourish. And not only honor,
but the well being of the country demand those exertions, since when Oratory
most generally flourishes, Liberty is most secure. There are circumstances that
now combine in their favor, with which the students of Oratory in ancient
days, and even your predecessors in this country, were unassisted. I sincerely
wish, and confidently expect, that their abilities, improving these
circumstances, will give to this country, already rendered illustrious,
additional brilliancy.

IN the school of Oratory which was instituted under the reign of Theseus, the
youth of abilities was taught to dispute juridically and to deceive Eti de,
tanantia dei dunasthai peithein, kathoper kai en tois sullogismois. Arist
Rhetor.
as in the regular form of syllogism. In the Lyceum, the Portico and the
Academy, where generous precepts flowed from eloquent lips, the young
philosopher had the opportunity of listening. But now, in this rising country,
he may not only learn the accumulated wisdom of every age, but he may learn to
apply that wisdom to the great purposes of life. Neither a forensic Sophist as
in the one case, nor an indolent auditor as in the other, he is taught to
emulate with active diligence those powers that once preserved Greece in the
enjoyment of her liberties, and that assisted to rescue this country.

IN former times the works of great masters (which are the true models for
improvement) were scarce and difficult of access; but now by the happy art of
Gottenburg, The inventor of Printing.
the glowing pages not only of the Historian Thucydides and Isaeus -- See
Plutarch in vita Demosthen.
and the orator from whom the great Athenian copied, but of the great Athenian
himself and of his Roma competitor, are endowed (if I may so speak) with a
benevolent ubiquity, by which while present with all, they invite all to rival
them. And by the encouragements here given to composition, of which so many
specimens have lately been exhibited; Upon the Death of General Washington.
they who are animated with the laudable ambition of excelling in that art
which governs the soul, inslead of being obliged like the orators of old to
have recourse for improvement to the unfaithful mirror of the cave, or to the
unconscious waves of the ocean, enjoy the inestimable advantage of a rational
and indulgent people, to inspin admire and reward their Essays.

History should be carefully studied and we should always bear in mind its
uses, and direct our investigations in such a manner, as to render our
knowledge applicable to purposes of practicable utility. The annals of remote
antiquity are in general mere chioniclen of names and dates, which form in fact
the only links whereby the events they record are connected.

Who Is the Historian? Is it he that moulds
And forms his matter but to suit the ends
Of faction, and of party? Is it he
That, little anxious about facts, contrives
To flatter some great patron? Is it he
That rounds a period by a breach of truth,
And forms antitheses by joining men
And things that never met? Or, is it he
That centers all these graces in himself?
No: it is the man that, undisinay'd by fear,
Addicted to no party, speaks the truth.
But we ought not to be satisfied with being mere Historians. If History,
Cicero.
who is the messenger of Antiquity, were not to be also the mistress of life,
her documents would be of little use, except to divert the anxieties of the
recluse Hypochondriac; her volumes would be of little value, except to swell
the Library of the lettered speculist. But History was not meant to be the
solace of the indolent, Tacitus.
it is her province and her praise to be the guide of the active. Since few can
by mere prudence distinguish the just from the prejudicial, the useful from the
dangerous: Many are taught by the events of others. Mark, however, that the
instructions of history are not fitted for the regulation of private
intercourse, but for the momentous administration of public affairs. To the
statesman and to the patriotic Orator, she manifests herself the light of truth
and the soul of memory: To all, however inexperienced, she liberally dispenses
wisdom, and points out, with an unerring hand how they may assert and defend
the dearest privileges of mankind. Thus it is that History is subservient to
Oratory, as Oratory is to the noblest purposes of existence.

WITH similar recommendations, Composition courts attention. Nothing (says
Tully, is so conducive to Oratory as writing. And we find that the greatest See
Plutarch in vita Demosthenes.
Orator the world ever produced, did not deem it unworthy his genius to spend
several months in a cave, in polishing a speech; to transcribe Thucydides eight
times, and to labor for the space of an Olympiad in imitating the orations of
Isaeus -- we must allow ample authority to the assertion.

THUS wisely did these founders provide History and composition as supporters
for Oratory, which may itself be styled the escutcheon of freedom. To
demonstrate this, the annals of the world evince, that it has been by the
influence of this divine art, which arouses, persuades and inspirs, that ever
the oppressed have been awakened from their ignominious acquiescence, have been
taught to know the dignity of their nature, and animated with courage to assert
their rights. It may be useful to enquire how this has happened.

FEW states have been originally free, and, what is remarkable, still fewer
have become free. The cause of this seems to be, that Oratory, which is the
instrument of freedom, cannot flourish under arbitrary government; sometimes
however it may happen that Mr. S. Adams, General Washington etc
one or two great and good men, endowed with abilities which fear does not
repiess, and animated with a love for the public good which ambition or
interest cannot warp, may become orators; these men may command the souls of
their countrymen, and arouse them to vindicate their native rights. This
country hazarded what appeared at first rashness to many; but the beneficial
consequences are now very visible to all the industrious throughout the United
States. I think the Histories of every age and of every nation concur in
demonstrating the truth of these principles. As they are of such moment, they
ought to be illustrated and confirmed by applying to History.

The Testimonies of History, it must be acknowledged, are often tedious, but
they are always impartial and conclusive: And I hope that truth will be
received with pleasure. The first constitution which human society knew was by
no means propitious to the birth of cioquence. The families of the Patriarchs
were ruled with absolute Plato de legib. l. iii. and he adduces in
corroboration of his opinion the Cyclopean polite, see Hom. Odyss, l. i.
authority; and there was little other occasion for speech than to signify the
will of the aged father. Men were thus from their infancy habituated to
implicit submission; and when in time they found it necessary to support public
hostilities, they crowded, without reluctance or compunction, around the
despotic banners of some illustrious chieftain.

SUCH was the early government of the Jews. Such was the constitution which
obtained among the Celtae, reputed the most ancient of nations, Being descended
from Gomer the eldest son of Japhet.
and which continued with them unaltered even down to the time of Julius
Caesar, from whom we receive the same Com. de bell. Gall. l. vi. c. 13 --
according to him their situation was very abject -- In omni Gallia, plebs pene
servorum habetur loco; quae per se nihil audet et nulli adhibetur concilio.
account of it. Such was the government of the Phrygians, the Phoenicians, Who
were descended from the Chaldaean's, and had the same government, see Bochart.
the Huns, the Scythians, Heroditus l. iv. c. 46. 76. 79.
and all the northern nations. In Egypt the government was monarchical, and the
scepter hereditary. Every thing seems to have been conducted in this kingdom
with a mysterious silence, even the juridical proceedings were transacted by
Hyeroglyphics. Diod. Sic. l. i. sec. 75.
In Persia, despotism commanded the prostration of the intellect as well as of
the body. In Assyra Though the Ctesian history has been objected to with
seeming propriety, yet we cannot discredit its account of the form of the
government, since this is corroborated by scripture. See Eusebius. Pamph. Chron.
lib. post. and compare Amos, Kings, etc.
the sovereign power was no less arbitrary; and the royal lineage of Nimrod,
like himself, were mighty upon the earth.

IN Greece alone did a Democracy exist; and climate seemed happily to conspire
with constitution to elevate the Grecians above the rest of mankind. Less
fierce than the northern Europeans, less effeminate than the Asiatics, they
were neither always in the field like the one, nor always on the couch like the
other: they had leisure and genius to invent arts; and wisdom and courage to
protect them. See Arist. de Rep. l. vii. c. 7.
Here it was accordingly, in the midst of Republics, that eloquence was called
into existence. Cicero de orat. l. 1. c. 5.
And it is worthy of remark that where eloquence was first known, there she was
most perfect: Like the tutelary Goddess of the place of her nativity, another
offspring of the head, she appeared consumate at her birth.

Examming the records of History we become convinced that eloquence not only
abhorred despotism, but discerned and abandoned supposititious freedom. The
study of oratory (said Tully) was not common to Greece, but peculiar to Athens.
For who has known an Argive, a Corinthian or a Theban orator: unless we except
Epaminondas, a man of singular accomplishments. Or has a Spartan orator been
heard of even to this day? Lace-daemon was called a free state, but the people
had no right to propose laws, nor to alter or debate upon such as the Senate
would propose, and hence their constant Laconic style. Carthage too was called
a free State; but its government (as Aristotle proves) was in fact an
oligarchy. At Carthage nothing was accounted base if it supplied lucre:
Polybius.
The votes of the electors were avowedly purchased: And the people, who were
the agents and factors of all other nations, intent as they were upon traffic,
and accustomed to naval discipline, were not less regardless of the blessings
of liberty, than they were ignorant of the charms and energies of speech. In
short, do we wish for a criterion of genuine constitutional Freedom? enquire
Dionysius Halicar.
if oratory flourishes in the state.

By comparing the number and style of the Athenian orators, with the political
transactions of the different periods in which they lived, it not only appears
that when Athens was most free, then were her citizens most generally eloquent;
but it is also discernable that among her great orators the excellence of each
was accurately paralleled by the spirit of independence with which he was
inspired. How far did Lysias, Isocrates, Isaeus, Demosthenes outvie Timaeus,
Sosigenes, Philagrius and Molo? Among the former how inferior to the rest was
the mild Isocrates, whose very censures were couched in panegyric, and who, if
he afforded any assistance to liberty, did it rather by deprecation See his
Oration to Philip
than by patronage!

From the death of Phocion, 'till the time of Dyonisius the Halicarnassian
(which was about the Augustan age of Rome) the original and Philosophic species
of eloquence Dyonys. Halic
was gradualy decaying, and in the time of Dyonisius was almost extinct. The
chaste and native Attic muse (says he) was despoiled of her property and her
respect, by the meretricious intrigues of the Phrygian, who supplanted her, and
seduced all the cities of Greece. And easily indeed must they have been liable
to such a seduction, when they were previously reduced into subjection by the
Macedonian arms.

The subject would take up too much time to trace, with accuracy, the progress
of eloquence through Greece and Rome, although new proof;s would still arise in
corroboration of what is here advanced. We might notice what influence every
political establishment at Athens had upon the art of speaking; and observe how
the authority of Pericles Plu. Polit.
and the tyranny of Pisistratus Pisistratus (...) tantum valuisse dicitur, ut
ei Athenienfes regium imperium oratione capts permitterent. Val. Maxim. l.
viii. c. 9.
were effected, not by the force of their arms but by the powers of their
elocution: and from thence advert to that objection which has been raised
against eloquence, that its powers have been sometimes perverted even to the
purposes of despotism. It might be demonstrated that such perversions are
unusual, never occurring, except where this powerful faculty is permitted to
become appropriate to one; that the light of eloquence should be, if possible,
as universally diffused as the light of heaven; for that, concentred into a
single point, however it may dazzle, it always becomes dangerous.

THESE considerations might suggest new ideas of the usefulness of those
studies, and infer new motives for the invigoration of your efforts to
accomplish them.

In might be observed how, in the last century of the Roman republic the
Grecian arts were imported into Rome, By Mumm^^s particularly -- See Velleins,
Pateri, etlut.
how the taste of Cicero, and of all the great geniuses of that age, was formed
before Julius Caesar was made perpetual dictator, and before Octavius was born.
See a disquisiton on the influence of liberty over taste, in letters to a young
Nobleman on the study of History -- let. vi.
It might finally be remembered, how eloquence fled from Rome as soon as the
commonwealth expired. Then might a descent be made to present times, and a
review taken with triumph, of cotemporary nations -- Rome might be compared to
Babylon, Holland to Carthage, Switzerland to Sparta, France (before the
revolution) to Persia, Spain to Assyria, England to Attica; See a beautiful
character of the Athenians in a parallel between them and the Carthagenians, by
Plutarch -- Cic. Hor. etc.
and with what pleasure do we add that this government enjoys all the
excellencies of the Athenian, unpolluted by one of its defects. Thus it appears
that eloquence is the satellite of liberty, deriving its splendour from the same
common source, rising and setting with it invariably and giving it new radiance
by the emanations of its luster; but we must stop lest our patience should be
exhausted, for the subject is inexhaustible -- Let us hope that the important
principles are fully established which were desired to be impressed upon the
mind. That there only where liberty obtains, can oratory flourish -- and that
where oratory most generally flourishes, liberty is most secure.

Now endeavor to apply these principles to circumstances.

UNTIL the ever memorable and happy revolution, America was nominally, but not
really free. In the pride of the heart, and the ignorance or delusion of the
understanding, the people were accustomed to boast of such a constitution as
the philosophic annalist of Rome describes Tacit. Ann. l. iv. c. 33 -- In that
remarkable Passage.
as the most perfect -- But they did not advert to the interference of Britain
nor to the exercised supremacy of a British parliament. These powers however
have been chased from the United States, and they are now free and independent.
What does not this country owe to the eloquence of some of its original
congress? and with what praises is not that art worthy to be adorned which can
obtain the greatest blessing human society can possess? The consequence of
emancipation will be the diffusion of that faculty which obtained it: and the
effect of this diffusion will be the preservation of those blessings that have
been acquired.

IT is liberty (says Longinus) that cherishes the thoughts of generous spirits,
These bold and energetic words, Longinus puts into the mouth of a philosopher
with whom we are to suppose him conversing. But the best critics have agreed,
that they contain his own sentiments, which he could not have openly expressed
without giving offense to Zenobia.
that elevates their hopes, that invigorates their faculties, and incites them
to mutual emulation and ambition for the palm of Honor. The powers of their
souls are struck out, as it were by collision, and the freedom of their speech
is not less illustrious than the freedom of their actions. Thus, since the
establishment of liberty, has oratory raised her head in the United States;
and, fraught with every grace and every blessing heaven can bestow, shall be
the tutelary genius of the Land. In every state where the government has been
upheld by force, and not by reason, she has been unknown: In every state where
the abilities of men have been neither shackled by submission to a despot, nor
composed by sovereignty over slaves, she has been venerated and found
benesicent of the most happy effects. It appears, then, that while to preserve
your freedom, and to transmit it to your posterity pure and stabilitated, is a
duty which every one of you owes to his country: Ye can only fulfill that duty
by encouraging and improving, as far as ye are able, that art which is the true
Palladium of a free constitution. But ye must not confine yourselves to such
oratory alone, as obtains within the walls of a Senate. He who at the bar
asserts property and personal liberty, he who in the pulpit vindicates
toleration and mental liberty, and he who supports independence and the liberty
of fair elections, is a friend to his country, and contributes to preserve in
Equipoise the great balance of political power.

YE may perceive that every extrinsic circumstance combines to assist you in
the performance of an important duty. Nothing remains but that ye should supply
your exertions, which ye ought not to remit, when ye recollect the
considerations by which ye are called upon to employ them in their utmost enegy.

As men of abilities, as the rising hope of America, ye are called upon to
cultitivate oratory, to cultivate that field, where while ye reap the produce
which is the true sustenance of liberty, ye may gather immortal amaranths and
laurels for your own brows. And now let it be asked -- Enjoying the peculiar
and supereminent advantages just now enumerated, men of abilities! What should
prevent you from equalling, from excelling the orators of Greece? Nothing
except your own idolence. Surmount that; employ, as your professions may lead
you, those advantages and those abilities in supporting your happy
constitution, where personal, civil and religious liberty are amply secure; and
in merit and honor, ye will not yield to the greatest, or most enlightened
nations of mankind.

THOUGH it were to be wished, that every individual in society would exert
whatever abilities of elocution he may possess with decency and propriety, it
would be wrong to accuse the silent man of a careless indolence or of a sullen
pride. Silence not unfrequently proceeds from modesty; and the modest, though
often culpable, are always so amiable they ought not to be censured; the
delicate sensibility of their nature recedes from the touch of reproof, tender
as the sensitive plant, and as tenderly to be cherished. There is no occasion
to be so cautious with the more bold and manly spirits who sometimes nobly err;
but let them remember, that error, whatever be its denomination, is still
error, and ought to be reclaimed: Genius will never charm if it be not
attempered by taste, that and even the sublime fails to impart pleasure when it
is unaccompanied by the beautiful. It is to be lamented to observe men of good
abilities abandoning, through an unhappy false taste, argument and philosophy,
and prostituting their faculties to the indiscriminate embrace of every vagrant
metaphor, and allusion, that their pandaring imaginations could collect. --
Rhetorical beauties are not hard to be acquired; to the imagination that
explores for them, thousands of splendid figures readily present themselves.
The mind that is influenced by a just sense of beauty selects those only that
are useful as well as ornamental; it will act like the Magnet, which attracts
from innumerable particles such alone as have a sympathetic quality with
itself. It is not to be recommended to substitute phelgmatic discussion and
cold analysis in the place of warm language, and animated argument. But
remember never to let the intrigues of a restless fancy supplant, from the
administration of your speech, sober reasoning and deliberate decision.

GOOD financiers ought to preside over the intellectual as well as the
political treasury; and the orator should always consider that his end is to
persuade; but, that by mere fancy he never can persuade. However, in warning
against that error, which the vivacity of youth renders most common, let it not
be forgotten that matter must be supported by language, Aristotle.
that it must not only be said what should be spoken, but as it should be
spoken -- And the best rule is, that perspicuity should ever be the leading
consideration, ornament but the subservient; for every endeavor to please must
be vain, unless it is understood.

IT too frequently happens that similies and metaphors but obscure the original
thought -- they ought to be employed as philosophers do certain optics, which
while they magnify the objects to which they are applied, represent them at
once more splendid and distinct.

BUT the use of almost every precept might be superceded in earnestly
recommending the study of that great man; who combining every attic excellence
gave the world a perfect model of Oratory, who added the grace and plainness of
Lysias, the sweetness and purity of Isocrates, the conciseness and expression
of Thucydides, the art and energy of Isoeus, to his own peculiar vehemence and
sublimity.

STUDY (when capable) with unremitting diligence, this master, this God of
eloquence. It is impossible, if ye do, but that some portion of his soul shall
be transfused into yours. Import his works, more generally, have them in your
libraries, and here you may find some capable of explaining them -- There are
some copies with private individuals only A public library, or a good book
store should have at least the works of all the excellent Historians, Orators
and Critics. -- Leland's Demosthenes is very good -- Taylor's (though not
perfect) is well worth purchasing.
which is to be lamented. Apply close to those fountains from whence this
advice has been derived. Every labor you shall bestow upon the sages of
antiquity, celebrated for Oratory and Rhetoric, as Demosthenes, Cicero,
Aristotle, etc. you will find amply and beyond expression rewarded.

TRANSPOSITION is advantageous, inasmuch as it engages the mind to a reasonable
degree of attention.

LOGIC is very useful to accomplish the orator, when divested of its pedantic
and unnecessary subtilties: Aristotle called it an Organon, to facilitate the
attainment of all other sciences. Rational Logic, or common sense improved by
rules, is a most valuable art. I have compiled and published a system of Logic,
which I recommend, as divested of every thing superfluous, and I flatter myself
not unworthy the attention of the most scientific. The professors of Columbia
college, New York, and of some of the New England colleges, make use of no
other.

Let the youth be exercised in composition, for excellent, and highly to be
praised, is he who can employ a successful pen in the cause of science, of
virtue or of liberty -- every thing ought to be done to encourage and inspirit
growing genius -- great caution should be used in judging of compositions,
always remembering of youth and inexperience, and that there is the greatest
danger, Dionysius Halic -- Longinus is the last Greek book read in the
university of Dublin and other European colleges for degrees, therefore not
suitable for schoolboys. Toup's Longinus is the best edition for the text --
the notes in Tollius's edition are very good.
even to the old, in determining on the merit of literary performances.
According to Longinus, a judicious criticism of writings is the very latest
acquisition of long experience. -- Prose composition, seems too much neglected,
although particularly entitled to regard. Independent of the consideration,
that poetry is the gift of nature, prose writing the production of study and
knowledge, and therefore that it behooves rather to attend to what may be
attained by all, than to what can be only the lot of a few; and as time is so
very precious in this country and climate, let no waste of it be made in madly
pretending to make poets, by writing nonsense verses and such like vagaries.

IT has been often enquired why the Greeks or Romans never composed verses in
Rhyme. By some it has been attributed to chance, and by others to a precellency
of taste: Some have conjectured that Rhyme was not sufficiently obvious or
requisite to procure its adoption; while others more ingeniously, have assigned
the facility of its composition, evident in the similar terminations of verbs,
nouns etc. as the cause of rejection. The true reason however, seems most
surprizingly to have eluded all the crities: they never once reflected that
from the structure of these languages it was utterly impossible to compose in
Rhyme. The accent never fell upon the last syllable, and consequently they were
for ever precluded from Rhyming, except in the Hudibrastic strain, to which the
gravity of these nations little encouraged them. What a sine figure would
Amantem, hiantem, merui, deterui munditiis, conviciis, and such pretty
coincidences, have cut in an heroic poem; I believe however, all will agree
that they would be far from enhancing its dignity.

Consider, that as oratory is the chief object, to preser that species of
composition, which conduces most to that desirable end; namely that which gives
an habit of cautious disquisiton, deep thought, accurate discrimination,
correct reasoning and sound inference; rather than that which teaches to
conclude before examination, to be persuaded without conviction, to be led by
passion and not by reason, to be loquacious without knowledge, and positive
without proof. It was not by quaint allusions, unexpected tropes of Rhetoric,
or a bombastic pomp of words, that Demosthenes governed at will the
accomplished citizens of Athens. No, he spoke irrefutable truth in the natural
language of the heart, and the people cried out "to arms! To arms! Let us march
against Philip! We will preserve our liberties or die!"

Then, entertain the muses, rather as the daughters of memory, than the
Goddesses of fiction, and while you offer every indulgence to the prose writer,
you will encourage the Poet only so far as he gives spirit to sentiment, beauty
to truth, and makes his art subservient to the interests of science and virtue.

Some models of perfect narration. The History of the death of Polyxeni in the
Hecuba of Euripides: -- of Oedipus blinding himseff in Oedipus Tyrannus; -- of
the death of the same, Oedipus Coloneus. -- of Haemon and Antigone in Antigone;
-- of the rage of Hercules, when poisoned, Trachinice; -- And of Ajax killing
himself, in the Ajax of Sophoeles etc.


There seems to be a gradation among the cultivators of intellectual knowledge,
which may be traced by the different degrees of obscurity in their instructions
or writings. The lowest and most insignificant class appear to be obscure from
their ideas being confused; another, though devoid of spirit, may be capable of
arranging their thoughts: These are distinguishable from each other, as the
former are intricately nonsensical, the later methodically slupid. There are,
to whom some small portion of spirit has been dealt out, beside these
pettifoggers of literature, (puisne heads) which like the foolish moth,
captivated by every thing glittering and uncommon, hover about the blaze of
wit, 'till they singe those wings, on which they flattered themselves, they
could raise their reputation. Thus their writings or instructions become
generally a heap of obscure inconsistencies, Serpents avibus geminantur
tigribus agui,
which eternally dazzle with their sparkling, or weary with their jingling; the
worthiest or the commonest thoughts are equally tricked out in theatrical
tinsel. -- The last class are they, who inspired with the generous slame of
true etherial spirit, spurn the glittering toys that amuse their puisne
inferiors, and aim at what is exactly adequate to the supremity of human
conception.

As truth, though naked, is more beautiful than falsehood in her prostitute garb
of parti-colored hues, so is the strenuous plainness of a generous soul, more
energetic than the flimsy sinery of affected eloquence; but when the sentiments
of a noble spirit shall deign to be clad, you will see them shining through the
radiant vestments of an angel, not hidden, not obscured, but displaying their
rational form more conspicuously by being covered.

BUT to return -- The English Language, it must be observed, unlike those of
the Ancients, has little or no inflexion. The various relations of a word in a
sentence, are denoted either by juxta position, or by the annexion of an
auxiliary particle: Whereas among the Ancients they were always known by a
resemblance in termition. This great dissimilarity in the original structure of
the Language necessarily occasions a great diversity in the expression. The
direct and immediate consequences of it, we find are, See Doctor Louth's
English Grummer.
that in the English Language, substantives have but one variation of case,
whereas in the Latin they have five: Adjectives admit of no variation, except
that which expresses the degrees of comparison; and verbs do not undergo above
five or six mutations from their original form, though in some Languages they
undergo as many hundreds. These peculiarities in the formation of the English
Language sufficiently diversify it from almost every other: For though there
are many modern Languages, whose inflexions do not much exceed ours in point of
number, yet there is none wherein these deficiencies are so adequately
supplied, nor is there, perhaps, any language, the structure of which is
altogether so simple as ours. But though simplicity and commodiousness of
construction are justly to be regarded, and cannot but be owned commendable
qualities in a Language, yet if they exclude other advantages of a more
important and requisite nature, our endeavors should rather be directed to add
to its complication, than to continue the exclusion of more favorable
accessions. Of these the most important that seems to be incompatible with such
plain simplicity, is Melody of Language; an acquisition of too happy utility
not to be strongly desirable, and whose loss, simplicity of structure alone can
never compensate.

IT may be useful to enquire how this simplicity of structure becomes inimical
to harmony, since a knowledge of the disease is the first step of sanation, and
though it may not entirely remove the malady, yet it will certainly tend to its
mitigation.

IT seems then that to this cause has been owing in a great measure that vast
multitude of monosyllables wherewith our language abounds: a circumstance which
will be found hereafter very prejudicial to melody. As the final syllables of
our words remain unvaried, the advantages which in other languages result from
inflexion, are procured with us by auxiliary monosyllables. Many of these are
of an uncouth and awkward pronunciation: and particularly incommodious, for
this reason, that their quantity is indistinctly, if at all marked, whereby
their pronunciation is unsettled and wavering; and above all, ungraceful in
versification, where yet their assistance is very often indispensibly required.
But the zeal of our ancestors to preserve their language in its original
Teutonic form, conspiring with its own proneness, has added still more to this
defect, by their etymological deductions. They imagined the introduction of
polysyllables would have been an unpardonable innovation; but yet perceiving
the necessity of supplying themselves with terms to denote those combinations
of ideas which the Romans had taught them to form, they contracted the Roman
words into as concise a pronunciation as possible; and thus though they
naturalized them, yet they entirely divested them of their primitive harmony,
and clothed them in the rugged harshness of their own taste. Many examples
which illustrate the justice of this observation may be seen in Doctor Wallis;
I shall just mention a few; escape from excipio, stretched from extractum, scour
from excorio, mend from emendo. I think, that, though the puerency of Doctor
Wallis's imagination occasioned him sometimes to stretch his derivations too
far, yet his final deductions are generally founded in reason and reasson truth.

ALL these causes combining with accident, and perhaps resulting from the
phlegmatic simplicity of the original formers, have bestowed on our language
that superabundance of monosyllables, of which we complain as so injurious to
melody. That this effect must ensue is evident; in some cases no doubt
monosyllables may be arranged to advantage; but it is no less indubitable that
their general tendency is to obstruct the run of a period, to render it rough
and uneven, and to intercept the melodious flow of the cadence. And this I take
to be one principal cause why our periods are frequently destitute of that
smoothness and harmony, which so eminently characterize, and so engagingly
adorn those of the ancients. Another no less remarkable cause, however,
contributed to this; which I shall mention here as it may enable us to
ascertain how far the former operates. I mean the superior opportunities the
ancients had of modulating their style by inversion. For as the relations and
dependencies of words in a sentence were expressed among them by similarity of
termination (a mode equally free from obscurity and misapprehension) they were
at liberty to transpose their words in such an order as was most aptly
accommodated to their varieties of length and tone; but we, having no adequate
equivalent to this, are obliged to depend upon juxta position alone, which,
though perhaps the most natural, is Lord Kaims.
confessedly the most inconvenient method, since it deprives us, in a great
measure, of the benefit of transposition, which besides improving the harmony,
adds much to the dignity, force and elevation of a period. -- Still as we
strutinize the English language, new causes present themselves of its essential
defect in melody: and still arising in the chief part from the peculiar form of
its structure.

THE next that appears is a superabundance of Consonants: A due proportion of
vowels and consonants seems as necessary, as of high and low notes in music,
toward the production of melody.

The ancient Languages are excellent in this respect; the coalitions of soft
and rough form a melodious equanimity of sound, which renders the pronouciation
easy and musical; whereas in our language an asperity of sound and a roughness
of tone predominate, which indicate something repugnant to delicacy, and very
often render the expression inadequate to the idea; so, that should the one
endeavor to excite the refined and delicate feelings, the other may counteract
its design, and repulse them by its severity. This latter defect appears to owe
its origin to the multiplicity of monosyllables, before remarked.

FOR we may perceive that in a monosyllable one vowel is generally sufficient
to give utterance to four or five, and sometimes even to six or seven
consonants, so that the sound of each may be distinguished, as for instance,
grunt, drudg'd snatched, stretch'ts. But in words of a greater length, as
sufficient leisure cannot be afforded to dwell so long on each particular
syllable as would be requisite to articulate many consonants, therefore the
mixture of vowels and consonants must necessarily be more equal, and of course,
more uniform and harmonious: Thus, for instance, compare these words with the
foregoing, Magnanimity, Reiterate, Anticipation. But as words of the former
species are infinitely more numerous in our language than of the latter, it is
plain how hard and rough must be our pronunciation, and evident from whence it
proceeds. It has been observed, however, by a learned Critic, Doctor Ward in
his Treatise on Oratory.
that what we have deemed a defects, is in reality an accession of value; for
the observes (and judiciously) that where a language like the Italian abounds
in vowels, the sound of it must be soft, effeminate and languid, whereas a
predominancy of consonants bestows sublimity, energy and animation. But this
can only relate to their equal and proportional interspersion through every
part of language; and I fear that when they come in the questionable shape in
which they visit our tongue, these effects may be doubted or denied: Their mode
of conveyance seems better adapted to impediment than to animation; to laconic
dissonance than to energetic majesty: and to the production of almost any other
character than that of sublime and sonorous. But of all the consonants which
abound in the English language there is none more abhorrant of harmony than the
letter s; yet at the same time none which so eminently predominates.

Semper tibi adero, omnibusque locis persequar.
What charms our ancestors found in sibilation, that they became so attached to
it, I cannot conceive. It is not, I am sure (if we may believe See Paradise
Lost, Book 10th.
Milton) of so very honorable an extraction as to conciliate our regard; and it
was so very odious to the Greeks that they gave it (I think) the epithets of
Savage and Impure. Yet this letter, with all its ungracefulness, has acquired
such a predominancy in our language, that I question if there could be a single
line selected from any of our poets wherein it is not reiterated, more or less:
Nay, what is worse, it has found means to insinuate itself into our gentlest
and softest expressions. Witness the following example of Pope.

"Soft is the strain when Zephyr gently blows
"And the smooth stream in smoother numbers flows.
Observe how differently speaks the Latin poet whom he imitated.

Tum si loeta canunt, hilari quoque carmina vultu
Incedunt, laetnmque sonant haud segnia-verba,
Seu cum vere novo rident prata humida seu cum
Panditur interea domus omnipotentis Olympa.
Vida. To say that this Letter is essential to language is absurd; nor is the
assertion either unsupported or novel. This letter has scarcely once been
expressed throughout the whole inimitable compositions of Pindar; so far is it
from being essential to excellence, and so far was the most beautiful and
sublime of poets from esteeming it advantageous to harmony, or conducive to the
production of exalted emotions.

THUS we have endeavored to trace by its several channels that
inharmoniousness with which our language labors, and we find that the
simplicity of its formation is the ultimate source. And indeed when we compare
our language with those of Greece and Rome, in respect of this circumstance, we
find the greatest reason to deplore our inferiority. The ascendancy seems not
only to have been measured out to them from the beginning, along with the
genius of their tongue, but also to have been successively and regularly
increased through their diligence in acquiring adventitious accessions. As we
are in a great measure deprived of one of these sources of advantage, it more
immediately behooves us to apply with attention to extract improvement from the
other: I mean from our own diligence, nor will it be so unworthily employed: To
harmonize the diction, to attune the discordance of style, and above all to
accommodate the expression to the feelings of the heart, cannot certainly be
unworthy motives to attention. Longinus ascribes Aill greater advantages to it
-- Section 39.
Nor can they be esteemed so by the man of learning and refined taste, since it
is the existence of these circumstances which introduces his qualities and
renders them acceptable. Discoveries no doubt may be made in Philosophy by a
stranger to the elegancies of language, and common transactions may be
negociated by the illiberal. But he to whom the treasures of the understanding
are dear, who wishes to expand his intellectual powers, and to comprehend the
cogency of his speech; who seeks to convey information in the vehicle of
delight, and who desires to partake those pleasures which imagination suggests;
he, I say, must not neglect the harmony of language, nor esteem such
philological inquiries unworthy. -- The beauties of native harmony which
already subsist are comparatively but sew, and of trifling importance, there
yet remains an extensive field for the ingenuity and sagacity of the reformer;
and the English language, from the imperfection of not only this, but of most
other branches, seems (so far from being on the decline) not yet to have
attain the previous summit of perfection -- It seems however to be speedily
verging toward it. As to the pre excellencies in respect of harmony which the
English enjoys over the ancient languages, their paucity renders them
insignificant; yet there are some that should be observed. We frequently accent
the last syllable, which besides inducing the advantages and beauties that
result from rhyme (of which the ancient languages are for this reason
incapable) renders the pronunciation even in prose, more lively and musical,
and tends to produce that regular and equable proportion of accents which
smooths the period, promotes the delivery, and adorns the cadence. Another
advantage of our language above the Roman is, that a great part of their words
end in m, a broad and hollow sound; but the generality of English words find
their termination either in n or y, sounds which are evidently more efficient
of melody.

The next important contingency of language, and which conduces in a principal
degree to constitute its character, is significancy; a quality which though
perhaps more absolutely essential to language than the preceding, yet has been
thus far postponed, as not seeming to be so intimately connected with its
peculiarity of structure, And under this head our language assumes a more
respectable and flourishing appearance: Its peculiar energy and force of
expression have justly been the subject of admiration and praise: to say it
equals the Greek is no exaggerated commendation; but its superiority over every
other language (except perhaps the Hebrew) admits not of a doubt. The recency
of its existence has perhaps contributed to this in no small degree. There
remain but few traces of the old Saxon, upon which it was grafied: the Greek,
the Roman, the Norman, nay even the Italian and the Dutch, have poured in such
plentiful supplies, as to render it rather the heir of many families, than the
hereditary descendant of a single lineage. -- The Tutonic and Roman languages
were its original parents, but it has culled the most expressive and energetic
sounds not only from them, but almost from every other with whose people the
English had any intercourse. In short it is like the statue of Zeuxis, in which
were combined the excellencies of the principal beauties of Greece. But beside
this happiness which we owe to the singular judgment of our predecessors, and
which universally pervades our language and may be exemplified in almost every
word we utter, there are some other instances of significancy which may admit a
more particular illustration. Of these the principal is that observed by doctor
Lowth, occasioned by its possessing two articles, whereby the extent of the
signification is determined with the greatest precision.

THERE is another extrinsical instance of the energy and significancy of our
language (which I shall just mention, as it has been descanted upon by other
writers;) that is its capacity, in common with the Greek, of forming a compound
adjective, by uniting an adjective and a substantive or adverb, as fair-haired
youth, rosy-fin-gered Aurora, dark-minded doemon, lack-lustre eye, quaint-eyed
visage, etc. These combinations, of which the Roman language is by no means so
Latin examples -- Verbi potens sacerdos -- Auricomum rus -- etc.
generally susceptible, have a beautiful effect when formed with judgment,
especially in poetry: They introduce ideas into the mind searce ever raken
notice of before; and they please the ear as well by the melody, as by the
novelty of the expression.

Dixais egregie notum si callida verbum. Reddiderit junctura novum. Hor.
Notwithstanding, however, that the general tenor of our language far exceeds
the Latin in respect of significancy, yet it seems to be inferior in some few
particulars; as for instance in diminutives, such as homunculus, animula,
vagula, etc. which abound very much in that language, and are always extremely
beautiful: in ours, diminutives are very infrequent, I can reckon only a few,
but they are such as confirm, in the liveliest manner, the opinion of a
deficiency; streamlet, eaglet, flowrer, hislock, lambkin, hamlet, droplet,
nymphlin.

THERE is likewise a great delicacy in several verbs and nouns compounded of
the preposition sub, which serves to diminish the force of the words with which
it is connected; as subrusticus, subraucus, subirasci, etc. -- we have
something analogous to this in our termination in ish, as blackish, saltish,
etc. which, as Doctor Johnson observes, when applied to adjectives, diminishes
the comparison somewhat below the positive; but this diminution is far
inferior, both in point of service and beauty to the Latin; for, as the same
writer continues, it is seldom added but to words expressing sensible
qualities, and mostly of one syllable; and is scarcely used in a style that is
solemn or sublime.

THE Latin verbs frequentatives; as scriptito, declamito, have also a peculiar
grace: to these, English verbs exhibit nothing analogous. Such beauties as
these, not depending upon any original texture of language, but merely upon
accidental and supervenient causes, are easily imitable. To transfer them
directly from one language to another may be too harsh a proceeding: but when
the principles of beauty are once established, particular illustrations
continually present themselves. The mind, amongst the perpetual vicissitude of
objects which pass in succession before it, will naturally attract and combine
those that tend to excite the feelings once remarked. And though the attainment
of excellence may sometimes be previous to the knowledge of what constitutes
that quality, yet such an abstract, or general knowledge, necessarily
predisposes the mind to select and dwell upon particular instances.

THERE is another light in which languages are capable of being compared, I
mean in respect of their copiousness. And this is a subject which demands our
attention equally for its Philosophical as its Philological importance. Here it
is that the deepest marks of the genius and propensities of a people are
impressed; their manners are delineated by this expressive peneil, which only
pourtrays the truth; for never does impartial language expatiate or amplify
upon subjects uncongenial to the disposition of its nation. The delicate
luxuries of the Persian were inexpressible in the language of the hardy
Scythian: The political or forensic dialect of an Athenian was jargon to the
heedless and peaceful inhabitant of Arcadia: while the meandering rills, the
verdant lawns and the shady bowers of a shepherd were just as ineffable by the
storm-borne citizen of Carthage

THE speculist who improves these considerations, has before him materials for
the most refined and pleasing, as well as, the most incontrovertable knowledge.
He may trace the course of arts and sciences through the world. He may pursue
every nation through its several progressions of intellectual capacity, from
the darkness of ignorance, through the dawn of ressnement, and the meridian
blaze of perfection, to the declension of excellence and the re-establishment
of night: He may observe the characteristics of every people: He may see their
ruling passion, and their ruling study: He may contemplate religious ceremonies
in Judea, Astronomy in Chaldaea, the polite arts in Greece, war in Rome, trade
in Holland, pleasure in Italy, Philosophy in France, and all these in
Great Britain, Ireland and here. In short, the arguments which probability and
moral certainty furnish for historical deductions, are no where more exuberant
than in the copiousness of language. And though a regular application
professedly for this design would be laborious, tedious, and perhaps in the end
nugatory, or at least insufficient, yet the incidental remarks of any person
acquainted with the extent of language, must be highly estimable, as strongly
conducive, and always coinciding with truth.

IN copiousness of words and universality of expression, the English far
exceeds not only the ancient, but even the modern languages. It has indeed been
generally equalled by the Greek in the richness of synonimous terms: but in
that transcendental extent of words, whereby we are enabled to give utterance
to almost every idea, it stands, perhaps, without a rival.

Synonimous Words.
To CHOOSE, to PREFER: One does not always choose that which he prefers; but
seldom do we ever prefer that but we would choose.

TRANSLATION, VERSION: The first is into the vulgar or vernacular language; the
other is into a strange or foreign tongue. Thus the rendering the bible into
English, is a translation: But into Latin, Greek, or French, is a version.

NOTES, REMARKS, OBSERVATIONS, REFLECTIONS. Notes, are short and precise;
Remarks show some things selected with care; Observations, intimate criticism
and research; Reflections are additions to the thoughts of the author. Notes
are often necessary; Remarks are frequently useful; Observations ought to be
learned; Reflections are sometimes superfluous.



THESE instances, with numberless others that might easily be adduced, suggest
the nature of synonimes; they have the singular character of resemblance, and
this resemblance makes us indifferent in the use of them; but, on a nearer
view, we shall find, that each has peculiar and appropriate ideas; and that in
the choice and use of these, delicacy, precision, and taste is displayed. If
this was not the case, Synonimous words, so far from contributing to the
richness of language, they would be useless sounds, and a superfluous
abundance; serving no other end, but that of producing useless repetitions.
Thus it is said a person is light, inconstant, fickle and changeable. These, by
writers, are often used indiscriminately, and frequently applied to the same
person. This may show copiousness; but to the critical scholar, it is want of
judgment and knowledge of the just ideas annexed to words. The light form no
strong attachments; the inconstant are attached but for a short time; the
sickle attach themselves to no one, etc.

AND yet notwithstanding this incontestible universality of expression, new
augmentations are daily found requisite. It is pleasant enough to see how this
copiousness has been exemplified by authors. One, Mr. Greenwood, very gravely
enumerates thirty synonimous terms to express the action of STRIKING, and above
forty to express ANGER, and its different degrees, as if the English had been
the most quarrelsome people on earth'; while another, with a great air of
triumph, observes THAT we bake our bread, boil our meat, seethe our salmon,
poche our eggs, stew our plums, and coddle our apples; but the Romans were
obliged to coquere them all.
-- The fine arts are even yet but a little advanced beyond the state of
infancy: Our Philosophy is complete, our Divinity perfect, our Poetry
consummat: but yet, how novel are the terms sbozzo and clear-obscure in
printing; piano and rondeau in music; terrace and vista in gardening, with many
others that are equally the creatures of yesterday; and like other foreigners
are only beginning to emerge our manners from ignorance. From these positions
we may very justly infer, that neither are we, or our language, in that state
of declension which some have supposed: And that when our language attains its
full completion, it will be more perfect and universal than any ever spoken on
the globe.

Selected English Phrases.
THE Serpent hisses, the Hog grunts, the Peacock screeches, the Horse neighs,
the Cow lows, the Ass brays, the Lamb bleats, the Lion roars, the Bull bellows,
the Mastiff barks, the Hound yelps, the Cat mews, the Mouse squakes, the
Cricket chirps, the Swallow twitters, the Magpye chatters, the Raven croaks,
the Owl hoots, the Pigeon coos, the Cock crows, the Hen cackles, the Duck
quakes, the Blackbird whistles, the Nightingale sings and the Bittern booms,
etc. etc.



THE language of Rome, though now, by the industry of monks and schoolmen,
pretty well furnished with spurious terms both in Philosophy and Divinity, was
yet in the days of Augustus much more notorious for its poverty in this branch,
than we are for ours in the fine arts. How surprised would a stranger to the
state of that country be to hear Lucretius apologizing for the deficiencies of
his performance, and accounting for the difficulty of writing upon such a
subject in poetry, not by the usual and obvious excuses, but Propter egestatem
linguae, and rerum novitatem.
l i, v. 139. And to hear Cicero unable to communicate ideas, not the most
abstracted or refined, without coining new terms of his own, or deriving from
those of the Greeks.

Examples of good Latin Phrases similar to English.
Ad maximas pecunias esse venturum. Cic.
That he would come to a great fortune.
Tibi tuurn negotium agere licebit. Cic.
You must be allowed to do your own business etc.


THAT the language of Greece should be found inadequate to the fullness of
modern knowledge is not to be wondered at, considering the early period of its
existence: It should rather excite our admiration to find a people perpetually
involved in domestic feuds and external wars, making so rapid a proficiency in
literary improvement; and by their application and happy genius, attaining a
knowledge of which their immediate successors were too indolent even to receive
information.

THESE considerations, however, though they redound to the honor of Greece, yet
infer such a deficiency in her acquirements, as plainiy declare her language
incomplete in point of copiousness. The Greek is a very polite or affectionate
language; the mode of address is always in the superlative degree; as Philtate,
Beltiste, etc. etc.

IT is to modern times alone that we are to look for a language fraught with
all the instruments of knowledge: And where should we more naturally expect to
meet with such a one, than in that country which has produced the most
illustrious adepts in every intellectual science?

AFTER allowing these encomiums to the English language which it so justly
merits, it is somewhat irksome to descend to animadversion. But there is one
instance, which however trivial, yet appears so striking a deviation from its
general character, that it would be partiality not to mention it. Amid the
unbounded richness and luxuriancy of our tongue, one word, Love, seems to stand
without any synonimous or appropinquating expression. The ardour of lovers
generally surmounts this obstacle by the resource of Tropes and Figures: But
strictly speaking, though there are a thousand different modifications of this
passion, and a thousand different degrees of its energy and delicacy; yet, the
most refined sensibility can say no more, than the most depraved lust, I love.
The Romans had two words to express their affection by, Diligo and Amo; but the
Greeks had (if I may use the expression) a correct and regular scale of
passion, as, Phileo, agapao, erao and potheo, etc.

IT has often been said that our attention should not be arrested by words, but
should be fixed on things; that grammatical disquisitions are puerile
contentions; and such like commonplace contumelies against philological
investigations. But can any one reslect for a moment, without acknowledging,
that our thoughts can neither be satisfactorily adjusted, nor correctly
imparted, unless we possess words aptly accommodated to them; and consequently
that the improvement of language must ever keep pace with the progress of the
understanding. Language is the attire in which knowledge must be clothed: and,
like our bodily vesture, may either encumber, disguise, and obscure it, or may
distinguish its rank, display its strength, and enhance its native beauty.

IT is the duty of philology to interpose for the welfare of mankind. The
influence of language upon thought has, in all ages and countries, been
considerable. Poverty of language circumscribes the flight of ideas: inaccuracy
of expression precludes precision of thought, and equivocal words generate
erroneous opinions.

THE ancients, especially the Greeks and Romans, took considerable pains to
polish and improve their languages; and in modern times some of the most
distinguished men in England and France have not disdained to employ their
talents in the same way. And if propriety of speech be worthy of such attention
when we consider it as ministering to the ordinary intercourse of mankind; with
how much more strictness should we regard it when we consider it as the agent
of philosophic precision.

AFTER having first attended to our language, which is naturally entitled to
pur chief regard, our next attention should be turned to that, by means of
which the intercourse of the learned in different parts of the world is most
generally upheld. --

THE claim of the Latin language is of a similar nature with that of our own;
and higher, though not more binding upon us; and also the Greek very necessary
and useful.

THUS a physician may very properly write a treatise in English, upon urine,
saliva, mucus, etc! Though he would fall into deserved derision, if he were to
treat of these excretions by the only names for them which the English language
furnishes.

No doubt the Greek and Latin which we pronounce, and often which we write, are
very different from the pronunciation and composition of an old Greek or Roman:
but this is no argument against our understanding the ancient languages, which
contain so many excellent works, or against our acquiring the same knowledge
which the most accomplished persons of our times possess.

Facile est ventis dare vela secundi^,
Faecundumque solum varias agitare per Arts.
THOUGH a pulpit orator must be born such, as well as a poet; yet moderate
talents, with constant exercise of composition and speaking, will soon enable
him to appear gracefully and succes fully before any congregation. Every
subject, regarding the present and future happiness of man, is of so dignified
and exalted a nature, that it is not difficult to be eloquent on them.

USEFUL sermons should touch on no controversial points, which most
unchristianly inflame the minds of one sect against the other, and prepare them
for blood and slaughter, rather than the practice of the milder charities of
the gospel. Theological dissertations on thorny, dark, and disputed points of
divinity, which bewilder the best understandings, and fill the weaker with
gloomy notions, ought to be avoided.

IT is almost impossible, with our present limited faculties, to fathom, or by
language to explain, the mysteries of the Trinity, of election and grace?
Simple belief of these, and other incomprehensible doctrines, is only necessary
for salvation; their investigation is, perhaps, far beyond the powers of common
reasoning faculties) notwithstanding what has been said concerning them) as the
celestial illuminations of baron Swedenborgh, or his conversations with angelic
spirits in the new Jerusalem. No such unsolid food should be administered,
which may inflate, but never can supply healthful nutriment to hearers. Neither
should time be wasted in an useless display of subtle reasoning, or in
detailing curious erudition, the result of critical and extensive reading;
these should be relinquished for matters of more general and higher importance;
although, to preserve the reputation of a scholar and a man of sense and
judgment, a logical connection must be preserved from the beginning to the
end: Such compositions do much better in a closet, or for a select company;
than in a mixed congregation, where it acts only as an opiate, and where its
soperiferous effects are visible in the half-closed eye lids of the auditors.
The heavy and uninteresting style of many preachers, both as to composition and
delivery is to be lamented. The various intonations of the voice, and lively
corresponding action (which Tully happily calls eloquentia corporis, the
eloquence of the body) Magna eloquentia sicut flamma, materia alitur, and
motibus excitatur and utendo clerescit. -- Tac. 487.
irresistibly seize the hearers, and lead the passions captive. Quintilian
observes, that the sinest productions of dramatic genius receive grace and
effect from good acting. In like manner, we never perceive the full force and
impression of the sublime truths of the revelation, but when accompanied with
animated delivery, which keeps the attention upon the stretch without tiring,
and strikes the imagination; hence, the animal spirits take a new direction,
the moving fibers are shaken, the soul is moved, and reason appears triumphant;
then it is that we feel ourselves changed, converted, regenerated.

I abhor the wild rants of fanatics, who if they subdue one vice, plant in its
stead some wretched unmeaning dogma. The wild ravings of Cromwell's saints,
kept up a high degree of fanaticism, the only Palladium of that artful and
bloody imposter. The famous Tycho Brache, writing to a friend, and praising an
excellent preacher who happened to be a good Mathematician, said -- I wish
there were many such preachers who understood Geometry well; for, then,
perhaps, we should have more instances of cautious and solid judgment, and
fewer of idle disputes and logomachies.

THE proposed end of preaching is the instruction of the people in the practice
of virtue, which should be impressed upon the hearers, avoiding all questions
of controversy, as only productive of dissension; however, the clergy should be
masters of controversial divinity, and prepared to repel the attack of the
infidel or caviller. When controversial divinity is inculcated, there should be
full opportunity for reflection to go hand in hand with argument, which cannot
easily be done in a limited discourse from the pulpit.

WHERE preachers are more solicitous to establish favorite opinions of their
own, than to inculcate that divine system of morality, which the gospel
dispenses for the regulation of our conduct; where congregations have been
continually wearied with abstract reasoning, which seldom satisfies the most
learned, and rather silences, than convinces the enquiring mind; where men have
endeavored to explain mysteries, some of which are inexplicable, and others not
to be understood, but by persevering study; the consequence has been, that many
have been driven into disgust from listening to preachers, from whom they could
reap no advantage, and others have been induced to view christianity rather as
a system of speculative opinions, than as a religion, the best calculated to
promote the happiness of mankind.

THERE is not a book on earth, so favorable to all the kind, and all the
sublime affections; or so unfriendly to hatred and persecutions; to tyranny,
injustice and every sort of malevolence, as the gospel. It breathes nothing
throughout, but mercy, benevolence and peace. All the genius and learning of
the heathen world; all the penetration of Pythagoras, Socrates and Aristotle,
had never been able to produce such a system of moral duty, and so rational an
account of providence and of man, as are to be found in the new testament.
Christian charity, which ought to regulate men's dispositions, should be
inculcated from the pulpit, as the basis of order and happiness among mankind;
for the positive and contentious, the rude and quarrelsome (whether preachers
or hearers) are the pest of society. How amiable appears a good disposition,
when contrasted with a malicious or envious one, which wraps itself up in its
own narrow interest, looks with an evil eye on the success of another, and,
with an unnatural satisfaction, feeds on his disappointments or miseries: If
mankind would be happy, let them guard against this malignant spirit: Let them
study that charity which thinks no evil.

THE general decay of piety, and prevailing depravity of morals, with which the
present age seems too justly changeable, deserve the serious attention of every
friend to religion and society.

THE natural weakness of the human mind, has rendered it at all times
susceptible of those impressions, which free-thinkers and atheists have arfully
attempted: And the ignorant and unsuspiciou: have too often been deluded by the
most abominable doctrines, conveyed under a subtle disguise. To prevent
consequences so destructive to the present and future happiness of mankind,
nothing seems more necessary or effectual, than the cultivation of knowledge,
through every rank of life: That kind of knowledge particularly, which may
convey to the mind satisfactory evidence of its own imperfection, and the
infinite wisdom of its creator.

To be convinced that there is a God, to us invinsible, whose exalted nature is
far beyond the finite comprehension of man; it is requisite that we acquire
some humiliating ideas of ourselves, and avoid the wretched error of those who,
attributing too much to human reason, deny the existence of every thing they
cannot understand.

THE narrow limits of our understanding, and the boundless perfection of the
deity, are no uncommon subjects of pulpit eloquence: The facts are often
pressed upon our minds, and frequently (it must be hoped) have the proper
effect. Something more, however, there seems yet necessary toward the
conviction of mankind, which might reach more generally the different classes
of society -- guard them against the attacks of irreligion -- and establish in
their minds a firm persuasion of God's absolute existence and power.

THE church is the only school where the public mind can be said to be
cultivated, and its morals formed; and where we are to learn the necessary
duties toward our creator and each other. Even here, some divines seem too
inattentive to subjects of the first importance -- they apply themselves
principally to the consideration of moral truth, and ethical systems, that
teach men those common duties in society, which even conscience itself will
dictate: but the belief of a Deity on which the whole superstructure of
religion and virtue must be founded, is taken for granted, or scarcely ever
enforced.

IT may be answered, that subjects which require a mode of discussion above the
comprehension of common capacities, are not the most eligible for the pulpit;
and that the existence of a Deity, being the first principle of a Christian's
creed, needs no enquiry before a Christian congregation. But how often is the
mind found to give its assent to propositions without proof? and though youth
follow the example and persuasion of their parents, how little acquainted must
they really be, with the true principles of their faith, until they arrive at a
maturity of judgment, capable of discriminating between truth and delusion? Nay
we may safely assert, that this imperfect degree of knowledge is a misfortune
attendant on far the greatest part of mankind; and if so, how liable must they
be to impositions? How easily shaken in their belief? How readily led from a
state of ignorance to that of scepticisin, and from thence to infidelity? But
as it is the fool who says in his heart there is no God, so the more our
knowledge is increased, our minds improved, and our faculties extended, the
more permanent will be our belief of that important truth: that the Deity,
though invisible to the mortal eye, is yet perceivable to the rational mind, in
these his lower works.

LET us remark that the most satisfactory evidence, the strongest proofs of a
divine being, are deducible from our senses; every object affords this proof;
all nature demonstrates the God of nature; and it is only necessary to lead the
mind to a proper coutemplation of these objects, by discovering to it some of
those peculiar properties that before lay unobserved, and it must yield to the
proposition unequivocal assent.

RIGHTLY therefore has the Apostle asserted that the invisible things of God
(whereby he means his eternal power and Godhead) are clearly seen, being
understood by the things which are made. -- Unfortunately indeed all mankind
are not equally capable of discovering the nature of Gods works; and therefore
they do not alike perceive his infinite power and wisdom. Hence the necessity
of that instruction, as the most useful, and essential to the support of piety
and virtue.

NOTHING can enlarge the mind more, than an extensive view of the works of God.
He who best knows the design and effect of things, will most clearly discover
their cause; and he who is acquainted with the wisdom, order, harmony, and use
of the several parts of this sublunary system will soon cry out, "These are thy
glorious works, Parent of good?" THOUGH the pulpit perhaps is not so well
calculated for arguments of this kind, yet the ministers should make such
attempts amongst their hearers, and it would redound to the praise of this
country, that whilst other people are insulting, and even dethroning, the
majesty of God, they were anxious to preserve the knowledge of him, without
which we deserve not the name of men.

I am sensible much more might be said on those subjects, but I would not
intrude upon your time and patience: An abler pen may perhaps improve these
hints.

IT is to be sincerely hoped and wished, that the fascinating arts of oratory
may attain perfection among the rising generation of those wide extended
states, and I trust that yet I may be a witness of that improvement, which from
every auspice there is reason to foresee. I expect that in whatever country I
may be, your fame will reach me, when it shall be my greatest boast to have
been once in some small degree See the Author's System of Logic, published at
New York in 1796.
an useful member of society and peaceful inhabitant of this country.

Charleston, South Carolina, 1800.

