A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF THE TRIAL FOR THE BLOODY and MYSTERIOUS MURDER OF THE
Unfortunate Young Woman, IN THE FAMOUS MANHATTAN WELL.

TAKEN IN SHORT HAND BY A GENTLEMAN OF THE BAR.

A BRIEF NARRATIVE, etc.
ON a subject of this important magnitude, in which the Public Mind is
irresistibly interested; where a transaction is to be developed, the mere
contemplation of which makes the soul shudder with horror; where the guilt or
innocence is to be ascertained, of a man criminated with an accusation of such
diabolic import, we deem it our duty to give the earliest information in our
power.

Is he guilty, let the culprit be held up to public detestation in all his
blackness, and receive the punishment of his crime; but if innocent, let the
unfortunate youth receive as public an acquittal. Let us wipe from his fair
fame every foul stain of suspicion -- let us regret that his character has been
traduced, his feelings lacerated, his very existence endangered by an
accusation as false as it was cruel, as unfounded as it was destructive.

This celebrated cause brought forth the talents, as well of the prosecutor for
the people, as of the advocates for the prisoner. But the professional activity
of the former, was not the only power with which the unfortunate prisoner had
to cope.

A thousand rumors of a vague and incongruous nature, were circulated by the
tongue of public report. Absurd and malignant stories were at every corner
repeated, calculated to prejudice the public mind.

It is unfortunately too common for the less liberal part of the community, to
transfer their abhorrence of the crime to the person who is suspected of its
commission; forgetful of that golden maxim, that we should deem every man
innocent, until, to an impartial jury of his fellow citizens, his guilt is made
manifest.

We have also heard, but for the honor of human nature we hope our information
is not correct, that one or more disinterested individuals, have exerted
themselves with peculiar activity to procure the conviction of the prisoner.

However desirous we may be that truth should be discovered, and crime brought
under the sword of justice -- and however we may applaud the exertions of those
whose professional duty calls on them to drag the assassin from his concealment
into open day; yet our feelings recoil at the idea of intruding services in a
case where the life of the prisoner is at stake -- where a conviction will
crimson the altar of public justice with the blood of a fellow creature.

But we cut short our preliminary remarks, and haster to the more important
occurrences of the trial.

A bill having been found by the grand jury, and the prisoner duly arraigned,
Monday was appointed as the awful -- the eventful era of his fate*

On this momentous occasion, the chamber of justice, the avenues of the
city-hall, and the streets adjacent, were thronged with an eager multitude of
our enlightened populace; -- A multitude, whose patience was only equalled by
their clemency.

Precisely at ten o'clock, the sun shining with considerable brilliancy, and
the weather being a little windy, the prisoner arrived, properly guarded. He
was also attended by a numerous train, a volunteer guard of citizens, as
distinguished for decorum of behavior, as for respectability of appearance.

The court being opened in due form, and the jury sworn, the prisoner was
brought to the bar.

Here let us remark the collected composure of his manner, and the open
expression of his countenance. His appearance interested us greatly in his
favor. We waited with anxiety for the testimony -- convinced that if his was
not the expression of conscious innocence, he was indeed a man incapable of
feeling, whose bosom was not to be assailed by any remorseful sensations.

The court room being excessively crowded, the constables were directed to
clear it of all superfluous spectators; and we were much delighted to see the
alacrity with which this respectable class of officers exerted themselves, in
the execution of the power delegated to them; -- an alacrity which we have in
every instance witnessed. They appear fully convinced of the authority they
possess, and perfectly disposed to exercise it in its amplest extent.

The prisoner being placed at the bar, was then called by name, and directed to
hold up his right hand. Having complied with this established usage, his
indictment was read, in which the accusation was contained, among a number of
other important and truly relevant allegations customary on such occasions.

The Attorney general then opened the prosecution, and introduced the witnesses
on the part of the people. These being fifty or sixty in number, and many of
them deposing matters of trivial import, we shall not go into the detail; but
merely remark, that the general tenor went to connect circumstances of a
presumptive nature; but which so connected, might establish a conclusive mass.
The nature of the case being such, that in proof of the prisoner's guilt,
presumptive evidence only could be adduced.

The testimony was brought forward to establish certain particulars which, if
properly proved, would have formed a connected chain of evidence, from which
presumption would arise sufficiently pointed to convince the minds of the jury,
producing the same conviction of his guilt, that would arise from positive
testimony. But if these proofs were rebutted, or differently explained by
opposing testimony, it would follow, that the most violent suspicions might
originate from circumstances of a harmless nature, and the most pointed
evidence might take its rise in error and misconception.

The following is the import of the material part of this evidence, which we
have selected from a confused mass of tedious unimportant matter.

It was endeavored on the part of the prosecution to prove, that the prisoner
had been in the habit of paying very particular attentions to the deceased --
that about 8 o'clock of the evening on which she was missing, he had come to
her uncle's, where she resided, and had departed about the same time at which
she was supposed to have left the house, which was about twenty minutes after
eight o'clock. A woman living in the neighborhood of the yard in which the
horse and sleigh of Ezra Weeks, brother to the prisoner, were kept, deposed,
that sometime about eight o'clock, being in her house, with her doors shut, she
heard the gate of the above yard open, and a carriage come out, whether a
sleigh or chair, she could not tell, and in about half an hour, she heard it
return, and the gate again shut. She admitted that she had never heard this
gate open or shut, except at this particular time, though it was in continual
use -- she was also certain that the evening was Sunday, though she appeared
very incorrect with respect to the time of the month. She also admitted that
she did not recollect any of those particulars till about twelve days after,
when she was informed of the unfortunate end of the young woman, and of the
time when the event happened. It is also to be noted, that this witness
appeared to be greatly advanced in age, and her memory not very tenacious on
most particulars.

An evidence was adduced to prove, that about the time mentioned, a one horse
sleigh without bells, was seen on the road, containing a woman and two men, who
appeared laughing very merrily.

Three other witnesses deposed that about half after eight o'clock, being in a
sleigh in the middle road, a one horse sleigh passed them on a gallop, without
bells, and containing two or three persons, but from the darkness of the night,
they were not able to speak decidedly as to the number, nor were they certain
as to the sex of all the persons it contained. As the sleigh passed them, the
witnesses huzza'd, in the manner frequently customary on such occasions. The
persons in the one horse sleigh took no notice of their shouting, but passed
them in perfect silence.

Two witnesses, a man and his wife, who reside in the vicinity of the Manhattan
Well, being regularly sworn, declared, that about tbe hour in which this
catastrophe is supposed to have happened, they heard exclamations of a female
in distress, and distinguished the words "O Lord have mercy, do help me!" The
old man looked through his window; but on being asked, declared that he did not
discover any sleigh; though it was observed that from the nature of the ground,
it was not impossible but a sleigh might have been kept from his view in a kind
of hollow between his house and the well.

Another witness deposed, that he passed not far from the Manhattan Well about
nine o'clock.

The time was ascertained by his having noticed the hour a few minutes before,
at the house he left.

He heard a voice, as of a female in distress, and went in the direction of the
Well to discover the cause. He heard the voice twice, but did not distinguish
any words. His wife called him, and told him she believed it came from a house
in the neighborhood -- he therefore desisted from his examination. He declared
that he saw no sleigh, and the sounds were not again repeated.

Another witness deposed, that passing near the well the morning after the
event, he saw the traces of a one-horse sleigh, which had went out of the road
and struck into the field, turning extremely near to the well. He remarked,
that the circumstance being very singular, arrested his attention: he did not
perceive whether it bore the marks of a pleasure sleigh, or a wood sleigh. The
latter appeared to have been the impression on his mind, as he thought that
some carmen, riding for sport, had turned out of the road through whim.

From the unfrequented nature of the ground, it being out of the common road,
the counsel for the prisoner discovered, by their questions, their opinion that
these traces of a sleigh might not have been made on the preceding night.

Two other circumstances were adduced, which appeared at first view, extremely
unfavorable to the prisoner.

He had declared, that he had never been at the well in his life, and a witness
was brought to prove, that he had seen him examining the depth of the well, a
week before this unfortunate circumstance occurred. This evidence deposed, that
about eleven o'clock on a Sunday morning, a week before the young woman was
missing, he saw a young man by the well, with whom he had some conversation;
and this young man fastening two pieces of wood together, which had been left
from the wood work, sounded the well in different places, mentioning to him the
depth. But the witness declined swearing to the identity of the person,
declaring that he could not take his oath that the prisoner was the man. -- He
also described accurately the dress of the person he saw at the well, which
happened to be particularly singular.

The persons who lived in the house with the prisoner, and the man with whom he
boarded, being called, declared that they had never seen clothes of this
description in his possession.

The attorney general seeing the incompetence of this testimony, dismissed it.

The other unfavorable circumstance was, that the prisoner, immediately on
being taken, asked if they had found the body in the MANHATTAN WELL.

But it was proved by several witnesses, that the muff of the deceased being
discovered, had led to a suspicion that her remains would be found in the well.
It was also clearly proved, that this circumstance of the finding of the muff,
had already been communicated to the prisoner.

These are the material evidences against the prisoner; To save time we have
accompanied some of them with the manner in which they were opposed or proved
groundless.

The evidence on the part of the prisoner was opened by Colonel Burr, in an
eloquent and masterly manner.

It went to prove, that he was a young man of much worth, of mild and amiable
manners, and of a very gentle and affectionate disposition. Several witnesses
were brought to show, that his conduct to the unfortunate young woman in
question, had been civilly attentive* but not more so than to other young women
in the house, or than was consistent with propriety.

It was clearly proved by a number of witnesses, that he was at Mr. Ezra Weeks,
his brother's, on that evening, from before candlelight till eight o'clock. It
was proved by a witness who lodged in the family of the deceased, that he came
home about two minutes before or after eight o'clock: that the prisoner, with
the deceased and family, were together: that shortly after, one of the company
looking at his watch, it was ten minutes after eight: that about four minutes
after this circumstance, he left the room. It appears from the evidence of the
family, that about this time, the prisoner took his leave; and it was supposed
by the family, that the young woman, who had gone up stairs, went away with
him. This from the evidence, must have been about a quarter after eight.

It was further proved, that some company who had been at Mr. Ezra Weeks's,
(the brother of the prisoner) remained with him till about twenty or
twenty-five minutes after eight, when they departed; and in consequence of the
darkness and slipperiness of the evening, Mr. Ezra Weeks stood at the door with
the candle, and lighted them. He returned, but had not sat down before his
brother, the prisoner, came in as usual, to receive directions for the work of
the next day. The interval unaccounted for, of the prisoner's absence, was thus
reduced to ten or fifteen minutes; in which time, if at all, he must have
perpetrated the crime -- must have gone to the Manhattan well, about a mile,
and returned; and must have composed his appearance, and overcome all kind of
agitation, and all signs of haste or exertion.

It was proved by evidence, that the sleigh of Mr. Ezra Weeks had bells: that
the boy who took care of the horse had sed him as usual, locked the door, and
either kept the key in his pocket, or placed it in the kitchen. It appears that
the bells were on the harness before and after this transaction, and in the
opinion of the lad who had the care of the horse, it would have taken about ten
minutes to remove the bells from the harness, and put the horse to the sleigh.

It was satisfactorily proved by numerous witnesses, that the behavior of the
prisoner in the evening prior to the young woman being missing, was perfectly
composed and cheerful as usual. It appears that on his return, his conduct was
the same, perfectly free from every kind of agitation, that he eat a hearty
supper, and received directions for making 8 doors of different dimensions, and
executed them accurately without further instructions.

It also was proved, by a person who worked in the same shop with him, and who
having heard some surmises hinted to his disadvantage, paid very particular
attention to his appearance; that his subsequent conduct was uniformly the same
as ever; that he paid the same attention to the superintendance of the work,
and never exhibited the smallest sign of guilt or agitation.

A variety of other witnesses were brought forward -- some invalidating the
testimony brought against him and others, tending to establish his innocence;
but those already detailed, appeared to remove every doubt from the minds of
the spectators.

The evidence of several medical gentlemen of respectability, who had examined
the body, was also taken; as was likewise the professional opinion of a
physician of eminence, who had not inspected it.

From their testimony, it would appear possible, that the deceased had received
her death from drowning, without having sustained any previous violence.

Some evidence was produced to show, that for a short time prior to her
unfortunate end, she had exhibited marks of occasional gloom and melancholy;
but several witnesses also deposed to the gaiety and cheerfulness of her
disposition.

As the counsel for the prisoner did not sum up, we had not an opportunity of
judging how far they meant to enforce this point; and we could only infer the
conclusion they were disposed to draw.

The evidence on both sides being closed, we anticipated that flow of eloquence
which was to be expected from the abilities of General Hamilton and Brockholst
Livingston, for the prisoner, and of Mr. Colden, the prosecutor for the people.

But the Attorney general rose and requested that the court would postpone the
pleadings on the cause, expressing his inability of entering into it at this
hour, declaring that he had not slept in eight and forty hours; and that if
after hearing the summing up of the gentlemen for the prisoner, he was obliged
at five or six o'clock in the morning to enter upon a reply, in which he must
consider the evidence, it would be totally out of his power.

The harrassed appearance of the attorney general, sufficiently substantiated
his assertions, as he appeared sinking under the fatigues he had suffered in
the course of this lengthy trial.

The court declined a compliance with this request, alleging the exhausted
state of the jury, who had already been locked up one night in the picture
room, and that if the court adjourned, the jury must of necessity be committed
to the same kind of durance, and that two nights passed in this manner, might
make some of them sick, and prevent a determination of the cause.

We heartily concurred with the court in opinion; for though the examinations
of the paintings, must doubtless have been very edifying and amusing to the
jury on the former night, yet it is doubtful whether a repetition of the
pleasure, would not have been so exquisite as to have produced a cloying effect.

The counsel for the prisoner expressed their opinion that the merits of the
cause, by no means required any length of time in summing up the evidence; and
proposed leaving the matter to the court and jury without further comment. This
proposal was accordingly acceded to.

Chief justice Lansing, then arose and delivered a judicious and appropriate
charge to the jury. He declined going into the mass of the evidence, but
detailed the most striking and important testimony; showing the deficiency of
motives to induce the prisoner to the commission of the crime, entering into
consideration of the most material evidence against him, and evincing the
opinion of the court, of its deficiency to prove the guilt of the prisoner. He
concluded, by directing them to decide according to the conviction produced in
their own minds, by the evidence produced, without being biassed, by any report
they might have heard circulated, before their arrival at court, or by any
regard to the consequences which would result to the prisoner.

The jury retired, and returned in less than two minutes; their names were then
called over; the prisoner was ordered to hold up his right hand, and having
again complied with this established and important custom. The jury pronounced
him NOT GUILTY.

We again remark the prisoner's collected behavior through the whole course of
the trial -- the perfect innocence and artlessness of his countenance. Guilt
could never have lurked under such a conduct. His face appeared the index of a
virtuous and benevolent heart; his deportment that of a man incapable of the
smallest approach to the crimes with which error had accused him.

We participated in the indignation excited by the persecution he had suffered
-- by the malignant attempts which had been made to inflame the public mind,
and prejudge his cause. The most shameful falsehoods had been circulated. A
story had been spread abroad respecting a witness in New Jersey, who had come
forward and confessed himself an accessory in the murder.

This tale was destitute of the smallest foundation, and perhaps originated in
the sanguinary malice of some wretch, who, for purposes unknown, was eager to
bring this unfortunate young man to an untimely end.

Other stories of a similar nature were diffused, tending to criminate the
prisoner with the blackest character; and to have credited the account of
popular rumor, we would have supposed his whole life had been one continued
tissue of enormities.

This affair is thus brought to a conclusion, as far as it implicated the
character of the prisoner. He has been tried by a jury of his peers, the whole
transaction has been minutely investigated, and he is declared Guiltless.

It only remains to warn our fellow-citizens of one too common error: -- When a
man has been suspected of an offense of this horrid nature, a degree of odium
not to be removed, is apt to attach itself to his character.

The world cannot easily forget that he has been suspected, and even an
acquittal does not always convince them of his innocence. Yet the injustice of
this procedure must be evident, on a moment's reflection. How many guiltless
persons may, by circumstances, be rendered liable to suspicion? Is it not then
dreadful, if even innocence, publicly established, shall not be rescued from
the most degrading punishment of guilt -- the loss of public good opinion!

We have attempted in this narrative, to give a just account of the trial, and
a faithful statement of the evidence, together with every circumstance worthy
of note, that fell under our observation. The careless and inelegant style in
which these are recited, we account for on three principles, independent of
deficiency in point of ^^ility: -- The first is, the excessive fatigue we have
undergone in ^^tending this lengthy trial, which has deprived us of two nights
^^st, and rendered us unfit for any occupation. The second is, the extreme
haste which we, though thus fatigued, are obliged to exert -- writing and
printing at the same time, that our competitors in this historical employment,
may not get the start of us. The third is, our entire indifference whether our
readers are pleased with our style or not. We are faithful in giving them the
matter, and we care very little about the manner.

We now conclude with assuring our enlightened fellow-citizens, of the full
acquaintance we possess with their fondness for the mavelous. We well know
the gratification they receive from the story of a ghost, the history of a
murder, or any other agreeable source of amusement. And they may rest assured,
that we will let slip no opportunity of delighting them with pleasant recitals
of this kind, provided they remunerate, our services, by purchasing our
publications with the necessary liberality.


