A DISCOURSE ON FRIENDSHIP

BY JONATHAN BIRD, A. M.

Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. -- This is my
commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.

CHRIST. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1800.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
PROVERBS xviii. 24. A man that has friends, must show himself friendly.


FRIENDSHIP is a natural and moral virtue; desirable in every situation; and
one of the nearest and most endearing relations subsisting among mankind. It is
the union and sympathy of souls; and "the medicine of lise." But, like every
other good, it is often abused: Hence, scarce any thing is more common than the
profession; or more rare, than the reality of genuine friendship. "Every friend
says, I am his friend also: but there is a friend who is only a friend in
name."

Friendship, like most other virtues, is pressed into the service of all the
fashionable vices; and too often, is a cover for the vilest actions. Such abuse
is, indeed, reprobated by all honest men: yet, however, the bare profession of
friendship passes current with most men. "Sir, I am your friend," is given and
received, as a polite compliment, where there is no idea of obligation on the
one hand; or of dependence on the other. This nominal deception keeps vice in
countenance, by rendering it familiar.

Very similar to this, is that friendship, extolled by many, which consists in
not taking pleasure in the misfortune of a neighbor; or, perhaps, in
contentment with his prosperity, wherein it does not interfere with their own:
that is, they are not disposed to injure him; or to rejoice in his misfortune
any further than it may subserve their own interest. This, doubtless, will be
received for friendship, when bare humanity shall deserve that title.

The profession of friendship may serve for many vile purposes. The wise son of
Sirach says, "There is a companion who rejoiceth in the prosperity of a friend:
he is a companion of the table: but, in the time of trouble, will be against
him. Again, Some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in
the day of thy trouble." Thus, many "bless their friend with a loud voice,
rising early in the morning." They have some purposes to effect, perhaps, good
and laudable in themselves; yet, by no means for the interest of their neighbor
to be engaged in. They, therefore, conceal their ends and designs from him; and
by artful address and friendly professions, engage his friendship and
assistance: but, their purposes being effected, the poor man finds himself
gulled, and the tool of a masked villain! To call such professions, friendship,
is a prostitution of the term, and burlesquing with a witness. Let me then
engage your attention for a few minutes, to the subject of real and genuine
Friendship.

I shall in the first place endeavor, briefly, to characterize a friend --
Secondly, I shall make some observations on the advantages of having friends --
and lastly, mention some things, as necessary to the obtaining and preserving
them.

The character of a friend will in the first place claim our attention. -- The
leading trait in such a character is, Love -- an esteem and respect for another
on a principle of real affection, arising from some real, or supposed worth.
Friendship, is more than bare civility -- a speaking well to, or of a person.
One who is most indifferent, or even an enemy, may, out of self-interest, or in
concurrence with general opinion, say and do many kind things to, and for a
person, whom they would rejoice to neglect, and even ruin, could they turn it
equally to their own advantage. This is the mask of friendship, to hide
baseness of heart. A friend has a similarity of mental taste and feeling -- a
sympathy of soul, which produces the exercises of tender affections and high
esteem. And, as esteem implies merit in the object, so the affection and esteem
will be as lasting as the apparent merit, and no longer; for the moment we
cease to perceive merit, we shall cease to esteem -- the fountain being dried
up, the streams will necessarily stop flowing.

This love of friendship, does not suppose a complacency in all the conduct of
our friend. We may be displeased with many things, yet feel truly benevolent
toward him: and such love will also cover amultitude of faults, and excite us
to many friendly actions concerning, both, his faults and virtues.

This leads me to observe, that "a friend loves at all times" -- he has a
fixed principle of benevolence in his heart. Trifles will not move him; nor
will he forsake us, until we forsake virtue; and even then, his hand will hold
us, and his heart bleed for our return. He will not neglect us, nor be our
enemy, though he find us imperfect and liable to many errors: He, also, has his
faults, and expects our forbearance with them, and kind construction of them.
Notwithstanding some natural, or even moral defects, he will be friendly while
he finds that worth and merit which first engaged his esteem. He loves at all
times. He loves in health and in sickness; in prosperity and in adversity; in
our virtues and in our faults; in good and in bad repute. Such a friend, is a
friend indeed. But that person who loves in prosperity, and forsakes in
adversity -- who loves while he can make us his instruments of gain,
reputation, or pleasure; and then abuses or neglects us, is a vile wretch and
bane of friendship.

I observe again; a friend is confidential -- One, in whom we can cheerfully
place explicit and implicit faith. Confidence, is the very soul of friendly --
that, without which, every other friendly qualification will be marred and of
little consequence. And for this confidence, our friend must have good sense,
prudence, upright intentions, truth and punctuality: without these
qualifications, we can have no justifiable confidence in him. Unless he has
sense to see the fitness and relation of things, and prudence, honesty, and
good faith to arrange and conduct them; our confidence in him, will be as a
broken tooth, or a foot out of joint.

It is utterly impossible for a fool or a knave to be a faithful friend. Nor
can we put confidence in a person given to folly, falsehood, deceit,
equivocation and a masked conduct. In such cases there can be no safety. --
Among friends there must be plain, undisguised dealing, and a mutual
confidence, or else a rupture. A friend, therefore, is one who casts off
disguise, discovers a plain, honest heart; and approves himself to be what he
professes.

He must not only be confidential in matters of special privacy, but maintain a
uniform probity and sincerity through the whole course of friendly connection.
Such a friend will partake of our joys, our sorrows and griefs: his advice,
rejoicing, consolation and reproof will be the expressions of affection. Into
the bosom of such a friend, we can pour our whole heart: it increases our joys
and alleviates our sorrows.

Such was the friendship between David and Jonathan; they opened their hearts
to each other, and took sweet counsel together and we read, that Jonathan loved
David, as he loved his own soul. Their mutual affection and confidence were
strong, sincere and fervent. Hence David's lamentation over his departed friend
-- "I am distressed for thee my brother Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been
unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women."

I observe, once more; a friend has a sincere regard for our interest in estate
and reputation. He is not, like many, a mere friend of the table -- full of
professions, that he may raise a reputation, or get a living at our expense.
This is pure selfishness. A friend seeks our good as his own -- he loves us as
himself -- he does as he would be done by.

He is not contented with mere professions and useless wishes: He approves
himself a friend by his deeds. He does not say, "Depart in peace, be ye warmed
and filled;" but does, and gives what is needful. He feels an interest in our
prosperity, health and good name; and endeavors to preserve and promote them.
-- He is always ready to assist us by his counsels, consolations and charity,
as occasion may require.

He will, also, encourage others to do us good; and constantly oppose our
enemies as his own: thus, he divides with us our gain and loss -- our pleasures
and our sorrows.

And, so far as he is influenced by divine wisdom and heavenly philanthropy, he
will seek to promote our spiritual and eternal happiness.

This is a friend indeed, the most precious of all worldly acquisitions. With
such a friend, adversity would be tolerable, and prosperity happy. But no
worldly good can compensate the loss of him. Riches, pleasures and honors are
insipid without the participation of a friend. I come now,

Secondly, To make some observations on the comforts and advantages of having
friends. -- "Thine own friend and thy father's friend forsake not -- Iron
sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend." As
rational and social beings, we wish for friends and are pleased with them: and
truly, without them, social life would be dreadful and intolerable! In our
friendship, we imitate the Divine Author of our holy religion, who went about
doing good, was a friend to all, and gave his life for the life of the world.
And it is his express command, that we love one another, as he has loved us.
The friendship of this world is never enmity to God, unless, when preserred to
him, and opposed to a lise of godliness. But when formed by nature's law,
Christ's example and precept, it is the will of heaven, and the benefit and
comfort of every man. It is meet and suitable to his state, in every
circumstance of life.

No person in the world can be comfortable without a friend. The high, the low,
the rich, the poor, all, have frequent occasion for a friend. -- Some, for
labor -- some, for counsel -- some, for rejoicing and amusement -- some, for
condolence -- and all of us need one for sociability and the various comforts
of life. Indeed, the condition of a beggar on a dunghill, with a friend, is
preferable to that of a king on a throne, without one.

Much may be said upon the advantages and comforts of friendship, as manifested
by the absence and presence of friends; but in such cases, our expressions will
not do justice to our feelings. Let it suffice to say, that nature points out
the necessity and pleasures of friendship. Thus we observe children, from two
or three years old and upward, form their little attachments and friendly
connections: and the sorrow they feel at parting from such friends; or at the
dissolution of their attachments, very forcibly describe the pleasure they felt
in them. But as we grow into riper years, our friendship is connected with
other passions and other interests; and, in many instances, becomes very
advantageous and exceedingly affecting. -- Our feelings, upon the loss of such
dear friends, teach us the worth of them beyond all possibility of speech.

And most certain it is, no connection in this life, whether family, civil or
religious, can be happy without friendship. Thus, if we look into family life,
where the husband and wife are very dissimilar in their mental taste, views of
interest, reputation and family government, we shall find confusion in most of
their affairs, and discord in their hearts. -- The children catch the
infection, oppose and quarrel with each other; and when reproved by one parent,
fly to the other for protection -- hard words, perhaps blows, end the fray. I
will not call this life hell on earth: let those who have tried it, give it a
name.

But let us now look into a family of friends, where the husband and wife are
connected by a similarity of mental taste; a union of hearts; a union of
interest; a union of family government -- Their designs, are one -- their joys,
one -- and their sorrows, one -- harmony, smiles in all their affairs. -- The
children, as branches of the same stock, receive the same spirit of union; live
in love and friendship among themselves, and in obedience to their parents. To
this description, let me add, vital piety, and the picture is complete: if
Heaven dwells on earth, it is in such a family! Agreably to which, King David
sings, "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together
in unity! It is like the precious ointment upon the hend, that ran down upon
the beard, even Aaron's beard; that went down to the skirts of his garments; as
the dew of Herman, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion:
for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore." -- These
examples need no comment; the advantages and comforts of friendship are
apparent.

And should we turn our thoughts to civil, or religious society, similar
observations will apply, in a certain, and interesting point of light. -- Where
the heads and rulers of a people are in union with the body, all their public
affairs are readily transacted -- peace smiles on the whole -- prosperity and
increase crown their friendly endeavors -- God commands his blessing; and they
are blessed indeed.

But very different is the state of that society, which is destitute of
friendship: there, is no charity, and little, or no considence. The door is
open for division, and every evil work; every man has an interest, and design,
diverse from his neighbor: Measures are disconcerted -- ill will arises --
society is broken up -- and they are cursed in their very blessings!

We must also notice the benesits of friendship, with relation to our several
stages of life. -- Youth, have great occasion for faithful friends, to provide
for them -- to protect, instruct, encourage, caution and admonish them, while
entering into the busy scenes of life.

Middle age, is a time of life, full of cares, troubles, and vexations. At this
stage, most persons have many, and some, peculiar occasions for a friend, both
in health, and in sickness; in public, family and personal concerns.

Old age, commences a second childhood, and stands in need of its friends, to
attend upon, and provide for it -- to sooth and comfort it, under the burdens
of declining years, and the approaches of death.

Different characters, also, have occasion for friends. The good man, receives
great comfort and benefit in the society of pious friends: it makes him wiser
and better; and ripens him for the enjoyments of the heavenly world. -- And the
wicked man, may find infinite advantage in having a true friend: it may save
him from great shame and evil in this life; and, perhaps, from eternal shame
and misery in the world to come. -- The advantages and comforts of friendship,
being so immensely great, naturally lead us to enquire,

Thirdly, what is necessary to be done, for obtaining and preserving friends.

The first thing I shall insist upon is, the importance of forming just
estimates, and right opinions of ourselves, and others. This remark, though
readily assented to in theory; is seldom sufficiently respected in practice. We
are too apt to think higher and better of ourselves; and lower of others, than
we ought to think. This casts an insuperable bar in the way of genuine and pure
friendship -- others cannot, or will not approach us in the character we
assume; nor will they acknowledge that, which, we allot them. Thus a silly
pride restrains our friendship, in proper character, toward them; and at the
same time, refuses theirs; or, at least, so embarrasses the expressions of it,
that it is of little, or no real value to either of us.

So long as we think higher of ourselves and lower of others than a proper
estimate will justify, we cannot meet on the ground of mutual and confidential
friendship; for, however desirable a lasting friendship may be, yet, our
self-conceit exalts us above their reach; and a too mean opinion of them,
depresses them below ours. Consequently, whatever forms of friendship may take
place between us, they will be governed by self-interested motives, not by
mutual esteem, and similarity of taste: And such motives ceasing, or being
discovered by the other party, friendship will also cease, or, at least,
degenerate into mere formality.

But friendship, formed between persons of similar mental tastes, and on proper
estimates of each other, will be permanent: it is established on a just and
equitable estimation: And nothing can dissolve such friendship, short of the
real, or supposed loss of the ground of that estimation. Would we, therefore,
obtain, or keep friends, we must carefully form proper estimates of ourselves,
and of them and act undisguisedly in our estimated characters.

This, suggests the importance of being, and feeling friendly to all men. A
fair outside may pass for a season; but will soon wear out, or be discovered:
like the way of sinners, it is a hard way. Would we do any thing to purpose, we
must have the reality of friendship: Love, begets love: -- Friendship, begets
friendship. -- It is not sufficient, however, that we merely love them that
love us -- it is pure selfishness. Our holy religion requires, that we have the
fountain of love in our own hearts; and that we love and do good to all men,
especially, to the household of faith, who, if they act in character, are the
best of friends; and as such, demand the first expressions of friendship in us.

It is observable, notwithstanding, that Christian benevolence looks directly
to the object itself; and not to the quality -- the fitness and suitableness of
it. Complacency in an object, is no way necessary, to our wishing and doing
well: we can, and ought to love our enemies, and pray for them who despitefully
use us. Although we cannot be friends to such, in the full extent of
complacency, intimacy, and confidence; yet, we may be real friends -- respect
their persons and characters -- do them good to the promotion of their health,
honor, and estate.

Thus we can act the friendly part toward all men; and ought to be, and feel,
what we profess to be. Hereby, we invite them to be our friends, yea, more, we
challenge it, for "He that has friends, must show himself friendly." But are
we selfish, insincere, equivocal, and disguised; merely aiming to love them who
love us, and to do good to them who do good to us, we shall soon find ourselves
destitute of intimate and faithful friends. Would we, therefore, have good and
faithful friends, we must maintain a principle of benevolence in our own
breasts; and exercise it toward all men, in their several characters,
stations, and relations in life.

Nor may we forget, that pity and compassion for others in their distress and
afflictions, are necessary for those who wish for friends. -- This world is a
world of sorrow: "Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward." We have
always occasion to pity and commiserate our fellow creatures: and it is great
comfort to a social being, that his neighbors call on him, and sympathize with
him, in the days of his calamity. In many cases, it takes off half the burden;
and gives renewed strength to support the remaining load.

But it must be remembered, we often have occasion not only for an affectionate
heart, but also for an open hand. A very trifle to us, may be a great deal to a
neighbor in distress. it may save his life; at least, it may save him many
pounds of interest, and days of sorrow. Such a commiseration of our neighbor's
calamity, will give us a peacesul mind -- open his heart to friendship --
excite esteem in others -- and call down the divine benedictions; for to the
merciful, the father of mercies will show himself merciful!

And we may notice further, that as compassion for the afflicted; so respect
for the good name of others, will have great influence in obtaining and keeping
friends. -- We should always speak well of others, when and wherein, we justly
can; and never evil, unnecessarily, of any one. I said, unnecessarily, because
the honor of God, and good of society may, on some occasions, call for our
testimony against their vices: but we should be silent, and ignorant of their
faults, when we can with propriety.

We all have faults, and are unwilling to have them blazoned abroad. Let us do
as we would be done by: this, is the golden rule and the royal law. By keeping
the good name of others, we make to ourselves friends; it is their interest to
be so: and a good name may be more than life. Our care to maintain it for our
neighbor, will tend to engage his heart in the bonds of genuine friendship:
And, indeed, will do much to mollify the obdurate heart of an enemy, humanize
his stubborn soul, and teach him to love and admire our virtue.

And as the good name, so the worldly interest of men, is dear to them: we
must, therefore, maintain their interest to obtain their friendship. Very few
persons will forgive, even, an attempt to defraud them of their just due. They
will not easily make friendship with one, who has designedly hurt, or attempted
to hurt their interest. By whatever means their interest is attacked, whether
by false information -- by oppression -- by negligence in business -- by taking
advantage of innocence or ignorance -- by false reckoning, weights or measures,
it will be noted down against that person; and will ever lie a heavy bar in the
way of pure friendship. We must maintain the just interest of our neighbor --
give him his just due -- and support his just cause; or we shall neither
obtain, nor keep friends.

These observations may be extended and applied to the spiritual and eternal
interest of mankind; especially, among those who believe in a future state, and
seek after the heavenly inheritance. Among such, our care and concern to
promote their spiritual interest, will have great influence in making warm and
lasting friendships. Such were the friendships of the Galatians toward St.
Paul: He bears them record, that if it had been possible, they would have
plucked out their own eyes, and have given them to him. Such friendships are of
the purest kind: they tend through creature comforts, to the supreme good. May
they abound more and more in our land!

I only observe further, that if we wish for friends we must consult the ease,
comfort and happiness of our fellow-men. -- When people perceive we feel no
interest in their happiness, and take no pains to please them; or avoid giving
them trouble they in return will not concern themselves about us nor seek or
esteem our connection. But when they find us friendly. -- willing and ready to
assist and oblige, as far as our circumstances will admit: when they find us
willing to do, as we would be done by; then, their hearts will be affected, and
their love and esteem will flow out toward us. They will make us the kind
returns of friendship, and thus we shall pass on, mutually assisting and
mutually rejoicing, through the thorny paths of life: and he who drops first,
will receive on his grave, the friendly tear of heartfelt sorrow.

Upon what has been said, it will be very obvious to remark, that those who
neglect and disregard friendship, are guilty of great folly and inconsistency.
-- Is friendship such as above deseribed, very miserable must be the condition
of those, who are destitute of friends. Mankind, by nature, are exceedingly
wicked. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life,
blind our minds, and hurry us into practices cruel, unjust, and inhuman! --
Natural and moral evils surround us. -- Temptations, from without, and from
within, assail us -- and innumerable infirmities of body, and of mind,
constantly attend us.

How very miserable then is the condition of the friendless man! He is liable
to pain, sickness and sorrow -- he stands alone in the midst of dangers; and
has no confidence in those about him -- he is exposed to envy, malice and
revenge; and has none to defend him; nor, to give him timely information, that
he may defend himself. Mankind by nature are selfish; and care not how, or what
he suffers -- many will rejoice in his misfortune, and take all the advantage
which an unprotected law will give them; I say, unprotected, because, few will
enforce the law in favor of the friendless man.

Is he destitute of christian benevolence in his own breast, his case is still
worse -- there is no source of comfort left. To God, he will not; and to man,
he cannot go. He has no alternative, but either, to sink into despair and
insensibility; or, to bid defiance to the world, shame and censure; and run
with violence and speed the thorny path of vice, to the goal of infamy and
death.

Indeed, such is the state of this world, that we could not live in it for any
time, unless we had friends; and the short space we might continue, would be a
scene of vexation and torment. -- Such is the condition of the friendless man!
And the condition of any man varies from it, but in proportion to the number,
faithfulness and influence of his friends. Very absurd, therefore, are those
who disregard friendship, and neglect to make to themselves friends when they
can. And when we further consider the comforts and advantages of having
friends; and the very easy, reasonable and equitable ground on which they may
be obtained; we must say, they will die as the fool dies -- with a glorious
prize in their hands, and no heart to improve it!

And doubtless, should we carry our views no further than this life, it will be
most comfortable and useful to have friends; and be friendly. This is evident,
from the miserable condition of the friendless man, just described: and also,
from the comforts and advantages of friendship, with regard to stations,
relations, ages and characters, as above.

The wise preacher of Israel has beautifully touched on both these
considerations, in his observations on a solitary life. -- "Two are better than
one; because they have a reward for their labor: for if they fall, the one will
lift up his fellow: but woe, to him that is alone when he falls; for he has
not another to help him up. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat:
but how can one be warm alone? And if one prevail against him, two shall
withstand him: and a threefold cord is not quickly broken." Mutual friendship,
is highly useful and comfortable, in every station and relation -- it is the
cordial of social life -- it sweetens every joy, and moderates every grief.

And let me add: it puts us into circumstances for doing and receiving more
good. This will have great influence on the benevolent heart, and increase his
pleasures. -- However friendly ourselves, yet the want of friends would leave
us little opportunity for doing good. It would seldom happen, we could do a
kindness in an acceptable manner: the want of friendship would bar the
kindness, or charge it to sinister views; and thus turn our good will into
evil. But mutual friends, have always opportunities of doing good; and that
which is more, of doing it an agreeable manner. It is kindly received and
kindly returned. Our friends will speak well of us -- frequently call upon us
-- and use their influence to put us in a way to be useful to ourselves and
others. Thus, we shall find an enlarged circle of receiving and of doing good.

In this view, friendship is not merely a social virtue, but assumes a higher
character; it is a Christian duty, looking forward to the day of account, and
to the recompense of reward. It is the bond of union among the sons of God. It
excites to diligence in every path of duty: and is acceptable to the Supreme
Judge. It gives a peaceful conscience, and claims alliance to divinity.

This reminds me, that friendship, in this high sense, resembles Christ, who is
the friend of all men. He was always pleased in doing good: it was his meat and
drink. He sought opportunities to show his friendship, and never avoided any,
who were willing to receive it. He was a friend to sinners -- a friend to his
enemies, and gave his life for them. He has left his examples on record, that
we should follow his steps -- do good to all men -- and if occasion so require,
lay down our life for the brethren.

Thus our friendship will resemble the Divine Example, and obey that
injunction, which he has laid on all his followers, to manifest their love for
him, by loving one another, as he has loved them. Friendship, in this sense,
is the distinguishing characteristic of all Christ's followers. In vain we talk
of our religion without it. Little can be expected from our professions, unless
we have a principle of divine love in our hearts.

There is, indeed, a friendship as above, arising from similarity of mental
taste, and various secular motives -- highly useful in its kind, and altogether
necessary for a tolerable life in the present state of things. But it is not
that friendship which delights in doing good, for goodness sake: It is at best,
but an external and faint resemblance of that friendship, which was eminently
in Christ Jesus; and which it is our duty and glory to imitate in heart and
life. -- Friendship, in this high sense, expresses our love and obedience to
him, who is eminently styled LOVE. It is the badge of our Christian profession,
and a very material evidence of our title to eternal life. -- May God grant
that the same mind of friendship shall live and abide in us, which was also in
Christ Jesus!

Finally, may the consideration that friendship resembles heaven, excite all of
us to a friendly conversation. That world is a world of love: All is peace and
harmony. God is love. Christ is love. Saints and angels dwell in love: And all
their worship and employments, are expressions of love. No evil passions
disturb their minds: No cross interests -- no envy -- no discord can ever enter
into that world of peace. All are friends to God -- friends to Christ -- and
friends to one another.

This is the happiness, we profess to hope for. This is the heaven, we are
professedly met to seek after. Let us seek with an heavenly temper -- love to
God and man. We must be friendly here, or depend upon it, my hearers, we shall
never meet friendly there.

How shocking to the benevolent soul, is the too frequent practice of mankind,
in this respect! How do they profess a hope of a friendly meeting in heaven,
and yet, go wrangling all the way there! How many express an expectation of
joining before the throne of God, in eternal hallelujahs; yet, when they meet
here, accost each other in the most uncivil, profane and opprobious language!
-- Depend upon it, such tempers can never enter the peaceful mansions of the
God of love.

Let us be wise for ourselves and put on friendship -- drop all divisions,
animosities and wrangling; and live in peace and love. Would we go to heaven,
we must put on the heavenly temper, while here; and love one another as Christ
has loved us. Thus shall we grow up into a meetness for that kingdom of peace
-- No bitter reflections will harrow up our souls at death. -- We shall depart
in favor with God and man. -- Shall exchange a state of imperfect friendship,
for a state of perfect love. -- And shall join the friendly society of heaven,
to celebrate in eternal praises, the friendship of our Divine Friend, who has
loved us with an everlasting love -- a love, stronger than death! AMEN.


