[CHEAP REPOSITORY. Number 18.]

THE History of the TWO SHOEMAKERS.

PART I.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, No. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800.

[Price 4 Cents.]

THE TWO SHOEMAKERS.
JACKBROWN and JAMES STOCK, were two lads apprentic'd at nearly the same time,
to Mr. Williams, a Shoemaker, in a small town in Oxfordshire; they were pretty
near the same age, but of very different characters and dispositions.

Brown was eldest son to a farmer in good circumstances, who gave the usual
prentice fee with him. Being a wild giddy boy, whom his father could not well
manage or instruct in farming he thought it better to send him out to learn a
trade at a distance, than to let him idle about at home: for Jack always
preferred bird's nesting and marbles to any other employment; and would trifle
away half the day, when his father thought he was at school, with any boys he
could meet with, who were as idle as himself; and never could be prevailed upon
to do, or to learn any thing, while a game at taw could be had for love or
money. All this time his little brothers, much younger than himself, were
beginning to follow the plough, or to carry the corn to mill as soon as they
were able to mount a cart-horse.

Jack, however, who was a lively boy, and did not naturally want either sense
or good nature might have turned out well enough, if he had not had the
misfortune to be his mother's favorite. She concealed and forgave all his
faults. -- To be sure he was a little wild, she would say, but he would not
make a worse man for that, for Jack had a good spirit of his own, and she would
not have it broke, and so make a mope of the boy. The farmer, for a quiet life
as it is called, gave up all these points to his wife; and with them, gave up
the future virtue and happiness of his child. He was a laborious and
industrious man but he had no religion; he thought only of the gains and
advantages of the present day, and never took the future into the account. His
wife managed him entirely, and as she was really notable, he did not trouble
his head about any thing farther. If she had been careless in her dairy, he
would have stormed and swore; but as she only ruined one child by indulgence,
and almost broke the hearts of the rest by unkindness, he gave himself little
concern about the matter. The cheese, certainly was good, and that indeed is a
great point; but she was neglectful of her children, and a tyrant to her
servants. Her husband's substance, indeed, was not wasted, but his happiness
was not consulted. His house, it is true, was not dirty, but it was the abode
of fury, ill-temper, and covetousness. And the farmer who did not care for
drink, was too often driven to the publick-house of an evening, because his own
was neither quiet nor comfortable. The mother was always scolding, and the
children were always crying.

Jack, however, notwithstanding his idleness, picked up a little reading and
writing, but never would learn to cast an account: that was too much labor.
His mother was desirous he should continue at school, not so much for the sake
of his learning, which she had not sense enough to value, but to save her
darling from the fatigue of labor; for if he had not gone to school, she knew
he must have gone to work, and she thought the former was the least tiresome of
the two. Indeed this foolish woman had such an opinion of his genius, that she
used from a child, to think he was too wise for any thing but a parson, and
hoped she should live to see him one. She did not wish to see her son a
minister because she loved either learning or goodness, but because she thought
it would make Jack a gentleman, and set him above his brothers.

Farmer Brown still hoped, that though Jack was likely to make but an idle and
ignorant farmer, yet he might make no bad tradesman when he should be removed
from the indulgences of a father's house, and from a silly mother, whose
fondness kept him back in every thing. This woman was enraged when she found
that so fine a scholar as she took Jack to be, was to be put apprentice to a
shoemaker. The farmer, however, for the first time in his life, would have his
own way. But being a worldly man, and too apt to mind only what is falsely
called the main chance; instead of being careful to look out for a sober,
prudent, and religious master for his son, he left all that to chance, as if it
had been a thing of little or no consequence. This is a very common fault; and
fathers who are guilty of it, are in a great measure answerable for the future
sins and errors of their children, when they grow up in the world, and set up
for themselves. If a man gives his son a good education, a good example, and a
good master, it is indeed possible that the son may not turn out well, but it
does not often happen; and when it does, the father has ^o blame resting on
him; and it is a great point toward a man's comfort to have his conscience
quiet in that respect, however GOD may overrule events.

The farmer however, took care to desire his friends to enquire for a shoemaker
who had good business, and was a good workman; and the mother did not forget to
put in her word, and desired that it might be one who was not too strict; for
Jack had been brought up tenderly, was a meek boy, and could not bear to be
contradicted in any thing. And this is the common notion of meekness among
people who know no better.

Mr. Williams was recommended to the farmer as being the best shoemaker in the
town where he lived, and far from a strict master; and without further
inquiries, to Mr. Williams he went.

JAMES STOCK, who was the son of an honest labourer in the next village, was
bound out by the parish, in consideration of his father having so numerous a
family, that he was not able to put him out himself. James was in every thing
the very reverse of his new companion. He was a modest, industrious, pious
youth; and though so poor, and the child of a labourer, was a much better
scholar than Jack, who was a wealthy farmer's son. His father, had it is true,
been able to give him but very little schooling, for he was obliged to be put
to work when quite a child. When very young he used to run of errands for Mr.
Thomas, the curate of the parish; a very kind hearted young gentleman, who
boarded next door to his father's cottage. He used also to rub down and saddle
his horse, and do any other little job for him, in the most civil obliging
manner. All this so recommended him to the clergyman, that he would often send
for him of an evening, after he had done his day's work in the field, and
condescended to teach him himself to write and cast accounts, as well as to
instruct him in the principles of his religion. It was not merely out of
kindness for the little good-natured serervices James did him, that he showed
him this favor, but also for his readiness in the catechism and his devout
behavior at church.

The first thing that drew the minisster's attention to this boy, was the
following: -- He had frequently given him halfpence and pence for holding his
horse and carrying him to water, before he was big enough to be further useful
to him. On Christmas Day he was surprised to see James at Church, reading out
of a handsome new prayer book; he wondered how he came by it, for he knew there
was nobody in the parish likely to have given it to him, for at that time there
were no Sunday schools; and the father could not afford it, he was sure.

"Well James, said he, as he saw him when they came out, "you made a good
figure at church to day; it made you look like a man and a christian, not only
to have so handsome a book, but to be so ready in all parts of the service. How
came you by that book?" James owned modestly, that he had been a whole year
saving up the money by single halfpence, all of which had been of the
minister's own giving, and in all that time he had not spent a single farthing
on his own diversions. "My dear boy," said good Mr. Thomas, "I am much mistaken
if thou do not turn out well in the world, for two reasons: -- first, from
thy saving turn and self denying temper; and next, because thou did^^ devote
the first eighteen pence thou wast ever worth in the world to so good (...)
purpose."

James bowed and blushed, and from that time Mr. Thomas began to take more
notice of him, and to instruct him as I said above. As James soon grew able to
do him more considerable service, he would now and then give him sixpence. This
he constantly saved till it became a little sum, with which he bought shoes and
stockings; well knowing that his poor father, with a hard family and low wages;
could not buy them for him. As to what little money he earned himself by his
daily labor in the field, he constantly carried it to his mother every
Saturday night, to buy bread for the family, which was a pretty help to them.

As James was not very stout in his make, his father thankfully accepted the
offer of the parish officers to bind out his son to a trade. This good man,
however, had not like Farmer Brown, the liberty of choosing a master for his
son, or he would carefully have enquired if he was a proper man to have the
care of youth; but Williams the shoemaker was already fixed on, by those who
were to put the boy out and if he wanted a master it must be him or none, for
the overseers had a better opinion of Williams than he deserved, and thought it
would be the making of the boy to go to him. The father knew that beggars must
not be choosers, so he fitted out James for his new place, having indeed little
to give him besides his blessing.

The worthy Mr. Thomas, however, kindly gave him an old coat and waistcoat,
which his mother, who was a neat and notable woman, contrived to make up for
him herself without a farthing expense, and when it was turned and made fit for
his size, it made him a very handsome suit for Sundays, and lasted him a couple
of years.

And here let me stop to remark what a pity it is, that poor women so seldom
are able or willing to do these sort of little handy jobs themselves; and that
they do not oftener bring up their daughters to be more useful in family work.
They are great losers by it every way; not only as they are disqualifying their
girls from making good wives hereafter, but they are losers in point of present
advantage: for gentle-folks could much oftener afford to give a poor boy a
jacket or a waistcoat, if it was not for the expense of making it which adds
very much to the cost. To my certain knowledge, many poor women would, often
get an old coat, or bit of coarse new cloth given them to fit out a boy, if the
mothers or sisters were known to be able to cut it out to advantage, and to
make it decently themselves. But half a crown for the making a bit of kersey,
which costs but a few shillings, is more than many very charitable gentry can
afford to give -- so they often give nothing at all when they see the mothers
so little able to turn it to advantage. It is hoped they will take this hint
kindly, as it is meant for their good.

But to return to our two young shoemakers. They were both now settled at Mr.
Williams's, who, as he was known to be a good workman, had plenty of business.
He had sometimes two or three journeymen but no apprentices but Jack and James.

Jack, who, with all his faults, was a keen, smart boy, took to learn the trade
quick enough, but the difficulty was to make him stick two hours together at
his work. At every noise he heard in the street, down went the work -- the last
one way, the upper leather another: the sole dropped on the ground, and the
thread he dragged after him, all the way up the street. If a blind fiddler, a
ballad singer, a mountebank, a dancing bear, or a drum, were heard at a
distance -- out ran Jack -- nothing could stop him, and not a stitch more could
he be prevailed on to do that day. Every day, every promise was forgot for the
present pleasure -- he could not resist the smallest temptation -- he never
stopped a moment to consider whether a thing was right or wrong, but whether he
liked it or disliked it. And as his ill-judging mother took care to send him
privately a good supply of pocket-money, that deadly bane to all youthful
virtue, he had generally a few pence ready to spend, and to indulge in the
present diversion whatever it was. And what was still worse than even spending
his money, he spent his time too, or rather his masters time. Of this he was
continually reminded by James, to whom he always answered, What have you to
complain about? It is nothing to you or any one else; I spend nobody's money
but my own That may be, replied the other, but you cannot say it is your own
time that you spend. He insisted upon it that it was; but James fetched down
their indentures, and there showed him that he had solemnly bound himself by
that instrument, not to waste his master's property. "Now," quoth James, thy
own time is a very valuable part of thy master's property. To this he replied,
Every ones time was his own, and he should not sit moping all day over his last
-- for his part, he thanked GOD, he was no parish 'prentice.

James did not resent this piece of foolish impertinence, as some silly lads
would have done; nor fly out into a violent passion: for even at this early
age, he had begun to learn of him who was meek and lowly of heart; and
therefore when he was reviled, he reviled not again. On the contrary he was so
very kind and gentle, that even Jack, vain and Idle as he was, could not help
loving him, though he took care never to follow his advice.

Jack's fondness for his boyish and silly diversions in the street, soon
produced the effects which might naturally be expected; and the same idleness
which led him to fly out into the town at the sound of a fiddle, or the sight
of a puppet show, soon led him to those places where all these fiddles and
shows naturally lead, I mean the ALEHOUSE. The acquaintance picked up in the
street was carried on at the Greyhound; and the idle pastimes of the boy soon
led to the destructive vices of the man.

As he was not an ill-tempered youth, nor naturally much given to drink; a
sober and prudent master, who had been steady in his management, and regular in
his own conduct; who had recommended good advice by a good example, might have
made something of Jack. But I am sorry to say, that Mr. Williams, though a good
workman, and not a very hard or severe master, was neither a sober nor a steady
man -- so far from it, that he spent much more time at the Greyhound, than at
home. There was no order either in his shop or family. He left the chief care
of the business to his two young apprentices; and being but a worldly man, he
was at first disposed to show favor to Jack much more than to James, because
he had more money, and his father was better in the world than the father of
poor James.

At first, therefore, he was disposed to consider James as a sort of drudge,
who was to do all the menial work of the family, and he did not care how little
he taught him of his trade. With Mrs. Williams the matter was still worse; she
constantly called him away from the business of his trade to wash the house,
nurse the child, turn the spit, or run of errands. And here I must remark, that
though parish apprentices are bound in duty to be submissive both to master and
mistress, and always to make themselves as useful as they can in a family, and
to be civil and humble; yet on the other hand it is the duty of masters always
to remember, that if they are paid for instructing them in their trade, they
ought conscientiously to instruct them in it, and not to employ them the
greater part of their time in such household or other drudgery, as to deprive
them of the opportunity of acquiring their trade.

Mr. Williams soon found out that his favorite Jack would be of little use to
him in the shop: for though he worked well enough, he did not care how little
he did. Nor could he be of the least use to his master in keeping an account,
or writing out a bill upon occasion, for, as he never could be made to learn to
cipher, he did not know addition from multiplication.

One day one of the customers called at the shop in a great hurry, and desired
his bill might be made out that minute: Mr. Williams, having taken a cup too
much, made several attempts to put down a clear account, but the more he tried,
the less he found himself able to do it. James, who was ^itting at his last,
rose up, and with great modesty, asked his master if he would please to give
him leave to make out the bill, saying that, though but a poor scholar, he
would do his best, rather than keep the gentleman waiting. Williams gladly
accepted his offer, and confused as his head was with liquor, he was yet able
to observe with what neatness, dispatch, and exactness, the account was drawn
out. From that time he no longer considered James as a drudge, but as one
fitted for the higher employments of the trade, and he was now regularly
employed to manage the accounts, with which all the customers were so well
pleased, that it contributed greatly to raise him in his master's esteem; for
there were now never any of those blunders, or false charges, for which the
shop had before been so famous.

James went on in a regular course of industry, and soon became the best
workman Mr. Williams had, but there were many things in the family which he
greatly disapproved. Some of the journeymen used to swear, drink, and sing very
licentious songs. All these things were a great grief to his sober mind; he
complained to his master, who only laughed at him: and indeed, as Williams did
the same himself, he put it out of his own power to correct his servants, if he
had been so disposed. James, however, used always to reprove them with great
mildness indeed, but with great seriousness also. This, but still more his own
excellent example, produced at length very good effects on such of the men as
were not quite hardened in sin.

What grieved him most was the manner in which the Sunday was spent. The master
lay in bed all the morning, nor did the mother or her children ever go to
church, except there was some new finery to be shown, or a christening to be
attended. The town's people were coming to the shop all the morning, for work
which should have been sent home the night before, had not the master been at
the alehouse. And what wounded James to the very soul was, that the master
expected the two apprentices to carry home shoes to the country customers on
the Sunday morning: which he wickedly thought was a saving of time, as it
prevented their hindering their work on the Saturday. These shameful practices
greatly afflicted poor James; he begged his master, with tears in his eyes, to
excuse him, but he only laughed at his squeamish conscience, as he called it.

Jack did not dislike this part of the business, and generally after he had
delivered his parcel, wasted good part of the day in nutting, playing at fives,
or dropping in at the public house: any thing was better than going to church.

James, on the other-hand, when he was compelled, sorely against his
conscience, to carry home any goods on a Sunday morning, always got up as soon
as it was light, knelt down and prayed* heartily to GOD to forgive him a sin*
which it was not in his power to avoid; he took care not to lose a moment by
the way, but as he was taking his walk with the utmost speed, to leave his
shoes with the customers, he spent his time in endeavoring to keep up good
thoughts in his mind, and praying that the day might come when his conscience
might be delivered from this grievous burden. He was now particularly
thankful, that Mr. Thomas had formerly taught him so many psalms and chapters
which he used to repeat in these walks with great devotion.

He always got home before the rest of the family were up, dressed himself very
clean and went twice to church; and as he greatly disliked the company and
practices of his master's house, particularly on the Sabbath Day, he preferred
spending his evening alone, reading his Bible, which I forgot to say the worthy
clergyman had given him when he left his native village. Sunday evening, which
is to some people such a burden, was to James the highest holiday. He had
formerly learnt a little how to sing a psalm of the clerk of his own parish,
and this was now become a very delightful part of his evening exercise. And as
one of the journeymen; by James's advice and example, was now beginning to be
of a more serious way of thinking, he often asked him to sit an hour with him,
when they read the Bible and talked it over together in a manner very pleasant
and improving; and as this man was a famous singer, a psalm or two sung
together, was a very innocent pleasure.

James's good manners and civility to the customers, drew much business to the
shop, and his skill as a workman was so great, that every person desired his
shoes might be made by James. Williams grew so very idle and negligent, that he
now totally neglected his affairs, and to hard drinking added deep gaming. All
James's care, both of the shop and the accounts, could not keep things in any
tolerable order: he represented to his master that they were growing worse and
worse; and exhorted him, if he valued his credit as a tradesman, his comfort as
a husband and father, his character as a master, and his soul as a christian,
to turn over a new leaf. Williams swore a great oath, that he would not be
restrained in his pleasures to please a canting parish 'prentice, nor to humor
a parcel of squalling brats -- that let people say what they would of him, they
should never say he was a hypocrite, and as long as they could not call him
that, he did not care what else they called him.

In a violent passion he immediately went to the Greyhound, where he now spent,
not only every evening, which he had long done, but good part of the day and
night also. His wife was very dressy, extravagant, and fond of company; and
spent at home as fast as her husband did abroad; so that all the neighbors
said, if it had not been for James, his master must have broke long ago, but
they were sure he could not hold it much longer.

As Jack Brown sung a good song, and played many diverting tricks, Williams
liked his company, and often allowed him to make one at the Greyhound, where he
would laugh heartily at his stories; so that every one thought Jack was much
the greater favorite -- so he was a companion in frolic, and foolery, and
pleasure, as it is called; but he would not trust him with an inch of leather
of sixpence in money: No, no -- when business was to be done, or trust was to
be reposed, James was the man: the idle and the drunken never trust one
another, if they have common sense. They like to laugh, and sing, and riot, and
drink together; but when they want a friend, a help in business or in trouble,
they go farther a field; and Williams, while he would drink with Jack, would
trust James with untold gold, and even was foolishly tempted to neglect his
business the more from knowing that he had one at home who was taking care of
it.

In spite of all James' care and diligence, however, things were growing worse
and worse: the more James saved the more the master and mistress spent. One
morning, just as the shop was opened, and James had set every body to their
respective work, and he himself was settling the business for the day, he found
that his master was not yet come from the Greyhound. As this was now become a
common case, he only grieved but did not wonder at it. Whilst he was indulging
sad thoughts on what would be the end of all this, in ran the tapster from the
Greyhound out of breath, and with a look of terror and dismay, desired James
would step over to the public-house with him that moment, for that his master
wanted him.

James went immediately, surprised at this unusual message. When he got into
the kitchen of the public-house, which he now entered for the first time in his
life, though it was opposite the house in which he lived, he was shocked at the
beastly disgusting appearance of every thing he beheld. There was a table
covered with tankards, punchbowls, broken glasses, pipes, and dirty greasy
packs of cards, and all over wet with liquor; the floor was strewed with broken
earthen cups, odd cards, and an EO table shivered to pieces in a quarrel;
behind the table stood a crowd of dirty fellows, with matted locks, hollow
eyes, and faces smeared with tobacco; James made his way after the tapster,
through this wretched looking crew, to a settle which stood in the chimney
corner. Not a word was uttered, but the silent horror seemed to denote
something more than a mere common drinking bout.

What was the dismay of James, when he saw his miserable master stretched out
on the settle, in all the agonies of death. He had fallen into a sit, after
having drank hard best part of the night, and seemed to have but a few minutes
to live. In his frightful countenance was displayed the dreadful picture of sin
and death: for he struggled at once under the guilt of intoxication, and the
pangs of a dying man. He recovered his senses for a few moments, and called out
to ask if his faithful servant was come: James went up to him, took him by his
cold hand, but was too much moved to speak. "Oh! James, James;" cried he in a
broken voice, "pray for me, comfort me." James spoke kindly to him, but was too
honest to give him false comfort, as is too often done by mistaken friends in
these dreadful moments.

"James," said he, I have been a bad master to you -- you would have saved me,
soul and body, but I would not let you -- I have ruined my wi^e, my children,
and my own soul. Take warning, oh, take warning by my miserable end, said he to
his stupefied companions; but none were able to attend him but James, who bid
him lift up his heart to GOD, and prayed heartily for him himself. "Oh!" said
the dying man, it is too late, too late for me -- but you have still time, said
he to the half-drunken terrified crew around him. "Where is Jack?" Jack Brown
came forward, but was too much frightened to speak. O wretched boy, said he, I
fear I shall have the ruin of thy soul, as well as my own, to answer for, Stop
short! -- Take warning -- now, in the days of thy youth. O James, James, thou
do not pray for me. Death is dreadful to the wicked. O the sting of death to
a guilty conscience! Here he lifted up his ghastly eyes in speechless horror,
grasped hard the hand of James, gave a deep hollow groan, and closed his eyes
never to open them but in awful eternity.

This was death in all it is horrors! The gay companions of his sinful pleasures
could not stand the sight; all s^unk away like guilty thieves from the late
favorite friend -- no one was left to Assist him but his two apprentices.
Brown was not so hardened but that he shed many tears for his unhappy master;
and even made some hasty resolutions of amendment, which were too soon
forgotten.

While Brown stepped home to call the workmen to come and assist in removing
their poor master, James staid alone with the corpse, and employed those awful
moments in indulging the most serious thoughts, and prayed heartily to GOD,
that so terrible a lesson might not be thrown away upon him; but that he might
be enabled to live in a constant state of preparation for death. -- The
resolutions he made at this moment, as they were not made in his own strength,
but in an humble reliance on GOD'S gracious help, were of use to him as long as
he lived; and if ever he was for a moment tempted to say, or do a wrong thing,
the remembrance of his poor dying master's last agonies, and the dreadful words
he uttered, always instantly checked him.

When Williams was buried, and his affairs came to be enquired into, they were
found to be in a sad condition. His wife, indeed, was the less to be pitied, as
she had contributed her full share to their common ruin. James, however, did
pity her, and by his skill in accounts, his known honesty, and the trust the
creditors put in his word, things came to be settled rather better than Mrs.
Williams expected.

Both Brown and James were now within a month or two of being out of their
time. The creditors, as was said before, employed James to settle his late
master's accounts, which he did in a manner so creditable to his abilities, and
his honesty, that they proposed to him to take the shop himself. He assured
them it was utterly out of his power for want of money. As the creditors had
not the least fear of being repaid, if it should please GOD to spare his life,
they generously agreed among themselves, to advance him a sum of money without
any security but his bond; for this he was to pay a very moderate interest, and
to return the whole in a certain number of years James shed tears of gratitude
at this testimony to his character, and could hardly be prevailed on to accept
their kindness, so great was his dread of being in debt.

He took the remainder of the lease from his mistress and in settling affairs
with her, took care to make every thing as advantageous to her as possible. He
never once allowed himself to think how unkind she had been to him, he only saw
in her the needy widow of his deceased master, and the distressed mother of an
infant family; and was heartily sorry it was not in his power to contribute to
their support, for it was not only his duty, but his delight to return good for
evil; for he was a CHRISTIAN.

James Stock was now, by the blessing of GOD on his own earnest endeavors,
master of a considerable shop, and was respected by the whole town for his
prudence, honesty, and piety. We will now proceed to show how he behaved in his
new station, and also what befell his comrade Brown.

In the mean time, other apprentices will do well to follow so praise worthy an
example, and to remember, that the respectable master of a large shop, and a
profitable business, was raised to that creditable situation, without money,
friends, or connections, from the low beginning of a parish 'prentice by
sobriety, industry, the fear of God, and an obedience to the divine principles
of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

This sudden prosperity was a time of trial to poor James; who, as he was now
become a creditable tradesman, I shall hereafter think proper to call Mr. James
Stock. I say, this sudden rise in life was a time of trial; for we hardly know
what we are ourselves till we become our own masters. There is indeed always a
reasonable hope that a good servant will not make a bad master, and that a
faithful apprentice will prove an honest tradesman. But the heart of man is
deceitful; and some folks who seem to behave very well while they are under
subjection, no sooner get a little power than their heads are turned, and they
grow prouder than those who are gentlemen born. They forget at once that they
were lately poor and dependent themselves, so that one would think that with
their poverty they had lost their memory too. I have known some who had
suffered most hardships in their early days, become the most hard and
oppressive in their turn; so that they seem to forget that fine considerate
reason which God gives to the children of Israel why they should be merciful to
their servants, "remembering" says he, "that thou thyself wast a bondsman."

Young Mr. Stock did not so forget himself. He had indeed the only sure guard
from falling into this error. It was not from any easiness in his natural
disposition: for that only just serves to make folks good natured when they are
pleased, and patient when they have nothing to vex them. James went upon higher
ground. He did not give way to abusive language, because he knew it was a sin.
He did not use his apprentices ill; because he knew he had himself a master in
heaven.

(To be continued.)

