A SERMON, DELIVERED IN THE FIRST CHURCH IN PORTSMOUTH, ON THE LORD'S DAY AFTER
THE MELANCHOLY TIDINGS OF THE DEATH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, THE FATHER, GUARDIAN,
AND ORNAMENT OF HIS COUNTRY.

BY JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER, A. M.

IT IS BETTER TO TRUST IN THE LORD THAN TO PUT CONFIDENCE IN MAN. Psalmist.
PORTSMOUTH, PRINTED BY JOHN MELCHER, 1800.

A SERMON, etc.
PSALM 18th -- XLVI Verse, THE LORD LIVES --
To discipline and direct our meditations, and reflections, in the various
circumstances of life, and occurrences of providence, is no small or
unimportant duty. In every event of providence there is a voice; the heart of
the wise should study to answer, and meet the just expectations of a merciful
and righteous Sovereign.

We inhabit a world subject to many and great changes, by any of which our
interests may be suddenly and materially affected. The changes in the heavens
and in the earth are reacted in the walks of civil, political, and social life.
And no man knows what may be on the morrow, or what may be the issues of the
passing day. But, as men, and as christians, we believe these changes are not
the effect of chance, or of uninterested design; they are a part of the
majestic government of him, who is above all changes, 'the same yesterday, to
day, and forever.' In this view, the importance of attending to the volume of
providence is greatly increased; and the duty of regarding the work of the
LORD, and of considering the operations of his hand, appears more eminent.

We live in an eventful period -- a period, replete with changes, serious in
their nature, and extensive in their operation and consequences. We hear of
wars and rumors of wars, read of nations rising up against nations, and
kingdoms against kingdoms, and tremble for the fate of empires, involved in
wild confusion, apparently tottering to their base.

Remote from the scene of terror, and preserved hitherto, in a good degree of
tranquillity, by the smiles of heaven, upon the wisdom of our counsels, the
purity of our principles, and the firmness and independence of our patriots, we
flattered ourselves with the hope of impunity and peace. But the melancholy
tidings, which the last week saluted our ears, carried from town to town by the
reiterated knell of death, excite a just and alarming apprehension that GOD is
coming out in ways of judgment against us, and calling home his servants from
the gathering storm.

WASHINGTON, the great -- the GENERAL the STATESMAN, the COUNSELOR, the FRIEND
of AMERICA and of MAN is DEAD! He, who combined a greater assemblage of
talents, virtues, and excellencies necessary to form the supereminent human
benefactor, than are perhaps left to any survivor, is no more. Weep, O AMERICA,
defended by his arm, in the time of danger, guided by his wisdom, prudence, and
patriotism, in scenes of political embarrassment and perplexity, taught by his
counsels and example in prosperity and adversity, weep over thy FATHER suddenly
taken from thy head.

Whatever shades, envy or malice, party spirit or ingratitude, may attempt to
draw over the virtues or exploits of our departed Sage, it will be universally
acknowledged, that 'a Prince and a Great Man has fallen among us.' To pay no
tribute of respect to the memory of such a Benefactor would be the height of
ingratitude; and to attempt no religious improvement of an event in providence,
that has so deeply wounded the public mind, would be a height of impiety at
which modern infidelity might blush, and modern stupidity shudder.

It will not, however, be expected that I should attempt to delineate the
character of GENERAL WASHINGTON, or to do justice to the merits and exploits of
this first and best of men. This is a theme that requires other talents, and
other data, than I possess, and will doubtless command the exertions of the
most brilliant geniuses in poetry and prose. I shall only say, That the MAN,
whom we lament, appeared, specially designed, raised, and formed by Heaven, for
the times in which he lived: the spheres in which he moved, and the events of
which he was to be the important instrument; that no man ever discovered more
patriotic firmness and integrity, or more disinterestedly served his fellow
men, and that he never ceased to deserve well of his country.

To endeavor to direct and regulate your feelings and reflections on so
affecting an occasion, and to assist you in making a religious improvement of
an event so impressive in its nature, and interesting in its probable
consequences, falls more immediately within my province; and is a duty which it
would be unpardonable for a minister not to attempt, though he should fall far
below his wishes, or the expectations of his hearers.

Apprehensive that the first impression, from a shock so great, so sudden, and
unexpected, must be of the depressing kind, I chose the words of my text to
meet a spirit of despondence, and check the fainting soul, sinking in the day
of rebuke. The LORD lives -- WASHINGTON, the great and good; great in himself,
great in all stations, in principle, purpose; and execution; illustriously
great in scenes of difficulty, demanding human energy and decision, is DEAD:
but He who made him great still lives -- lives above all changes, and reigns
above control.

The Sovereign Proprietor of talents, in various proportion, bestows them upon
his servants. To one he gives ten talents, to another five, and to others one;
filling up the intermediate spaces, as occasion and circumstances require. The
most distinguished of our race have nothing but what they receive. A native
sense of this, a regular and devout acknowledgment of dependence upon divine
providence, and of indebtedness to divine influence and inteposition, formed a
luminous trait in the character of our departed General. To glory over others,
for that which is altogether received, is the mark of a little, or a base mind;
as it is of an ignorant and unprincipled one, not to acknowledge the author of
its benefits. The talents with which we are entrusted, add not a cubit to our
stature; in our improvement of them consists our glory and reward. Our
illustrious fellow citizen, who was honored with as many talents as were ever
entrusted to mortal man; and who honored himself more than others by his use
and improvement of them, is called to his account, leaving a bereaved country,
and a weeping nation, crying, 'My father; my father; the chariots of Israel and
the horsemen thereof.' Yet, the LORD lives, who entrusted him with these
talents. The source is inexhausted, and inexhaustible, from whence they were
derived; with GOD is the residue of the spirit. He can form and furnish other
characters as exactly suited to existing or expected circumstances, as our
departed Hero, Statesman, and Politician, was to those threatening ones, which
have passed over us. 'Have passed over us,' exclaims the alarmed and fainting
soul! "Never was there a season of more imminent danger to our country; never a
time that called louder for those peculiar talents, which distinguished this
illustrious Patriot, this best of men. Europe is in convulsions. The nations,
with whom we have principal connection, are most deeply interested in the
threatening scene; envying our growing greatness, they are respectively jealous
of its preponderating influence, and fruitful in expedients to convert it to
their own benefit. An important negotiation is now depending with the French
nation, the success of which must depend more upon interested than honorable
views and motives -- When they shall hear that WASHINGTON is dead, the soul of
our armies, the center of our union, the inspirer of our counsels, whose name
was a host, and his virtues a pavilion, revered by the virtuous, and dreaded by
the unprincipled of all climes; they will spurn our generous and pacific
overtures, repeating the indignities they have already offered. Other rival or
despising nations will rise in their exactions, injuries, and insults, when
they see, that our defense and glory are departed from us."

If these fears are just and rational, as probably they are, and this tribute
of respect is due to the virtues and talents of the great deceased, yet let us
meet these fears with the language of the text, and pay divine honors to the
perfections of Jehovah. 'The LORD lives, and blessed be our rock, and let the
GOD of our salvation be exalted.' 'He sits in the congregation of the
mighty, He judges among the gods.' 'He is the wonderful counselor, the Prince
of peace!' It is indeed God's usual method to work by probable means and
instruments; yet he can accomplish his purposes without them; and often
displays the glory of his administration by disappointing the most rational
expectations; and pouring the blush upon all human conjecture. 'He turns wise
men backward, and makes diviners mad!' He has intimate access to the hearts of
men, and can influence and overrule them at his pleasure. 'There is no counsel,
understanding or might against the LORD!' 'He can look upon every one that is
high and bring him low; he can make a little one to become a thousand, and a
small one a strong nation.' If national pride and insolence, impiety and
profaneness should take occasion, from the afflictive visitation of heaven, to
tyrannize and oppress, to treat with insolence and scorn those whom 'GOD has
wounded', let us remember 'the LORD lives.' In such a case, may we not expect
the special interposition of providence, and the display of divine aid in the
mount of difficulty. 'If thou see the oppression of the poor, marvel not at
the matter; He who is higher than the highest regards, and there be higher
than they.' Though we have great reason for deep humiliation under this bereaving
stroke, which has weakened our defense, and veiled our glory; and cannot but be
concerned for its probable influence upon our foreign interests and relations,
yet we have no sufficient cause for terrifying fears, or desponding
apprehensions; for, the LORD lives, who has ever been the shield and defense of
America, permitting no weapon formed against her, ultimately, to prosper. 'He
is a strong hold in the day of trouble, he knows all them that trust in him.'

Scarcely are these fears soothed, respecting our foreign relations, ever
others more formidable arise, respecting our domestic interests, expressed in
accents like these. "While our honor and prosperity, our safety and comfort, if
not our existence as a nation, depend upon our union; upon harmonizing and
concentrating public sentiment and affection, the great band of our union is
broken. The Man greatly beloved, universally esteemed, and the object of
confidence in the camp and the Senate house -- who has once and again hushed
the voice of faction, silenced the clamor of party, and conciliated contending
interests and designs, is removed from the midst of us, and this at a time when
division and animosity are at a threatening height, and discord, discord, drowns
the voice of reason, of patriotism, of interest, and of religion."

The justness of these accents thickens indeed the gloom of this afflictive
event, and darkens the shades in which it is shrouded; giving us reason to
apprehend that GOD in judgment is visiting us, preparing sorer chastenings for
an ungrateful people. Ancient dispensations of providence may lead us to
conclude, that, in mercy to our deceased Guardian, of whom we had rendered
ourselves unworthy, GOD has called him off from the evil that is coming, upon
the country which he emancipated. By this event, so afflictive to us, though we
have reason to hope, joyful to him, saving him the mortification of seeing the
evil accelerated, by any farther disregard of his parental advice and entreaty,
which he poured forth, with such ardent affection, when he retired from the
patriarchal Chair. We have reason to fear that GOD is angry with us; but, that
we provoke him no farther. Let us lay to heart this awakening stroke, 'let us
hear the rod, and him that has appointed it,' and let us give no occasion for
the repetition of the complaint by the prophet. 'The righteous dies and no man
lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the
righteous are taken away, from the evil to come.' But while we carefully avoid
'despising this chastening of the LORD;' let us as carefully avoid 'fainting
under his rebukes'. Our earthly mediator between contending parties indeed is
dead. He whose voice was harmony, and his accents peace, is shrouded in the
tomb; but, our heavenly Peace. Maker still lives. 'He has the hearts of all men
in his hands, to turn them as the rivers of water.' 'He stilleth the raging of
the sea, the noise of its waves, and the tumults of the people'. The human
heart, indeed, ceases to beat, that was the center of American affection; the
tongue is silent in the grave, that poured forth the most conciliating strains
of persuasive eloquence; yet he being dead still speaks to us, in that
admirable address to the people of these States which he poured forth with so
much patriotic ardor, and parental concern, when he retired from the chair of
State. This legacy, more valuable than the bequest of millions, will be
reviewed and perused with affectionate emotion; the tears of grateful
sensibility, which it cannot fail to excite, may so water the precious seed
that it shall spring up to a plentiful harvest; and the spirit of the address,
caught by every bosom, may so harmonize public sentiment, and correct the
errors of patriotic ardor, as that all shall turn indignant from foreign
influence and intrigue, and glory only in the title of Americans. Happy, thrice
happy country, could this be effected! The spirit of our departed Washington
would look down with transport upon such a fruit of his departure; and consider
it the consummation of his earthly glory. GOD is able to effect this.

While we pay the tribute of grateful respect to the memory of our departed
Hero, and mingle our tears with a weeping country, let us not indulge
desponding apprehensions, but rest on the assurance that the LORD lives, that
it is his prerogative to bring light out of darkness, and good out of evil, and
charge his darkest providence with the highest blessings.

Loudly does this event summon us to 'cease from man whose breath is in his
nostrils;' and as loudly does it call us to trust only in the LORD. If so much
worth and excellence must fail, let us despair of finding, below the skies, an
object of human confidence. And let our trust be in GOD, all rational
expectation is from him. Has there not been 'verily' a fault in us, in this
particular? May not our merciful FATHER design to correct our impiety, by this
grievous stroke? We have venerated and extoled him, who was greatest among men
-- Have we suitably remembered who made him great? We have honored and praised
the Defender of his country, the Guardian of her rights -- but, have our
praises ultimately arisen to the throne of GOD, who alone forms and furnishes
human benefactors? WASHINGTON is no more with us, to receive our ascriptions,
to be the occasion of festal assemblies, or the object of patriotic homage, but
the LORD lives, to receive our acknowledgments. To him, they are most justly
due, that He raised up for us such a character, furnishing him with talents
admirably suited to the parts assigned him on the theater of time. That he
crowned with success all his various enterprises in his country's cause -- That
He made him great in the field, great in the cabinet, and still greater in his
retreat from public life; crowning all his glory, with a resplendent luster, by
the eminence of his private virtues, and the consistency of his religious
ascriptions. When a grateful country loaded him with praises, he laid his
laurels at the feet of Him who rules in the Heavens: exclaiming with the
Psalmist. 'Not unto me, not unto me, but to thy name be the praise.' The Idol
of an Empire vanishes, but, the LORD lives to receive our acknowledgments. To
him the tribute of praise is due, to him let the incense of ascription rise.

While our praises are presented, as most justly due, for the distinction
confered, upon our age and nation, by the life and virtues of so eminent a
Benefactor. Let us earnestly pray, that God would sanctify, to an afflicted and
weeping country, the grievous rebuke of his providence in summoning him from
us. That He would heal the breach, which his hand has made. That He would cause
a double portion of the spirit of his ascending favorite to rest upon his
successors in office; and cover them respectively with his falling mantle. That
He would take us into his holy keeping, and be himself our Father, Guide, and
Guardian. That He would give us grace, religiously, to improve a providence so
affecting, and learn the lessons it is designed to teach.

In what piercing accents does this event proclaim, the frailty and feebleness
of man -- the vanity of all earthly honors and distinctions. He, who has been
the 'terror of the mighty, in the land of the living,' has no terror for the
tyrant death. He, who has been the shield of thousands in the time of danger,
and the confidence of millions in the season of perplexity, has no shield
against death's fatal arrow, nor power in the day of dissolution. Rank,
station, and merit make distinctions and difference among men here; and they
promote the order of society, and the happiness of social intercourse. But
death confounds them all.

" Earth's highest honors end in, here he lies;
" And dust to dust, concludes her noblest song."
What little cause is there for human pride, envy, or ambition. He is the
deserving man, who acts well the part assigned him, performs the duties of his
station, with life and vigor, and moves with firmness and dignity in his
sphere. What a striking comment is the event we deplore upon passages of
scripture like these. 'What is man whose breath is in his nostrils, and wherein
is he to be accounted of:' 'It is better to trust in the LORD than to put
confidence in Princes.' 'Vanity of vanities, says the preacher, all is vanity.'

But, while this afflictive event teaches us the frailty and feebleness of man,
the folly of trusting in an arm of flesh, or boasting, in human honor, however
eminent; does it not teach us the high importance of the Gospel revelation, in
which 'life and immortality are bro't to light.' And ought it not to excite the
liveliest gratitude that we are in possession of this inestimable treasure; and
by the light derived from its divine Author, can pierce the shades of death,
and look with comfort to brighter scenes? What accumulated horror rests on the
closing scene of life, if, viewed as the end of our existence, the grave of our
hopes and expectations? How does the mind shudder at the idea, and the heart
revolt from the apprehension, that the most distinguished and eminent of our
race, no less than the most infamous and useless should sink in the gulf of
utter annihilation? but the light of nature leaves them in one common ruin.
Revelation alone assures us that when 'the dust returns to the earth as it was,
the spirit returns to GOD who gave it,' that the happy soul honored with an
approving sentence from the lips of JESUS, shall pass from glory to glory, in
progressive elevation, far beyond the limits of our present conception. This
brings light into the shades of death, consistency and glory into the mazy
scenes of time, and proclaims the propriety of our cheerfully confiding in the
governing providence of GOD, and humbly submitting to his sovereign hand.

Let us duly prize this inestimable treasure, and scrupulously watch against
every attempt to wrest it from us. Let us imbibe the spirit of the Gospel --
embrace its doctrines, obey its precepts, and imitate the example of its divine
Author. He wept at the tomb of Lazarus, comforted the hearts that were torn
with anguish, raising their thoughts from the darkness of death to the
brightness of the morning of the resurrection. Thus let us do on the present
mournful occasion.

Our beloved WASHINGTON is dead. 'The eye of him that has seen him will see
him no more.' He has no more a portion in the land of the living. But he will
rise again, and we must meet him at the bar of GOD. Let us show ourselves
worthy of so great a character, and act becoming our relation to him as our
political FATHER, SAVIOR, and BENEFACTOR. Let him live in the lively
remembrance of a grateful country. Let his counsels be honored -- his example
be imitated -- his generous disinterestedness, firmness, and patriotism be
emulated -- and his modesty, piety, and perseverance be copied by all ranks in
life. And while we gratefully exult in this uncommon gift of Heaven, so long
continued to us, and praise GOD for the blessings of which he was the honored
instrument; let us act worthy of such a Sire. Standing fast in the liberty
wherewith he has made us free, let us never sacrifice our birth right at the
shrine of ambition, nor lose our inheritance in the vortex of Discord.

A SERMON, DELIVERED IN THE FIRST CHURCH IN PORTSMOUTH, JANUARY 5th, 1800. THE
HOUSE BEING DRESSED IN MOURNING IN TOKEN OF RESPECT TO THE MEMORY OF GENERAL
WASHINGTON.
WHAT mean these emblems of mourning, with which I stand surrounded? What event
has shrouded the sacred desk in sable? Why these traces of deep-wrought sorrow
on every countenance, and these badges of grief on every arm?

"Art thou a stranger in America, and know not the cause of these
appearances? GOD has come out in ways of judgment against us, covered with a
cloud our dear country in his anger, smote the pillars of it that they tremble,
and filled every loin with pain; summoning from our head, by the relentless
messenger of death, our political FATHER, SAVIOR, and BENEFACTOR. He has broken
the golden pipe, the conduit of his choicest national blessings, and has dried
up the stream which watered and refreshed the whole land. He has called home
the favorite instrument of his most extensive benediction; who, by the splendour
of his talents, the disinterestedness of his patriotism, the purity of his
character, the firmness of his principles, and the luster of his exploits,
stands unrivalled among the sons of fame. WASHINGTON is dead! who led our
armies to victory, and our country to independence and peace; who presided in
conciliating the jarring interests of America, and combined them in a
Constitution of General Government, which strengthened us in our weakness,
raised us in our depression, surrounded us with honor, and rapidly advanced us
in the career of national prosperity. The man to whom all eyes were directed in
the day of danger, and in whom, when helpers failed, our hopes were centered,
and who was ever ready to extend his shield, and spread his pavilion at the
call of his country, is suddenly summoned from his intercourse with mortals.
These emblems of grief are tokens of respect to departed worth, expressing the
sorrow of our hearts, and evincing a desire to conform to the aspects of
Providence, and meet the voice of GOD summoning to deep humiliation."

Truly there is cause for all that we see, there is just occasion for all that
we feel. Too great honor, which falls short of divine, cannot be paid to the
memory of a character so distinguished. Too great grief, which does not sink
into despondence, cannot be exhibited at the loss of such a Benefactor. Let
America be hung in sable; let the voice of joy and gladness, of vain mirth and
dissipation, be silent in her borders, until the aspects of Providence
brighten, and the cloud, which covers her, be taken up. Let the heart of the
wise be in the house of mourning, till it effectually learn the vanity of man,
the sovereignty of GOD, and the wisdom of trusting unreservedly in him. Let the
heart of the devout unceasingly pour forth its supplications to the repairer of
breaches, and the restorer of paths to dwell in, that he would heal the
breaches of our land, by reason of which it shakes; and that he would make
plain paths for our feet in this day of our rebuke, 'that the lame among us may
not be turned out of the way, but effectually healed.'

I endeavored, you will recollect, to take early notice of this afflictive
event, and pay a small tribute of respect to the memory of departed worth. My
esteem and veneration for our deceased Guardian and Benefactor would induce me
to repeat the attempt, were I not conscious, that any strains of mine would be
like the pebbled rivulet to the streams of eloquence, which will be poured
forth upon the occasion, or like the dim, trembling taper to the blaze of day.

Leaving in a measure this theme and the event which has occasioned it, I would
lead your attention to another, which this has indeed suggested; but which you
will acknowledge to have been attended with effects, far more interesting and
important to mankind. It is the death of the SON of GOD. For a contemplation of
this scene the transactions of the past week, and the event which occasioned
them may have prepared the mind; and the duty of the day calling us to
commemorate the dying love of CHRIST, renders it a subject highly proper for
our meditation. The attending circumstance of his death, which I design to make
the subject of some remarks, is recorded --

MATTHEW, 27th Chap. 45th Verse. NOW FROM THE SIXTH HOUR THERE WAS DARKNESS
OVER ALL THE LAND UNTO THE NINTH HOUR. WHAT an astonishing event was this! What
a mighty cause must there have been to have produced such an effect -- to have
occasioned such a scene! We have seen the earth covered with darkness in the
absence of the sun during the hours of rest; but this commenced at high noon,
when the sun was at its meridian altitude, and had reached the zenith of its
splendour. For the Jews began to reckon their time from our six o'clock in the
morning, so that their sixth hour was midday, and their ninth, three in the
afternoon, including that part of the day in which the light and heat are most
powerful. We have seen partial darkness, during a short season, and over a
limited space, owing to eclipses of the sun by the interference of the moon.
This can happen at new moon only, nor can it possibly continue for the space of
three hours; but the darkness at the death of CHRIST demonstrably happened at
the time of full-moon, when no such interference could possibly take place.
CHRIST was crucified at the time of the Jewish Passover, which happened upon
the fourteenth day of the first month; and their months, if not in the
beginning, yet toward the decline of their state always began with the new
moon. This is attested by Josephus, a Jewish priest, and therefore an
unexceptionable witness, who expressly asserts, that the Day of Expiation, and
consequently all other feasts were reckoned by the age of the moon. This must
have been a preternatural and miraculous eclipse, a black covering spread over
the light of heaven. We have seen cities, states, and countries covered with
gloom, and their inhabitants dressed in sable, at the extinction of civil,
political, and religious lights, at the death of eminent and exalted
characters; but never did we see the light of heaven suspended, and the whole
land covered with darkness.

What was the mighty cause of this phenomenon? -- the dreadful plot which
spread this sable scenery? A cause more than sufficient, a mystery at which
heaven and earth wonder and adore. The SON of GOD was then hanging on the cross
-- the SAVIOR of the world was then bleeding on Mount Calvary -- the light of
Heaven was trembling to its extinction -- and, what was more than all, the
spotless, innocent, and divine JESUS was dying under the insults and revilings
of rebel worms. The envious and malicious rulers of the Jews had extorted a
sentence of crucifixion from the pusillanimous Roman governor, and early in the
morning they prepare for its execution. They load our SAVIOR with his cross,
and lead him forth to Calvary; by the third hour they stretch him on the wood,
raise him between Heaven and earth in company with two notorious malefactors,
and with hearts harder than adamant 'sit down to watch him.' Those who passed
by reviled him, wagging their heads, and insulting him with the declarations he
had made, that he would build the temple in three days, and that he was the Son
of GOD. Chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders, forgetting the gravity of age, and
descending from the dignity of their stations, mocked him also, and said 'he
saved others, himself he cannot save.' Even the thieves, crucified with him,
'cast the same in his teeth.'

This was too much for the light of Heaven to behold. The sun withdrew from a
spectacle so awful, the foundations of the earth were shaken, and 'there was
darkness over all the land from the sixth hour to the ninth.' This doubtless
silenced their cruel invectives, and induced an awful suspense, and uncertainty
of what would be the issue. During these three long hours, we do not read, that
a word escaped the lips of our SAVIOR. His soul, retired within itself, was
probably in the utmost agony, conflicting with the powers of darkness. The
surrounding darkness was an emblem of the greater darkness, which shrouded his
soul under the hidings of his Father's face. At the expiration of this scene of
horror, JESUS cried with a loud voice 'Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani! My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me!' breathing a prayer of forgiveness for his
betrayers and murderers, 'he cried again, and yielded up the ghost.'

But are any ready to ask, "why was this tremendous event permitted? why was
this glorious character immolated?" O my brethren, had there not been a cause
it would not have taken place. "Could he not have rescued himself from the
hands of ruffians, and looked his foes into confusion?" Had he not been bound
with other bands, than those the soldiers used, he would readily have rescued
himself from sufferings; but he was bound with cords of love and compassion
toward a guilty world. We had rebelled against our Sovereign, were prisoners
of justice and objects of wrath. Upon us the full vials must have been poured,
and we must have weltered in everlasting woe, had not JESUS offered himself our
surety and mediator. 'He who knew no sin was made a sin offering for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him.' 'GOD laid upon him the
iniquity of us all,' 'and he bore our sins in his own body on the tree, that by
his stripes we might be healed.' He could not then be released from his
sufferings without relinquishing his object. Therefore he cries in the full
prospect of his sufferings, 'I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I
straitened till it be accomplished.' His love for a guilty world was 'stronger
than death, which many waters could not quench nor floods drown. Therefore he
shrunk not from the prospect; therefore he delivered not himself from his
anguish, nor refused to drink the cup, necessary to be drank to save a guilty
world, though mingled to the brim with the bitterest ingredients. This indeed
was love, benevolence, and compassion like a God. 'Though he was in the form of
GOD, and thought it no robbery to be equal with GOD, yet he made himself of no
reputation and took upon him the form of a servant;' and for as much as the
objects of his love and compassion 'were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
took part of the same,' and put himself into a capacity of being 'in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin.'

The life of our SAVIOR was devoted to our service; to the communication of the
most important instruction, and to the deliverance of the human mind from the
horrors of superstition, and the doubts and fears of ignorance, error, and
delusion. He distributed the fruits of his beneficence wherever he went,
relieved every afflicted object which sought his aid, and finally died for our
guilty race under the forementioned circumstances. By his death he appeased the
wrath of Heaven, 'spoiled principalities and powers,' which had brought us into
vassalage, 'triumphing over them on the cross,' and purchased for us eternal
redemption. Words are too feeble, language too inadequate to give us any idea
of the glory of this personage, or of the obligation we are under to this
'Captain of Salvation,' this mighty Deliverer of the human race.

We have heard of eminent characters raised up among mankind, who seemed to
surpass the common class of mortals, as much perhaps as angels surpassed them.
We read of heroes, sages, and statesmen, who have devoted their lives to the
service of their fellow men, and who have been gloriously instrumental in
defending, delivering, and exalting their country. We have seen one, who
perhaps stands at the head of the catalogue, who was born for his fellow men,
lived the Defender, Guardian, Father, and Benefactor of his country, and whose
death has covered it with universal gloom. But raise your eyes, Christians, and
behold an object more stupendous! Raise your eyes, mortals, and behold the
divine JESUS -- a personage so exalted, that all the angels of GOD were
commanded to worship him. HE, laying aside his glory, and taking the form of a
servant, devoted his life, not only to the service of a country and an age, but
to the service of the world throughout all generations. HE voluntarily
sacrificed his life for their salvation; enduring the wrath of GOD, and a
conflict with Devils, that they might be delivered from the wrath to come, and
from the vassalage of Satan, and be exalted, not to the most distinguished
height of earthly splendour merely, but to 'crowns* of glory' in the regions of
immortality 'which shall never fade away,' to heights of felicity in those
blessed abodes, 'which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
in the heart of man to conceive.' And all this, for whom? For his friends? --
For the well-deserving? -- For the virtuously unhappy? No, my brethren. For his
enemies -- for the ill-deserving -- for voluntary rebels to his crown and
dignity. 'GOD commends his love toward us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, CHRIST (...) for the ungodly.' Wonder, O Heaven! be astonished, O
Earth! and let universal nature praise and adore! What a tribute of praise is
due to such a benefactor! What obligation we are under to such infinite
beneficence!

Though there is no term of comparison between this divine personage, and the
most exalted of the creation, though all nations are before him, 'as the drop
of the bucket,' and the highest human character must be lost in the smallest of
his glories; yet may I not, with adoring reverence, take occasion from your
present feelings, and the event which has excited them, to reason with you upon
your duty to the divine JESUS, whose ambassador I am, and to whom I would
espouse you.

You have tears of gratitude, affection, and respect for our beloved
WASHINGTON, when you call to mind his virtues, his disinterestedness, and
benefactions. Nor are they censurable. They are a tribute justly due to worth
like his; and lost must be the heart to human sensibility, which is not
conscious of emotion when he is the subject of reflection. But where are your
tears of grateful adoration for our SAVIOR? who was infinitely glorious, the
joy of Heaven, the beloved of the FATHER, the friend of sinners, and the
infinite benefactor of the human race. You are affected with the death of our
venerable Patriot, Christian, and Sage. The emblems of mourning, which every
where strike our eyes, are expressions of your grief; and are you not affected
with the death of JESUS, who died that we might live -- do you not grieve for
the tremendous cause? You resolve that the memory of WASHINGTON shall never be
obliterated from your throbbing hearts -- you dwell upon his virtues, his
talents, and his exploits; and will you forget the blessed JESUS -- will you
not contemplate his divine perfections, read the history of his life, and
admire the achievements of his mercy? What eye will not gaze upon the
resembling portraits of our departed General, left behind to aid our
recollection? Will you then, my dear friends, turn away your eyes from
beholding the emblems of the SAVIOR, which he has appointed to refresh our
memories, and affect our hearts? The dear REDEEMER could not leave behind the
picture of himself. No limner could draw his divine perfections. But he
constituted bread and wine, administered at his table, to be the emblems of his
body and blood, and the memorials of his death; and will you not gaze upon
these wonderful bequests? You will read and respect the dying counsel and
advice of our political Father; you will hide it in your bosoms, and copy it in
your lives; and why, my dear friends, will you not hear the dying charge of
JESUS, ' This do in remembrance of me.'

But the subject is too tender, the remonstrance too affecting. I will leave
the rest to your own reflections, humbly hoping that He, whose prerogative it
is to work by what means he pleases, will so accompany this afflictive
visitation with the energy of his spirit, and the influences of his grace, that
we shall all be excited seriously to consider our duty, and religiously perform
it; then may our beloved WASHINGTON be again hailed the SAVIOR of his country,
and to us, no less than to himself will 'the day of his death be better than
the day of his birth.'

A SECOND SERMON, DELIVERED LORD'S DAY, JANUARY 5, 1800, FROM MATTHEW, 27th
Chap. 45th Verse. NOW FROM THE SIXTH HOUR THERE WAS DARKNESS OVER ALL THE LAND
UNTO THE NINTH HOUR.
OUR preceding discourse contained some remarks upon the new and extraordinary
phenomenon mentioned in the text. They were designed to prove that the darkness
could not be the effect of any natural cause, but was a miraculous attestation
to the tragedy then acting on earth, expressing the sympathy of heaven with the
divine sufferer.

The glorious IMMANUEL, by whom the heavens were spread, the earth founded, and
the race of men created, nailed to the accursed tree, was then suspended
between heaven and earth, an object of insults and abuse, for rebel worms! The
innocent and holy JESUS was then shedding his precious blood, and offering his
life, an expiatory sacrifice, for the sins of men; nay more, He was spoiling
principalities and powers, who had led us captive, and drinking the cup of
divine wrath filled to the brim by our sin and transgression. Nature,
sympathising with its dying Lord, was convulsed at the tremendous spectacle.
The sun withdrew his rays -- the heavens spread their sable curtains -- and
earth was wrapped in awful gloom. Here we find the cause of these hours of
darkness, of this temporary extinction of the light of heaven.

It is the opinion of many, that this darkness was confined to the land of
Judea, upon which the principal guilt of the crucifixion rests. The common
translation of our Bible is favorable to such an opinion, but the original is
as favorable to an universal darkness. It is however of little consequence
which it was; a darkness, confined to the land of Judea, was no less a miracle,
under existing circumstances, than a darkness commensurate with the globe.
There was no sufficient natural cause of the former, and the same power, that
miraculously suspended the rays of the sun from a portion of the globe could as
easily suspend them from the whole. That the Jews should attempt to suppress
this miracle, or, since they could not do that, to lessen it as much as
possible, was to be expected, considering their obstinate unbelief, consummated
by the ridiculous tale invented to confute the evidence of the Savior's
resurrection. "But," say the advocates for partial darkness, "there was not the
same cause for the silence of heathen writers, who speak very little of this
darkness." If there were no monuments of this event among them, it would be
presumptive evidence that the darkness did not reach them; but one learned and
judicious commentator says, that, 'some of the ancients appealed to the annals
of the nations concerning this extraordinary eclipse, at the death of CHRIST,
as a thing well known, and which gave notice to those parts of the world, of
something great then in doing.' Another mentions, by name, Phlegon as taking
notice of this darkness; and most say, that, Dionysius of Heliopolis in Egypt
was filled with so much wonder, astonishment, and just conviction, of the
miraculousness of the event that he exclaimed 'Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut
mundi machina dissolvitur.' The God of nature suffers, or the universe is
dissolving. So justly thought this renowned Philosopher, ignorant of the
tragedy then acting in Judea. The Roman Centurion and the guard which he
commanded, for the purpose of aiding and superintending the awful transactions
of the day, who may be supposed to have been selected for their uncommon
insensibility, and congeniality to the occasion, when they saw the darkness,
the earthquake, and the things that were done, lost their confidence and
stupidity, exclaiming, Surely, this was the SON OF GOD.

Never did prodigies, like these at the death of CHRIST, mark any other triumph
of the King of terrors. Great men have fallen -- the greatest, the wisest, and
the best, for 'No man has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, neither
has he power in the day of death, there is no discharge in that war.' 'The
LORD has taken away the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, the
prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, the captain of fifty, and the
honorable man, and the counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent
orator.' GOD may have given, some times, premonitions of the death of eminent
characters, that an afflicted people might be prepared for their bereavement.
-- So deep has been the wound from the loss of men, in whom all that was great
and good centered, that the country they have blessed has seemed to sympathize
with its inhabitants, and put on, as ours now does, Winter.
a dreary and joyless appearance; the hoarse sounding winds, and the chilling
blasts may be imagined to respond to the sighs and groans of the orphan family;
but, never was there a death, except this of our divine SAVIOR, at which the
heavens spread their sackcloth, dressing themselves in darkest shades, and
earth groaned to its lowest center.

Does not this striking difference at the death of CHRIST loudly proclaim his
infinite superiority to all mortals, and afford us an important argument and
evidence of his proper divinity? I pay respect to human greatness, especially
when allied to human virtue, and devoted to defend and bless mankind. Every
token of veneration, gratitude and love, that falls short of divine, is but a
just tribute to excellence like that, of which America has lately been
bereaved. But may I not pertinently take occasion, from this event and the
emotions it excites, to bring into view our glorious EMMANUEL, and show how
much he excels all human excellence; how justly he is entitled to the highest
homage, supreme love, and everlasting remembrance of our indebted race.

There are those, who deny divine honors to our SAVIOR, or at least, strip him
of his royal crown and diadem, by disclaiming his title to divine perfections.
They place him high, indeed, in the creation of GOD, the firstborn of every
creature, as the model after which all human souls should be created; but they
place him far below the dignity and honor of a divine person, and think him
entitled to the homage that is paid him, more from his delegated power and
authority, than his innate worth and excellence. Others there are, who consider
CHRIST as no other than a mere man. They allow him, indeed, to be an
extraordinary man, raised up and furnished as a supereminent Prophet,
commissioned to publish the will of GOD to men, and by his instructions and
example to recover them from the paths of error, ignorance and superstition,
into which they had unhappily declined; that, in execution of his commission,
he attested the truth of his doctrines by his sufferings, and sealed them with
his blood. Still, others there are -- (it is a lamentation they are so many,
and an astonishment they are so active in their ruinous attempt!) who reject
the whole christian revelation, representing the Gospel as 'a cunningly devised
fable,' its history a forgery, and its author an impostor. Blush, O human
intellect, at such an abuse of intelligence, shudder, O my soul, at blasphemy
so daring!

While this latter class will feel themselves but little interested in what can
be said upon this subject, for they ridicule and insult the story of the
crucifixion, with all its tremendous scenery; I would ask the two former
classes, who subscribe to the truth of the Gospel history, and believe this
miraculous darkness attending the death of CHRIST, though they deny his divinity,
and proper atonement for sin; why this unexampled appearance, and astonishing
phenomenon? Why this sympathy of nature with the dying JESUS? Great men have
died in every possible situation. The highest human benefactors have expired in
scenes of their greatest usefulness -- in the full career of glory -- and when
they have reached its summit. Sages and Legislators, Philosophers and
Moralists, who have wasted the midnight lamp, and the midday sun, to reform
and bless their fellow men, have had their purposes broken off, and left their
benevolent wishes unaccomplished. And Prophets and Apostles, sealing the truth
of their doctrines with their blood, have expired under every species of
torture and ignominy, which the wit and malice of their enemies could invent:
yet heaven and earth moved on their usual courses, silent, and uninterested
spectators of the scenes. The greatest and the best of men with us has died,
the defender of our rights, the avenger of our wrongs, our political Father,
friend and Benefactor, the glory of his country, and the boast of the human
race; but we had no premonition of the event, no attending testimonials of his
death. The inhabitants of our land have felt the shock, and every where exhibit
emblems of grief; but, the earth has maintained her usual steadiness, and the
heavens have exhibited their accustomed brightness. Why was the death of Jesus
so greatly distinguished from the deaths of all the worthies that have ever
fallen? Why should the earth tremble to its lowest base, and the sun expire for
three long hours? O, my brethren, the Centurion gives us the true reason,
'Doubtless this was the SON OF GOD.' And Dionysius of Heliopolis reasoned and
concluded justly, the GOD of nature suffered. By which is not intended, that
the divine nature, simply considered, suffered; but the divine nature was so
united with the human nature in CHRIST JESUS, that the person, who was dying on
the cross, without the gates of Jerusalem, was, in every proper consideration,
a divine person; GOD and man mysteriously united, constituting that 'mystery of
godliness, GOD manifest in the flesh,' into which angels pry with profound
astonishment. And this divine personage was then dying in agony, not merely to
attest the truth of his doctrines, and seal his testimony with his blood, but
to make expiation for the sins of men, and present an adequate atonement for
their guilt. He was conflicting with the powers of darkness, to rescue us,
captives, from their chain. He was suffering that we might be happy -- dying,
that we might live -- bearing the wrath of GOD, that we might enjoy his smiles,
and reign with him forever.

Here was reason sufficient for the mighty difference between the death of
CHRIST, and the deaths of all who have ever fallen, abundant cause for all the
prodigies that attended his crucifixion, nay, is it not matter of wonder, that
the hosts of heaven had not interfered and rescued their beloved? They would,
had not he, from compassion to man, restrained their ardor. Is it not matter of
surprise that nature had not expired, in convulsive agonies, at the affecting
spectacle? It would, had not he sustained it, by his mighty power, that the
scriptures might be fulfilled, and the great salvation be effected.

Whatever homage, therefore, is due to created excellence, or human worth,
infinitely higher is due to the LORD JESUS CHRIST. However deep the impression,
made upon the human heart, by the death of the most eminent, useful, and
disinterested human Benefactor, deeper should be the impression from the death
of CHRIST. No one will imagine that these remarks intend the least reflection
upon the emotion that has been excited in the public mind, by the death of our
beloved WASHINGTON, or that they convey the remotest degree of censure, upon
the tribute of grateful respect, that has been, so universally, paid to his
memory. To have been unmoved at such bereavment, would have been the highest
reflection upon our sensibility, and to have withholden the tribute of mournful
respect would have proved us impious and ungrateful. Every token of human
respect that a widowed country can bestow will fall short of the merit of its
illustrious Guardian. When this Father of his Country was performing his
continental circuit, visiting the several apartments of his great family, to
gratify the wishes of his affectionate children and give the patriarchal
blessing; as he approached this town, a just and laudible zeal was exhibited,
by every class of citizens, to remove every obstacle out of the way, 'to make
the crooked ways straight, and the rough places plain.' The pleasing solicitude
then displayed to give honor to the illustrious defender of our rights, and
prepare the way for his approach, suggested to me the propriety of discoursing
to you upon the importance of preparing the way for the approach of the 'KING
OF GLORY' and of removing every obstacle to his favoring us with a visit, who
has ransomed and redeemed his people, and wrought out eternal salvation for
them. Is there less propriety, that, from the death of this great man, whom
'the multitude of his brethren delight to honor,' and from the multiplied
tokens of respect paid to his memory, I should take occasion to discourse to
you upon the importance of paying all possible homage to the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
our once crucified, but now exalted Redeemer, at whose feet, the highest of the
heavenly hosts, how in low prostration? Is* it not acting in character, as a
Minister of CHRIST, who 'wishes above all things' that the whole family of
earth, might be influenced to reverence and adore, to love and serve the divine
SAVIOR, to take every proper occasion to discourse of his glories, and
recommend him to the homage of guilty dependents?

If departed spirits have any knowledge of the transactions on earth, and the
death of our admired General should be the mean of affecting any heart more
deeply with a sense of the death of CHRIST; or of exciting it to pay its
unreserved homage to him -- the venerable shade, of our departed WASHINGTON,
would more rejoice in this fruit of his death, than in all the triumphal
arches, marble statues, or mournful monuments that a grateful country will
raise to his memory. Will he not, then, approve my attempt, to direct your
tears, shed at his death, into the channel of weeping for your dying Jesus, and
to elevate your veneration for his embalmed memory, to divine veneration of the
adorable IMMANUEL, 'who is over all GOD blessed forever.' Did not our christian
Hero, while running his career of glory, bow dependent at the throne of grace,
did he not ascribe all his honors and successes to the interposing influence of
an overruling Providence? Is he not now, as we fondly hope, casting his crown
at the feet of JESUS, with a, 'not unto me, not unto me, but to thy name be the
praise?' And, will he not be pleased, that earth should, this day, resemble
heaven, and his family left behind, should, at humbler distance, be imitating
his exercises, and preparing for his joys? 'They mourn the dead aright who live
as they would wish.' This is the improvement of the death of others, which
reason and religion require of us, that we should rise from the creature to the
Creator, 'and set our affections on things above where GOD is, and where CHRIST
is at his right hand.'

Who will not be ambitious to have portraits and pictures of our departed
Patron and Benefactor? Who will not think them the ornaments of their best
apartments? Who will not make them the subject of conversation, and the
occasion of recalling to a grateful remembrance, the virtues and exploits of
their admired original? While propriety may exclude pretended resemblances of
the Savior! will you not by meditation render familiar to you his divine
perfections, engrave his virtues on the tablet of your hearts; and make him and
his benefits the subject of conversation, on proper occasions, that love may be
enkindled in your own breasts, quickened in the breasts of others, and
'believing you may rejoice with exceeding joy?'

A grateful public will doubtless erect, in one place and another, statues of
the deceased, and adorn their public places with portraits large as the life,
and with historic paintings emblematic of his deeds; and grateful individuals,
on public political occasions, will flock to behold them, with emotions
honorary to departed worth. And will any be unconcerned to have public places
of worship, where GOD may record his name? or neglect to assemble where he will
accept their vows, and manifest himself in his own institutions?

It has been proposed to collect and publish, in one volume, the principal
public communications of our departed Sage, Statesman, and Defender, that every
successor in the stations he has filled, and the offices he has sustained, may
have a general manual, and posterity be instructed by his uncommon genius. Who
would not possess such a volume? Who would not give it the most conspicuous
place in his library, or have it nearer at hand for habitual use? Will you not
thus honor the writings of the blessed JESUS, which contain the words of
eternal life? Will you not give them a conspicuous place in your dwellings, and
have them ever at hand for your instruction and comfort? I confess, my
brethren, I have been sometimes grieved, to see the implements of amusement
occupying the place of the word of GOD, in the dwellings of professing
christians; and to find in every corner a novel or a romance, Some writings of
this kind may afford instruction, but an indiscriminate reading of them,
vitiates the taste, corrupts the heart, and fills the youthful imagination with
romantic fancies that only make wretched in future life.
while a Bible, if a tenant of the place, was scarcely to be found.

Ye parents and heads of families, you will doubtless converse with one
another, and with your children and dependents, upon the virtues and
atchievments of our departed Hero and Statesman -- you will tell them how much
they are indebted to his valor, his wisdom and firmness, for the good land they
possess, and the liberties and privileges with which it is distinguished; you
will not cease the pleasing tale till emotions of respect, for him they never
(...), swell their youthful bosoms. And will you not lead them to venerate and
adore the divine SAVIOR, and aid their devotions by your family examples and
prayers? Will you not converse with them upon the glories of CHRIST -- and tell
them how he labored, bled, and died for their sakes; is risen and ascended to
be their intercessor in heaven, where he is preparing mansions for them that
love him? Will you not continue the interesting theme, till their young hearts
throb with grateful emotions, their eyes fill with the expressive tear, and
they resolve to lay their blushing honors at the feet of JESUS?

Should you meet with any disposed to depreciate the worth of our illustrious
Benefactor, to detract from the merit of his well earned praise, or fully the
glory with which he died surrounded, ('for who can stand before envy,' or
answer for the effects of party spirit and prejudice) would you not recoil
indignant from such accents? Should you meet with essays, whose open or covert
design, is to blast the fame of WASHINGTON, and reduce him to a level with
common men; (for who can tell to what prostitution presses may descend) would
you give them a patient reading; or feast your eyes on the unhallowed page? --
And will you lend the listening ear, or the apparently grateful attention, to
those who deny divine honors to the SAVIOR; and strip him of his royal crown
and diadem? Will you, with pleasure read those monstrous essays which blaspheme
the virtues of the bleeding JESUS, and represent him in characters and titles,
that I forbear to name? Will you not turn, indignant, from such essays and
consign them and their Authors to the oblivion they deserve?

Should you, my young friends, in your hours of business, or relaxation, find
any disposed to make the venerable name of WASHINGTON, a mere expletive in
language, to use it in common conversa-without meaning or reflection -- would
not your patriotic ardor burn indignant at such abuse? Would you not reprove
such profanation, and decline the company of those so ungrateful? And will you
feel no emotion when you hear the name and attributes of Deity so abused, and
our streets filled with oaths and curses? Will you not frown upon such debasing
abuse of speech, retire from the polluted region, and leave to themselves
those, whose minds are so vitiated, their lips so profane, and their hearts so
destitute of all religious principle? In fine. For I know not to what length I
might extend the subject.

Had our beloved WASHINGTON, our political SAVIOR and BENEFACTOR, appointed a
significative rite, expressive of his love to his country, of his exertions for
its benefit, and of his ardent wishes for its prosperity, and left it in charge
to remember him in its observance -- With what readiness would you have
attended upon it? How scrupulously would you have regarded his dying request?
Would you have made it a necessary prerequisite, that you should fully see its
beneficial tendency, or as fully comprehend all that his exalted mind might
mean and intend? Would not gratitude to your Benefactor, and confidence in his
discernment, have surmounted lesser scruples, and made you respectful observers
of his last request? Our adorable JESUS, has instituted a memorial of his dying
love, a festal remembrance of his death, in the celebration of which, he is set
before us, in some of the most affecting scenes of his mediation; upon which he
has directed us to attend, 'in remembrance of him,' and 'shew forth his death
till he come,' -- yet how many neglect this expressive memorial, this dying
request of the bleeding JESUS! What is the cause, my beloved Brethren? Have you
veneration for created excellence -- and have you not for excellence divine? Do
you love and respect the instruments of temporal benediction -- and do you not
love and respect the Author of eternal blessings? Should not the friends of
JESUS meet at his table? Should not they, who confide in his death, obediently
show it forth? But, are any ready to say, 'we see not the special benefit of
this institution' -- And dare you not confide in the dictates of unerring
wisdom? Do any say farther. 'We fear we have not those exercises of heart which
are due, nor that sense of the Savior's worth, and veneration for his memory
which will render our attendance a sincere and acceptable service.' My friends,
should there be any of our fellow citizens, in this day of national mourning,
who should withhold the tribute of respect, due to the memory of our departed
Benefactor, from a consciousness they did not feel that respect, which such
tribute indicated -- What advice would you give them? Would it not be, 'to
divest themselves of prejudice -- to review the virtues and talents, the
character and exploits of the beloved WASHINGTON -- to consider, heartily, his
inviolable integrity, his disinterested patriotism, and unabated ardor for his
country's good, and emotions of respect, gratitude, and love will spontaneously
arise.' The advice you would give in this case, will you, heartily, receive in
one much more important? Divest yourselves of prejudice against the plan of the
Gospel; listen to the accents of unerring truth, contemplate the glorious
character of JESUS CHRIST; consider our extreme need of such a character; read
the history of his love; view him represented to the world, as its only hope,
in the types and shadows of the ancient dispensation; see him, actually, living
on earth, scattering the shades of ignorance and superstition by his doctrine;
and bringing life and immortality to light; follow him in his course of godlike
beneficence dispersing blessings all around him; meditate upon the scenes
exhibited in the garden of Gethsemane, and on the top of Calvary; behold the
blessed Jesus, bearing our sins, carrying our sorrows, stricken, smitten of
GOD, and afflicted, that he might expiate our guilt; hear him crying 'it is
finished;' when he yielded up the Ghost; behold him rising from the dead,
exalted to the right hand of the Majesty on high, as our Advocate and
Intercessor, and preparing mansions in Glory for all who love him; dwell upon
these themes 'till your hearts melt, within you, and in the conquests of faith
you can exclaim, with Thomas, 'My LORD, and my GOD:' And come surround his
table, taste of his love, and prepare to dwell with him forever.

FINIS.

