The Spirit of Independence: AN ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE PROVIDENCE
ASSOCIATION OF MECHANICS AND MANUFACTURERS, AT THEIR ANNUAL ELECTION, April 14,
1800.

BY TRISTAM BURGES, A. M.

PRINTED BY B. WHEELER, PROVIDENCE. 1800.

At a Meeting of the Providence Association of Mechanics and Manufacturers on
Monday the 14th Day of April, A. D. 1800.
RESOLVED, That Messrs. Isaac Greenwood, Jeremiah Whiting, and Abel Allen be,
and they hereby, are appointed a Committee to wait on Tristam Burges, Esquire and
present him the Thanks of this Association for his very elegant and appropriate
Address delivered before them this Day, and request a Copy thereof for the
Press.

A true Copy: Witness, JOS. BALCH, Sec'ry.

TO the Association at whose Request this Oration is published, it is most
respectfully inscribed by

Their very humble Servant, TRISTAM BURGES.
Providence, April 15th, 1800.
AN ORATION.
Gentlemen of the Association,
TOday you commemorate the establishment of your Society. This anniversary
discovers the importance of your institution. On the present occasion, we
behold, not only the Members of your Association, every department of the
community seems to crowd about you, and laudably emulate your zeal for
improving the arts of our country. The ancients, our forefathers, and we
ourselves, have, by national festivals, ever delighted to solemnize the events
of war; because those events terminated hostilities, established the
sovereignty of empires, and in a manner secured the enjoyment of all the
tranquillity of peace. With singular propriety, then, do your fellow-citizens
unite with you, in the ceremonial of institutions, which cannot exist, unless
under the auspices of peace, the offspring of those mighty events. If, at such
times, our annual rejoicings have been great, because those events were
glorious, our celebration of these establishments will be had with still
greater joy, because they are more useful; for even deeds of glory cease to be
interesting, when they no longer have utility; and the effulgence of victory
herself loses the power to excite admiration, when once she becomes
destructive. The arts of peace, therefore, to which all other things are but
subservient, will forever remain most important, because they will forever
remain most useful.

THIS consideration greatly heightens the embarrassment of one who could never
without trembling publicly speak on the most trivial occasion. On the subject
before us, what can he say? Every thing has been anticipated by the
philosophizing sagacity of a Burrill, the dazzling imagination of a Maxcy, and
the all-exhausting copiousness of a Wilson. I feel the presumption of my
attempt; and nothing could have induced the undertaking, but a most ardent wish
to comply with the request of that order of the community, to which the first
habits of my life united me. Although for this task very little qualified by
nature, and still less by the discipline of early instruction; although the
duration of his residence among you scarcely entitles him to the indulgence of
an acquaintance, while the pecuniary circumstances of his life have hitherto
excluded him from the honors of citizenship; yet, Gentlemen, his appearing in
this place, before you, and at your appointment, communicates to the Orator of
the present occasion, a most undoubting assurance of your patronizing candor,
together with the liberal and polite attention of all that numerous, and
brilliant concourse of citizens, which seems to crowd every part of this august
temple.

GENTLEMEN, you associated for specific purposes. These must have been the
advancement of the mechanic interest, together with the general benefit of the
commonwealth. Skill in your Arts and Manufactures, economy in the distribution
of your benevolence, and a viligant attention to the interests of your order,
as they stand related to the great community, doubtless constituted the most
considerable objects of your institution. The means of forwarding these
intentions, and the importance of those objects which your union was formed to
secure lay before us materials for long discourse. Among these, you will say,
with me, that your anniversary Orator ought ever to find his theme. If I may be
permitted to tell how your designs might be advanced, I would first solicit
your attention to the improvement of your arts; and then say a few things
concerning their importance. On these arts, however, I would not be thought to
offer a word by way of instruction; for although the hand of my youth was
hardened by the toil of a most laborious trade, yet whatever I can advance on
these subjects, must be perfectly known to men, who have wiped from their brow
the sweat of mechanic labor through the heat of fifty summers.

NOTHING seems to me to comprehend more of the means of your improvement, than
your associated, and individual independence. Dependence, it is true, is the
principle of union throughout material and moral nature; but, it is also true,
that independence is the principle of individuality. It is this which makes
each being what it is, and preserves it in the exercise of its constituted
nature. There is, through all the universe, a principle by which each
particular being appropriates whatever it acquires to the perpetuation of its
own individual existence. -- This is but the principle of independence. Under
various names we every where behold it. In the inanimate world, it is called
attraction; in plants, vegetation; instinct, in mere animals; reason in man;
and independence in political associations. Destroy this appropriating
principle of independence, and nations would dissolve into unconnected
wanderers; men would cease to regard each other, because they would not feel
interested in themselves; brutes might wallow in the brook or trample on the
green herbage, but they would never make an effort to quench their thirst, or
satisfy their hunger; the verdure of spring never more could cloth the valley;
the rock on which we step would pulverize beneath our foot, and the earth
itself crumble into atoms too small for divisibility.

THOSE beings are most perfect in their kind, most completely subserve the
design of their creation, in which this principle is found most uninterrupted
in its operations. In the inanimate world, it is not often disturbed, and we,
therefore, see, that part of the universe, unvaryingly subserve the purposes of
animated, reasonable and social existence, the great and only design of its
creation. In plants, this principle is almost as steady. They vegetate, with
nearly the same certainty, that rain descends from the clouds, or rivers roll
away from their sources. Animals follow their honest instincts, and travel
round the circle of their existence just as certainly as spring renews the
green foliage of the oak. In man, this principle is violated. We see him, often
rash, or weak, and undecided. It is because he suffers his reason, the director
of his actions, the principle of his independence, the guardian of his
individuality, to remain uninstructed by knowledge, not strengthened by
frequent discipline, and often biased by passions. Such a reason will, one
moment, make a thousand resolves, and supercede them, by a thousand contrary
resolutions the next; and finally, when it determines to action, that
determination is as probably the will of another, as that of its possessor. --
Actions, originating from such a will, and such a reason, are puny and feeble,
like their parents; they deprave human nature, and diminish individuality by
increasing dependence. It is an informed, strong, and unbiased reason, which
gives energy to his will, and moves a man forward in the orbit of his nature,
like the Sun traveling through the fields of heaven. -- Such men are sufficient
for whatever God designed them. They are fraught with exhaustless resources,
and seem almost self-subsistent. Men of the opposite character are swallowed up
in the common mass of animated things; and if deprived of shapes and names they
would not retain one characteristeric of individuality.

IN political bodies, this principle is still more frequently violated. That
spirit of independence, which supports their existence, and ought to direct all
their actions, like the reason of an individual, often becomes weak,
unenlightened, and liable to influence in a thousand ways. Every society, like
every man, too ignorant, too weak, too pusilanimous, or, in one word, too
dependent, to direct its own actions, will forever find the intriguing, or the
powerful, ready to assume the direction of them. As this dependence increases,
their individuality fades away, until nothing of it remains but the name of
their incorporation. It is this huge Leviathan of dependence, stretched on the
political ocean, which swallows up even states and empires.

When once a corporation has lost its independence, when once its existence has
become merely nominal, the designs of its institution, whatever they may have
been, must be entirely lost. Let the improvement of home manufactures be the
design of an association, would this improvement be made if this association
were totally dependant on a collection of men, united to increase the
importation of foreign manufactures? If it were formed to encourrage
benevolence, would it not be destroyed by a dependence on an institution to
promote parsimony? -- If it were instituted to advance religion, or morals, or
arts, or science, when once its resolves, and its actions, were governed by a
society on which it was entirely dependant, and the object of whose institution
was entirely different from its own, would not the design of its union be lost
in that dependence which thus almost annihilates its existence? Let it,
therefore, Gentlemen, be remembered that nothing can secure, nothing can
forward, the design of your Association, when once its independence has
departed from it.

THIS independence of corporation, implies the independence of all those
individuals who compose it. It will not be possible to form an independent
Association from individuals who have any other dependencies than mutual ones.
If each citizen of the United States lived, and had no other means of living,
but by a pension from the King of Great Britain, where should we find the
independence of the Federal Government? If therefore, Gentlemen, your
Association be independent, every member of it will be independent.

THIS independence is a condition below the dissipation of wealth, and above
the solicitude of necessity; it is as far removed from the hurry of want, as
from the laziness of opulence; it is the parent of leisure, of that leisure
which ever associates itself with constant pursuit, and regular employment. --
Let us, Gentlemen, enquire how this independence can forward any of the designs
of your Association.

MEN in this condition, with too much of business ever to be idle, and too far
removed from want, ever to be hurried in the performance of their labor, will
not only finish their work with accuracy and skill, they will also lay the
perfecting hand of improvement on that art which employs their attention. But
the man, who is dependant, who is driven on in the performance of his task by
the commands of penurious necessity, will never have time to give his work a
perfect finishing. His productions will be the half formed result of hurried
application; scarred by the rapidity of a hasty hand; and among a multiplicity
of them you will search in vain to find a piece completed by the finishing
touches of an artist. For though want has been the ever teeming parent of
inventions; yet, like the indigent and widowed mother of a numerously
multiplied progeny of orphans, this prolifick parent of inventions has always
been compelled to leave them, unnurtured, without culture, and rude as when
they first received their existence. One mechanic of independence will give
more perfection to an art, than a host of "lean unwashed artificers," who,
driven on by penurious dependence "to their daily labors add the night."

IN all arts there is a science, a system of elementary rules, or first
principles, which may properly be denominated their philosophy. It is the
theory of the art; that part of it which stands opposed to practice; that which
exists in the mind, not that which employs the hand. Theory teaches the artist
what to do; practice guides him in the performance. The complete artist has,
not only accustomed his hand to all the curiously difficult operations of his
trade; but he has also made himself perfectly master of all its whole system of
scientifick principles, and is entirely a philosopher in his own profession. He
goes still further, and examines all that world of things which lies
immediately surrounding his daily employment. Nor is this applicable to the
less toilsome trades only. Even the rough son of Mulcerber has seen the steel
redden in the fire, and expand beneath the hammer; but this is not all. He has
learned their philosophy. He knows the power of the subtle, active, all
softening, all-dissipating element; and, in a thousand ways, can call "this
flaming minister" to aid his hand, and with a philosophic skill instruct is
whither to direct its blazing energies.

THE man who operates on principle, who unites theory and practice, who has
perfected philosophy by experiment, and become more skilful in experiment, by
the aid of philosophy, this man in his own trade is more sage than Newton, more
powerful than Franklin, and will produce, whatever of perfection, his art can
produce. But before he can do this, he must have rendered himself independent.
Little indeed can he philosophize, who must stand at the whistle of a thousand
dependencies; who suffers his mind to feel the whirl of an eternal rotation of
wants. Independence alone gives time for thought, and bestows that leisure in
which we can indulge curiosity, and pursue investigation. If therefore,
Gentlemen, you would perfect yourselves as artists, you must secure to
yourselves independence.

SKILL in art, is the effect of a habit, which, like all other habits, grows
from a repetition of precisely the same performance. The foot becomes
habituated to a frequent trodden path, and we pass over it with such facility
that the distance seems shortened. A man writes his name better than any other
word, because he is most habituated to writing it. One constant, unvaried, and
frequent operation, grows into a habit; and that habit gives the hand of the
artificer the easy, rapid, and dexterous movement, which is denominated skill.
To perfect skill, therefore, the operations of the hand should be as little
varied as possible. For when we forsake one operation for another, we
inevitably lose skill in that from which we departed; because, time obliterates
every thing, and those habits which custom has impressed on our system are worn
away by time. -- What we acquire in youth, unless retained by constant
practice, will escape from us in age. The mind must lose its ideas, the "right
hand its cunning." He then who would perfect his skill, must constantly apply
to one trade.

IT is an observation, not less true, than ancient, that he, who applies to a
multiplicity of trades, will be skillful at none of them. If he be, at one
time, a shipwright, at another, a carpenter, then a smith, a tailor, or a
shoemaker, we should wonder indeed if he were not a bungler at all his trades.
I have seen men who were sometimes, farmers, and, sometimes, artificers; the
consequence was, their lands were wretchedly cultivated, and all their work but
half finished. They might have been skilful husbandmen, or skilful artificers,
had they applied to one of these occupations only, but, perpetually exchanging,
they could not excel in either. Let, therefore, the smith remain a smith, the
carpenter, a carpenter; and each particular artificer uninterruptedly pursue
the trade to which from infancy he has accustomed his hand; for in this way
only can he cherish the young habits of his nature, and complete all his
productions with dexterity, and skill.

THIS can seldom be performed, in our country, by the sons of dependence.
Nothing, like unfeeling necessity, drives a man round the toilsome circuit of
all the trades. A want of employment, at one, hurries him into another; and,
the same day, you may see him sweating over the ax, driving the saw, or smoking
at the anvil. Independence only will save him from these vicissitudes. The
independent man will not be hurried in any one employment, nor obliged to
pursue many at the same time. He therefore can fix all his attention to one
kind of operation, and give every piece of his workmanship a perfect finishing.

I KNOW it may be said, that such a division of labor, as will confine each
man to one employment, is the effect of the populousness and luxury of a
country, not of the independence of its artificers. -- It is true, the wealthy
cities of Europe and Asia, open a market for every production of art. It is
true, artificers in those cities seldom know the sweets of independence. They
are the poor, pitiful, hirelings of the wealthy, and the powerful; or the
abject slaves of their own wants and extravagancies. Necessity alone urges them
to ply the hand; and a solicitude to please their proud patrons, and ornament
their pageantry, drives them to finish their work with anxious attention. With
them the completion of the artificer is the perfect degradation of the man.
They are not only servile, but ignorant. In London, where the meagre forms of
men are for life confined to pointing needles, or heading pins, we shall find
them indeed skilful in these occupations, but stupid beyond all conception, and
ignorant of every thing except the mere mechanic task which daily employs their
hands. Their minds are contracted to the narrow dimensions of their labor; the
little trade engrosses all the little man; and he has quite as much claim to
rationality, as the little tools with which he performs his work.

SURELY our Country would not improve arts and manufactures at such expense.
If, for every finished artificer, a citizen must be sacrificed, the gain will
be far short of the loss; and it were better to remain satisfied with the rude
productions of unpractised hands, than to degrade a large and intelligent part
of the community into pieces of mere mechanism. Consider, Gentlemen, the
amazing difference between our country, and those which have been populated
almost ever since the birth of creation. We have not, and long may we be
destitute of, the causes to perfect arts and manufactures, which have given
them perfection in the luxurious regions of Europe and Asia. Here they must owe
their improvement to the independence of their votaries; to that independence
which, while it gives power to confine their hands to the exercise of one art
only, leaves their minds possessed of leisure amply sufficient to study the
principles, the philosophy of their own profession.

IF independence be of so much importance in the improvements of arts, does it
not become a part of our subject? Will it not be proper for a moment to turn
our attention to the means of acquiring it? Every man may be independent; every
man who can so control his own wants, that he will have need of nothing which
he has not already obtained, or which it is in the power of any one to withhold
from him. Dependence does not inevitably grow out of a multiplicity of wants;
nor independence flourish amidst the immensity of possessions. We often see the
independent man clad in plain garments, while the sons of servility are robed
in gorgeous apparel. The whole art of independence consists in keeping our
desires within our power of gratifying them. While we do this, whether the
inventory of our goods and chattels be long, or short; whether our power be
narrow, or uncircumscribed, we shall lean on no man, we shall be influenced by
no man, but, lords, and sovereigns of ourselves, we shall be masters of our own
resolves. On the contrary, the moment we suffer our wants to advance beyond the
line of our ability, neither the wealth of both Indies, nor the power of an
ancient Caliph, can elevate us above the prostrate servility of dependence.

THERE has been introduced into our country a mode of living very unfriendly to
this noble spirit of which we are discoursing. We shall be convinced of this,
and perhaps discover a remedy for this public disease, by examining its origin
and progress. At the close of the revolutionary war, much of the public debt
was in the hands of men in needy circumstances. To relieve their own wants, and
support their families, they sold the price of their toil at a small part of
the nominal value. This began the first act in the great farce of American
speculation. The sale of lands followed; and these negociations were carried to
an amazing extent. Fortunes on paper were created in a day. Men rose at once
from penurious obscurity, and blazed, and dazzled in all the splendour of
opulence. They revelled in the luxuries of wealth; became ostentatious of their
riches; built houses, set up equipages, and furnished tables merely to show the
world how much money they could throw away.

THIS spirit of speculation spread, rapidly as the fogs of a vernal atmosphere,
until it had possessed every class of the community. All were making haste, not
only to be rich, but also to be luxurious. The bubble of imaginary wealth
raised millions to bask in the blaze of prosperity; millions who evidently
beheld in its broad transparent bosom all the glories of a new heaven and a new
earth. As it expanded they were elevated, until its fatal explosion, and they
found themselves struggling in the dirt from which they first emerged.

BUT when the phantom fled from our deluded country it left behind a foul
progeny; it left us all our habits of profusion and extravagance. The simple
manners and rigid economy of our ancestors, had been expelled from the nation;
the productions of our own soil could not regale our fastidious appetites; the
manufactures of our own country were too plain for her proud sons and
daughters; and our wants, originating from this source, have reduced us to a
servile dependence on foreign nations for our food and raiment.

IT is for you, Gentlemen, if you would be independent, to restore primitive
plainness. In the American war, when our country struggled with unutterable
difficulties, how did the spirit of our ancestors walk abroad in the majesty of
independence? Beauty was then clad in garments which her own hand had wrought;
and blushing in unadorned loveliness, felt secure of conquest without the aid
of Asiatic or European auxiliaries. Those who then fought, waited not until
they could be robed in purple, and fine linen; but, dressed from the loom where
our mothers toiled to cloth their sons for the long campaign, they rushed from
their native hills, terrible in the battles of their country, and victorious
over her foes. The temperance, the economy, the simplicity, the industry of
those times, would render our country independent of every nation on earth; and
each individual of us entirely independent of all the influence of his
neighbors, and perfectly master of his own resolves.

LOOK out, and behold the independence of all creation. The oak grows from the
earth, drinks the dewy showers, warms by the rays of summer noon, and expands
its verdant foliage to the sweeping breeze of evening; yet, though fed, and
supported, by all the elements of nature, it leans to none of them, but lifts
its branches toward heaven, and rears its head aloft in all the majesty of
independence. -- The ox on the plain lows without permission from a neighbor
grazer. The wolf asks not his kindred prowler of the forest when he may leave
his rocky den, stalk down from the mountain, or howl to the dismal responses of
midnight echo. Even the dog, that fawns on man so much, begs not a brother dog
for leave to bark. Every thing but man preserves its native independence.

IF, therefore, Gentlemen, independence be the preserving principle of the
Universe; if the brutes by their instincts, and the very trees by silent
example seem to teach it to man; if the influence of it preserves the existence
of nations; if the designs of your Association must expire when they shall no
longer be nurtered by this principle; if in our country your arts cannot
flourish unless they flourish under its fostering hand, then let independence
be the great mystery of all your trades, the first and last maxim of your lives.

SHOULD any imagine this path to mechanical improvement, steep of ascent, and
difficult to be trodden, let them with me, a little while, contemplate the
importance of those arts; and they cannot then want motives to animate, and to
urge their exertions. To speak on this part of the subject is difficult indeed;
for it is scarcely possible to look out a point of beginning, or to fix any
ultimate boundary to discourse. I can see nothing; I can think of nothing,
which does not hold up to me the importance of your arts. Convenience is
indebted to them no less than superfluity; and it would be difficult to say
whether they most advance the utilities or the ornaments of life. Is there any
thing commodious, useful, or ornamental; is their any thing beautiful, grand,
sublime, or magnificent, among the works of men, which did not originate from
them, as naturely, and as necessarily as streams originate from their fountains.

LOOK at your white ensign which to day has waved in the winds of heaven. The
world of mechanic philosophy is epitomized on that wonderful production of
nature's admired copiest, and arts most ingenious pupil.

WHAT built the numerous cities, what raised the vast palaces which glitter
along the shores of our country? What spread this town on the banks of a river
once rolling its black waves through the shaggy bosom of a forest? Whence those
edifices, catching the gazing attention of the traveller? Whence this temple,
reared on ground, where erst the unhallowed foot of barbarity beat the shaded
sod? This lofty temple, whose broad front blazes so far in the sunbeams of
evening, whose consecrated dome so often re echos with the sound of morning
hallelujahs. -- All these grew up under the fostering hand of mechanic arts;
and all these are but a small part of their many productions. It would be
endless to trace them through all their connexions with the most important
transactions of man; to tell how by them war is armed with all his terrors; by
them peace is robed in all her allurements; by them agriculture "hews the hard
rock, and harrows up the plain;" by them commerce freights the wealth of every
clime, associates the nations of distant worlds, and encircles every region of
the earth in one broad horizon.

THE improvement of mechanic arts in our country will expand into vast
importance, when we consider our immense importation of foreign manufactures.
We know that from thence our ships are rigged for the sea; from thence our
houses receive their ornaments; and the very beds on which we repose ourselves
are fitted up, and sent to us by foreigners. We are, every one of us, dressed
by other nations. Columbian beauty wraps her white limbs in the lawn of a
foreign loom; and the valor of America does not yet disdain to wear a British
livery. The materials of which these were wrought, perhaps, were worth one
hundredth part the price at which we purchase them. Nine hundred of every
thousand dollars, paid by us for imported manufactures, rewards the superior
skill of the foreign artist. These must be obtained in exchange for the
unwrought productions of our own soil. How vastly against us the balance in
this exchange. What a trifle, growing on the plains of Flanders, or the hills
of China, will, before it arrives at the hands of one of our husbandmen,
purchase the labors of his whole year. I have seen the company, at a
birth-night ball, glittering in the spoils of a hundred seasons. Imagine,
therefore, if you can, Gentlemen, imagine, a subject more important, more
interesting, to our country than the improvement of American arts and
manufactures; for until we can excel foreigners, this importation cannot be
prevented. Will not, then, the improvement of your arts be a rich reward for
all the labor it can cost you?

THE importance of your arts will be still more conspicuous, if we consider the
political influence of that noble spirit of independence by which they are
cherished and improved. In all countries wealth is power; and therefore the
most wealthy are the most powerful. He, who can support one man, will be more
powerful, than he, who cannot support one. If one thousand pounds a year will
feed ten dependents, ten thousand pounds a year will feed one hundred. Every
accession of wealth will produce a new accession of power. Thus it was over all
Europe in the days of feudal dominion. The tyrant, whether a prince, or a lord,
who could, by parceling out his lands, pay the greatest number of soldiers, was
ever most powerful. Thus it is in the Ottoman realms at this day. The Grand
Seignor is sole proprietor of all the lands; and these constitute the whole
wealth of the empire. He is, therefore, the unresisted, and undisputed lord,
not only of the services, but of the lives, of his trembling vassals.

THE genius of our government is not like those; but though vastly different, it
is quite as liable to be wielded by that kind of power. Although every thing with
us is done by suffrage; yet he, who can bring to the place of election, one
thousand, who eat bread from his table, will be as powerful, as a thousand
whose wealth can support none of these dependents. Here we behold the birth of
aristocracies; and they grow up, and gather strength, from all those causes
which collect the wealth of a nation into the hands of a few. Great individual
wealth has an influence, hostile to the first principles of our government.
This influence ought to be opposed, or, like a troubled ocean, it will break in
upon us, and deluge the liberties of our nation. In this opposition nothing can
be so efficient as individual independence; as that spirit by which your arts
must be fostered, and improved; that spirit which will animate every artificer,
whose habits of life set him beyond reliance on the rich, whose professional
skill renders him necessary to the luxurious, and whose erect and independent
soul will never lean from its own basis to support the powerful.

ALTHOUGH this country has not felt the effects of exorbitant individual wealth,
although no proud aristocracy hitherto has laid its massy hand on this
government; yet if ever accident, or any permanent cause, should throw too much
wealth into the hands of a few, this spirit of power, "this goblin damned,"
would rise secretly, like "the pestilence that walks in darkness;" or
gathering audacity from an accumulation of the causes which first gave it
existence, it would finally stalk abroad at noonday, in all the haughty forms
of usurped authority, and insolent oppression. If ever this should happen in
our country, then would an independence like yours, the independence of
numerous, intelligent, and respectable citizens, be too mighty for this genius
of mischief, and hie him back to the foul region from which he arose.

THINK not, Gentlemen, that I would degrade your Association into a democratic
club. These clubs are the birth places of party spirit. Here young faction is
cradled, and nursed, until with gigantic limbs stalking forth he can trample on
law, religion, and humanity. That independence, which I would recommend, is not
the independence of a party, but of the individual. It is the independence of a
man, and not of a faction. Its votary is of no party, he is of the community.
You, therefore, Gentlemen, in guarding against the influence of wealth, will
never enquire from what department of the community that influence originated.
In these political efforts, you will never stand forth as a mechanic
association, but as so many unconnected individuals, taught by long habits of
independence, to oppose every influence which may rise up to overthrow the
principles of our government.

THE importance of your arts will shine with the most engaging luster, when we
behold their improvement collecting you together as a benevolent association.
Although our country feeds most of her children with a liberal profusion, yet
many, and many, are the sons and daughters of want. Truly was it said to
mortals; "The poor you always have with you." That host of contingencies which
perpetually war against human hopes, can, and often do, in a day, lay waste all
our expectations. Have you not seen those whose bounty fed thousands reduced to
the necessity of begging? How often death transfixes with one dart two kindred
bosoms; and leaves their young orphans, the tender blossoms of their love, to
be blighted by the cold unkindness of a world! Few are the joys of many. They
seldom taste the wholesome meal, or feel the warm garment, or see the bright
fire. Often do they stand the barefooted companions of unhoused nakedness,
shivering in the howling winds of December midnight.

SHALL they be doomed to ceaseless wretchedness? Will not charity nourish them
in her own bosom? For their relief, and for our joy in relieving them, has not
the hand of nature woven the fine filaments of compassion into the texture of
our hearts? That benevolence, Gentlemen, which your Association inculcates,
will never pass by them on the other side of the way. You will cheer their
gloomy abodes with the voice of consolation. You will cause the widowed heart
to sing for joy. You will rescue young innocence from the temptations of cruel
necessity; and lead those by the hand who have none to direct their steps. How
then do your arts rise in importance when benevolence becomes the inseparable
companion of their improvement!

I FEEL still an additional proof of the importance of your Association, when I
behold assembled on the present occasion, so large a collection of such
Apprentices. Young Gentlemen, we all rejoice to see you here; to me it is
doubly grateful. It brings back to memory the days of my own apprenticeship.
What my Master, my Father, then taught me, I will now say to you. Be not
satisfied, before you perfectly know, whatever you undertake to learn. If there
be any excellence in your trade, if there be any praise which can be merited by
you, cease not to labor, and to meditate, until you have obtained that
excellence, until you have deserved that praise. Youth is the stuff of which
your whole characters must be wrought. If you waste this, or work it up into
vicious habits your characters will be contemptible, and your lives wretched.
The idle boy will be an idle man; the ignorant boy will be an ignorant man; the
vicious boy will be a vicious man You never saw a man, idle, and ignorant, and
vicious, who was not poor, and despised, and miserable. If, therefore, you
would be happy and respectable men, you must now be industrious, sober, and
thoughtful; you must turn your eyes from every temptation, nor even set a foot
in the path of vice.

YOU have parents whose hearts throb with anxiety for your success in life.
Your prosperity will cheer them to the very evening of their days; your ruin
would carry them sorrowing to the grave. Your Masters have this day presented
you to the public; and in this hallowed temple, with the eyes of all this
assembly upon you, they now consecrate you to your country. Remember you must
one day become citizens, you must one day solemnize the rites of this society;
and when your masters shall be taken from your head, may a double portion of
the spirit of this institution, like the mantle of the departing prophet,
forever rest upon you.

SINCE these things are so, Gentlemen, what shall we say? Can you purchase the
objects of your Association at a price too dear? Will you reluct at any toil,
any perseverance, any sacrifice of superfluity? Will you not cultivate those
arts which furnish man with all his accommodations, all his ornaments? What
though art can never equal nature; though she cannot give that endless variety
which blossoms round the globe; though she cannot arrange like the system of the
Universe, nor spread over her works the coloring of the rainbow, nor touch
them with that polish which shines on the front of heaven; yet can she continue
to invent, and to improve the productions of those inventions, until the world
of art shall blush with a beauty, almost as perfected, as the creation of
nature. Shall a country like ours, so rich in soil, so multifarious in
productions, stoop to depend on other nations for the necessaries of life? When
will Columbia, like another China, distribute her rich wrought manufactures to
every nation of the globe? Will you not lure improvement from the embattled
shores of Europe? Already she stands on the margin of the deep, trembling at
the thunder of war. How long shall she look wishfully over the wide Atlantic,
and hope in vain to behold the sail whitening on the horizon; the sail which
shall waft her to the bosom of her sister liberty, in the peaceful, and happy
regions of our country? Shall not arts be cultivated? Does not the genius of
independence give them to flourish into perfection? Yes, that mighty genius of
independence, who, strong as the angel wielding the four winds of heaven, holds
over our government the broad aegis of protection, while law, and freedom, and
morality, and religion, sit smiling beneath its ample shade. Is there not in
benevolence, in goodness, a charm of almighty allurement? Is it not all we love
in mortals, all we adore in God? Is it not circled in the embrace of your
institution? Does not the tearful eye of distress every hour call it into
exercise. Persevere then, Gentlemen, we know you will persevere; we know you
will pursue the path of improvement; we know you will perfect the noble designs
of your institution; and we know while you imitate the handy work of the Great
Master Builder of the Universe, you will feel the full blaze of his divine
munificence kindling in your souls the ardent glow of benevolence.

ODES, PERFORMED AT THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION OF THE OFFICERS OF THE PROVIDENCE
ASSOCIATION OF MECHANICS AND MANUFACTURERS, ON Monday, April 14, 1800.

Ode First, Composed by Paul Allen, Esquire.
GENIUS of Art when we survey,
Thy works, our minds with rapture glow,
The rising and the setting day
Display thy wonders here below.
Our bosoms own thy magic power,
Our native dignity we scan,
And feel at every passing hour,
The inborn majesty of man.
The massy pyramids that rise,
And over the humble cottage frown,
The lofty towers that prop the skies,
Are monuments of thy renown.
Behold the savage quits his bow,
Forsakes his wild ferocious clan,
He feels the genial current flow,
And mellows into social man.
Yon field of flax which summer gales,
Wave as they sweep along the plain,
Transformed by art to swelling sails,
Shall waft our glory over the main.
Where mines of min'ral dark and drear,
Lay covered with the mountain heap,
Arts mighty Genius whispers here,
Columbia's future thunders sleep.
Ode Second, Composed by Paul Allen, Esquire.
COLD was the earth and dark the skies,
No vernal beauty bloomed,
The wild flower spread its crimson dies,
And barren heaths perfumed.
Wide as an Angel's eye could ken,
The tangling desert lay,
And scarce the cottages of men,
Would mark the length of way.
The hunger famished Wolf with ire,
Would pace the shades of night,
While children at the winter fire,
Sat shivering with affright.
Mechanic Art! thy mighty hand,
Dispels the midnight gloom,
We view the heath with flowers expand,
And bursting into bloom.
Let there be light, the Almighty said,
And shook the vast profound,
Dark midnight threw aside her shade,
Creation sparkled round.
The hills with flagrance seemed to breathe,
The birds were heard to sing,
While all creation blushed beneath,
The rosy-footed Spring.
'Twas by thine aid Almighty Art,
The world beheld this light,
And should thy heavenly beams depart,
Would sink obscured in night.
Ode Third, Composed by Paul Allen, Esquire.
CONTENT, thou dear object of all our desires,
To thee the fond bosom with rapture aspires;
Poor mortals deluded thy phantom pursue;
We never possess, though we keep thee in view.
Had Adam, our father, thy beauty but known,
Serene as the morning his days would have flown,
All nations and ages had bowed to thy reign,
Nor pity's soft Angel would ever complain.
Dame Nature foresaw what her sons would endure,
And like a fond parent provided a cure;
She called fair Invention her aid to impart,
That handmaid of Science and glory of Art.
Fair Science that lately in caverns unknown,
Repined like a vestal, forlorn and alone;
On wings of Invention exulting shall rise,
And measure her flight with the bounds of the skies.
Those men whom the love of their country has fired
Who smiled in the arms of applause, and expired;
From tombs more resplendently rise to the views,
Applauded by Senates, and sung by the Muse.
All hail then, Invention, thy blessings bestow,
To brighten the prospects of mortals below;
The Arts and the Sciences both shall combine,
With chaplets of glory to cover thy shrine.

