[CHEAP RESPOSITORY.] [No. VIII]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers; Or, the History of Mr. BRAGWELL.

PART IV.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JoHNSON, No. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800. [Price 4 Cents Or 2s. 4d. per. doz.]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers, etc PART IV.
AS soon as it was sold, Bragwell again said softly to Worthy, "Five from
fifty, and there remain forty-five. The dinner and drink will not cost me five
pounds, and I have got fifty more than the land was worth. Spend a shilling to
gain a pound, this is what I call practical Arithmetic, Mr. Worthy."

Mr. Worthy was glad to get out of this scene; and seeing that his friend was
quite sober, he resolved as they rode hom^ to deal plainly with him. Bragwell
had found out among his calculations, that some sins could only be committed by
a prudent man one at a time. For instance* he knew that a man could not well
get rich and get drunk at the same mome^^ but he had found out that some vices
made very good company together; so, while he had watched himself in drinking,
l^st he should become as unfit to sell as his guests were to buy, he had
indulged without measure in the good dinner he had provided. Mr. Worthy, I say,
seeing him able to bear reason, rebuked him for this day's proceedings with
some severity. Bragwell bore his reproofs with that sort of patience which
arises from an opinion of one's own wisdom, and a recent flush of prosperity.
He behaved with that good humor which grows out of vanity and good luck. "You
are too squemish, Mr. Worthy," said he, "I have done nothing discreditable.
These men came with their eyes open. There is no compulsion used. They are free
to bid or to let it alone. I make them welcome, and I shall not be thought a
bit the worse of tomorrow, when they are sober. Others do it besides me, and I
shall never be ashamed of any thing as long as I have custom on my side.

Worthy. "I am sorry, Mr. Bragwell, to hear you support such practices by such
arguments. There is not perhaps a more dangerous snare to the souls of men than
is to be found in that word CUSTOM. It is a word invented to reconcile
corruption with credit and sin with safety. But no custom, no fashion, no
combination of men to set up a false standand can ever make a wrong action
right. That a thing is often done, is so far from a proof of its being right,
that it is the very reason which will set a thinking man to inquire if it be
not really wrong, lest he should be following "a multitude to do evil." Right
is right, though only one man in a thousand pursues it, and wrong will be for
ever wrong, though it be the allowed practice of the other nine hundred and
ninety-nine. If this shameful custom is really common, which I can hardly
believe, that is a fresh reason why a conscientious man should set his face
against it. And I must go so far as to say (you will excuse me Mr. Bragwell)
that I see no great difference in the eye of conscience, whatever there may be
in the eye of law, between your making a man lose his reason, and then getting
50 guineas out of his pocket because he has lost it, and your picking the fifty
guineas out of his pocket if you had met him dead drunk in his way ^ome
tonight. Nay, he who meets a man already drunk and robs him, commits but one
sin, while he who makes him drunk first that he may rob him afterward, commits
two."

Bragwell gravely replied, "Mr. Worthy, while I have the practice of people of
credit to support me, and the law of the land to protect me, I see no reason to
be ashamed of any thing I do." -- "Mr. Bragwell, answered Worthy, a truly
honest man is not always looking sharp about him, to see how far custom and the
law will bear him out; if he be honest on principle he will consult the law of
his conscience, and if he be a Christian he will consult the written law of God.

Notwithstanding this rebuff, Mr. Bragwell got home in high spirits, for no
arguments could hinder him from feeling that he had the 50 guineas in his
purse. As soon as he came in, he threw the money he had received on the table,
and desired his wife to lock it up. Instead of receiving it with her usual
satisfaction, she burst into a violent fit of passion, and threw it back to
him. "You may keep your cash yourself, said she. It is all over: we want no
more money. You are a ruined man! A wicked creature, scraping and working as we
have done for her!" Bragwe^l trembled, but durst not ask what he dr^aded to
hear. His wife spared him the trouble, by crying out, as soon as her rage
permitted, "Polly is gone off!" Poor Bragwell's heart sunk within him; he grew
sick and giddy, and as his wife's rage swallowed up her grief, so in his grief
he almost forgot his anger. The purse fell from his hand, and he cast a look of
anguish upon it, finding, for the first time, that it could not relieve his
misery.

Mr. Worthy, who though much concerned, was less discomposed now, called to
mind that the young lady had not returned with her mother and sister the night
before: he begged Mrs. Bragwell to explain the sad story. She, instead of
soothing her husband, fell to reproaching him. "It is all your fault, said she,
you were a fool for your pains. If I had had my way, the girls never would have
kept company with any but men of substance." "Mrs, Bragwell," said Worthy, "If
she has chosen a bad man, it would be still a misfortune, even though he had
been rich." "O that would alter the case," said she; "a fat sorrow is better
than a lean one. But to marry a beggar!" Here Miss Betsey who stood sullenly
by, put in a word, and said, "her sister, however, had not disgraced herself by
having married a Farmer or a Tradesman, she had at least made choice of a
Gentleman." "What marriage! what Gentleman," cried the afflicted father. "Tell
me the worst!" He was now informed that his darling daughter was gone off with
a strolling player, who had been acting in the neighboring villages lately.
Miss Betsey again put in, saying, "he was no stroller, but a gentleman in
disguise, who only acted for his own diversion," "Does he so," said the now
furious Bragwell, "then he shall be transported for mine. At this moment a
letter was brought him from his new son-in-law, who desired his leave to wait
upon him, and implore his forgiveness. He owned he had been shopman to a
haberdasher, but thinking his person and talents ought not to be thrown away
upon trade, and being also a little behind hand he had taken to the stage with
a view of making his fortune. That he had married Miss Bragwell entirely for
love, and was sorry to mention so paltry a thing as money, which he despised,
but that his wants were pressing, his landlord, to whom he was in debt, having
been so vulgar as to threaten to send him to prison. He ended with saying, "I
have been obliged to shock your daughter's delicacy, by confessing my unlucky
real name; I believe I owe part of my success to my having assumed that of
Augustus Frederick Theodosious. She is inconsolable at this confession, which,
as you are now my father. I must also make to you, and subscribe myself, with
many blushes, your dutiful son,

TIMOTHY INCLE."


"O," cried the afflicted father, as he tore the letter in a rage. "Miss
Bragwell married to a strolling actor! How shall I bear it?" "Why, I would not
bear it at all," cried the enraged mother. "I would never see her, I would
never forgive her. I would let her starve at one corner of the barn, while that
rascal, with all those Pagan, popish names, was ranting away at the other."
"Nay," said Miss Betsey, "If he is only a shopman, and if his name be really
Timothy Incle; I would never forgive her neither. But who would have thought it
by his looks, and by his monstrous genteel behavior."

"Come, come," said Mr. Worthy, "were he really an honest haberdasher, I should
think there was no other harm done, except the disobedience of the thing. Mr.
Bragwell, this is no time to blame you, or hardly to reason with you. I feel
for you sincerely. I ought not perhaps, just at present, to reproach you for
the mistaken manner in which you have bred up your daughters. Your error has
brought its punishment along with it. You now see, because you now feel, the
evil of a false education. It has ruined your daughter, your whole plan has led
to some such end. The large sums you spent to qualify them as you thought for a
high station, could do them nothing but harm, while your habits of life
properly confined them to company of a lower station. While they were better
dressed than the daughters of the first gentry, they were worse taught than the
daughters of your plowmen. Their vanity has been raised by excessive finery,
and kept alive by excessive flattery. Every evil temper has been fostered by
indulgence. Their pride has never been controled. Their self-will has never
been turned. Their idleness has laid them open to every temptation, and their
abundance has enabled them to gratify every desire. Their time, that precious
talent, has been entirely wasted. Every thing they have been taught to do is of
no use, while they are utterly unacquainted with all which they ought to have
known. I deplore Miss Polly's false step. That she should have married a
runaway shopman, turned stroller, I truly lament. But for what husband was she
qualified? For the wife of a Farmer she was too idle. For the wife of a
tradesman she was too expensive. For the wife of a Gentleman she was too
ignorant. You yourself was most to blame. You expected her to act wisely,
though you never taught her that fear of God which is the beginning of wisdom.
I owe it to you, as a friend, and to myself as a Christian to declare, that
your practices in the common transactions of life, as well as your present
misfortune, are almost the natural consequences of those false principles,
which I protested against when you were at my* house.

Mrs. Bragwell attempted several times to interrupt Mr. Worthy, but her husband
would not permit it. He felt the force of all his friend said and encouraged
him to proceed. Mr. Worthy thus went on. "It grieves me to say how much your
own indiscretion has contributed even to bring on your present misfortune. You
gave your countenance to this very company of strollers, though you knew they
were acting in defiance to the laws of the land, to say no worse. They go from
town to town, and barn to barn, stripping the the poor of their money, the
young of their innocence, and all of their time. Do you remember with how much
pride you told me that you had bespoke The bold Stroke for a Wife, for the
benefit of this very Mr. Frederic Theodosious? To this pernicious ribaldry you
not only carried your own family, but wasted I know not how much money in
treating your workmen's wifes and children, in these hard times too, when they
have scarcely bread to eat or a shoe on their feet. And all this only that you
might have the absurd pleasure of seeing those flattering words. By Desire of
Mr. Bragwell, stuck up in Print at the Public-house, on the Blacksmith's shed,
at the Turnpike-gate, and on the Barn-door."

Mr. Bragwell acknowledged, that his friend's rebuke was but too just, and he
looked so very contrite as to raise the pity of Mr. Worthy, who, in a mild
voice, thus went on. "What I have said is not so much to reproach you with the
ruin of one daughter, as from a desire to save the other. Let Miss Betsey go
home with me. I do not undertake to be her jailer, but I will be her friend.
She will find in my daughters, kind companions, and in my wife a prudent guide.
I know she will dislike us at first, but I do not despair in time of convincing
her that a sober, humble, useful, pious life is as necessary to make us happy
on earth, as it is to fit us for heaven."

Poor Miss Betsey, though she declared it would be frightful dull, and
monstrous vulgar, and dismal melancholy, yet she was so terrified at the
discontent and grumbling which she would have to endure at home, that she
sullenly consented. She had none of that filial tenderness which led her to
wish to stay and sooth and comfort her afflicted father. All she thought about
was to get out of the way of her mother's ill-humour, and to carry so much
finery as to fill the Miss Worthies with envy and respect. Poor girl! She did
not know that envy was a feeling they never indulged: and that fine clothes was
the last thing to draw their respect. Mr. Worthy took her home next day. When
they reached his house, they found there young wilson, Miss Betsey's old
admirer. She was much pleased at this, and resolved to treat him well. But her
good or ill treatment now signified but little. This young Grazier reverenced
Mr. Worthy's character, and since he had met him at the Lion, had been thinking
what a happiness it would be to marry a young woman bred up by such a father.
He had heard much of the modesty a discretion of both the daughters, but his
inclination now determined him in favor of the elder.

Mr. Worthy, who knew him to be a young man of good sense and sound principles,
allowed him to become a visitor at his house, but deferred his consent to the
marriage till he knew him more thoroughly. Mr. Wilson, from what he saw of the
domestic piety of this family, improved daily both in the knowledge and
practice of religion, and Mr. Worthy soon formed him into a most valuable
character. During this time Miss Bragwell's hopes had revived, but though she
appeared in a new dress almost every day, she had the mortification of being
beheld with great indifference by one whom she had always secretly liked. Mr.
Wilson married before her face a girl who was greatly her inferior in fortune,
person and appearance, but who was humble, frugal, meek and pious. Miss
Bragwell now strongly felt the truth of what Mr. Wilson had once told her,
"that a woman may make an excellent partner for a dance, who would make a very
bad one for life."

Mr. Bragwell was so much afflicted at the disgraceful marriage of his
daughter, who ran off with Timothy Incle, the strolling-player, that he never
fully recovered his spirits. His cheerfulness which had arisen from an high
opinion of himself, had been confirmed by a constant flow of uninterrupted
success; and that is a sort of cheerfulness which is very liable to be
impaired, because it lies at the mercy of every accident and cross event in
life. But though his pride was now disappointed, his misfortunes had not taught
him any humility, because he had not discovered that they were caused by his
own fault; nor had he acquired any patience or submission, because he had not
learnt that all afflictions come from the hand of God to awaken us to a deep
sense of our sins, and to draw off our hearts from the perishing vanities of
this life. Besides, Mr. Bragwell was one of those people, who, even if they
would be thought to bear with tolerable submission such trials as appear to be
sent more immediately from Providence, yet think they have a sort of right to
rebel at every misfortune which befalls them through the fault of a
fellow creature; as if our fellow creatures were not the agents and instruments
by which Providence often sees fit to try or to punish us.

This imprudent daughter, Bragwell would not be brought to see or forgive, nor
was the degrading name of Mrs. Incle ever allowed to be pronounced in his
hearing. He had loved her with an excessive and undue affection; and while she
gratified his vanity by her beauty and finery, he deemed her faults of little
consequence; but when she disappointed his ambition by a disgraceful marriage,
all his natural affection only served to increase his resentment. Yet, though
he regretted her crime less than his own mortification, he never ceased in
secret to lament her loss. She soon found out she was undone, and wrote in a
strain of bitter repentance to ask his forgiveness. She owned that her husband,
whom she had supposed to be a man of fashion in disguise, was a low person in
distressed circumstances. She implored that her father, though he refused to
give her husband that fortune for which alone it was now too plain he had
married her, would at least allow her some subsistence, for that Mr. Incle was
much in debt, and she feared in danger of a gaol. The father's heart was half
melted at this account, and his affection was for a time awakened. But Mrs.
Bragwell opposed his sending her any assistance. She always made it a point of
duty never to forgive; "for she said it only encouraged those who had done
wrong once to do worse next time. For her part she had never yet been guilty of
so mean and pitiful a weakness as to forgive any one; for to pardon an injury
always showed either want of spirit to feel it, or want of power to resent it.
She was resolved she would never squander the money for which she had worked
early and late, on a baggage who had thrown herself away on a beggar while she
had a daughter single who might raise her family by a great match." I am sorry
to say that Mrs. Bragwell's anger was not owing to the undutifulness of the
daughter, or the worthlessness of the husband; poverty was in her eyes the
grand crime. The doctrine of forgiveness, a a religious principle, made no more
^ part of Mr. Bragwell's system than of h^^ wife's, but in natural feeling,
particular^^ for this offending daughter, he much exceeded her.

In a few months, the youngest Miss Bragwell desired leave to return home from
Mr. Worthy's. She had, indeed* only consented to go thither as a less ev^^ of
the two than staying in her father'^ house after her sister's elopement. B^^
the sobriety and simplicity of Mr. Worthy's family were irksome to her. Habit^
of vanity and idleness were become so rooted in her mind, that any degree of
restraint was a burden; and though s^^ was outwardly civil, it was easy to see
that she longed to get away. She resolved, however, to profit by her sister's
faults; and made her parents easy by assuring them she never would throw
herself away on a man who was worth nothing. Encouraged by these promises,
which were all that her parents thought they could in reason expect, her father
allowed her to come home.

Mr. Worthy, who accompanied her, found Mr. Bragwell gloomy and dejected. As
his house was no longer a scene of vanity and festivity, Mr. Bragwell tried to
make himself and his friend believe that he was grown religious; whereas he was
only become discontented. As he had always fancied that piety was a melancholy
gloomy thing, and as he felt his own mind really gloomy, he was willing to
think he was growing pious. He had, indeed, gone more constantly to church, and
had taken less pleasure in feasting and cards, and now and then read a chapter
in the Bible, but all this was because his spirits were low, and not because
his heart was changed. The outward actions were more regular, but the inward
man was the same. The forms of religion were resorted to as a painful duty; but
this only added to his misery, while he was utterly ignorant of its spirit and
power. He still, however, reserved religion as a loathsome medicine, to which
he feared he must have recourse at last and of which he even now considered
every abstinence from pleasure, or every exercise of piety as a bitter dose.
His health also was impaired, so that his friend found him in a pitiable state,
neither able to receive pleasure from the world, which he so dearly loved, nor
from religion which he so greatly feared. He expected to have been much
commended by Worthy for the change in his way of life; but Worthy, who saw that
the alteration was only owing to the loss of animal spirits, and to the casual
absence of temptation, was cautious of flattering him too much. "I thought, Mr.
Worthy," said he, "to have received more comfort from you. I was told too, that
religion was full of comfort, but I do not find much in it." You were told the
truth, replied Worthy, Religion is full of comfort, but you must first be
brought into a state fit to receive it before it can become so; you must be
brought to a deep and humbling sense of sin. To give you comfort while you are
puffed up with high thoughts of yourself, would be to give you a strong cordial
in a high fever. Religion keeps back her cordials till the patient is lowered
and emptied; emptied of self, Mr. Bragwell. If you had a wound, it must be
examined and cleansed, aye, and probed too, before it would be safe to put on a
healing plaster. Curing it to the outward eye, while it was corrupt at bottom,
would only bring on a mortification, and you would be a dead man while you
trusted that the plaster was curing you. You must be, indeed, a Christian,
before you can be entitled to the comforts of Christianity. -- I am a
Christian, said Bragwell, many of my friends are Christians, but I do not see
it has done us much good. -- Christianity itself, answered Worthy, cannot make
us good unless it be applied to our hearts. Christian privileges will not make
us Christians unless we make use of them. On that shelf I see stands your
medicine. The doctor orders you to take it. " Have you taken it?" -- Yes,
replied Bragwell. Are you the better for it? said Worthy. -- I think I am, he
replied. -- But, added Worthy, are you the better because the doctor has
ordered it merely, or because you have also taken it? -- What a foolish
question, cried Bragwell. Why to be sure the doctor might be the best doctor,
and his physic the best physic in the world; but if it stood forever on the
shelf, I could not expect to be cured by it. My doctor is not a mountebank. He
does not pretend to cure by a charm. The physic is good, and as it suits my
case, though it is bitter, I take it. -- You have now, said Worthy, explained
undesignedly the reason why Religion does so little good in the world. It is
not a mountebank; it does not work by a charm; but offers to cure your worst
corruptions by wholesome, though sometimes bitter prescriptions. But you will
not take them; you will not apply to God with the same earnest desire to be
healed with which you apply to your doctor; you will not confess your sins to
the one as honestly as you tell your symptoms to the other, nor read your Bible
with the same faith and submission with which you take your medicine. In
reading it, however, you must take care not to apply to yourself the comforts
which are not suited to your case. You must, by the grace of God, be brought
into a condition to be entitled to the promises, before you can expect the
comfort of them. Conviction is not conversion; that worldly discontent which is
the effect of worldly disappointment, is not that godly sorrow which works
repentance. Besides, while you have been pursuing all the gratifications of the
world, do not complain that you have not all the comforts of Religion too.
Could you live in the full enjoyment of both, the Bible would not be true.

Bragwell now seemed resolved to set about the matter in earnest, but he
resolved in his own strength; and, unluckily, the very day Mr. Worthy took
leave, there happened to be a grand ball at the next town, on account of the
assizes. An assize-ball is a scene to which gentleman and ladies periodically
resort to celebrate the crimes and calamities of their fellow creatures by
dancing and music, and to divert themselves with feasting and drinking, while
unhappy wretches are receiving sentence of death.

To this ball Miss Bragwell went, dressed out with a double portion of finery,
pouring out on her own head the whole band-box of feathers and flowers her
sister had left behind her. While she was at the ball her father formed many
plans of religious reformation; he talked of lesssening his business, that he
might have more leisure for devotion; though not just now, while the markets
were so high; and then he began to think of sending a handsome subscription to
the infirmary; though, on second thoughts, he concluded he need not be in a
hurry, but leave it in his will, but to give, and repent, and reform, were
three things he was bent upon. But when his daughter came home at night, so
happy and so fine, and telling how she had danced with Squire Squeeze the great
corn contractor, and how many fine things he had said to her, Mr. Bragwell felt
the old spirit of the world return in its full force. A marriage with Mr.
Dashall Squeeze, the contractor, was beyond his hopes, for Mr. Squeeze was
supposed from a very low beginning to have got rich during the war. As for Mr.
Squeeze he had picked up as much of the history of his partner between the
dances as he desired, he was convinced there would be no money wanting, for
Miss Bragwell, who was now looked on as an only child, must needs be a great
fortune, and he was too much used to advantageous contracts to let this slip.
As he was gaudily dressed, and possessed all the arts of vulgar flattery, Miss
Bragwell eagerly caught at his proposal to wait on her father next day. Squeeze
was quite a man after Bragwell's own heart, a genius at getting money, a fine
dashing fellow at spending it. He told his wife that this was the very sort of
man for his daughter, for he got money like a Jew and spent it like a prince;
but whether it was fairly got, or wisely spent, he was too much a man of the
world to inquire. Mrs. Bragwell was not so run away with by appearances, but
she desired her husband to be careful and quite sure that it was the right Mr.
Squeeze, and no impostor. But being assured that Betsey would certainly keep
her carriage, she never gave herself one thought with what sort of a man she
was to ride in it. To have one of her daughters drive in her own coach, filled
up all her ideas of human happiness. The marriage was celebrated with great
splendour, and Mr. and Mrs. Squeeze set off for London, where they had a house.

Mr. Bragwell now tried to forget that he had any other daughter, and if some
thoughts of the resolutions he had made of entering on a more religious course
would sometimes force themselves upon him, they were put off, like the
repentance of Felix, to a more convenient season, and finding he was likely to
have a grandchild, he became more worldly and ambitious than ever, thinking
this a just pretense for adding house to house, and field to field; and there
is no stratagem by which men more deceive themselves than when they make even
unborn children a pretense for that rapine, or that hoarding (...) which their
own covetousness is the true motive. Whenever he ventured to write to Mr.
Worthy about the Wealth, the gaiety, and the grandeur of Mr. and Mrs* Squeeze,
that faithful friend honestly reminded him of the vanity and uncertaint^ of
worldly greatness, and the error h^ had been guilty of in marrying his daughter
before he had taken time to inquir^ into the real character of the man, sayin^
that he could not help foreboding, th^^ the happiness of a match made at a b^^
might have an end. Notwithstandin^ Mr. Bragwell had paid down a la^g^ fortune
than was prudent, for fear Mr. Squeeze should fly of, yet he was surprised to
receive very soon a pressing letter from him, desiring him to advance a
considerable sum, as he had the offer of an advantageous purchase, which he
must lose for want of money. Bragwell was staggered, and refused to comply; but
his wife told him he must not be shabby to such a gentleman as Squire Squeeze,
for that she heard on all sides such accounts of their grandeur, their feasts,
their carriages, and their liveries, that she and her ^usband ought even to
deny themselves comforts to oblige such a generous son, who did all this in
honor of their daughter; besides, if he did not send the money soon, they
might be obliged to lay down their coach, and then she should never be able to
show her face again. At length Mr. Bragwell lent him the money on ^is bond: he
knew Squeeze's income ^as large, for he had carefully enquired unto this
particular, and for the rest he ^ook his word. Mrs. Squeeze also got ^reat
presents from her mother, by repre^enting to her how expensively they were
^orced to live to keep up their credit and what honor she was confering on the
family of the Bragwell's by spending their money in such grand company. Among
many other letters she wrote her the following: -- "To Mrs. Bragwell.
"You cannot imagine, dear mother, how charmingly we live -- I lie a-bed almost
all day, and am up all night; but it is never dark for all that, for we burn
such numbers of candles all at once, that the sun would be of no use at all in
London. -- Then I am so happy; for we are never quiet a moment, Sundays or
working-days, nay, I should not know which was which, only that we have most
pleasure on a Sunday, because it is the only day in which people have nothing
to do but to divert themselves. -- Then the great folks are all so kind, and so
good, that they have not a bit of pride, for they will come and eat and drink,
and win my money just as if I was their equals; and if I have got but a cold,
they are so very unhappy that they send to know how I do; and though I suppose
they cannot rest till the footman has told them, yet they are so polite, that if
I have been dying they seem to have forgot it next time we meet, and not to
know but they have seen me the day before. Oh! they are true friends; and for
ever smiling, and so fond of one another, that they like to meet and enjoy one
another's company by hundreds, and always think the more the merrier.

Your dutiful daughter, BETSEY SQUEEZE."




The style of her letters, however, altered in a few months. She owned that
though things went on gayer and grander than ever, yet she hardly ever saw her
husband, except her house was full of company, and cards, or dancing was going
on; and that he was often so busy he could not come all night, and that he
always borrowed the money her mother sent her when he was going out on this
nightly business; and that the last time she had asked him for money, he
cursed, and swore, and bid her apply to the old farmer and his rib who were
made of money. This letter Mrs. Bragwell concealed from her husband.

At length on some change in public affairs, Mr. Squeeze, who had made an
overcharge of some thousand pounds in one article, lost his contract; he was
found to owe a large debt to government, and his accounts must be made up
immediately. This was impossible, he had not only spent his large income
without making any provision for his family, but had contracted heavy debts by
gaining and other vices. His creditors poured in upon him. He wrote to Bragwell
to borrow another sum; but without hinting at the loss of his contract. These
repeated demands made Bragwell so uneasy, that instead of sending him the
money, he resolved to go himself secretly to London, and judge by his own eyes
how things were going on, as his mind strangely misgave him. He got to Mr.
Squeeze's house about eleven at night, and knocked gently, concluding that they
must needs be gone to bed. But what was his astonishment to find the hall was
full of men; he pushed through in spite of them, though to his great surprise
they insisted on knowing his name. This affronted him: he refused, saying, I am
not ashamed of my name, it will pass for thousands in any market in the west of
England. Is this your London manners, not to let a man of my credit in without
knowing his name indeed! What was his amazement to see every room as full of
card-tables, and of fine gentleman and ladies as it would hold; all was so
light, and so gay, and so festive, and so grand, that he reproached himself for
his suspicions, thought nothing too good for them, and resolved secretly to
give Squeeze another five hundred pounds to help to keep up so much grandeur
and happiness. At length seeing a footman he knew, he asked him where were his
master and mistress, for he could not pick them out among the company; or
rather his ideas were so confused with the splendor of the scene, that he did
not know whether they were there or not. The man said that his master had just
sent for his lady up stairs, and he believed that he was not well. Mr. Bragwell
said he would go up himself and look for his daughter, as he could not speak so
freely to her before all that company. He went up and knocked at the chamber
door, and its not being opened; made him push it with some violence. He heard a
bustling noise within, and again made a fruitless attempt to open the door. At
this the noise increased, a^ Mr. Bragwell was struck to the heart (...) the
sound of a pistol from within. He n^^ kicked so violently against the door
(...) it burst open, when the first sight he s^^ was his daughter falling to
the ground in a fit, and Mr. Squeeze dying b^ a sh^^ from a pistol which was
dropping out (...) his hand. Mr. Bragwell was not the ^^ly person whom the
sound of the (...) had alarmed. The servants, the comp^ny, all heard it, and
all ran up to (...) scene of horror. Those who had the (...) of the game took
care to bring up the tricks in their hands, having had (...) prudence to leave
the very few who c^^ be trusted, to watch the stakes, (...) those who had a
prospect of losing, p^^fited by the confusion and threw up, the cards. All was
dismay and terror. (...) ran for a surgeon, others examin^^ (...) dying man,
while some remove^ (...) Squeeze to her bed, while poor (...) could neither see
nor hear, nor (...) thing. One of the company took (...) letter which lay open
upon the tabl^ ^^dressed to him, they read it, hoping (...) might explain the
horrid mystery. (...) was as follows: "To Mr. Bragwell.
"SIR,
"Fetch home your daughter, I have ruined her, myself, and the child, to which
she every hour expects to be a mother. I have lost my contract. My debts are
immense. You refuse me mo^^y: I must die then; but I will die like man of
spirit. They wait to take me to ^^^son, I have two executions in my (...); but
I have ten card tables in it. (...) die as I have lived. I invited all (...)
company, and have drank hard since (...) to get primed for the dreadful deed.
(...) refuses to write to you for ano^^^r thousand, and she must take the
con^^^uence^. Vanity has been my ruin. It ^^s caused all my crimes. Whoever is
^^^ved to live beyond his income is lia^^^ (...) every sin. He can never say to
(...) thus far shall thou go and no far^^^^* Vanity led me to commit acts of
(...), that I might live in splendour; (...) makes me commit self-murder,
^^^^use I will not live in poverty. The (...) philosophy says, that death is an
eter^^^ sleep; but the new philosophy lies. Do you take heed: It is too late
for me. The dreadful gulf yawns to swallow me -- I plunge into perdition.
There is no repentance in the grave, no hope in hell.

Yours DASHALL SQUEEZE."




The dead body was removed, and Mr. Bragwell remaining almost without speech,
or motion, the company began to think of retiring, much out of humor at having
their party so disagreeably broken up; they comforted themselves, however, that
as it were so early, for it was now scarcely twelve, they could finish their
evening at another party or two; so completely do habits of pleasure, as it is
called, harden the heart, and steel it not only against virtuous impressions,
but against natural feelings. Now it was, that those who had nightly rioted at
the expense of those wretched people were the first to abuse them. Not an offer
of assistance was made to this poor forlorn woman; not a word of kindness or of
pity, nothing but censure was now heard. Why must those upstarts ape people of
quality? though as long as these upstarts could feast them, their vulgarity and
their bad character had never been produced against them. "As long as thou do
well unto thyself, men shall speak good of thee." One guest who, unluckily, had
no other house to go to, coolly said, as he walked off, -- Squeeze might as
well have put off shooting himself till the morning. It was monstrous provoking
that he could not wait an hour or two.

As every thing in the house was seized, Mr. Bragwell prevailed on his
miserable daughter, weak as she was, next morning to set out with him for the
country. His acquaintance with polite life was short, but he had seen a great
deal in a little time. They had a slow and a sad journey. In about a week, Mrs.
Squeeze lay-in of a dead child, she herself languished a few days and then
died; and the afflicted parents saw the two darling objects of their ambition,
for whose sakes they had made too much haste to be rich, carried to the land
where all things are forgotten. Mrs. Bragwell's grief, like her other passions
was extravagant; and poor Bragwell's sorrow was rendered so bitter by
self-reproach, that he would quite have sunk under it, had he not thought of
his old expedient in distress, that of sending for Mr. Worthy to comfort him.
It was Mr. Worthy's way, to warn people of those misfortunes which he saw their
faults must needs bring on them, but not to reproach, or desert them when the
misfortunes came. He had never been near Bragwell, during the short, but
flourishing reign of the Squeezes; for he knew that prosperity made the ears
deaf, and the heart hard to good counsel; but as soon as he heard his friend
was in trouble he set out to go to him. Bragwell burst into a violent fit of
tears when he saw him, and when he could speak, said, This trial is more than I
can bear. Mr. Worthy kindly took him by the hand, and when he was a little
composed, said, I will tell you a short story. There was in ancient times a
famous man who was a slave. His master, who was very good to him, one day gave
him a bitter melon, and bade him eat it; he eat it up without one word of
complaint. How was it possible, said the master, for you to eat so very
nauseous and disagreeable a fruit? The slave replied, My good master, I have
received so many favors from your bounty, that it is no wonder if I should
once in my life eat one bitter melon from your hands. This generous answer so
struck the master, that the history, says he, gave him his liberty. With such
submissive sentiments, my friend, should man receive his portion of sufferings
from God, from whom he receives so many blessings. You in particular have
received ^uch good at the hand of God, shall not you receive evil also?

TO BE CONTINUED.

