ARTHUR MERVYN; OR, MEMOIRS OF THE YEAR 1793.

SECOND PART.

BY THE AUTHOR OF WIELAND, ORMOND, HUNTLEY, etc.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY GEORGE F. HOPKINS AT WASHINGTON'S HEAD, 136,
PEAR(...). 1800.

ARTHUR MERVYN; OR, MEMOIRS OF THE YEAR 1793. SECOND PART. CHAPTER I.
HERE ended the narrative of Mervyn. Surely its incidents were of no common
kind. During this season of pestilence, my opportunities of observation had
been numerous, and I had not suffered them to pass unimproved. The occurrences
which fell within my own experience bore a general resemblance to those which
had just been related, but they did not hinder the latter from striking on my
mind with all the force of novelty. They served no end, but as vouchers for the
truth of the tale.

Surely the youth had displayed inimitable and heroic qualities. His courage
was the growth of benevolence and reason, and not the child of insensibility
and the nursling of habit. He had been qualified for the encounter of gigantic
dangers by no laborious education. He stepped forth upon the stage, unfurnished,
by anticipation or experience, with the means of security against fraud; and
yet, by the aid of pure intentions, had frustrated the wiles of an accomplished
and veteran deceiver.

I blessed the chance which placed the youth under my protection. When I
reflected on that tissue of nice contingences which led him to my door, and
enabled me to save from death a being of such rare endowments, my heart
overflowed with joy, not unmingled with regrets and trepidation. How many have
been cut off by this disease, in their career of virtue and their blossom-time
of genius! How many deeds of heroism and self-devotion are ravished from
existence, and consigned to hopeless oblivion!

I had saved the life of this youth. This was not the limit of my duty or my
power. Could I not render that life profitable to himself and to mankind? The
gains of my profession were slender; but these gains were sufficient for his
maintenance as well as my own. By residing with me, partaking my instructions,
and reading my books, he would, in a few years, be fitted for the practice of
physic. A science, whose truths are so conducive to the welfare of mankind, and
which comprehends the whole system of nature, could not but gratify a mind so
beneficent and strenuous as his.

This scheme occurred to me as soon as the conclusion of his tale allowed me to
think. I did not immediately mention it; since the approbation of my wife, of
whose concurrence, however, I entertained no doubt, was previously to be
obtained. Dismissing it, for the pre^ent, from my thoughts, I reverted to the
incidents of his tale.

The lady whom Welbeck had betrayed and deserted, was not unknown to me. I was
but too well acquainted with her fate. If she had been single in calamity, her
tale would have been listened to with insupportable sympathy; but the frequency
of the spectacle of distre^s, seems to lessen the compassion with which it is
reviewed. Now that those scenes are only remembered, my anguish is greater than
when they were witnessed. Then every new day was only a repetition of the
disasters of the foregoing. My sensibility, if not extinguished, was blunted;
and I gazed upon the complicated ills of poverty and sickness with a degree of
unconcern, on which I should once have reflected with astonishment.

The fate of Clemenza Lodi was not, perhaps, more sig^al than many which have
occurred. It threw detest^ble light upon the character of Welbeck, and showed
him to be more inhuman than the tale of Mervyn had evinced him to be. That man,
indeed, ^as hitherto imperfectly seen. The time had not come which should fu^ly
unfold the enormity of his transgre^sions and the complexity of his frauds.

There lived in a remote quarter of the city a woman, by name Villars, who
passed for the widow of an English officer. Her manners and mode of living were
speci^^^. She had three daughters, well trained in the school of fashion, and
elegant in person, manners and dress. They had lately arrived from Europe, and
for a time, received from their neighbors that respect to which their education
and fortune appeared to lay claim.

The fallacy of their pretensions slowly appeared. It began to be suspected
that their subsistence was derived not from pension or patrimony, but from the
wages of pollution. Their habitation was clandestinely frequented by men who
were unfaithful to their secret; one of these was allied to me by ties, which
authorized me in watching his steps and detecting his errors, with a view to
his reformation. From him I obtained a knowledge of the genuine character of
these women.

A man like Welbeck, who was the slave of depraved appetites, could not fail of
being quickly satiated with innocence and beauty. Some accident introduced him
to the knowledge of this family, and the youngest daughter found him a proper
subject on which to exercise her artifices. It was to the frequent demands made
upon his purse, by this woman, that part of the embarrassments in which Mervyn
found him involved, are to be ascribed.

To this circumstance must likewise be imputed his anxiety to transfer to some
other the possession of the unhappy stranger. Why he concealed from Mervyn his
connection with Lucy Villars, may be easily imagined. His silence, with regard
to Clemenza's asylum, will not create surprise, when it it is told that she was
placed with Mrs. Villars. On what conditions she was received under this roof,
cannot be so readily conjectured. It is obvious, however, to suppose, that
advantage was to be taken of her ignorance and weakness, and that they hoped,
in time, to make her an associate in their profligate schemes.

The appearance of pestilence, meanwihle, threw them into panick, and they
hastened to remove from danger. Mrs. Villars appears to have been a woman of no
ordinary views. She st^oped to the vilest means of a^assing money; but this
money was employed to secure to herself and her daughters the benefits of
independence. She purchased the house which she occupied in the city, and a
^ansion in the environs, well built and splendidly furnished. To the latter,
she and her family, of which the Italian girl was now a member, retired at the
close of July.

I have mentioned that the source of my intelligence was a kinsman, who had
been drawn from the paths of sobriety and rectitude, by the impetuosity of
youthful passions. He (...) power to confess and deplore, but none to repair
his errors. One of these women held him by a spell which he struggled in vain
to dissolve, and by which, in spite of resolutions and remo^^es, he was drawn
to her feet, and made to sacrifice to her pleasure, his reputation and his
fortune.

My house was his customary abode during those intervals in which he was
persuaded to pursue his profession. Some time before the infection began its
progress, he had disappeared. No tidings was received of him, till a messenger
arrived entreating my assistance. I was conducted to the house of Mrs. Villars,
in which I found no one but my kinsman. Here it seems he had immured himself
from my enquiries, and on being seized by the reigning malady, had been
deserted by the family, who, ere they departed, informed me by a messenger of
his condition.

Despondency combined with his disease to destroy him. Before he died, he
informed me fully of the character of his betrayers. The late arrival, name and
personal condition of Clemenza Lodi were related. Welbeck was not named, but
was described in terms, which, combined with the narrative of Mervyn, enabled
me to recognize the paramour of Lucy Villars in the man whose crimes had been
the principal theme of our discourse.

Mervyn's curio^ity was greatly routed when I intimated my acquaintance with
the fate of Clemenza. In answer to his eager interrogations, I related what I
knew. The tale plunged (...) into reverie. Recovering, at length, from his
thoughtfulness, he spoke.

Her condition is perilous. The poverty of Welbeck will drive him far from her
abode. Her profligate protectors will entice her or abandon her to ruin. Cannot
she be saved?

I know not, answered I, by what means.

The means are obvious. Let her remove to some other dwelling. Let her be
apprized of the vices of those who surround her. Let her be entreated to fly.
The will need only be inspired, the danger need only be shown, and she is safe,
for she will remove beyond its reach.

Thou art an adventurous youth. Who will thou find to undertake the office? Who
will be persuaded to enter the house of a stranger, seek without an
introduction the presence of this girl, tell her that the house she inhabits is
an house of prostitution, prevail on her to believe the tale, and persuade her
to accompany him? Who will open his house to the fugitive? Whom will you
convince that her illicit intercourse with Welbeck, of which the opprobrious
tokens cannot be concealed, has not fitted her for the company of prostitutes,
and made her unworthy of protection? Who will adopt into their family, a
stranger, whose conduct has incurred infamy, and whose present associates have,
no doubt, made her worthy of the curse?

True. These are difficulties which I did not foresee. Must she then perish!
Shall not something be done to rescue her from infamy and guilt?

It is neither in your power nor in mine to do any thing.

The lateness of the hour put an end to our conversation and summoned us to
repose. I seized the first opportunity of imparting to my wife the scheme which
had occurred, relative to our guest; with which, as I expected, she readily
concurred. In the morning, I mentioned it to Mervyn. I dwelt upon the benefits
that adhered to the medical profession, the power which it confers of
lightening the distresses of our neighbors, the dignity which popular opinion
annexes to it, the avenue which it opens to the acquisition of competence, the
freedom from servile cares which attends it, and the means of intellectual
gratification with which it supplies us.

As I spoke, his eyes sparkled with joy. Yes, said he with vehemence, I
willingly embrace your offer. I accept this benefit, because I know that if my
pride should refuse it, I should prove myself less worthy than you think, and
give you pain, instead of that pleasure which I am bound to confer. I would
enter on the duties and studies of my new profession immediately, but somewhat
is due to Mr. Hadwin and his daughters. I cannot vanquish my inquietudes
respecting them, but by returning to Malverton and ascertaining their state
with my own eyes. You know in what circumstances I parted with Wallace and Mr.
Hadwin. I am not sure, that either of them ever reached home, or that they did
not carry the infection along with them. I now find myself sufficiently strong
to perform the journey, and proposed to have acquainted you, at this interview,
with my intentions. An hour's delay is superfluous, and I hope you will consent
to my setting out immediately. Rural exercise and air, for a week or fortnight,
will greatly contribute to my health.

No objection could be made to this scheme. His narrative had excited no common
affection in our bosoms for the Hadwins. His visit could not only inform us of
their true state, but would dispel that anxiety which they could not but
entertain respecting our guest. It was a topic of some surprise that neither
Wallace nor Hadwin had returned to the city, with a view to obtain some tidings
of their friend. It was more easy to suppose them to have been detained by ^ome
misfortune, than by insensibility or indol^nce. In a few minutes Mervyn bade us
adieu, and set out upon his journey, promising to acquaint us with the state of
affairs, as soon as possible after his arrival. We parted from him with
reluctance, and found no consolation but in the prospect of his speedy return.

During his absence, conversation naturally turned upon those topics which were
suggested by the narrative and deportment of this youth. Different conclusions
were formed by his two auditors. They had both contracted a deep interest in
his welfare, and an ardent curiosity as to those particulars which his
unfinished story had left in obscurity. The true character and actual condition
of Welbeck, were themes of much ^p^culation. Whether he were dead or alive,
near or distant from his ancient abode, was a point on which neither Mervyn,
nor any of those with whom I had means of intercourse, afforded any
information. Whether he had shared the common fate, and had been carried by the
collectors of the dead from the highway or the ^ovel to the pits opened alike
for the rich and the poor, the known and the unknown; whether he had escaped to
a foreign shore, or were destined to re-appear upon this stage, were questions
involved in uncertainty.

The disappearance of Watson would, at a different time, have excited much
enquiry and suspicion; but as this had taken place on the e^e of the epidemic,
his kindred and friends would acquiesce, without scruple, in the belief that he
had been involved in the general calamity, and was to be numbered among the
earliest victims. Those of his profession usually resided in the street where
the infection began, and wh^re its ravages had been most destructive; and this
circumstance would corroborate the conclusions of his friends.

I did not perceive any immediate advantage to ^low from imparting the
knowledge I had l^tely gained to others. Shortly after Mervyn's departure to
Malverton, I was visited by Wortley. Enquiring for my guest, I told him that,
having recovered his health, he had left my house. He repeated his invectives
against the villainy of Welbeck, his suspicions of Mervyn, and his wishes for
another interview with the youth. Why had I suffered him to depart, and whither
had he gone?

He has gone for a short time into the country. I expect him to return in less
than a week, when you will meet with him here as often as you please, for I
expect him to take up his abode in this house.

Much astonishment and disapprobation were expressed by my friend. I hinted
that the lad had made disclosures to me, which justified my confidence in his
integrity. These proofs of his honesty were not of a nature to be
indiscriminately unfolded. Mervyn had authori^ed me to communicate so much of
his story to Wortley, as would serve to vindicate him from the charge of being
Welbeck's copartner in fraud; but this end would only ^e counteracted by an
imperfect tale, and the full recital, though it might exculpate Mervyn, might
produce inconveniences by which this advantage would be outweighed.

Wortley, as might be naturally expected, was by no means satisfied with this
statement. He suspected that Mervyn was a wily imposter; that he had been
trained in the arts of fraud, under an accomplished teacher; that the tale
which he had told to me, was a tissue of ingenious and plausible lies; that the
mere assertions, however plausible and solemn, of one like him, whose conduct
had incurred such strong suspicions, were unworthy of the least credit.

It cannot be denied, continued my friend, that he lived with Welbeck at the
time of his elopement; that they disappeared together; that they entered a
boat, at Pine-street wharf, at midnight; that this boat was discovered by the
owner in the possession of a fisherman at Red-bank, who affirmed that he had
found it stranded near his door, the day succeeding that on which they
disappeared. Of all this, I can supply you with incontestible proof. If, after
this proof, you can give credit to his story, I shall think you made of very
perverse and credulous materials.

The proof you mention, said I, will only enhance his credibility. All the
facts which you have stated, have been admitted by him. They constitute an
essential portion of his narrative.

What then is the inference? Are not these evidences of a compact between them?
Has he not acknowledged (...) compact in confessing that he knew Welbeck was my
debtor; that he was apprized of his flight, but that, (what matchless
effrontery!) he had promised secrecy, and would, by no means, betray him? You
say he means to return; ^ut of that I doubt. You will never see his face more.
He is too wise to thrust himself again into the noose: but I do not utterly
despair of lighting upon Welbeck. Old Thetford, Jamieson and I, have sworn to
hunt him through the world. I have strong hopes that he has not strayed far.
Some intelligence has lately been received, which has enabled us to place our
hounds upon the scent. He may double and skulk* but if he does not fall into
our toils at last, he will have the agility and cunning, as well as the
malignity of devils.

The vengeful disposition thus betrayed by Wortley, was not without excuse. The
vigor of his days had been spent in acquiring a slender capital: his diligence
and honesty had succeeded, and he had lately thought his situation such as to
justify marriage with an excellent woman, to whom he had for years been
betrothed, but from whom his poverty had hitherto compelled him to live
separate. Scarcely had this alliance taken pi^ce, and the full career of
nuptial enjoyments begun, when his ill fate exposed him to the frauds of
Welbeck, and brought him, in one evil hour, to the brink of insolvency.

Jamieson and Thetford, however, were rich, and I had not till now been
informed that they had reasons for ^ursuing Welbeck with peculiar animosity.
The latter was the uncle of him whose fate had been related by Mervyn, and was
one of those who employed money, not as the medium of traffic, but as in itself
a commodity. He had neither wines nor cloths, to transmute into silver. He
thought it a tedious process to exchange to day, one hundred dollars for a cask
or bale, and tomorrow exchange the bale or cask for an hundred and ten
dollars. It was better to give the hundred for a piece of paper, which, carried
forthwith to the money changers, he could procure an hundred twenty-three and
three-fourths. In short, this man's coffers were supplied by the despair of
honest men and the stratagems of rogues. I did not immediately suspect how this
man's prudence and indefatigable attention to his own interest should allow him
to become the dupe of Welbeck.

What, said I, is old Thetford's claim upon Welbeck?

It is a claim, he replied, that, if it ever be made good, will doom Welbeck to
imprisonment and wholesome labor for life.

How? Surely it is nothing more than debt.

Have you not heard? But that is no wonder. Happily you are a stranger to
mercantile anxieties and revolutions. Your fortune does not rest on a basis
which an untoward blast may sweep away, or four strokes of a pen may demolish.
That hoary dealer in suspicions was persuaded to put his hand to three notes
for eight hundred dollars each. The eight was then dexterously prolonged to
eighteen; they were duly deposited in time and place, and the next day Welbeck
was credited for fifty-three hundred and seventy-three, which an hour after,
were told out to his messenger. Hard to say whether the old man's grief, shame
or rage be uppermost. He di^dains all comfort but revenge, and that he will
procure at any price. Jamieson, who deals in the same stuff with Thetford, was
outwitted in the same manner, to the same amount, and on the same day.

This Welbeck must have powers above the common rate of mortals. Grown gray in
studying the follies and the stratagems of men, these veterans were
overreached. No one pities them. 'Twere well if his artifices had been limited
to such, and he had spared the honest and the poor. It is for his injuries to
men who have earned their scanty subsistence without forfeiting their probity,
that I hate him, and shall exult to see him suffer all the rigors of the law.
Here Wortley's engagements compelled him to take his leave.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER II.
WHILE musing upon these facts, I could not but reflect with astonishment on
the narrow escapes which Mervyn's virtue had experienced. I was by no means
certain that his fame or his life was exempt from all danger, or that the
suspicions which had already been formed respecting him, could possibly be
wiped away. Nothing but his own narrative, repeated with that simple but
nervous eloquence, which we had witnessed, could rescue him from the most
heinous charges. Was there any tribunal that would not acquit him on merely
hearing his defense?

Surely the youth was honest. His tale could not be the fruit of invention; and
yet, what are the bounds of fraud? Nature has set no limits to the combinations
of fancy. A smooth exterior, a show of virtue* and a specious tale, are, a
thousand times, exhibited in human intercourse by craft and subtlety. Motives
are endlessly varied, while actions continue the same; and an acute penetration
may not find it hard to select and arrange motives, suited to exempt from
censure any action that an human being can commit.

Had I heard Mervyn's story from another, or read it in a book, I might,
perhaps, have found it possible to suspect the truth; but, as long as the
impression, made by his tones, gestures and looks, remained in my memory, this
suspicion was impossible. Wickedness may sometimes be ambiguous, its mask may
puzzle the observer; our judgment may be made to faulter and fluctuate, but the
face of Mervyn is the index of an honest mind. Calm or vehement, doubting or
confident, it is full of benevolence and candor. He that listens to his words
may question their truth, but he that looks upon his countenance when speaking,
cannot withhold his says.

It was possible, however, to find evidence, supporting or confuting his story.
I chanced to be acquainted with a family, by name (...), who were natives of
that part of the country where his father resided. I paid them a visit, and,
after a few preliminaries, mentioned, as if by accident, the name of Mervyn.
They immediately recognized this name as belonging to one of their ancient
neighbors. The death of the wife and sons, and the seduction of the only
daughter by Colvil, with many pathetic incidents connected with the fate of
this daughter, were mentioned.

This intelligence induced me to inquire of Mrs. Althorpe, a sensible and
candid woman, if she were acquainted with the recent or present situation of
this family.

I cannot say much, she answered, of my own knowledge. Since my marriage, I am
used to spend a few weeks of summer, at my father's, but am less inquisitive
than I once was into the concerns of my old neighbors. I recollect, however,
when there, last year, during the fever, to have heard that Sawny Mervyn had
taken a second wife; that his only son, a youth of eighteen, had thought proper
to be highly offended with his father's conduct, and treated the new mistress
of the house with insult and contempt. I should not much wonder at this, seeing
children are so apt to deem themselves unjustly treated by a second marriage of
their parent, but it was hinted that the boy's jealousy and discontent was
excited by no common cause. The new mother was not much older than himself, had
been a servant of the family, and a criminal intimacy had subsisted between
her, while in that condition, and the son. Her marriage with his father was
justly accounted by their neighbors, (...) most pro^^igate and odious
transaction. The son, perhaps, had, in such a cas^, a right to scold, but he
ought not to have carried his anger to such extremes as have been imputed to
him. He is said to have grinned upon her with contempt, and even to have called
her strumpet in the presence of his father and of strangers.

It was impossible for such a family to keep together. Arthur took leave one
night to possess h^mself of all his father's cash, mount the best horse in his
meadow, and clope. For a time, no one knew whither he had gone. At last, one
was said to have met with him in the streets of this city, metamorphosed from a
rustic lad* into a fine gentleman. Nothing could be quicker than this change,
for he left the country on a Saturday morning, and was seen in a French frock
and silk stockings, going into Christ's Church the next day. I suppose he kept
it up with an high hand, as long as his money lasted.

My father paid us a visit last week, and among other country news, told us
than Sawny Mervyn had sold his place. His wife had persuaded him to try his
fortune in the Western Country. The price of his hundred acres here would
purchase a thousand there, and the man being very gross and ignorant, and
withal, quite a simpleton, found no difficulty in perceiving that a thousand
are ten times more than an hundred. He was not aware that a rood of ground upon
Schuylkill is ten fold better than an acre on the Tenessee.

The woman turned out to be an artful profligate. Having sold his ground and
gotten his money, he placed it in her keeping, and she, to enjoy it with the
more security, ran away to the city; leaving him to prosecute his journey to
Kentucky, moneyless and alone. Sometime after, Mr. Althorpe and I were at the
play, when he pointed out to me a groupe of females in an upper box, one of
whom was no other than Betty Laurence. It was not easy to recognize, in her
present gaudy trim, all flaunting with ribbons and shining with trinkets, the
same Betty who used to deal out pecks of potatoes and superintend her basket of
cantilopes in the Jersey market, in p^ste-board bonnet and linsey petticoat.
Her companions were of the infamous class. If Arthur were still in the city,
there is no doubt that the mother and (...) might renew the ancient terms of
their acquaintance.

The old man, thus robbed and betrayed, sought consolation in the bottle, of
which he had been at all times overfo^d. He wandered from one tavern to another
till his credit was exhausted, and then was sent to jail, where, I believe, he
is likely to continue till his death. Such, my friend, is the history of the
Mervyns.

What proof, said I, have you of the immoral conduct of the son? of his
mistreatment of his mother, and his elopement with his father's horse and money?

I have no proof but the unanimous report of Mervyn's neighbors. Respectable
and honest men have affirmed, in my hearing, that they have been present when
the boy treated his mother in the way that I have described. I was, besides,
once in company with the old man, and heard him bitterly inveigh against his
son, and charge him with the fact of stealing his horse and money. I well
remember that tears rolled from his eyes while talking on the subject. As to
his being seen in the city (...) next day after his elopement, dressed in a
most (...) and fashionable manner, I can doubt that as little (...) the rest,
for he that saw him was my father, and you who know my father, know what credit
is due to his eyes and his word. He had seen Arthur often enough not to be
mistaken, and described his appearance with great exactness. The boy is
extremely handsome, give him his due; has dark hazle eyes, auburn hair, and
very elegant proportions. His air and gate have nothing of the clown in them.
Take away his jacket and ^row^^rs, and you have as spruce a fellow as over came
from dancing-school or college. He is the (...) picture of his mother, and the
most perfect contrast to the sturdy legs, squat figure, and broad, unthinking,
sheepish face of the father that can be imagined. You must confess that his
appearance here is a pretty strong proof of the father's assertions. The money
given for these clothes could not possibly have been honestly acquired. It is
to be presumed that they were bought or stolen, for how else should they have
been gotten?

What was this lad's personal deportment during the life of his mother, and
before his father's second marriage?

Very little to the credit of his heart or his intellects. Being the youngest
son, the only one who at length survived, and having a powerful resemblance to
herself, he became the mother's favorite. His constitution was feeble, and he
loved to stroll in the woods more than to plow or sow. This idleness was much
against the father's inclination and judgment; and, indeed, it was the
foundation of all his vices. When he could be prevailed upon to do any thing it
was in a bungling manner, and so as to prove that his thoughts were fixed on
any thing except his business. When his assistance was wanted he was never to
be found at hand. They were compelled to search for him among the rocks and
bushes, and he was generally discovered sauntering along the bank of the river,
or lolling in the shade of a tree. This disposition to inactivity and laziness,
in so young a man, was very strange. Persons of his age are rarely fond of
work, but then they are addicted to company, and sports, and exercises. They
ride, or shoot, or frolic; but this being ^oped away his time in solitude,
never associated with other young people, never mounted an horse but when he
could not help it, and never fired a gun or angled for a fish in his life. Some
people supposed him to be half an idiot, or, at least, not to be in his right
mind; and, indeed, his conduct was so very perverse and singular, that I do not
wonder: those who accounted for it in this way.

But surely, said I, he had some object of pursuit. Perhaps he was addicted to
books.

Far from it. On the contrary, his aversion to school was as great as his
hatred of the plough. He never could get his lessons or bear the least
constraint. He was so much indulged by his mother at home, that tasks and
discipline of any kind were intolerable. He was a perpetual truant; till the
master one day attempting to strike him, he ran out of the room and never
entered it more. The mother excused and countenanced his frowardness, and the
foolish father was obliged to give way. I do not believe he had two month's
schooling in his life.

Perhaps, said I, he preferred studying by himself, and at liberty. I have
known boys endowed with great curiosity and aptitude to learning, who never
could endure set tasks, and spurned at the pedagogue and his rod.

I have known such likewise, but this was not one of them. I know not whence he
could derive his love of knowledge or the means of acquiring it. The family
were totally illiterate. The father was a Scotch peasant, whose ignorance was
so great that he could not sign his name. His wife, I believe, could read, and
might sometimes decypher the figures in an almanac, but that was all. I am apt
to think, that the son's ability was not much greater. You might as well look
for silver platters or marble tables in his house, as for a book or a pen.

I remember calling at their house one evening in the winter before last. It
was intensely cold; and my father, who rode with me, having business with
Sawney Mervyn, we stopped a minute at his gate; and, while the two old men were
engaged in conversation, I begged leave to warm myself by the kitchen fire.
Here, in the chimney-corner, seated on a block, I found Arthur busily engaged
in knitting stockings! I thought this a whimsical employment for a young active
man. I told him so, for I wanted to put him to the blush; but he smiled in my
face, and answered, without the least discomposure, just as whimsical a
business for a young active woman. Pray, did you never knit a stocking?

Yes; but that was from necessity. Were I of a different sex, or did I possess
the strength of a man, I should rather work in my field or study my book.

Rejoice that you are a woman, then, and are at liberty to pursue that which
costs least labor and demands most skill. You see, though a man, I use your
privilege, and prefer knitting yarn to threshing my brain with a book or the
barn-floor with a flail.

I wonder, said I contemptuously, you do not put on the petticoat as well as
handle the needle.

Do not wonder, he replied: it is because I hate a petticoat encumbrance as
much as I love warm f^^t. Look there (offering the stocking to my in^pection)
is it not well done?

I did not touch it, but sneeringly said, excellent! I wonder you do not
apprentice yourself to a tailor.

He looked at me with an air of ridiculous simplicity and said, how prone the
woman is to wonder. You call the work excellent, and yet wonder that I do not
make myself a slave to improve my skill! Did you learn needle work from seven
year's squatting on a taylor's board* Had you come to me, I would have taught
you in a day.

I was taught at school.

And paid your instructor?

To be sure.

'Twas liberty and money thrown away. Send your sister, if you have one, to me,
and I will teach her without either rod or wages. Will you?

You have an old and a violent antipathy, I believe, to any thing like a school.

True. It was early and violent. Had not you?

No. I went to school with pleasure; for I thought to read and write were
accomplishments of some value.

Indeed? Then I misunderstood you just now. I thought you said, that, had you
the strength of a man, you should prefer the plough and the book to the needle.
Whence, supposing you a female, I inferred that you had a woman's love for the
needle and a fool's hatred of books.

My father calling me from without, I now made a motion to go. Stay, continued
he with great earnestness, throwing aside his knitting apparatus, and beginning
in great haste to pull off his stockings. Draw these stockings over your shoes.
They will ^ave your feet from the snow while walking to your horse.

Half angry, and half laughing, I declined the offer. He had drawn them off,
however, and holding them in his hand, be persuaded, said he; only lift your
feet, and I will slip them on in a trice.

Finding me positive in my refusal, he dropped the stockings; and, without more
ado, caught me up in his arms, ru^hed out of the room, and, running barefoot
through the snow, set me fairly on my horse. All was done in a moment, and
before I had time to reflect on his intentions. He then seized my hand, and,
kissing it with great fervor, exclaimed, a thousand thanks to you for not
accepting my stockings. You have thereby saved yourself and me the time and
toil of drawing on and drawing off. Since you have taught me to wonder, let me
practice the lesson in wondering at your folly, in wearing worsted shoes and
silk stockings at a season like this. Take my counsel, and turn your silk to
worsted and your worsted to leather. Then may you hope for warm feet and dry.
What! Leave the gate without a blessing on your counselor?

I spurred my horse into a gallop, glad to escape from ^o strange a being. I
could give you many instances of behavior equally singular, and which betrayed
a mixture of shrewdness and folly, of kindness and impudence, which justified,
perhaps, the common notion that his intellects were unsound. Nothing was more
remarkable than his impenetrability to ridicule and censure. You might revile
him for hours, and he would listen to you with invincible composure. To awaken
anger or shame in him was impossible. He would answer, but in such a way as to
show him totally unaware of your true meaning. He would afterward talk to you
with all the smiling affab^l^ty and freedom of an old friend. Every one (...)
him for his idleness and folly, no less conspicuous in his words than his
actions; but no one feared him, and few were angry with him, till after the
detection of his commerce with Betty, and his inhuman treatment of his father.

Have you good reasons for supposing him to have been illicitly connected with
that girl?

Yes. Such as cannot be discredited. It would not be proper for me to state
these proofs. Nay, he never denied it. When reminded, on one occasion, of the
inference which every impartial person would draw from appearances, he
acknowledged, with his usual placid effrontery, that the inference was
unavoidable. He even mentioned other concurring and contemporary incidents,
which had eluded the observation of his censurer, and which added still mo^e
force to the conclusion. He was studious to pa^^iate the vices of this woman as
long as he was her only paramour; but after her marriage with his father, the
t^ne was changed* He confessed that she was tiny, notable, industrious; but,
then, she was a prostitute. When charged with being instrumental in making her
such, and when hid companions dwelt upon the depravity of reviling her for
vices which she owed to him: True, he would say, there is depravity and folly
in the conduct you describe. Make me out, if you please, to be a villain. What
then? I was talking not of myself, but of Betty. Still this woman is a
prostitute. If it were I that made her such, with more confidence may I make
the charge. But think not that I blame Betty. Place me in her situation, and I
should have acted just so. I should have formed just such notions of my
interest, and pursued it by the same means. Still, say I, I would fain have a
different woman for my father's wife, and the mistress of this family.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER III.
THIS conversation was interrupted by a messenger from my wife, who desired my
return immediately. I had some hopes of meeting with Mervyn, some days having
now elapsed since his parting from us, and not being conscious of any
extraordinary motives for delay. It was Wortley, however, and not Mervyn, to
whom I was called.

My friend came to share with me his suspicions and inquietudes respecting
Welbeck and Mervyn. An accident had newly happened which had awakened these
suspicions afresh. He desired a patient audience while he explained them to me.
These were his words.

Today a person presented me a letter from a mercantile friend at Baltimore. I
easily discerned the bearer to be a sea captain. He was a man of sensible and
pleasing aspect, and was recommended to my friendship and counsel in the letter
which he brought. The letter stated, that a man, by name Amos Watson, by
profession a mariner, and a resident at Baltimore, had disappeared in the
summer of last year, in a mysterious and incomprehensible manner. He was known
to have arrived in this city from Jamaica, and to have intended an immediate
journey to his family, who lived at Baltimore; but he never arrived there, and
no trace of his existence has since been discovered. The bearer had come to
investigate, if possible, the secret of his fate, and I was earnestly entreated
to afford him all the assistance and advice in my power, in the prosecution of
his search. I expressed my willingness to serve the stranger, whose name was
Williams* and, after offering him entertainment at my house, which was
thankfully accepted, he proceeded to unfold to me the particulars of this
affair. His story was this.

On the 20th of last June, I arrived, said he, from the West Indies, in company
with captain Watson. I commanded the ship in which he came as a passenger, his
own ship being taken and confiscated by the English. We had long lived in
habits of strict friendship, and I loved him for his own sake, as well as
because he had married my sister. We landed in the morning, and went to dine
with Mr. Keysler, since dead, but who then lived in Water-street. He was
extremely anx^ous to visit his family, and having a few commissions to perform
in the city, which would not demand more than a couple of hours, he determined
to set out next morning in the stage. Meanwhile, I had engagements which
required me to repair with the utmost expedition to New York. I was scarcely
less anxious than my brother to reach Baltimore, where my friends also reside,
but there was an absolute necessity of going eastward. I expected, however, to
return hither in three days, and then to follow Watson home. Shortly after
dinner we parted; he to execute his commissions, and I to embark in the
mail-stage.

In the time prefixed I returned. I arrived early in the morning, and prepared
to depart again at noon. Meanwhile, I called at Keysler's. This is an old
acquaintance of Watson's and mine; and, in the course of talk, he expressed
some surprise that Watson had so precipitately deserted his house. I stated the
necessity there was for Wa^^on's immediate departure southward, and added,
(...) no doubt my brother had explained this necessity.

Why, said (...), it is (...) C^^tain Watson mention^d his int^ntion of leaving
(...) early next day; but ^hen he gave me reason to expect that he would (...)
and long with me that night, whereas he has not made his appearanc^ since.
Beside his trunk was brought to my house. This, no doubt, he intended to carry
home with him, but here it remains still. It is not likely that in the hu^ry of
departure his baggage was forgotten. Hence, I inferred that he was still in
town, and have been puzzling myself these th^ee days with conjectures, as to
what is become of him. What surprises me more is, that, on enquiring among the
few friends which he has in this city, I find them as ignorant of his motions
as myself. I have not, indeed, been wholly without apprehensions that some
accident or other has befallen him.

I was not a little alarmed by this intimation. I went myself, agreeably to
Keysler's direction^, to Watson's friends, and made anxious enquiries, but none
of them had seen my brother since his arrived. I endeavored to recollect the
commissions which he designed to execute, and, if possible, to trace him to the
spot where he last appeared. He had several packets to deliver, one of which
was addressed to Walter Thetford. Him, after some enquiry, I found out, but
unluckily he chanced to be in the country. I found, by questioning a clerk who
transacted his business in his absence, that a person, who answered the minute
description which I gave of Watson, had been there on the day on which I parted
with him, and had left papers relative to the capture of one of Thetford's
vessels by the English. This was the sum of the information he was able to
afford me.

I then applied to three merchants for whom my brother had letters. They all
acknowledged the receipt of these letters, but they were delivered through the
medium of the post office.

I was extremely anxious to reach home. Urgent engagements compelled me to go
on without delay. I had already exhausted all the means of enquiry within my
reach, and was obliged to acquiesce in the belief, that Watson had proceeded
homeward at the time appointed, and left, by forgetfulness or accident, his
trunk behind him. On examining the books kept at the stage offices, his name no
where appeared, and no conveyance by water had occurred during the last week.
Still the only conjecture I could form, was that he had gone homeward.

Arriving at Baltimore, I found that Watson had not yet made his appearance.
His wife produced a letter, which, by the post mark, appeared to have been put
into the office at Philadelphia, on the morning after our arrival, and on which
he had designed to commence his journey.. This letter had been written by my
brother, in my presence, but I had dissuaded him from sending it, since the
same coach that should bear the letter, was likewise to carry himself. I had
seen him put it unwafered in his pocketbook, but this letter, unaltered in any
part, and containing money which he had at first intended to enclose in it, was
now conveyed to his wife's hand. In this letter he mentioned his design of
setting out for Baltimore, on the twenty-first, yet, on that day the letter
itself had been put into the office.

We hoped that a short time would clear up this mystery, and bring the fugitive
home, but from that day till the present, no atom of intelligence has been
received concerning him. The yellow-fever, which quickly followed, in this
city, and my own engagements, have hindered me, till now, from coming hither
and resuming the search.

My brother was one of the most excellent of men. His wife loved him to
distraction, and, together with his children, depended for subsistence upon his
efforts. You will not, therefore, be surprised that his disappearance excited,
in us, the deepest consternation and distress; but I have other, and peculiar
reasons for wishing to know his fate. I gave him several bills of exchange on
merchants of Baltimore, which I had received in payment of my cargo, in order
that they might, as soon as possible, be presented and accepted. These have
disappeared with the bearer. (...) another circumstance that makes his (...)
small value.

There is an English family, who forme^^^ (...) Jamaica, and possessed an
estate of great value, but who, for some years, have lived in the neighborhood
of Baltimore. The head of this family died a year ago, and left a widow and
three daughters. The lady though it it eligible to sell her husband's property in
Jamaica, the Island becoming hourly more exposed to the chances of war and
revolution, and transfer it to the United States, where she purposes henceforth
to reside. Watson had been her husband's friend, and his probity and
disinterestedness being well known, she entrusted him with legal powers to sell
this estate. This commission was punctually performed, and the purchase money
was received. In order to confer on it the utmost possible security, he rolled
up four bills of exchange, drawn upon opulent merchants of London, in a thin
sheet of lead, and depositing this roll in a leather^ girdle, fastened it round
his waist, and under his clothes; a second set he gave to me, and a third he
dispatched to Mr. Keysler, by a vessel which sailed a few days before him. On
our arrival in this city, we found that Keysler had received those transmitted
to him, and which he had been charged to keep till our arrival. They were now
produced, and, together with those which I had carried, were delivered to
Watson. By him they were joined to those in the girdle, which he still wore,
conceiving this method of conveyance to be safer than any other, and, at the
same time, imagining it needless, in so short a journey as remained to be
performed, to resort to other expedients.

The sum which he thus bore about him, was no less than ten thousand pounds
sterling. It constituted the whole patrimony of a worthy and excellent family,
and the loss of it reduces them to beggary. It is gone with Watson, and whither
Watson has gone, it is impossible even to guess.

You may now easily conceive, Sir, the dreadful disasters which may be
connected with this man's fate, and with what immeasurable anxiety his family
and friends have regarded his disappearance. That he is alive, can scarcely be
believed, for in what situation could he be placed in which he would not be
able and willing to communicate some tidings of his fate to his family?

Our grief has been unspeakably aggravated by the suspicions which Mrs. Maurice
and her friends have allowed themselves to admit. They do not scruple to
insinuate, that Watson, tempted by so great a prize, has secretly embarked for
England, in order to obtain payment for these bills, and retain the money for
his own use.

No man was more impatient of poverty than Watson, but no man's honesty was
more inflexible. He murmured at the destiny that compelled him to sacrifice his
(...), and risk his life upon the ocean in order to procure the means of
subsistence; and all the property which he had spent the best part of his life
in collecting, had just been ravished away from him by the English; but if he
had yielded to this temptation at any time, it would have been on receiving
these bills at Jamaica. Instead of coming hither, it would have been infinitely
more easy and convenient to have embarked directly for London; but none, who
thoroughly knew him, can, for a moment, harbor a suspicion of his truth.

If he be dead, and if the bills are not to be recovered, yet, to ascertain
this, will, at last, serve to vindicate his character. As long as his fate is
unknown, his fame will be loaded with the most flagrant imputations, and if
these bills be ever paid in London, these imputations will appear to be
justified. If he has been robbed, the robber will make haste to secure the
payment, and the Maurices may not unreasonably conclude that the robber was
Watson himself." Many other particulars were added by the stranger, to show the
extent of the evils flowing from the death of his brother, and the loss of the
papers which he carried with him.

I was greatly at a loss, continued Wortley, what directions or advice to
afford this man. Keysler, as you know, died early of the pestilence; but
Keysler was the only resident in this city with whom Williams had any
acquaintance. On mentioning the propriety of preventing the sale of these bills
in America, by some public notice, he told me that this caution had been early
taken; and I now remembered seeing the advertisement, in which the bills had
been represented as having been lost or stolen in this city, and a reward of a
thousand dollars was offered to any one who should restore them. This caution
had been published in September, in all the trading towns from Portsmouth to
Savannah, but had produced no satisfaction.

I accompanied Williams to the mayor's office, in hopes of finding in the
records of his proceedings, during the last six months, some traces of Watson,
but neither these records nor the memory of the magistrate, afforded us any
satisfaction. Watson's friends had drawn up, likewise, a description of the
person and dress of the fugitive, an account of the incidents attending his
disappearance, and of the papers which he had in his possession, with the
manner in which these papers had been secured. These had been already published
in the Southern newspapers, and have been just reprinted in our own. As the
former notice had availed nothing, this second expedient was thought necessary
to be employed.

After some reflection, it occurred to me that it might be proper to renew the
attempt which Williams had made to trace the footsteps of his friend to the
moment of his final disappearance. He had pursued Watson to Thetford's, but
Thetford himself had not been seen, and he had been contented with the vague
information of his clerk. Thetford and his family, including his clerk, had
perished, and it seemed as if this source of information was dried up. It was
possible, however, that old Thetford might have some knowledge of his nephew's
transactions, by which some light might chance to be thrown upon this
obscurity. I therefore called on him, but found him utterly unable to afford me
the light that I wished. My mention of the packet which Watson had brought to
Thetford, containing documents respecting the capture of a certai^ ship,
reminded him of the injuries which he had received from Welbeck, and excited
him to renew his menaces and imputations on that wretch* Having somewhat
exhausted this rhetoric, he proceeded to tell me what connection there was
between the remembrance of his injuries and the capture of this vessel.

This vessel and its cargo were, in fact, the property of Welbeck. They had
been sent to a good market and had been secured by an adequate insurance. The
value of this ship and cargo, and the validity of the policy he had taken care
to ascertain by means of his two nephews, one of whom had gone out supercargo.
This had formed his inducement to lend his three notes to Welbeck, in exchange
for three other notes, the whole amount of which included the equitable
interest of five per cent. per month on his own loan. For the payment of these
notes, he by no means relied, as the world foolishly imagined, on the seeming
opulence and secret funds of Welbeck. These were illusions too gross to have
any influence on him. He was too old a bird to be decoyed into the net by such
chaff. No; his nephew, the supercargo, would of course receive the produce of
the voyage, and so much of this produce as would pay his debt. He had procured
the owner's authority to intercept its passage from the pocket of his nephew to
that of Welbeck. In case of loss, he had obtained a similar security upon the
policy. Jamieson's proceedings had been the same with his own, and no affair in
which he had ever engaged, had appeared to be more free from hazard than this.
Their calculations, however, though plau^ible, were defeated. The ship was
taken and condemned, for a cause which rendered the insurance ineffectual.

I bestowed no time in reflecting on this tissue of extortions and frauds, and
on that course of events which to often disconcerts the stratagems of cunning.
The names of Welbeck and Watson were thus associated together, and filled my
thoughts with restlessness and suspicion. Welbeck was capable of any
wickedness. It was possible an interview had happened between these men, and
that the fugitive had been someway instrumental in Watson's fate. These
thoughts were mentioned to Williams, whom the name of Welbeck threw into the
utmost perturbation. On finding that one of this name had dwelt in this city,
and, that he had proved a villain, he instantly admitted the most dreary
forebodings.

I have heard, said Williams, the history of this W^^^beck a score of times
from my brother. There formerly subsisted a very intimate connection between
them. My brother had conferred upon one whom he thought honest, innumerable
benefits, but all his benefits had been repaid by the blackest treachery.
Welbeck's character and guilt had often been made the subject of talk between
us, but, on these occasions, my brother's placid and patient temper forsook
him. His grief for the calamities which had sprung from this man, and his
desire of revenge, burst all bounds, and transported him to a pitch of
temporary frenzy. I often enquired in what manner he intended to act, if a
meeting should take place between them. He answered, that doubtless he should
act like a maniac, in defiance of his sober principles, and of the duty which
he owed his family.

What, said I, would you stab or pistol him?

No! I was not born for an assassin. I would upbraid him in such terms as the
furious moment might suggest, and then challenge him to a meeting, from which
either he or I should not part with life. I would allow time for him to make
his peace with Heaven, and for me to blast his reputation upon earth, and to
make such provision for my possible death, as duty and discretion would
prescribe.

Now, nothing is more probable than that Welbeck and my brother have met.
Thetford would of course mention his name and interest in the captured ship,
and hence the residence of this detested being in this city, would be made
known. Their meeting could not take place without some dreadful consequence. I
am fearful that to that meeting we must impute the disappearance of my brother.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER IV.
HERE was new light thrown upon the character of Welbeck, and new food
administered to my suspicions. No conclusion could be more plausible than that
which Williams had drawn; but how should it be rendered certain? Walter
Thetford, or some of his family, had possibly been witnesses of something,
which, added to our previous knowledge, might strengthen or prolong that clue,
one end of which seemed now to be put into our hands; but Thetford's
father-in-law was the only one of his family, who, by seasonable flight from
the city, had escaped the pestilence. To him, who still resided in the country,
I repaired with all speed, accompanied by Williams.

The old man being reminded, by a variety of circumstances, of the incidents of
that eventful period, was, at length, enabled to relate that he had been
present at the meeting which took place between Watson and his son Walter, when
certain packets were delivered by the former, relative, as he quickly
understood, to the condemnation of a ship in which Thomas Thetford had gone
supercargo. He had noticed some emotion of the stranger, occasioned by his
son's mentioning the concern which Welbeck had in the vessel. He likewise
remembered the stranger's declaring his intention of visiting Welbeck, and
requesting Walter to afford him directions to his house.

"Next morning at the breakfast table, continued the old man, I adverted to
yesterday's incidents, and asked my son how Welbeck had borne the news of the
loss of his ship. He bore it, says Walter, as a man of his wealth ought to bear
so trivial a loss. But there was something very strange in his behavior, says
my son, when I mentioned the name of the captain who brought the papers; and
when I mentioned the captain's design of paying him a visit, he stared upon me,
for a moment, as if he were frighted out of his wits, and then, snatching up
his hat, ran furiously out of the house. This was all my son said upon that
occasion; but, as I have since heard, it was on that very night, that Welbeck
absconded from his creditors."

I have this moment returned from this interview with old Thetford. I come to
you, because I thought it possible that Mervyn, agreeably to your expectations,
had returned, and I wanted to see the lad once more. My suspicions with regard
to him have been confirmed, and a warrant was this day issued for apprehending
him as Welbeck's accomplice.

I was startled by this news. My friend, said I, be cautious how you act, I
beseech you. You know not in what evils you may involve the innocent. Mervyn I
know to be blameless; but Welbeck is indeed, a villain. The latter I shall not
be sorry to see brought to justice, but the former, instead of meriting
punishment, is entitled to rewards.

So you believe, on the mere assertion of the boy, perhaps, his plausible lies
might produce the same effect upon me, but I must stay till he thinks proper to
exert his skill. The suspicions to which he is exposed will not easily be
obviated; but if he has any thing to say in his defense, his judicial
examination will afford him the suitable opportunity. Why are you so much
afraid to subject his innocence to this test? It was not till you heard his
tale, that your own suspicions were removed. Allow me the same privilege of
unbelief.

But you do me wrong, in deeming me the cause of his apprehension. It is
Jamieson and Thetford's work, and they have not proceeded on shadowy surmises
and the impulses of mere revenge. Facts have come to light of which you are
wholly unaware, and which, when known to you, will conquer even your
incredulity as to the guilt of Mervyn.

Facts? Let me know them, I beseech you. If Mervyn has deceived me, there is an
end to my confidence in human nature. All limits to dissimulation, and all
distinctions between vice and virtue will be effaced. No man's word, no force
of collateral evidence shall weigh with me an hair.

It was time, replied my friend, that your confidence in smooth features and
fluent accents should have ended long ago. Till I gained from my present
profession, some knowledge of the world, a knowledge which was not gained in a
moment, and has not cost a trifle, I was equally wise in my own conceit; and,
in order to decide upon the truth of any one's pretensions, needed only a clear
view of his face and a distinct hearing of his words. My folly, in that
respect, was only to be cured, however, by my own experience, and I suppose
your credulity will yield to no other remedy. These are the facts.

Mrs. Wentworth, the proprietor of the house in which Welbeck lived, has
furnished some intelligence respecting Mervyn, whose truth cannot be doubted,
and which furnishes the strongest evidence of a conspiracy between this lad and
his employer. It seems, that, some years since, a nephew of this lady left his
father's family clandestinely, and has not been heard of since. This nephew was
intended to inherit her fortunes, and her anxieties and enquiries respecting
him have been endless and incessant. These, however, have been fruitless.
Welbeck, knowing these circumstances, and being desirous of substituting a girl
whom he had molded for his purpose, in place of the lost youth, in the
affections of the lady while living, and in her testament when dead, endeavored
to persuade her that the youth had died in some foreign country. For this end,
Mervyn was to personate a kinsman of Welbeck who had just arrived from Europe,
and who had been a witness of her nephew's death. A story was, no doubt, to be
contrived, where truth should be copied with the most exquisite dexterity, and
the lady, being prevailed upon to believe the story, the way was cleared for
accomplishing the remainder of the plot.

In due time, and after the lady's mind had been artfully prepared by Welbeck,
the pupil made his appearance; and, in a conversation full of studied
ambiguities, assured the lady, that her nephew was dead. For the present he
declined relating the particulars of his death, and displayed a constancy and
intrepidity in resisting her entreaties, that would have been admirable in a
better cause. Before she had time to fathom this painful mystery, Welbeck's
frauds were in danger of detection, and he and his pupil suddenly disappeared.

While the plot was going forward, there occurred an incident which the
plotters had not foreseen or precluded, and which possibly might have created
some confusion or impediment in their designs. A bundle was found one night in
the street, consisting of some coarse clothes, and containing, in the midst of
it, the miniature portrait of Mrs. Wentworth's nephew. It fell into the hands
of one of that lady's friends, who immediately dispatched the bundle to her.
Mervyn, in his interview with this lady, spied the portrait on the
mantle-piece. Led by some freak of fancy, or some web of artifice, he
introduced the talk respecting her nephew, by boldly claiming it as his; but,
when the mode in which it had been found was mentioned, he was disconcerted and
confounded, and precipitately withdrew.

This conduct, and the subsequent flight of the lad, afforded ground enough to
question the truth of his intelligence respecting her nephew; but it has since
been confuted, in a letter just received from her brother in England. In this
letter she is informed, that her nephew had been seen by one who knew him well,
in Charleston; that some intercourse took place between the youth and the
bearer of the news, in the course of which the latter had persuaded the nephew
to return to his family, and that the youth had given some tokens of
compliance. The letter-writer, who was father to the fugitive, had written to
certain friends at Charleston, entreating them to use their influence with the
runaway to the same end, and, at any rate, to cherish and protect him. Thus, I
hope you will admit that the duplicity of Mervyn is demonstrated.

The facts which you have mentioned, said I, after some pause, partly
correspond with Mervyn's story; but the last particular is irreconcileably
repugnant to it. Now, for the first time, I begin to feel that my confidence is
shaken. I feel my mind bewildered and distracted by the multitude of new
discoveries which have just taken place. I want time to revolve them slowly, to
weigh them accurately, and to estimate their consequences fully. I am afraid to
speak; fearing, that, in the present trouble of my thoughts, I may say
something which I may afterward regret. I want a counselor; but you, Wortley,
are unfit for the office. Your judgment is unfurnished with the same materials;
your sufferings have soured your humanity and biassed your candor. The only one
qualified to divide with me these cares, and aid in selecting the best mode of
action, is my wife. She is mistress of Mervyn's history; an observer of his
conduct during his abode with us; and is hindered, by her education and temper,
from deviating into rigor and malevolence. Will you pardon me, therefore, if I
defer commenting on your narrative till I have had an opportunity of reviewing
it and comparing it with my knowledge of the lad, collected from himself and
from my own observation.

Wortley could not but admit the justice of my request, and after some
desultory conversation we parted. I hastened to communicate to my wife the
various intelligence which I had lately received. Mrs. Althorpe's portrait of
the Mervyns contained lineaments which the summary detail of Arthur did not
enable us fully to comprehend. The treatment which the youth is said to have
given to his father; the illicit commerce that subsisted between him and his
father's wife; the pillage of money and his father's horse, but ill accorded
with the tale which we had heard, and disquieted our minds with doubts, though
far from dictating our belief.

What, however, more deeply absorbed our attention, was the testimony of
Williams and of Mrs. Wentworth. That which was mysterious and inscrutable to
Wortley and the friends of Watson, was luminous to us. The coincidence between
the vague hints, laboriously collected by these enquirers, and the narrative of
Mervyn, afforded the most cogent attestation of the truth of that narrative.

Watson had vanished from all eyes, but the spot where rested his remains was
known to us. The girdle spoken of by Williams, would not be suspected to exist
by his murderer. It was unmolested, and was doubtless buried with him. That
which was so earnestly sought, and which constituted the subsistence of the
Maurices, would probably be found adhering to his body. What conduct was
incumbent upon me who possessed this knowledge?

It was just to restore these bills to their true owner; but how could this be
done without hazardous processes and tedious disclosures? To whom ought these
disclosures to be made? By what authority or agency could these half-decayed
limbs be dug up, and the lost treasure be taken from amidst the horrible
corruption in which it was immersed?

This ought not to be the act of a single individual. This act would entangle
him in a maze of perils and suspicions, of concealments and evasions, from
which he could not hope to escape with his reputation inviolate. The proper
method was through the agency of the law. It is to this that Mervyn must submit
his conduct. The story which he told to me he must tell to the world.
Suspicions have fixed themselves upon him, which allow him not the privilege of
silence and obscurity. While he continued unknown and unthought of, the
publication of his story would only give unnecessary birth to dangers; but now
dangers are incurred which it may probably contribute to lessen, if not to
remove.

Meanwhile the return of Mervyn to the city was anxiously expected. Day after
day passed and no tidings were received. I had business of an urgent nature
which required my presence in Jersey, but which, in the daily expectation of
the return of my young friend, I postponed a week longer than rigid discretion
allowed. At length I was obliged to comply with the exigence, and left the
city, but made such arrangements that I should be apprized by my wife of
Mervyn's return with all practicable expedition.

These arrangements were superfluous, for my business was dispatched, and my
absence at an end, before the youth had given us any tokens of his approach. I
now remembered the warnings of Wortley, and his assertions that Mervyn had
withdrawn himself forever from our view. The event had hitherto unwelcomely
coincided with these predictions, and a thousand doubts and misgivings were
awakened.

One evening, while preparing to shake off gloomy thoughts by a visit to a
friend, some one knocked at my door, and left a billet containing these words:
"Dr. Stevens is requested to come immediately to the Debtors' Apartments in
Prune Street."

This billet was without signature. The handwriting was unknown, and the
precipitate departure of the bearer, left me wholly at a loss with respect to
the person of the writer, or the end for which my presence was required. This
uncertainty only hastened my compliance with the summons.

The evening was approaching -- a time when the prison doors are accustomed to
be shut and strangers to be excluded. This furnished an additional reason for
dispatch. As I walked swiftly along, I revolved the possible motives that might
have prompted this message. A conjecture was soon formed, which led to
apprehension and inquietude.

One of my friends, by name Carlton, was embarrassed with debts which he was
unable to discharge. He had lately been menaced with arrest, by a creditor not
accustomed to remit any of his claims. I dreaded that this catastrophe had now
happened, and called to mind the anguish with which this untoward incident
would overwhelm his family. I knew his incapacity to take away the claim of his
creditor by payment, or to soothe him into clemency by supplication.

So prone is the human mind to create for itself distress, that I was not aware
of the uncertainty of this evil till I arrived at the prison. I checked myself
at the moment when I opened my lips to utter the name of my friend, and was
admitted without particulur enquiries. I supposed that he by whom I had been
summoned hither would meet me in the common room.

The apartment was filled with pale faces and withered forms. The marks of
negligence and poverty were visible in all; but few betrayed, in their features
or gestures, any symptoms of concern on account of their condition. Ferocious
gaiety, or stupid indifference, seemed to sit upon every brow. The vapor from
an heated stove, mingled with the fumes of beer and tallow that were spilled
upon it, and with the tainted breath of so promiscuous a crowd, loaded the
stagnant atmosphere. At my first transition from the cold and pure air without,
to this noxious element, I found it difficult to breathe. A moment, however,
reconciled me to my situation, and I looked anxiousl^ round to discover some
face which I knew.

Almost every mouth was furnished with a segar, and every hand with a glass of
porter. Conversation, carried on with much emphasis of tone and gesture, was
not wanting. Sundry groupes, in different corners, were beguiling the tedious
hours at whist. Others, unemployed, were strolling to and fro, and testified
their vacancy of thought and care by humming or whistling a tune.

I fostered the hope, that my prognostics had deceived me. This hope was
strengthened by reflecting that the billet received was written in a different
hand from that of my friend. Meanwhile I continued my search. Seated on a
bench, silent and aloof from the crowd, his eyes fixed upon the floor, and his
face half concealed by his hand, a form was at length discovered which verified
all my conjectures and fears. Carlton was he.

My heart drooped, and my tongue faultered, at this sight. I surveyed him for
some minutes in silence. At length, approaching the bench on which he sat, I
touched his hand and awakened him from his reverie. He looked up. A momentary
gleam of joy and surpri^e was succeeded by a gloom deeper than before.

It was plain that my friend needed consolation. He was governed by an
exquisite sensibility to disgrace. He was impatient of constraint. He shrunk,
with fastidious abhorrence, from the contact of the vulgar and the profligate.
His constitution was delicate and feeble. Impure airs, restraint from exercise,
unusual aliment, unwholesome or incommodious accommodations, and perturbed
thoughts, were, at any time, sufficient to generate disease and to deprive him
of life.

To these evils he was now subjected. He had no money wherewith to purchase
food. He had been dragged hither in the morning. He had not tasted a a morsel
since his entrance. He had not provided a bed on which to lie; or enquired in
what room, or with what companions, the night was to be spent.

Fortitude was not among my friend's qualities. He was more prone to shrink
from danger than encounter it, and to yield to the flood rather than sustain
it; but it is just to observe, that his anguish, on the present occasion, arose
not wholly from selfish considerations. His parents were dead, and two sisters
were dependent on him for support. One of these was nearly of his own age. The
other was scarcely emerged from childhood. There was an intellectual as well as
a personal resemblance between my friend and his sisters. They possessed his
physical infirmities, his vehement passions, and refinements of taste; and the
misery of his condition was tenfold increased, by reflecting on the feelings
which would be awakened in them by the knowledge of his state, and the
hardships to which the loss of his succor would expose them.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER V.
IT was not in my power to release my friend by the payment of his debt; but,
by contracting with the keeper of the prison for his board, I could save him
from famine; and, by suitable exertions, could procure him lodging as
convenient as the time would admit. I could promise to console and protect his
sisters, and, by cheerful tones and frequent visits, dispel some part of the
evil which encompassed him.

After the first surprise had subsided, he enquired by what accident this
meeting had been produced. Conscious of my incapacity to do him any essential
service, and unwilling to make me a partaker in his miseries, he had forborne
to inform me of his condition.

This assurance was listened to with some wonder. I showed him the billet. It
had not been written by him. He was a stranger to the penmanship. None but the
attorney and officer were apprized of his fate. It was obvious to conclude,
that this was the interposition of some friend, who, knowing my affection for
Carlton, had taken this mysterious method of calling me to his succor.

Conjectures, as to the author and motives of this interposition, were
suspended by more urgent considerations. I requested an interview with the
keeper, and enquired how Carlton could be best accommodated.

He said, that all his rooms were full but one, which, in consequence of the
dismission of three persons in the morning, had at present but one tenant. This
person had lately arrived, was sick, and had with him, at this time, one of his
friends. Carlton might divide the chamber with this person. No doubt his
consent would be readily given; though this arrangement, being the best, must
take place whether he consented or not.

This consent I resolved immediately to seek, and, for that purpose, desired to
be led to the chamber. The door of the apartment was shut. I knocked for
admission. It was instantly opened, and I entered. The first person who met my
view was -- Arthur Mervyn.

I started with astonishment. Mervyn's countenance betrayed nothing but
satisfaction at the interview. The traces of fatigue and anxiety gave place to
tenderness and joy. It readily occurred to me that Mervyn was the writer of the
note which I had lately received. To meet him within these walls, and at this
time, was the most remote and undesirable of all contingences. The same hour
had thus made me acquainted with the kindred and unwelcome sat of two beings
whom I most loved.

I had scarcely time to return his embrace, when, taking my hand, he led me to
a bed that stood in one corner. There was stretched upon it one whom a second
glance enabled me to call by his name, though I had never before seen him. The
vivid portrait which Mervyn had drawn was conspicuous in the sunken and haggard
visage before me. This face had, indeed, proportions and lines which could
never be forgotten or mistaken. Welbeck, when once seen or described, was
easily distinguished from the rest of mankind. He had stronger motives than
other men for abstaining from guilt, the difficulty of concealment or disguise
being tenfold greater in him than in others, by reason of the indelible and
eye-attracting marks which nature had set upon him.

He was pallid and emaciated. He did not open his eyes on my entrance. He
seemed to be asleep; but, before I had time to exchange glances with Mervyn, or
to enquire into the nature of the scene, he awoke. On seeing me he started, and
cast a look of upbraiding on my companion. The latter comprehended his emotion
and endeavored to appease him.

This person, said he, is my friend. He is likewise a physician; and,
perceiving your state to require medical assistance, I ventured to send for him.

Welbeck replied, in a contemptuous and indignant tone, thou mistakest my
condition, boy. My disease lies deeper than his scrutiny will ever reach. I had
hoped thou were gone. Thy importunities are well meant, but they aggravate my
miseries.

He now rose from the bed, and continued, in a firm and resolute tone, you are
intruders into this apartment. It is mine, and I desire to be left alone.

Mervyn returned, at first, no answer to this address. He was immersed in
perplexity. At length, raising his eyes from the floor, he said, my intentions
are indeed honest, and I am grieved that I want the power of persuasion.
Tomorrow, perhaps, I may reason more cogently with your despair, or your
present mood may be changed. To aid my own weakness I will entreat the
assistance of this friend.

These words roused a new spirit in Welbeck. His confusion and anger increased.
His tongue faultered as he exclaimed, good God! what mean you? Headlong and
rash as you are, you will not share with this person your knowledge of me? --
Here he checked himself, conscious that the words he had already uttered tended
to the very end which he dreaded. This consciousness, added to the terror of
more ample disclosures, which the simplicity and rectitude of Mervyn might
prompt him to make, chained up his tongue, and covered him with dismay.

Mervyn was not long in answering -- I comprehend your fears and your wishes. I
am bound to tell you the truth. To this person your story has already been
told. Whatever I have witnessed under your roof, whatever I have heard from
your lips, have been faithfully disclosed to him.

The countenance of Welbeck now betrayed a mixture of incredulity and horror.
For a time his utterance was stifled by his complicated feelings.

It cannot be. So enormous a deed is beyond thy power. Thy qualities are
mavelous. Every new act of thine outstrips the last, and bel^es the newest
calculations. But this -- this perfidy exceeds -- This outrage upon promises,
this violation of faith, this blindness to the future is incredible. There he
stopped; while his looks seemed to call upon Mervyn for a contradiction of his
first assertion.

I know full well how inexpiably stupid or wicked my act will appear to you,
but I will not prevaricate or lie. I repeat, that every thing is known to him.
Your birth; your early fortunes; the incidents at Charleston and Wilmington;
your treatment of the brother and sister; your interview with Watson, and the
fatal issue of that interview -- I have told him all, just as it was told to me.

Here the shock that was felt by Welbeck overpowered his caution and his
strength. He sunk upon the side of the bed. His air was still incredulous, and
he continued to gaze upon Mervyn. He spoke in a tone less vehement.

And have thou then betrayed me? Have thou shut every avenue to my return to
honor? Am I known to be a seducer and assassin? To have meditated all crimes,
and to have perpetrated the worst?

Infamy and death are my portion. I know they are reserved for me; but I did
not think to receive them at thy hands, that under that innocent guise there
lurked a heart treacherous and cruel. But go; leave me to myself. This stroke
has exterminated my remnant of hope. Leave me to prepare my neck for the
halter, and my lips for this last, and bitterest cup.

Mervyn struggled with his tears and replied, all this was foreseen, and all
this I was prepared to endure. My friend and I will withdraw, as you wish; but
tomorrow I return; not to indicate my faith or my humanity; not to make you
recant your charges, or forgive the faults which I seem to have committed, but
to extricate you from your present evil, or to arm you with fortitude.

So saying he led the way out of the room. I followed him in silence. The
strangeness and abruptness of this scene left me no power to assume a part in
it. I looked on with new and indescribable sensations. I reached the street
before my recollection was perfectly recovered. I then reflected on the purpose
that had led me to Welbeck's chamber. This purpose was yet unaccomplished. I
desired Mervyn to linger a moment while I returned into the house. I once more
enquired for the keeper, and told him I should leave to him the province of
acquainting Welbeck with the necessity of sharing his apartment with a
stranger. I speedily rejoined Mervyn in the street.

I lost no time in requiring an explanation of the scene that I had witnessed.
How became you once more the companion of Welbeck? Why did you not inform me by
letter of your arrival at Malverton, and of what occurred during your absence?
What is the fate of Mr. Hadwin and of Wallace?

Alas! said he, I perceive, that, though I have written, you have never
received my letters. The tale of what has occurred since we parted is long and
various. I am not only willing but eager to communicate the story, but this is
no suitable place. Have patience till we reach your house. I have involved
myself in perils and embarrassments from which I depend upon your counsel and
(...) to release me.

I had scarcely reached my own door, when I was overtaken by a servant, whom I
knew to belong to the family in which Carlton and his sisters resided. Her
message, therefore, was readily guessed. She came, as I expected, to enquire
for my friend, who had left his home in the morning with a stranger, and had
not yet returned. His absence had occasioned some inquietude, and his sister
had sent this message to me, to procure what information respecting the cause
of his detention I was able to give.

My perplexity hindered me, for some time, from answering. I was willing to
communicate the painful truth with my own mouth. I saw the necessity of putting
an end to her suspense, and of preventing the news from reaching her with
fallacious aggravations or at an unseasonable time.

I told the messenger, that I had just parted with Mr. Carlton, that he was
well, and that I would speedily come and acquaint his sister with the cause of
his absence.

Though burning with curiosity respecting Mervyn and Welbeck, I readily
postponed its gratification till my visit to Miss Carlton was performed. I had
rarely seen this lady; my friendship for her brother, though ardent, having
been lately formed, and chiefly matured by interviews at my house. I had
designed to introduce her to my wife, but various accidents had hindered the
execution of my purpose. Now consolation and counsel was more needed than ever,
and delay or reluctance in bestowing it would have been, in an high degree,
unpardonable.

I therefore parted with Mervyn, requesting him to await my return, and
promisin^ to perform the engagement which compelled me to leave him with the
utmost dispatch. On entering M^ss Ca^lt^n's apartment, I assumed an air of as
much tranqill^ty as possible. I found the lady seated at a desk, with pen in
hand and parchment before her. She greeted me with affectionate dignity, and
caught from my countenance that cheerfulness of which on my entrance she was
destitute.

You come, said she* to inform me what has made my brother a truant today.
Till your message was received I was somewhat anxious. This day he usually
spends in rambling through the fields, but so bleak and stormy an atmosphere I
suppose would prevent his excursion. I pray, sir, what is it detains him?

To conquer my embarrassment, and introduce the subject by indirect and
cautious means, I eluded her question, and casting an eye at the parchment, how
now? said I; this is strange employment for a lady. I knew that my friend
pursued this trade, and lived by binding fast the bargains which others made,
but I knew not that the pen was ever usurped by his sister.

The usurpation was prompted by necessity. My brother's impatient temper and
delicate frame unfitted him for this trade. He pursued it with no less
reluctance than diligence, devoting to the task three nights in the week and
the whole of each day. It would long ago have killed him, if I had not
bethought myself of sharing his tasks. The pen was irksome and toilsome at
first, but use has made it easy, and far more eligible than the needle, which
was formerly my only tool.

This arrangement affords my brother opportunities of exercise and recreation,
without diminishing our profits; and my time, though not less constantly, is
more agreeably, as well as more lucratively, employed than formerly.

I admire your reasoning. By this means provision is made against untoward
accidents. If sickness should disable him, you are qualified to pursue the same
means of support.

At these words the lady's countenance changed. She put her hand on my arm, and
said, in a fluttering and hurried accent, is my brother sick?

No. He is in perfect health. My observation was an harmless one. I am sorry to
observe your readiness to draw alarming inferences. If I were to say, that your
scheme is useful to supply deficiencies, not only when your brother is disabled
by sickness, but when thrown, by some inhuman creditor, into jail, no doubt you
would perversely and hastily infer that he is now in prison.

I had scarcely ended the sentence, when the piercing eyes of the lady were
anxiously fixed upon mine. After a moment's pause, she exclaimed -- The
inference, indeed, is too plain. I know his fate. It has long been foreseen and
expected, and I have summoned up my equanimity to meet it. Would to Heaven he
may find the calamity as light as I should find it; but I fear his too
irritable spirit.

When her fears were confirmed, she started out into no vehemence of
exclamation. She quickly suppressed a few tears which would not be withheld,
and listened to my narrative of what had lately occurred, with tokens of
gratitude.

Formal consolation was superfluous. Her mind was indeed more fertile than my
own in those topics which take away its keenest edge from affliction. She
observed that it was far from being the heaviest calamity which might have
happened. The creditor was perhaps vincible by arguments and supplications. If
these should succeed, the disaster would not only be removed, but that security
from future molestation, be gained, to which they had for a long time been
strangers.

Should he be obdurate, their state was far from being hopeless. Carlton's
situation allowed him to pursue his profession. His gains would be equal, and
his expenses would not be augmented. By their mutual industry they might hope
to amass sufficient to discharge the debt at no very remote period.

What she chiefly dreaded was the pernicious influence of dejection and
sedentary labor on her brother's health. Yet this was not to be considered as
inevitable. Fortitude might be inspired by exhortation and example, and no
condition precluded us from every species of bodily exertion. The less inclined
he should prove to cultivate the means of deliverance and happiness within his
reach, the more necessary it became for her to stimulate and fortify his
resolution.

If I were captivated by the charms of this lady's person and carriage, my
reverence was excited by these proofs of wisdom and energy. I zealously
promised to concur with her in every scheme she should adopt for her own or her
brother's advantage; and after spending some hours with her, took my leave.

I now regretted the ignorance in which I had hitherto remained respecting this
lady. That she was, in an eminent degree, feminine and lovely, was easily
discovered; but intellectual weakness had been rashly inferred from external
frailty. She was accustomed to shrink from observation, and reserve was
mistaken for timidity. I called on Carlton only when numerous engagements would
allow, and when by some accident, his customary visits had been intermitted. On
those occasions, my stay was short, and my attention chiefly confined to her
brother. I now resolved to atone for my ancient negligence, not only by my own
assiduities, but by those of my wife.

On my return home, I found Mervyn and my wife in earnest discourse. I
anticipated the shock which the sensibility of the latter would receive from
the tidings which I had to communicate respecting Carlton. I was unwilling, and
yet perceived the necessity, of disclosing the truth. I desired to bring these
women, as soon as possible, to the knowledge of each other, but the necessary
prelude to this was an acquaintance with the disaster that had happened.

Scarcely had I entered the room, when Mervyn turned to me and said, with an
air of anxiety and impatience -- Pray, my friend, have you any knowledge of
Francis Carlton?

The mention of this name by Mervyn, produced some surprise. I acknowledged my
acquaintance with him.

Do you know in what situation he now is?

In answer to this question, I stated by what singular means his situation had
been made known to me, and the purpose, from the accomplishment of which, I had
just returned. I enquired, in my turn, whence originated this question?

He had overheard the name of Carlton in the prison. Two persons were communing
in a corner, and accident enabled him to catch this name, though uttered by
them in an half whisper, and to discover that the person talked about, had
lately been conveyed thither.

This name was not now heard for the first time. It was connected with
remembrances that made him anxious for the fate of him to whom it belonged. In
discourse with my wife, this name chanced to be again mentioned, and his
curiosity was roused afresh. I was willing to communicate all that I knew, but
Mervyn's own destiny was too remarkable not to absorb all my attention, and I
refused to discuss any other theme till that were fully explained. He postponed
his own gratification to mine, and consented to relate the incidents that had
happened from the moment of our separation till the present.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER VI.
AT parting with you, my purpose was to reach the abode of the Hadwins as
speedily as possible. I traveled therefore with diligence. Setting out so
early, I expected, though on foot, to reach the end of my journey before noon.
The activity of muscles is no obstacle to thought. So far from being
inconsistent with intense musing, it is, in my own case, propitious to that
state of mind.

Probably no one had stronger motives for ardent meditation than I. My second
journey to the city was prompted by reasons, and attended by incidents, that
seemed to have a present existence. To think upon them, was to view, more
deliberately and thoroughly, objects and persons that still hovered in my
sight. Instead of their attributes being already seen, and their consequences
at an end, it seemed as if a series of numerous years and unintermitted
contemplation were requisite to comprehend them fully, and bring into existence
their most momentous effects.

If men be chiefly distinguished from each other by the modes in which
attention is employed, either on external and sensible objects, or merely on
abstract ideas and the creatures of reflection, I may justly claim to be
enrolled in the second class. My existence is a series of thoughts rather than
of motions. Ratiocination and deduction leave my senses unemployed. The fullness
of my fancy renders my eye vacant and inactive. Sensations do not precede and
suggest, but follow and are secondary to the acts of my mind.

There was one motive, however, which made me less inattentive to the scene
that was continually shifting before and without me than I am wont to be. The
loveliest form which I had hitherto seen, was that of Clemenza Lodi. I recalled
her condition as I had witnessed it, as Welbeck had described, and as you had
painted it. The past was without remedy; but the future was, in some degree,
within our power to create and to fashion. Her state was probably dangerous.
She might already be forlorn, beset with temptation or with anguish; or danger
might only be approaching her, and the worst evils be impending ones.

I was ignorant of her state. Could I not remove this ignorance? Would not some
benefit redound to her from beneficent and seasonable interposition?

You had mentioned that her abode had lately been with Mrs. Villars, and that
this lady still resided in the country. The residence had been sufficiently
described, and I perceived that I was now approaching it. In a short time I
spied its painted roof and five chimnies through an avenue of catalpas.

When opposite the gate which led into this avenue, I paused. It seemed as if
this moment were to decide upon the liberty and innocence of this being. In a
moment I might place myself before her, ascertain her true condition, and point
out to her the path of honor and safety. This opportunity might be the last.
Longer delay might render interposition fruitless.

But Low was I to interpose? I was a stranger to her language, and she was
unacquainted with mine. To obtain access to her, it was necessary only to
demand it. But how should I explain my views and state my wishes when an
interview was gained? And what expedient was it in my power to propose?

Now, said I, I perceive the value of that wealth which I have been accustomed
to despise. The power of eating and drinking, the nature and limits of
existence and physical enjoyment, are not changed or enlarged by the increase
of wealth. Our cor^oreal and intellectual wants are supplied at little expense;
but our own wants are the wants of others, and that which remains, after our
own necessities are obviated, it is always easy and just to employ in relieving
the necessities of others.

There are no superfluities in my store. It is not in my power to supply this
unfortunate girl with decent raiment and honest bread. I have no house to which
to conduct her. I have no means of securing her from famine and cold.

Yet, though indigent and feeble, I am not destitute of friends and of home.
Cannot she be admitted to the same asylum to which I am now going? This thought
was sudden and new. The more it was revolved, the more plausible it seemed.
This was not merely the sole expedient, but the best that could have been
suggested.

The Hadwins were friendly, hospitable, uns^spicious. Their board, though
simple and uncouth, was wholesome and plenteous. Their residence was
sequestered and obscure, and not obnoxious to impertinent enquiries and
malignant animadversion. Their frank and ingenuous temper would make them easy
of persuasion, and their sympathies were prompt and overflowing.

I am nearly certain, continued I, that they will instantly afford protection
to this desolate girl. Why shall I not anticipate their consent, and present
myself to their embraces and their welcomes in her company?

Slight reflection showed me, that this precipitation was improper. Whether
Wallace had ever arrived at Malverton? Whether Mr. Hadwin had escaped
infection? whether his house were the abode of security and quiet, or a scene
of desolation? were questions yet to be determined. The obvious and best
proceeding was to hasten forward, to afford the Hadwins, if in distress, the
feeble consolations of my friendship; or, if their state were happy, to procure
their concurrence to my scheme respecting Clemenza.

Actuated by these considerations, I resumed my journey. Looking forward, I
perceived a chaise and horse standing by the left hand fence, at the distance
of some hundred yards. This object was not uncommon or strange, and, therefore,
it was scarcely noticed. When I came near, however, methought I recognized in
this carriage the same in which my importunities had procured a seat for the
languishing Wallace, in the manner which I have formerly related.

It was a crazy vehicle and old fashioned. When once seen it could scarcely be
mistaken or forgotten. The horse was held by his bridle to a post, but the seat
was empty. My solicitude with regard to Wallace's destiny, of which he to whom
the carriage belonged might possibly afford me some knowledge, made me stop and
reflect on what measures it was proper to pursue.

The rider could not be at a great distance from this spot. His absence would
probably be short. By lingering a few minutes an interview might be gained, and
the uncertainty and suspense of some hours be thereby precluded. I therefore
waited, and the same person whom I had formerly encountered made his
appearance, in a short time, from under a copse that skirted the road.

He recognized me with more difficulty than attended my recognition of him. The
circumstances, however, of our first meeting were easily recalled to his
remembrance. I eagerly enquired when and where he had parted with the youth who
had been, on that occasion, entrusted to his care.

He answered, that, on leaving the city and inhaling the purer air of the
fields and woods, Wallace had been, in a wonderful degree, invigorated and
refreshed. An instantaneous and total change appeared to have been wrought in
him. He no longer languished with fatigue or fear, but became full of gaiety
and talk.

The suddenness of this transition; the levity with which he related and
commented on his recent dangers and evils, excited the astonishment of his
companion, to whom he not only communicated the history of his disease, but
imparted many anecdotes of a humorous kind. Some of these my companion
repeated. I heard them with regret and dissatisfaction. They betokened a mind
vitiated by intercourse with the thoughtless and depraved of both sexes, and
particularly with infamous and profligate women.

My companion proceeded to mention, that Wallace's exhiliration lasted but for
a short time, and disappeared as suddenly as it had appeared. He was seized
with deadly sickness, and insisted upon leaving the carriage, whose movements
shocked his stomach and head to an insupportable degree. His companion was not
void of apprehensions on his own account, but was unwilling to desert him, and
endeavored to encourage him. His efforts were vain. Though the nearest house
was at the distance of some hundred yards, and though it was probable that the
inhabitants of this house would refuse to accommodate one in his condition, yet
Wallace could not be prevailed on to proceed; and, in spite of persuasion and
remonstrance, left the carriage and threw himself on the grassy bank beside the
road.

This person was not unmindful of the hazard which he incurred by contact with
a sick man. He conceived himself to have performed all that was consistent with
duty to himself and to his family; and Wallace, persisting in affirming that,
by attempting to ride farther, he should merely hasten his death, was at length
left to his own guidance.

These were unexpected and mournful tidings. I had fondly imagined, that his
safety was put beyond the reach of untoward accidents. Now, however, there was
reason to suppose him to have perished by a lingering and painful disease,
rendered fatal by the selfishness of mankind, by the want of seasonable
remedies, and exposure to inclement airs. Some uncertainty, however, rested on
his fate. It was my duty to remove it, and to carry to the Hadwins no mangled
and defective tale. Where, I asked, had Wallace and his companion parted?

It was about three miles further onward. The spot and the house within view
from the spot, were accurately described. In this house it was possible that
Wallace had sought an asylum, and some intelligence respecting him might be
gained from its inhabitants. My informant was journeying to the city, so that
we were obliged to separate.

In consequence of this man's description of Wallace's deportment, and the
proofs of a dissolute and thoughtless temper which he had given, I began to
regard his death as an event less deplorable. Such an one was unworthy of a
being so devoutly pure, so ardent in fidelity and tenderness as Susan Hadwin.
If he loved, it was probable that in defiance of his vows, he would seek a
different companion. If he adhered to his first engagements, his motives would
be sordid, and the disclosure of his latent defects might produce more
exquisite misery to his wife, than his premature death or treacherous desertion.

The preservation of this man, was my sole motive for entering the infected
city, and subjecting my own life to the hazards, from which my escape may
almost be esteemed miraculous. Was not the end disproportioned to the means?
Was there arrogance in believing my life a price too great to be given for his?

I was not, indeed, sorry for the past. My purpose was just, and the means
which I selected, were the best my limited knowledge applied. My happiness
should be drawn from reflection on the equity of my intentions. That these
intentions were frustrated by the ignorance of others, or my own, was the
consequence of human frailty. Honest purposes, though they may not bestow
happiness on others, will, at least, secure it to him who fosters them.

By these reflections my regrets were dissipated, and I prepared to rejoice
alike, whether Wallace should be found to have escaped or to have perished. The
house to which I had been directed was speedily brought into view. I enquired
for the master or mistress of the mansion, and was conducted to a lady of a
plain and housewifely appearance.

My curiosity was fully gratified. Wallace, whom my description easily
identified, had made his appearance at her door on the evening of the day on
which he left the city. Thedread of the fever was descanted on with copious and
rude eloquence. I supposed her eloquence on this theme to be designed to
apologize to me for her refusing entrance to the sick man. The peroration,
however, was different. Wallace was admitted, and suitable attention paid to
his wants.

Happily, the guest had nothing to struggle with but extreme weakness. Repose,
nourishing diet, and salubrious airs restored him in a short time to health. He
lingered under this roof for three weeks, and then, without any professions of
gratitude, or offers of pecuniary remuneration, or information of the course
which he determined to take, he left them.

These facts, added to that which I had previously known, threw no advantageous
light upon the character of Wallace. It was obvious to conclude, that he had
gone to Malverton, and thither there was nothing to hinder me from following
him.

Perhaps, one of my grossest defects is a precipitate temper. I choose my path
suddenly, and pursue it with impetuous expedition. In the present instance, my
resolution was conceived with unhesitating zeal, and I walked the faster that I
might the sooner execute it. Miss Hadwin deserved to be happy. Love was in her
heart the all-absorbing sentiment. A disappointment there was a supreme
calamity. Depravity and folly must assume the guise of virtue before it can
claim her affection. This disguise might be maintained for a time, but its
detection must inevitably come, and the sooner this detection takes place the
more beneficial it must prove.

I resolved to unbosom myself, with equal and unbounded confidence, to Wallace
and his mistress. I would choose for this end not the moment when they were
separate, but that in which they were together. My knowledge, and the sources
of my knowledge, relative to Wallace, should be unfolded to the lady with
simplicity and truth. The lover should be present, to confute, to extenuate, or
to verify the charges.

During the rest of the day these images occupied the chief place in my
thoughts. The road was miry and dark, and my journey proved to be more tedious
and fatiguing than I expected. At length, just as the evening closed, the
well-known habitation appeared in view. Since my departure, winter had visited
the world, and the aspect of nature was desolate and dreary. All around this
house was vacant, negligent, forlorn. The contrast between these appearances
and those which I had noticed on my first approach to it, when the ground and
the trees were decked with the luxuriance and vivacity of summer, was mournful,
and seemed to foretoken ill. My spirits drooped as I noticed the general
inactivity and silence.

I entered, without warning, the door that led into the parlour. No face was to
be seen or voice heard. The chimney was ornamented, as in summer, with
evergreen shrubs. Though it was now the second month of frost and snow, fire
did not appear to have been lately kindled on this hearth.

This was a circumstance from which nothing good could be deduced. Had there
been those to share its comforts, who had shared them on former years, this was
the place and hour at which they commonly assembled. A door on one side led,
through a narrow entry, into the kitchen. I opened this door, and passed
toward the kitchen.

No one was there but an old man, squatted in the chimney-corner. His face,
though wrinkled, denoted undecayed health and an unbending spirit. An homespun
coat, leathern breeches wrinkled with age, and blue yarn hose, were well suited
to his lean and shrivelled form. On his right knee was a wooden bowl, which he
had just replenished from a pipkin of hasty-pudding still smoking on the
coals* and in his left hand a spoon, which he had, at that moment, plunged into
a bottle of molasses that stood beside him.

This action was suspended by my entrance. He looked up and exclaimed, hey day!
who is this that comes into other people's houses without so much as saying "by
your leave?" What Is thee business? Who Is thee want?

I had never seen this personage before. I supposed it to be some new domestic,
and enquired for Mr. Hadwin.

Ah! replied he with a sigh, William Hadwin. Is it him thee wants? Poor man! He
is gone to rest many days since.

My heart sunk within me at these tidings. Dead, said I, do you mean that he is
dead? -- This exclamation was uttered in a tone of some vehemence. It attracted
the attention of some one who was standing without, who immediately entered the
kitchen. It was Eliza Hadwin. The moment she beheld me she shrieked aloud, and,
rushing into my arms, fainted away.

The old man dropped his bowl; and, starting from his seat, star^d alternately
at me and at the breathless girl. My emotion, made up of joy, and sorrow, and
surprise, rendered me for a moment powerless as she* At length, he said, I
understand this. I know who thee is, and will tell her thee's come. So saying
he hastily left the room.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER VII.
IN a short time this gentle girl recovered her senses. She did not withdraw
herself from my sustaining arm, but, leaning on my bosom, she resigned herself
to passionate weeping. I did not endeavor to check this effusion, believing
that its influence would be salutary.

I had not forgotten the thrilling sensibility and artless graces of this girl.
I had not forgotten the scruples which had formerly made me check a passion
whose tendency was easily discovered. These new proofs of her affection were,
at once, mournful and delightful. The untimely fate of her father and my friend
pressed with new force upon my heart, and my tears, in spite of my fortitude,
mingled with hers.

The attention of both was presently attracted by a faint scream, which
proceeded from above. Immediately tottering footsteps were heard in the
passage, and a figure rushed into the room, pale, emaciated, haggard, and wild.
She cast a piercing glance at me, uttered a feeble exclamation, and sunk upon
the floor without signs of life.

It was not difficult to comprehend this scene. I now conjectured, what
subsequent enquiry confirmed, that the old man had mistaken me for Wallace, and
had carried to the elder sister the news of his return. This fatal
disappointment of hopes that had nearly been extinct, and which were now so
powerfully revived, could not be endured by a frame verging to dissolution.

This object recalled all the energies of Eliza, and engrossed all my
solicitude. I lifted the fallen girl in my arms; and, guided by her sister,
carried her to her chamber. I had now leisure to contemplate the changes which
a few months had made in this lovely frame. I turned away from the spectacle
with anguish, but my wandering eyes were recalled by some potent fascination,
and fixed in horror upon a form which evinced the last stage of decay. Eliza
knelt on one side, and, leaning her face upon the bed, endeavored in vain to
smother her sobs. I sat on the other motionless, and holding the passive and
withered hand of the sufferer.

I watched with ineffable solicitude the return of life. It returned, at
length, but merely to betray symptoms that it would speedily depart forever.
For a time my faculties were palsied, and I was made an impotent spectator of
the ruin that environed me. This pusillanimity quickly gave way to resolutions
and reflections better suited to the exigencies of the time.

The first impulse was to summon a physician, but it was evident that the
patient had been sinking by slow degrees to this state, and that the last
struggle had begun. Nothing remained but to watch her while expiring, and
perform for her, when dead, the rites of interment. The survivor was capable of
consolation and of succor. I went to her and drew her gently into another
apartment. The old man, tremulous and wonderstruck, ^eemed anxious to perform
some service. I directed him to kindle a fire in Eliza's chamber. Meanwhile I
persuaded my gentle friend to remain in this chamber, and resign to me the
performance of every office which her sister's condition required. I sat beside
the bed of the dying till the mortal struggle was past.

I perceived that the house had no inhabitant beside the two females and the
old man. I went in search of the latter* and found him crouched as before, at
the kitchen fire, smoking his pipe. I placed myself on the same bench, and
entered into conversation with him.

I gathered from him that he had, for many years, been Mrs. Hadwin's servant.
That lately he had cultivated a small farm in this neighborhood for his own
advantage. Stopping one day in October, at the tavern, he heard that his old
master had lately been in the city, had caught the fever, and after his return
had died with it. The moment he became sick, his servants fled from the house,
and the neighbors refused to approach it. The task of attending his sick bed,
was allotted to his daughters, and it was by their hands that his grave was
dug, and his body covered with earth. The same terror of infection existed
after his death as before, and these hapless females were deserted by all
mankind.

Old Caleb was no sooner informed of these particulars, than he hurried to the
house, and had since continued in their service. His heart was kind, but it was
easily seen that his skill extended only to execute the directions of another.
Grief for the death of Wallace, and her father, preyed upon the health of the
elder daughter. The younger became her nurse, and Caleb was always at hand to
execute any orders, the performance of which was on a level with his
understanding. Their neighbors had not withheld their good offices, but they
were still terrified and estranged by the phantoms of pestilence.

During the last week Susan had been too weak to rise from her bed, yet such
was the energy communicated by the tidings that Wallace was alive, and had
returned, that she leaped upon her feet and rushed down stairs. How little did
that man deserve so strenuous and immortal an affection.

I would not allow myself to ponder on the sufferings of these women. I
endeavored to think only of the best expedients for putting an end to these
calamities. After a moment's deliberation, I determined to go to an house at
some miles distance; the dwelling of one, who, though not exempt from the
reigning panic, had shown more generosity toward these unhappy girls than
others. During my former abode in this district, I had ascertained his
character, and found him to be compassionate and liberal.

Overpowered by fatigue and watching, Susan was no sooner relieved by my
presence, of some portion of her ^ares, than she sunk into profound slumber. I
directed Caleb to watch the house till my ret^rn, which should be before
midnight, and then set out for the dwelling of Mr. Ellis.

The weather was temperate and moist, and rendered the footing of the meadows
extremely difficult. The ground that had lately been frozen and covered with
snow, was now changed into gullies and pools, and this was no time to be
fastidious in the choice of paths. A brook, swelled by the recent thaw, was
likewise to be passed. The rail which I had formerly placed over it by way of
bridge, had disappeared, and I was obliged to wade through it. At length I
approached the house to which I was going.

At so late an hour, farmers and farmer's servants are usually abed, and their
threshold is entrusted to their watch-dogs. Two belonged to M^. Ellis, whose
ferocity and vigilance were truly formidable to a stranger, but I hoped that in
me they would recognize an old acquaintance, and suffer me to approach. In this
I was not mistaken. Though my person could not be distinctly seen by
starlight, they seemed to scent me from afar, and met me with a thousand
caresses.

Approaching the house, I perceived that its tenants were retired to their
repose. This I expected, and hastened to awaken Mr. Ellis, by knocking briskly
at the door. Presently he looked out of a window above, and in answer to his
enquiries, in which impatience at being so unseasonably disturbed, was mingled
with anxiety, I told him my name, and entreated him to come down and allow me a
few minutes conversation. He speedily dressed himself, and opening the kitchen
door, we seated ourselves before the fire.

My appearance was sufficiently adapted to excite his wonder; he had heard of
my elopement from the house of Mr. Hadwin, he was a stranger to the motives
that prompted my departure, and to the events that had befallen me, and no
interview was more distant from his expectations than the present. His
curiosity was written in his features, but this was no time to gratify his
curiosity. The end that I now had in view, was to procure accommodation for
Eliza Hadwin in this man's house. For this purpose it was my duty to describe
with simplicity and truth, the inconveniences which at present surrounded her,
and to relate all that had happened since my arrival.

I perceived that my tale excited his compassion, and I continued with new zeal
to paint to him the helplessness of this girl. The death of her father and
sister left her the property of this farm. Her sex and age disqualified her for
superintending the harvest-field and the threshing-floor; and no expedient was
left, but to lease the land to another, and, taking up her abode in the family
of some kinsman or friend, to subsist, as she might easily do, upon the rent.
Meanwhile her continuance in this house was equally useless and dangerous, and
I insinuated to my companion the propriety of immediately removing her to his
own.

Some hesitation and reluctance appeared in him, which I immediately ascribed
to an absurd dread of infection. I endeavored, by appealing to his reason, as
well as to his pity, to conquer this dread. I pointed out the true cause of the
death of the elder daughter, and assured him the youngest knew no indisposition
but that which arose from distress. I offered to save him from any hazard that
might attend his approachin^ the house, by accompanying her hither myself. All
that her safety required was that his doors should not be shut against her when
she presented herself before them.

Still he was fearful and reluctant; and, at length, mentioned that her uncle
resided not more than sixteen miles farther; that he was her natural protector,
and he dared to say would find no difficulty in admitting her into his house.
For his part, there might be reason in what I said, but he could not bring
himself to think but that there was still some danger of the fever. It was
right to assist people in distress, to be sure; but to risk his own life he did
not think to be his duty. He was no relation of the family, and it was the duty
of relations to help each other. Her uncle was the proper person to assist her,
and no doubt he would be as willing as able.

The marks of dubiousness and indecision which accompanied these words,
encouraged me in endeavoring to subdue his scruples. The increase of his
aversion to my scheme kept pace with my remonstrances, and he finally declared
that he would, on no account, consent to it.

Ellis was by no means hard of heart. His determination did not prove the
coldness of his charity, but merely the strength of his fears. He was himself
an object more of compassion than of anger; and he acted like the man, whose
fear of death prompts him to push his companion from the plank which saved him
from drowning, but which is unable to sustain both. Finding him invincible to
my entreaties, I thought upon the expedient which he suggested of seeking the
protection of her uncle. It was true, that the loss of parents had rendered her
uncle her legal protector. His knowledge of the world; his house, and property,
and influence would, perhaps, fit him for this office in a more eminent degree
than I was fitted. To seek a different asylum might, indeed, be unjust to both,
and* after some reflection, I not only dismissed the regret which Ellis's
refusal had given me, but even thanked him for the intelligence and counsel
which he had afforded me. I took leave of him, and hastened back to Hadwin's.

Eliza, by Caleb's report, was still asleep. There was no urgent necessity for
awakening her; but something was forthwith to be done with regard to the
unhappy girl that was dead. The proceeding incumbent on us was obvious. All
that remained was to dig a grave, and to deposit the remains with as much
solemnity and decency as the time would permit. There were two methods of doing
this. I might wait till the next day; till a coffin could be made and conveyed
hither; till the woman, whose trade it was to make and put on the habiliments
assigned by custom to the dead, could be sought out and hired to attend; till
kindred, friends, and neighbors could be summoned to the obsequies; till a
carriage were provided to remove the body to a burying-ground, belonging to a
meeting house, and five miles distant; till those, whose trade it was to dig
graves, had prepared one, within the sacred enclosure, for her reception; or,
neglecting this toilsome, tedious, and expensive ceremonial, I might seek the
grave of Hadwin, and lay the daughter by the side of her parent.

Perhaps I was wrong in my preference of the latter mode. The customs of burial
may, in most cases, be in themselves proper. If the customs be absurd, yet it
may be generally proper to adhere to them: but, doubtless, there are cases in
which it is our duty to omit them. I conceived the present case to be such an
one.

The season was bleak and inclement. Much time, labor, and expense would be
required to go through the customary rites. There was none but myself to
perform these, and I had not the suitable means. The misery of Eliza would only
be prolonged by adhering to these forms; and her fortune be needlessly
diminished, by the expenses unavoidably to be incurred.

After musing upon these ideas for some time, I rose from my seat, and desired
Caleb to follow me. We proceeded to an outer shed where farmers' tools used to
be kept. I supplied him and myself with a spade, and requested him to lead me
to the spot where Mr. Hadwin was laid.

He betrayed some hesitation to comply, and appeared struck with some degree of
alarm, as if my purpose had been to molest, instead of securing, the repose of
the dead. I removed his doubts by explaining my intentions, but he was scarcely
less shocked, on discovering the truth, than he had been alarmed by his first
suspicions. He stammered out his objections to my scheme. There was but one
mode of burial he thought that was decent and proper, and he could not be free
to assist me in pursuing any other mode.

Perhaps Caleb's aversion to the scheme might have been easily overcome, but I
reflected that a mind like his was at once flexible and obstinate. He might
yield to arguments and entreaties, and act by their immediate impulse; but the
impulse passed away in a moment, old and habitual convictions were resumed, and
his deviation from the beaten track would be merely productive of compunction.
His aid, on the present occasion, though of some use, was by no means
indispensible. I forbore to solicit his concurrence, or even to vanquish the
scruples he entertained against directing me to the grave of Hadwin. It was a
groundless superstition that made one spot more suitable for this purpose than
another. I desired Caleb, in a mild tone, to return to the kitchen, and leave
me to act as I thought proper. I then proceeded to the orchard.

One corner of this field was somewhat above the level of the rest. The tallest
tree of the groupe grew there, and there I had formerly placed a bench, and
made it my retreat at periods of leisure. It had been recommended by its
sequestered situation, its luxuriant verdure, and profound quiet. On one side
was a potatoe field, on the other a melon-patch; and before me, in rows, some
hundreds of apple trees. Here I was accustomed to seek the benefits of
contemplation, and study the manuscripts of Lodi. A few months had passed since
I had last visited this spot. What revolutions had since occurred, and how
gloomily contrasted was my present purpose with wh^t had formerly led me hither!

In this spot I had hastily determined to dig the grave of Susan. The grave was
dug. All that I desired was a cavity of sufficient dimensions to receive her.
This being made, I returned to the house, lifted the corpse in my arms, and
bore it without delay to the spot. Caleb seated in the kitchen, and Eliza
asleep in her chamber, were wholly unapprised of my motions. The grave was
covered, the spade reposited under the shed, and my seat by the kitchen fire
resumed in a time apparently too short for so solemn and momentous a
transaction.

I look back upon this incident with emotions not easily described. It seems as
if I acted with too much precipitation; as if insensibility, and not reason,
had occasioned that clearness of conceptions, and bestowed that firmness of
muscles, which I then experienced. I neither trembled nor wavered in my
purpose. I bore (...) my arms the being whom I had known and loved, through the
whistling gale and intense darkness of a winter's night; I heaped earth upon
her limbs, and covered them from human observation, without fluctuations or
tremors, though not without feelings that were awful and sublime.

Perhaps some part of my stedfastness was ow^^g to my late experience, and some
minds may be more easily inured to perilous emergencies than others. If reason
acquires strength only by the diminution of sensibility, perhaps it is just for
sensibility to be diminished.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER VIII.
THE safety of Eliza was the object that now occupied my cares. To have slept,
after her example, had been most proper, but my uncertainty with regard to her
fate, and my desire to conduct her to some other home, kept my thoughts in
perpetual motion. I waited with impatience till she should awake and allow me
to consult with her on plans for futurity.

Her sleep terminated not till the next day had arisen. Having recovered the
remembrance of what had lately happened, she enquired for her sister. She
wanted to view once more the face, and kiss the lips, of her beloved Susan.
Some relief to her anguish she expected to derive from this privilege.

When informed of the truth, when convinced that Susan had disappeared forever*
she broke forth into fresh passion. It seemed as if her loss was not hopeless
or complete as long as she was suffered to behold the face of her friend and to
touch her lips. She accused me of acting without warrant and without justice;
of defrauding her of her dearest and only consolation; and of treating her
sister's sacred remains with barbarous indifference and rudeness.

I explained in the gentlest terms the reasons of my conduct. I was not
surprised or vexed, that she, at first, treated them as futile, and as
heightening my offense. Such was the impulse of a grief, which was properly
excited by her loss. To be tranquil and steadfast, in the midst of the usual
causes of impetuosity and agony, is either the prerogative of wisdom that
sublimes itself above all selfish considerations, or the badge of giddy and
unfeeling folly.

(...) torrent was at length exhausted. Upbraiding was at an end; and
gratitude, and tenderness, and implicit acquiescence in any scheme which my
prudence should suggest, succeeded. I mentioned her uncle as one to whom it
would be proper, in her present distress, to apply.

She started and betrayed uneasiness at this name. It was evident that she by
no means concurred with me in my notions of propriety; that she thought with
aversion of seeking her uncle's protection. I requested her to state her
objections to this scheme, or ^o mention any other which she thought preferable.

She knew no body. She had not a friend in the world but myself. She had never
been out of her father's house. She had no relation but her uncle Philip, and
he -- she could not live with him. I must not insist upon her going to his
house. It was not the place for her. She should never be happy there.

I was at first, inclined to suspect in my friend some capricious and
groundless antipathy. I desired her to explain what in her uncle's character
made him so obnoxious. She refused to be more explicit, and persisted in
thinking that his house was no suitable abode for her.

Finding her, in this respect, invincible, I sought for some other expedient.
Might she not easily be accommodated as a boarder in the city, or some village,
or in a remote quarter of the country? Ellis, her nearest and most opulent
neighbor, had refused to receive her; but there were others who had not his
fears. There were others, within the compass of a day's journey, who were
strangers to the cause of Hadwin's death; but would it not be culpable to take
advantage of that ignorance? Their compliance ought not to be the result of
deception.

While thus engaged, the incidents of my late journey recurred to my
remembrance, and I asked, is not the honest woman, who entertained Wallace,
just such a person as that of whom I am in search? Her treatment of Wallace
shows her to be exempt from chimerical fears, proves that she has room in her
house for an occasional inmate.

Encouraged by these views, I told my weeping companion, that I had recollected
a family in which she would be kindly treated; and that, if she chose, we would
not lose a moment in repairing thither. Horses, belonging to the farm, grazed
in the meadows, and a couple of these would carry us in a few hours to the
place which I had selected for her residence. On her eagerly assenting to this
proposal, I enquired in whose care, and in what state, our present habitation
should be left.

The father's property now belonged to the daughter. Eliza's mind was quick,
active, and sagacious; but her total inexperience gave her sometimes the
appearance of folly. She was eager to fly from this house, and to resign
herself and her property, without limitation or condition, to my control. Our
intercourse had been short, but she relied on my protection and counsel as
absolutely as she had been accustomed to do upon her father's.

She knew not what answer to make to my enquiry. Whatever I pleased to do was
the best. What did I think ought to be done?

Ah! thought I, sweet, artless, and simple girl! how would thou have fared,
if Heaven had not sent me to thy succor? There are beings in the world who
would make a selfish use of thy confidence; who would beguile thee at once of
innocence and property. Such am not I. Thy welfare is a precious deposit, and
no father or brother could watch over it with more solicitude than I will do.

I was aware that Mr. Hadwin might have fixed the destination of his property,
and the guardianship of his daughters, by will. On suggesting this to my
friend, it instantly reminded her of an incident that took place after his last
return from the city. He had drawn up his will, and gave it into Susan's
possession, who placed it in a drawer, whence it was now taken by my friend.

By this will his property was now found to be bequeathed to his two daughters;
and his brother, Philip Hadwin, was named executor, and guardian to his
daughters till they should be twenty years old. This name was no sooner heard
by my friend, than she exclaimed, in a tone of affright, executor! My uncle!
What is that? What power does that give him?

I know not exactly the power of executors. He will, doubtless, have possession
of your property till you are twenty years of age. Your person will likewise be
under his care till that time.

Must he decide where I am to live?

He is vested with all the power of a father.

This assurance excited the deepest consternation. She fixed her eyes on the
ground, and was lost, for a time, in the deepest reverie. Recovering, at
length, she said, with a sigh, what if my father had made no will?

In that case, a guardian could not be dispensed with, but the right of naming
him would belong to yourself.

And my uncle would have nothing to do with my affairs?

I am no lawyer, said I; but I presume all authority over your person and
property would devolve upon the guardian of your own choice.

Then I am free. Saying this, with a sudden motion, she tore in several pieces
the will, which, during this dialogue, she had held in her hand, and threw the
fragments into the fire.

No action was more unexpected to me than this. My astonishment hindered me
from attempting to rescue the paper from the flames. It was consumed in a
moment. I was at a loss in what manner to regard this sacrifice. It denoted a
force of mind little in unison with that simplicity and helplessness which this
girl had hitherto displayed. It argued the deepest apprehensions of
mistreatment from her uncle. Whether his conduct had justified this violent
antipathy, I had no means of judging. Mr. Hadwin's choice of him, as his
executor, was certainly one proof of his integrity.

My abstraction was noticed by Eliza, with visible anxiety. It was plain, that
she dreaded the impression which this act of seeming temerity had made upon me.
Do not be angry with me, said she; perhaps I have been wrong, but I could not
help it. I will have but one guardian and one protector.

The deed was irrevocable. In my present ignorance of the domestic hi^tory of
the Hadwins, I was unqualified to judge how far circumstances might extenuate
or justify the act. On both accounts, therefore, it was improper to expatiate
upon it.

It was concluded to leave the care of the house to honest Caleb; to fasten
closets and drawers, and, carrying away the money which was found in one of
them, and which amounted to no inconsiderable ^um, to repair to the house
formerly mentioned. The air was cold; an heavy snow began to fall in the night;
the wind blew tempestuously; and we were compelled to confront it.

In leaving her dwelling, in which she had spent her whole life, the unhappy
girl gave way afresh to her sorrow. It made her feeble and helpless. When
placed upon the horse, she was scarcely able to maintain her seat. Already
chilled by the cold, blinded by the drifting snow, and cut by the blast, all my
remonstrances were needed to inspire her with resolution.

I am not accustomed to regard the elements, or suffer them to retard or divert
me from any design that I have formed. I had overlooked the weak and delicate
frame of my companion, and made no account of her being less able to support
cold and fatigue than myself. It was not till we had made some progress in our
way, that I began to view, in their true light, the obstacles that were to be
encountered. I conceived it, however, too late to retreat, and endeavored to
push on with speed.

My companion was a skilful rider, but her steed was refractory and
unmanageable. She was able, however, to curb his spirit till we had proceeded
ten or twelve miles from Malverton. The wind and the cold became too violent to
be longer endured, and I resolved to stop at the first house which should
present itself to my view, for the sake of refreshment and warmth.

We now entered a wood of some extent, at the termination of which I remembered
that a dwelling stood. To pass this wood, therefore, with expedition, was all
that remained before we could reach an hospitable asylum. I endeavored to
sustain, by this information, the sinking spirits of my companion. While busy
in conversing with her, a blast of irresistible force twisted off the highest
branch of a tree before us. It fell in the midst of the road, at the distance
of a few feet from her horse's head. Terrified by this accident, the horse
started from the path, and, rushing into the wood, in a moment threw himself
and his rider on the ground, by encountering the rugged stock of an oak.

I dismounted and flew to her succor. The snow was already dyed with the blood
which flowed from some wound in her head, and she lay without sense or motion.
My terrors did not hinder me from anxiously searching for the hurt which was
received, and ascertaining the extent of the injury. Her forehead was
considerably bruised* but, to my unspeakable joy, the blood flowed from the
nostrils, and was, therefore, to be regarded as no mortal symptom.

I lifted her in my arms, and looked around me for some means of relief. The
house at which I proposed to stop was upwards of a mile distant. I remembered
none that was nearer. To place the wounded girl on my own horse, and proceed
gently to the house in question, was the sole expedient; but, at present, she
was senseless, and might, on recovering, be too feeble to ^u^tain her own
weight.

To recall her to life was my first duty; but I was powerless, or unacquainted
with the means. I gazed upon her features, and endeavored, by pressing her in
my arms, to inspire her wi^h some warmth. I looked toward the road, and
listened for the wished-for sound of some carriage that might be prevailed on
to stop and receive her. Nothing was more improbable than that either pleasure
or business would induce men to encounter so chilling and vehement a blast. To
be lighted on by some traveller was, therefore, an hopeless event.

Meanwhile, Eliza's swoon continued, and my alarm increased. What effect her
half-frozen blood would have in prolonging this condition, or preventing her
return to life, awakened the deepest apprehensions. I left the wood, still
bearing her in my arms, and re-entered the road, from the desire of descrying,
as soon as possible, the coming passenger. I looked this way and that, and
again listened. Nothing but the sweeping blast, rent and falling branches, and
snow that filled and obscured the air, were perceivable. Each moment retarded
the course of my own blood and stiffened my sinews, and made the state of my
companion more desperate. How was I to act? To perish myself or see her perish,
was an ignoble fate: courage and activity were still able to avert it. My horse
stood near, docile and obsequious; to mount him and to proceed on my way,
holding my lifeless burden in my arms, was all that remained.

At this moment my attention was called by several voices, issuing from the
wood. It was the note of gaiety and glee: presently a sleigh, with several
persons of both sexes, appeared, in a road which led through the forest into
that in which I stood. They moved at a quick pace, but their voices were hushed
and they checked the speed of their horses on discovering us. No occurrence was
more auspicious than this; for I relied with perfect confidence on the
benevolence of these persons, and as soon as they came near, claimed their
assistance.

My story was listened to with sympathy, and one of the young men, leaping from
the sleigh, assisted me in placing Eliza in the place which he had left. A
female, of sweet aspect and engaging manners, insisted upon turning back and
hastening to the house, where it seems her father resided, and which the party
had just left. I rode after the sleigh, which in a few minutes arrived at the
house.

The dwelling was spacious and neat, and a venerable man and woman, alarmed by
the quick ^eturn of the young people, came forth to know the cause. They
received their guest with the utmost tenderness, and provided her with all the
accommodations which her condition required. Their daughter relinquished the
scheme of pleasure in which she had been engaged, and, compelling her
companions to depart without her, remained to nurse and console the sick.

A little time showed that no lasting injury had been suffered. Contusions,
more troublesome than dangerous, and easily curable by such applications as
rural and traditional wisdom has discovered, were the only consequences of the
fall. My mind, being relieved from apprehensions on this score, had leisure to
reflect upon the use which might be made of the present state of things.

When I marked the structure of this house, and the features and deportment of
its inhabitants, methought I discerned a powerful resemblance between this
family and Hadwin's. It seemed as if some benignant power had led us hither as
to the most suitable asylum that could be obtained; and in order to supply, to
the forlorn Eliza, the place of those parents and that sister she had lost, I
conceived, that, if their concurrence could be gained, no abode was more
suitable than this. No time was to be lost in gaining this concurrence. The
curiosity of our host and hostess, whose name was Curling, speedily afforded me
an opportunity to disclose the history and real situation of my friend. There
were no motives to reserve or prevarication. There was nothing which I did not
faithfully and circumstantially relate. I concluded with stating my wishes that
they would admit my friend as a boarder into their house.

The old man was warm in his concurrence. His wife betrayed some scruples;
which, however, her husband's arguments and mine removed. I did not even
suppress the tenor and destruction of the will, and the antipathy which Eliza
had conceived for her uncle, and which I declared myself unable to explain. It
presently appeared that Mr. Curling had some knowledge of Philip Hadwin, and
that the latter had acquired the repute of being obdurate and profligate. He
employed all means to accomplish his selfish ends, and would probably endeavor
to usurp the property which his brother had left. To provide against his power
and his malice would be particularly incumbent on us, and my new friend readily
promised his assistance in the measures which we should take to that end.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER IX.
THE state of my feelings may be easily conceived to consist of mixed, but on
the whole, of agreeable sensations. The death of Hadwin and his elder daughter
could not be thought upon without keen regrets. These it were useless to
indulge, and were outweighed by reflections on the personal security in which
the survivor was now placed. It was hurtful to expend my unprofitable cares
upon the dead, while there existed one to whom they could be of essential
benefit, and in whose happiness they would find an ample compensation.

This happiness, however, was still incomplete. It was still exposed to hazard,
and much remained to be done before adequate provision was made against the
worst of evils, poverty. I now found that Eliza, being only fifteen years old,
stood in need of a guardian, and that the forms of law required that some one
should make himself her father's administrator. Mr. Curling being tolerably
conversant with these subjects, pointed out the mode to be pursued, and engaged
to act on this occasion as Eliza's friend.

There was another topic on which my happiness, as well as that of my friend,
required us to form some decision. I formerly mentioned, that during my abode
at Malverton, I had not been insensible to the attractions of this girl. An
affection had stolen upon me, for which, it was easily discovered, that I
should not have been denied a suitable return. My reasons for stifling these
emotions, at that time, have been mentioned. It may now be asked, what effect
subsequent events had produced on my feelings; and how far partaking and
relieving her distresses, had revived a passion which may readily be supposed
to have been, at no time, entirely extinguished.

The impediments which then existed, were removed. Our union would no longer
risk the resentment or sorrow of her excellent parent. She had no longer a
sister to divide with her the property of the farm, and make what was
sufficient for both, when living together, too little for either separately.
Her youth and simplicity required, beyond most others, a legal protector, and
her happiness was involved in the success of those hopes which she took no
pains to conceal.

As to me, it seemed at first view, as if every incident conspired to determine
my choice. Omitting all regard to the happiness of others, my own interest
could not fa^l to recommend a scheme by which the precious benefits of
competence and independence might be honestly obtained. The excurions of my
fancy had sometimes carried me beyond the bounds prescribed by my situation,
but they were, nevertheless, limited to that field to which I had once some
prospect of acquiring a title. All I wanted for the basis of my gaudiest and
most dazzling structures, was an hundred acres of plough-land and meadow. Here
my spirit of improvement, my zeal to invent and apply new maxims of household
luxury and convenience, new modes and instruments of tillage, new arts
connected with orchard, garden and cornfield, were supplied with abundant
scope. Though the want of these would not benumb my activity, or take away
content, the possession would confer exquisite and permanent enjoyments.

My thoughts have ever hovered over the images of wife and children with more
delight than over any other images. My fancy was always active on this theme,
and its reveries sufficiently extatic and glowing; but since my intercourse
with this girl, my scattered visions were collected and concentered. I had now
a form and features before me, a sweet and melodious voice vibrated in my ear,
my soul was filled, as it were, with her lineaments and gestures, actions and
looks. All ideas, possessing any relation to beauty or sex, appeared to assume
this shape. They kept an immovable place in my mind, they diffused around them
an ineffable complacency. Love is merely of value as a prelude to a more
tender, intimate and sacred union. Was I not in love, and did I not pant after
the irrevocable bonds, the boundless privileges of wedlock?

The question which others might ask, I have asked myself. Was I not in love? I
am really at a loss for an answer. There seemed to be irresistible weight in
the reasons why I should refuse to marry, and even forbe^r to foster love in my
friend. I considered my youth, my defective education and my limited views. I
had passed from my cottage into the world. I had acquired even in my transient
sojourn among the busy haunts of men, more knowledge than the lucubrations and
employments of all my previous years had conferred. Hence I might infer the
childlike immaturity of my understanding, and the rapid progress I was still
capable of making. Was this an age to form an irrevocable contract; to choose
the companion of my future life, the associate of my schemes of intellectual
and benevolent activity?

I had reason to contemn my own acquisitions; but were not those of Eliza still
more slender? Could I rely upon the permanence of her equanimity and her
docility to my instructions? What qualities might not time unfold, and how
little was I qualified to estimate the character of one, whom no vicissitude or
hardship had approached before the death of her father? Whose ignorance was,
indeed, great, when it could justly be said even to exceed my own.

Should I mix with the world, enrol myself in different classes of society; be
a witness to new scenes* might not my modes of judging undergo essential
variations? Might I not gain the knowledge of (...) whose virtue was the gift
of experience and the grow^^ of knowledge? Who joined to the modesty and charms
of woman, the benefits of education, the maturity and steadfastness of age, and
with whose character and sentiments my own would be much more congenial than
they could possibly be with the extreme youth, rustic simplicity and mental
imperfections of Eliza Hadwi^?

To say truth, I was now conscious of a revolution in my mind. I can scarcely
assign its true cau^^. No tokens of it appeared during my late retreat to
Malverton. Subsequent incidents, perhaps, joined with the influence of
meditation, had generated new views. On my first visit to the city, I had met
with nothing but scenes of folly, depravity and cunning. No wonder that the
images connected with the city, were disastrous and g^^omy; but my second visit
produced somewhat different impressions. Maravigli, Estwick, M^dli^ote and you,
were beings who inspired veneration and love. Your residence appeared to
beautify and consecrate this spot, and gave birth to an opinion that if cities
are the chosen seats of misery and vice, they are likewise the soil of all the
laudable and strenuou^ productions of mind.

My curiosity and thir^t of knowledge had likewi^e received a new direction.
Book and (...) nature were cold and (...). Men and the works of m^n, were the
(...), and our own eyes only could communicate just concep^^^ns of human
performances. The influence of manners, profe^sion^ and social in^titutions,
could be thoro^^hly known only (...).

Competence, fixed proper^^ and a settled ^b^de, rural occupation^ (...), were
justly to be prized; ^ut their value (...) their benefits fully enjoyed (...)
who have tried a^^ (...) and ranks; who have partak^^ of all (...); and who
have vi^ited different (...). The next (...) years of my life, should be
devoted to activity and change: it should be a period of hardship danger and
privation: it should be my apprenticeship to fortitude and wisdom, and be
employed to fit me for the tranquil pleasures and steadfast exertions of the
remainder of my life.

In consequence of these reflections, I determined to suppress that tenderness
which the company of Miss Hadwin produced, to remove any mistakes into which
she had fallen, and to put it out of my power to claim from her more than the
dues of friendship. All ambiguities, in a case like this, and all delays were
hurtful. She was not exempt from passion, but this passion I thought was young,
and easily extinguished.

In a short time her health was restored, and her grief melted down into a
tender melancholy. I chose a suitable moment, when not embarrassed by the
presence of others, to reveal my thoughts. My disclosure was ingenuous and
perfect. I laid before her the whole train of my thoughts, nearly in the order,
though in different and more copious terms than those in which I have just
explained them to you. I concealed nothing. The impression which her artless
lovelines had made upon me at Malverton; my motives for estranging myself from
her society; the nature of my present feelings with regard to her, and my
belief of the state of her heart; the reasonings into which I had entered; the
advantages of wedlock and its inconveniences; and, finally, the resolution I
had formed of seeking the city, and perhaps, of cr^^sing the ocean, were
minutely detailed.

She interrupted me not, but changing looks, blushes, flutterings and sighs,
showed her to be deeply and variously affected by my discourse. I paused for
some observation or comment. She seemed conscious of my expectation, but had no
power to speak. Overpowered, at length, by her emotions, she burst into tears.

I was at a loss in what manner to construe these symptoms. I waited till her
vehemence was somewhat subsided, and then said -- what think you of my schemes?
Your approbation is of some moment: do you approve of them or not?

This question excited some little resentment, and she answered -- you have
left me nothing to say. Go and be happy: no matter what becomes of me. I hope I
shall be able to take care of myself.

The tone in which this was said, had something in it of upbraiding. Your
happiness, said I, is too dear to me to leave it in danger. In this house you
will not need my protection, but I shall never be so far from you, as to be
disabled from hearing how you fared, by letter, and of being active for your
good. You have some money which you must husband well. Any rent from your farm
cannot be soon expected; but what you have got, if you remain with Mr. Curling,
will pay your board and all other expenses for two years: but you must be a
good economist. I shall expect, continued I, with a serious smile, a punctual
account of all your sayings and doings. I must know how every minute is
employed, and every penny is expended, and if I find you erring, I must tell
you so in good round terms.

These words did not dissipate the sullenness which her looks had betrayed. She
still forebore to look at me, and said -- I do not know how I should tell you
every thing. You care so little about me that -- I should only be troublesome.
I am old enough to think and act for myself, and shall advise with no body but
myself.

That is true, said I. I shall rejoice to see you independent and free. Consult
your own understanding, and act according to its dictates. Nothing more is
wanting to make you useful and happy. I am anxious to return to the city; but,
if you will allow me, will go first to Malverton, see that things are in due
order, and that old Caleb is well. From thence, if you please, I will call at
your uncle's, and tell him what has happened. He may, otherwise, entertain
pretensions and form views, erroneous in themselves and injurious to you. He
may think himself entitled to manage your estate. He may either suppose a will
to have been made, or may actually have heard from your father, or from others,
of that which you burnt, and in which he was named executor. His boisterous and
sordid temper may prompt him to seize your house and goods, unless seasonably
apprised of the truth; and, when he knows the truth, he may start into rage,
which I shall be more fitted to encounter than you. I am told that anger
transforms him into a ferocious madman. Shall I call upon him?

She shuddered at the picture which I had drawn of her uncle's character; but
this emotion quickly gave place to self-upbraiding, for the manner in which she
had repelled my proffers of service. She melted once more into tears and
exclaimed:

I am not worthy of the pains you take for me. I am unfeeling and ungrateful.
Why should I think ill of you for despising me, when I despise myself?

You do yourself injustice, my friend. I think I see your most secret thoughts;
and these, instead of exciting anger or contempt, only awaken compassion and
tenderness. You love, and must, therefore, conceive my conduct to be perverse
and cruel. I counted on your harboring such thoughts. Time only and reflection
will enable you to see my motives in their true light. Hereafter you will
recollect my words, and find them sufficient to justify my conduct. You will
acknowledge the propriety of my engaging in the cares of the world, before I
sit down in retirement and ease.

Ah! how much you mistake me! I admire and approve of your schemes. What angers
and distresses me is, that you think me unworthy to partake of your cares and
labors; that you regard my company as an obstacle and encumbrance; that
assistance and counsel must all proceed from you; and that no scene is fit for
me, but what you regard as slothful and inglorious.

Have I not the same claims to be wise, and active, and courageous as you? If I
am ignorant and weak, do I not owe it to the same cause that has made you so;
and will not the same means which promote your improvement be likewise useful
to me? You desire to obtain knowledge, by traveling and conversing with many
persons, and studying many sciences; but you desire it for yourself alone. Me,
you think poor, weak, and contemptible; fit for nothing but to spin and churn.
Provided I exist, am screened from the weather, have enough to eat and drink,
you are satisfied. As to strengthening my mind and enlarging my knowledge,
these things are valuable to you, but on me they are thrown away. I deserve not
the gift.

This strain, simple and just as it was, was wholly unexpected. I was surprised
and disconcerted. In my previous reasonings I had certainly considered her sex
as utterly unfitting her for those scenes and purs^its, to which I had destined
myself. Not a doubt of the validity of my conclusion had insinuated itself; but
now my belief was shaken, though it was not subverted. I could not deny, that
human ignorance was curable by the same means in one sex as in the other; that
fortitude and skill was of no less value to one than to the other.

Questionless, my friend was rendered, by her age and inexperience, if not by
sex, more helpless and dependent than I; but had I not been prone to overrate
the difficulties which I should encounter? Had I not ^eemed unjustly of her
constancy and force of mind? Marriage would render her property joint, and
would not compel me to take up my abode in the woods, to a^ide f^r^ver in one
spot, to shackle my curiosity, or limit my excursions.

But marriage was a contract awful and irrevocable. Was this the woman with
whom my reason enjoined me to bl^nd my fate, without the power of dissolution?
(...) no time unfold qualities in her which I did not at (...) ^^spect, and
which would evince an incurable difference in our minds? Would not time lead me
to the f^^t of one who more nearly approached that standard of ideal excellence
which poets and romancers had exhibited to my view?

These considerations were powerful and delicate. I knew now in what terms to
state them to my companion, so as to preclude the imputation of arrogance or
indecorum. It became me, however, to be explicit, and to excite her resentment
rather than mislead her judgment. She collected my meaning from a few words,
and, interrupting me, said:

How very low is the poor Eliza in your opinion! We are, indeed* both too young
to be married. May I not see you, and talk with you, without being your wife?
May I not share your knowledge, relieve your cares, and enjoy your confidence,
as a sister might do? May I not accompany you in your journeys and studies, as
one friend accompanies another? My property may be yours; you may employ it for
your benefit and mine; not because you are my husband, but my friend. You are
going to the city. Let me go along with you. Let me live where you live. The
house that is large enough to hold you, will hold me. The fare that is good
enough for you will be luxury to me. Oh! let it be so, will you? You cannot
think how studious, how thoughtful, how inquisitive I will be. How tenderly I
will nurse you when sick: it is possible you may be sick, you know, and no one
in the world will be half so watchful and affectionate as I shall be. Will you
let me?

In saying this, her earnestness gave new pathos to her voice. Insensibly she
put her face close to mine, and, transported beyond the usual bounds of
reserve, by the charms of that picture which her fancy contemplated, she put
her lips to my cheek, and repeated, in a melting accent, will you let me?

You, my friends, who have not seen Eliza Hadwin, cannot conceive what effect
this entreaty was adapted to produce in me. She has surely the sweetest voice,
the most speaking features, and most delicate symetry, that ever woman
possessed. Her guileless simplicity and tenderness made her more enchanting. To
be the object of devotion to an heart so fervent and pure, was, surely, no
common privilege. Thus did she tender me herself; and was not the gift to be
received with eagerness and gratitude?

No. I was not so much a stranger to mankind as to acquiesce in this scheme. As
my sister or my wife, the world would suffer us to reside under the same roof;
t^ apply, to common use, the same pro^erty; and daily to enjoy the company of
each other: but she was not my sister, and marriage would be an act of the
grossest indiscretion. I explained to her, in few words, the objections to
which her project was liable.

Well, then, said she, let me live in the next house, in the neighborhood, or,
at least, in the same city. Let me be where I may see you once a day, or once a
week, or once a month. Shut me not wholly from your society, and the means of
becoming, in time, less ignorant and foolish than I now am.

After a pause, I replied, I love you too well not to comply with this request.
Perhaps the city will be as suitable a residence as any other for you, as it
will, for some time, be most convenient to me. I shall be better able to watch
over your welfare, and supply you with the means of improvement, when you are
within a small distance. At present, you must consent to remain here, while I
visit your uncle, and afterward go to the city. I shall look out for you a
suitable lodging, and inform you when it is found. If you then continue in the
same mind, I will come, and, having gained the approbation of Mr. Curling, will
conduct you to town. Here ended our dialogue.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER X.
THOUGH I had consented to this scheme, I was conscious that some hazards
attended it. I was afraid of calumny, which might trouble the peace or destroy
the reputation of my friend. I was afraid of my own weakness, which might be
seduced into an indiscreet marriage, by the charms or sufferings of this
bewitching creature. I felt that there was no price too dear to save her from
slander. A fair fame is of the highest importance to a young female, and the
loss of it but poorly supplied by the testimony of her own conscience. I had
reason for tenfold solicitude on this account, since I was her only protector
and friend. Hence, I cherished some hopes, that time might change her views,
and suggest less dangerous schemes. Meanwhile, I was to lose no time in
visiting Malverton and Philip Hadwin.

About ten days had elapsed since we had deserted Malverton. These were days of
successive storms, and traveling had been rendered inconvenient. The weather
was now calm and clear* and, early in the morning that ensued the dialogue
which I have just related, I set out on horseback.

Honest Caleb was found, eating his breakfast, nearly in the spot where he had
been first discovered. He answered my enquiries by saying, that, two days after
our departure, several men had come to the house, one of whom was Philip
Hadwin. They had interrogated him as to the condition of the farm, and the
purpose of his remaining on it. William Hadwin they knew to have been sometime
dead, but where were the girls, his daughters?

Caleb answered that Susy, the eldest, was likewise dead.

These tidings excited astonishment. When died she, and how, and where was she
buried?

It happened two days before, and she was buried, he believed, but could not
tell where.

Not tell w^ere? By whom then was she buried?

Really, he could not tell. Some strange man came there just as ^he was dying.
He went to the room, and when she was dead, took her away, but what he did with
the body, was more than he could say, but he had a notion that he buried it.
The man staid till the morning, and then went off with Lizzy, leaving him to
keep house by himself. He had not seen either of them, nor indeed, a single
soul since.

This was all the information that Caleb could afford the visitants. It was so
lame and incredible, that they began to charge the man with falsehood, and to
threaten him with legal animadversion. Just then, Mr. Ellis entered the house,
and being made acquainted with the subject of discourse, told all that he
himself knew. He related the midnight visit which I had paid him, explained my
former situation in the family, and my disappearance in September. He stated
the advice he had given me to carry Eliza to her uncle's, and my promise to
comply with his counsel. The uncle declared he had seen nothing of his niece,
and Caleb added, that when she set out, she took the road that led to town.

These hints afforded grounds for much conjecture and suspicion. Ellis now
mentioned some intelligence that he had gathered respecting me in a late
journey to -- It seems I was (...) son of an honest farmer in that quarter, who
married a tidy girl of a milk maid, that lived with him. My father had detected
me in making some atrocious advances to my mother-in-law, and had turned me out
of doors. I did not go off, however, without rifling his drawer of some
hundreds of dollars, which he had laid up against a rainy day. I was noted for
such pranks, and was hated by all the neighbors for my pride and laziness. It
was easy by comparison of circumstances, for Ellis to ascertain that Hadwin's
servant Mervyn, was the same against whom such hearty charges were laid.

Previously to this journey, he had heard of me (...) Hadwin, who was loud in
praise of my diligence, ^ob^^ety and modesty. For his part, he had always been
cautious of giving countenance to vagrants, that came from nobody knew where,
and worked their way with a plausible tongue. He was not surprised to hear it
whispered that Betsey Hadwin had fallen in love with the youth, and now, no
doubt, he had persuaded her to run away with him. The heiress of a fine farm
was a prize not to be met with every day.

Philip broke into rage at this news; swore that if it turned out so, his niece
should starve upon the town, and that he would take good care to baulk the lad.
His brother he well knew had left a will, to which he was executor, and that
this will, would in good time, be forth coming. After much talk and ransacking
the house, and swearing at his truant niece, he and his company departed,
charging Caleb to keep the house and its contents for his use. This was all
that Caleb's memory had retained of that day's proceedings.

Curling had lately commented on the character of Philip Hadwin. This man was
totally unlike his brother, was a noted brawler and bully, a tyrant to his
children, a plague to his neighbors, and kept a rendezvous for drunkards and
idlers, at the sign of the Bull's Head, at -- He was not destitute of parts,
and was no less dreaded for cunning than malignity. He was covetous, and never
missed an opportunity of overreaching his neighbor. There was no doubt that his
niece's property would be embezzled, should it eve^ come into his hands, and
any power which he might ^^^tain over her person, would be exercised to her
(...). His children were tainted with the dissolut^ne^s of their father, and
marriage had not repaired the reputation of his daughter^, or cured them of
depravity: this was the man whom I now proposed to visit.

I scarce^y need to say that the calumny of Betty Lawrence ^^ve me no
unea^^ness. My father had no doubt been deceived, as well as my father's
neighbors, by the arti^ices of this woman. I passed among them for a thief and
a prof^^gate, but their error had hitherto been harmless to me. The time might
come which should confute the tale, without my efforts. Betty, sooner or later
would drop her mask, and afford the antidote to her own poisons, unless some
new incident should occur to make (...) ha^ten the catastrophe.

I arrived at Hadwin's hou^e. I was received with some attention as a guest. I
looked among the pimpled visages that filled the p^azza, for that of the
landlord, but found him in an inner apartment with two or three more, seated
round a table. On intimating my wish to speak with him alone* the others
withdrew.

Hadwin's visage had some traces of resemblance to his brother; but the meel^,
placid air, pale cheeks and slender form of the latter, were powerfully
contra^ted with the blo^^ed arrogance, imper^^s brow and (...) ^^mbs of the
former. This man's rage was awaken^d by a straw; it impelled him in an instant
to oath^ and ^^^ssetings, and m^de his life an eternal brawl. The sooner my
interview with such a personage should be at an end, (...). I therefore
explained the purpo^e of my (...) fully and in as few words as po^sible.

You^ name, Sir, is Philip Hadwin* Your brother William* of (...), died lately
and left two daughters. The (...) only is now alive^ and I come, commissioned
from her, to inform you, that ^ no will of her father's is extant, ^he i^
preparing to administer to (...). As her father's brother* he thought you (...).

The change which took place in the countenance of this man, during this
address, was remarkable, but not easily described. His cheeks contracted a
deeper crimson, his eyes sparkled, and his face assumed an expression in which
curiosity was mingled with rage. He bent forwards and said, in an hoarse and
contemptuous tone, pray, is your name Mervyn?

I answered, without hesitation, and as if the question were wholly
unimportant, yes: my name is Mervyn.

God damn it! You then are the damned rascal -- (but permit me to repeat his
speech without the oaths, with which it was plentifully interlarded. Not three
words were uttered without being garnished with a -- God damn it! damnation!
I Will be damned to hell if -- and the like energetic expletives.) You then are
the rascal that robbed Billy's house; that ran away with the fool his daughter;
persuaded her to burn her father's will, and have the hellish impudence to come
into this house! But I thank you for it. I was going to look for you -- youv'e
saved me trouble. I Will settle all accounts with you here. Fair and softly, my
good lad! If I don't bring you to the gallows -- If I let you escape without
such a dressing! Damned impudence! Fellow! I Have been at Malverton. I Have heard
of your tricks: so! finding the will not quite to your mind, knowing that the
executor would baulk your schemes, you threw the will into the fire; you robbed
the house of all the cash, and made off with the girl! -- The old fellow saw it
all, and will swear to the truth.

These words created some surprise. I meant not to conceal from this man the
tenor and destruction of the will, nor even the measures which his niece had
taken or intended to take. What I supposed to be unknown to him, appeared to
have been communicated by the talkative Caleb, whose mind was more inquisitive
and less sluggish than first appearances had led me to imagine. Instead of
moping by the kitchen fire, when Eliza and I were conversing in an upper room,
it now appeared that he had reconnoitred our proceedings through some key hole
or crevice, and had related what he had seen to Hadwin.

Hadwin proceeded to exhaust his rage in oaths and menaces. He frequently
clenched his fist, and thrust it in my face, drew it back as if to render his
blow more deadly; ran over the same series of exclamations on my impudence and
villainy, and talked of the gallows and the whipping-post; enforced each word
by the epithets -- damnable and hellish -- closed each sentence with -- and be
cursed to you!

There was but one mode for me to pursue: all forcible opposition to a man of
his strength was absurd. It was my province to make his anger confine itself to
words, and patiently to wait till the paroxism should end or subside of itself.
To effect this purpose, I kept my seat, and carefully excluded from my
countenance every indication of timidity and panick on the one hand, and of
scorn and defiance on the other. My look and attitude were those of a man who
expected harsh words, but who entertained no suspicion that blows would be
inflicted.

I was indebted for my safety to an inflexible adherence to this medium. To
have strayed, for a moment, to either side, would have brought upon me his
blows. That he did not instantly resort to violence, inspired me with courage,
since it depended on myself whether food should be supplied to his passion.
Rage must either progress or decline, and since it was in total want of
provocation, it could not fail of gradually subsiding.

My demeanor was calculated to damp the flame, not only by its direct
influence, but by diverting his attention from the wrongs which he had
received, to the novelty of my behavior. The disparity in size and strength
between us, was too evident to make him believe that I confided in my sinews
for my defense; and since I betrayed neither contempt nor fear, he could not
but conclude that I trusted to my own integrity or to his moderation. I seized
the first pause in his rhetoric to enforce this sentiment.

You are angry, Mr. Hadwin, and are loud in your threats, but they do not
frighten me. They excite no apprehension or alarm, because I know myself able
to convince you that I have not injured you. This is an inn, and I am your
guest. I am sure I shall find better entertainment than blows. Come, continued
I, smiling, it is possible that I am not so mischievous a wretch as your fancy
paints me. I have no claims upon your niece but that of friendship, and she is
now in the house of an honest man, Mr. Curling, where she proposes to continue
as long as is convenient.

It is true that your brother left a will, which his daughter burnt in my
presence, because she dreaded the authority which that will gave you, not only
over her property, but person. It is true that on leaving the house, she took
away the money which was now her own, and which was necessary to subsistence.
It is true that I bore her company, and have left her in an honest man's
keeping. I am answerable for nothing more. As to you, I meant not to injure
you; I advised not the burning of the will. I was a stranger till after that
event, to your character. I knew neither good nor ill of you. I came to tell
you all this, because, as Eliza's uncle, you had a right to the information.

So! you come to tell me that she burnt the will, and is going to administer --
to what, I beseech you? To her father's property? Aye, I warrant you; but take
this along with you, that property is mine; land, house, stock, every thing.
All is safe and snug under cover of a mortgage, to which Billy was kind enough
to add a bond. One was sued, and the other entered up* a week ago. So that all
is safe under my thumb, and the girl may whistle or starve for me. I shall give
myself no concern about the strumpet. You thought to get a prize; but, damn me,
you have met with your match in me. Phil. Haddin's not so easily choused, I
promise you. I intended to give you this news, and a drubbing into the bargain*
but you may go, and make haste. She burnt the will, did she; because I was
named in it -- and sent you to tell me so? Good souls! It was kind of you, and
I am bound to be thankful. Take her back news of the mortgage; and, as for you,
leave my house. You may go scot free this time; but I pledge my word for a
sound beating when you next enter these doors. I Will pay it you with interest.
Leave my house, I say!

A mortgage, said I, in a low voice, and affecting not to hear his commands,
that will be sad news for my friend. Why, sir, you are a fortunate man.
Malverton is an exce^lent spot; well watered and manured; newly and completely
fence^: not a larger barn in the county: oxen, and horses, and cows in the best
order: I never sat eyes on a finer orchard. By my faith, sir, you are a
fortunate man. But, pray, what have you for dinner? I am hungry as a wolf.
Order me a beef-steak, and some potation or other. The bottle there -- it is
cider, I take it; pray, push it to this side. Saying this, I stretched out my
hand toward the bottle which stood before him.

I con^ided in the power of a fearless and sedate manner. Methought that as
anger was the food of anger, it must unavoidably subside in a contest with
equability. This opinion was intuitive, rather than the product of experience,
and perhaps, I gave no proof of my sagacity in hazarding my safety on its
truth. Hadwin's character made him dreaded and obeyed by all. He had been
accustomed to ready and tremulous submission from men far more brawny and
robust than I was, and to find his most vehement menaces and gestures, totally
ineffectual on a being so slender and diminutive, at once wound up his rage and
excited his astonishment. One motion counteracted and suspended the other. He
lifted his hand, but delayed to strike. One blow, applied with his usual
dexterity, was sufficient to destroy me. Though seemingly careless, I was
watchful of his motions, and prepared to elude the stroke by shrinking or
stooping. Meanwhile, I stretched my hand far enough to seize the bottle, and
pouring its contents into a tumbler, put it to my lips.

Come, sir, I drink your health, and wish you speedy possession of Malverton. I
have some interest with Eliza, and will prevail on her to forbear all
opposition and complaint. Why should she complain? While I live, she shall not
be a beggar. No doubt, your claim is legal, and therefore ought to be admitted.
What the law gave, the law has taken away. Blessed be the dispensers of law --
excellent cider! open another bottle, will you, and I beseech hasten dinner, if
you would not see me devour the table.

It was just, perhaps, to conjure up the demon avarice to fight with the demon
anger. Reason alone, would, in such a contest, be powerless, but, in truth, I
spoke without artifice or disguise. If his claim were legal, opposition would
be absurd and pernicious. I meant not to rely upon his own assertions, and
would not acknowledge the validity of his claim, till I had inspected the deed.
Having instituted suits, this was now in a public office, and there the
inspection should be made. Meanwhile, no reason could be urged why I should
part from him in anger, while his kindred to Eliza, and his title to her
property, made it useful to secure his favor. It was possible to obtain a
remission of his claims, even when the law enforced them: it would be imprudent
at least to diminish the chances of remission by fostering his wrath and
provoking his enmity.

What, he exclaimed, in a transport of fury, a^^'t I master of my own house?
Out, I say!

These were harsh terms, but they were not accompanied by gestures and tones so
menacing ^s those which had before been used. It was plain that the tide, which
so lately threatened my destruction, had begun to recede. This encouraged me to
persist.

Be not alarmed, my good friend, said I, placidly and smiling. A man of your
bone need not fear a pigmy like me. I shall scarcely be able to dethrone you in
your own castle, with an army of hostlers, tap^ters, and cooks at your book.
You shall still be master here, provided you use your influence to procure me a
dinner.

His acquiescence in a pacific system, was extremely reluctant and gradual. He
laid aside one sullen tone and wrathful look after the other; and, at length,
consented not only to supply me with a dinner, but to partake of it with me.
Nothing was more a topic of surprise to himself, than his forbearance. He knew
not how it was. He had never been treated so before. He was not proof against
entreaty and submission; but I had neither supplicated nor submitted. The stuff
that I was made of was at once damnably tough and devilishly pliant. When he
thought of my impudence, in staying in his house after he had bade me leave it,
he was tempted to resume his passion. When he reflected on my courage, in
making light of his anger, notwithstanding his known impetuosity and my
personal inferiority, ^e could not withhold his esteem. But my patience under
his rebukes, my unalterable equanimity, and my ready consent to the validity of
his claims, soothed and propitiated him.

An exemption from blows and abuse was all that I could gain from this man. I
told him the truth, with regard to my own history, so far as it was connected
with the Hadwins. I exhibited, in affecting colors, the helpless condition of
Eliza; but could extort from him nothing but his consent, that, if she chose,
she might come and live with him. He would give her victuals and clothes for so
much house-work as she was able to do. If she chose to live elsewhere, he
promised not to molest her, or intermeddle in her concerns. The house and land
were his by law, and he would have them.

It was not my province to revile, or expostulate with him. I stated what
measures would be adopted by a man who regarded the interest of others more
than his own; who was anxious for the welfare of an innocent girl, connected
with him so closely by the ties of kindred, and who was destitute of what is
called natural friends. If he did not cancel, for her sake, his bond and
mortgage, ^e would, at least, afford her a frugal maintenance. He would extend
to her, in all emergences, his counsel and protection.

All that, he said, was sheer non^ense. He could not sufficiently wonder at my
folly, in proposing to him to make a free gift of an hundred rich acres, to a
girl too who scarcely knew her right hand from her left; whom the first cunning
young rogue, like myself, would chouse out of the whole, and take herself into
the bargain. But my folly was even surpassed by my impudence, since, as the
friend of this gi^l* I was merely petitioning on my own account. I had come to
him, whom I never saw before, on whom I had no claim, and who, as I well knew,
had reason to think me a sharper, and modestly said -- "Here Is a girl who has
no fortune. I am greatly in want of one. Pray, give her such an estate that you
have in your possession. If you do, I Will marry her, and take it into my own
hands." I might be thankful that he did not answer such a petition with an
horse-whipping. But if he did not give her his estate, he might extend to her,
forsooth, his counsel and protection. That I Have offered to do, continued he.
She may come and live in my house, if she will. She may do some of the family
work. I Will discharge the chambermaid to make room for her. Lizzy, if I
remember right, has a pretty face. She cannot have a better market for it than
as chambermaid to an inn. If she minds her p's and q's she may make up a
handsome sum at the year's end.

I thought it time to break off the conference; and, my dinner being finished,
took my leave; leaving behind me the character of a queer sort of ^hap. I
speeded to the prothonotary's office, which was kept in the village, and
quickly ascertained the truth of Hadwin's pretensions. There existed a
mortgage, with bond and warrant of attorney, to so great an amount as would
swallow up every thing at Malverton. Furnished with these tidings, I prepared,
with a droop^ng heart, to return to Mr. Curling's.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XI.
THIS incident necessarily produced a change in my views with regard to my
friend. Her fortune consisted of a few hundreds of dollars, which, frugally
administered, might procure decent accommodation in the country. When this was
consumed, she must find subsistence in tending the big-wheel or the milk-pail,
unless fortune should enable me to place her in a more favorable situation.
This state was, in some respects, but little different from that in which she
had spent the former part of her life; but, in her father's house, these
employments were dignified by being, in some degree, voluntary, and relieved by
frequent intervals of recreation and leisure. Now they were likely to prove
irksome and servile, in consequence of being performed for hire, and imposed by
necessity. Equality, parental solicitudes, and sisterly endearments would be
wanting to lighten the yoke.

These inconveniences, however, were imaginary. This was the school in which
fortitude and independence were to be learned. Habit, and the purity of rural
manners, would, likewise, create anew those ties which death had dissolved.
The affections of parent and sister would be supplied by the fonder and more
rational attachments of friendship. These toils were not detrimental to beauty
or health. What was to be dreaded from them, was, their tendency to quench the
spirit of liberal curiosity; to habituate the person to bodily, rather than
intellectual, exertions; to supersede, and create indifference or aversion to
the only instruments of rational improvement, the pen and the book.

This evil, however, was at some distance from Eliza. Her present abode was
quiet and serene. Here she might enjoy domestic pleasures and opportunities of
mental improvement, for the coming twelvemonth at least. This period would,
perhaps, be sufficient for the formation of studious habits. What schemes
should be adopted, for this end, would be determined by the destiny to which I
myself should be reserved.

My path was already chalked out, and my fancy now pursued it with uncommon
pleasure. To reside in your family; to study your profession; to pursue some
subordinate or casual mode of industry, by which I might purchase leisure for
medical pursuits, for social recreations, and for the study of mankind on your
busy and thronged stage, was the scope of my wishes. This destiny would not
hinder punctual correspondence and occasional visits to Eliza. Her pen might be
called into action, and her mind be awakened by books, and every hour be made
to add to her stores of knowledge and enlarge the bounds of her capacity.

I was spiritless and gloomy when I left --, but reflections on my future lot,
and just views of the situation of my friend, insensibly restored my
cheerfulness. I arrived at Mr. Curling's in the evening, and hastened to impart
to Eliza the issue of my commission. It gave her uneasiness, merely as it
frustrated the design, on which she had fondly mused, of residing in the city.
She was somewhat consoled by my promises of being her constant correspondent
and occasional visitor.

Next morning I set out on my journey hither, on foot. The way was not long;
the weather, though cold, was wholesome and serene. My spirits were high, and I
saw nothing in the world before me but sunshine and prosperity. I was conscious
that my happiness depended not on the revolutions of nature or the caprice of
man. All without was, indeed, vicissitude and uncertainty; but within my bosom
was a center not to be shaken or removed. My purposes were honest and
steadfast. Every sense was the inlet of pleasure, because it was the avenue to
knowledge; and my soul brooded over the world of ideas, and glowed with
exultation at the grandeur and beauty of its own creations.

This felicity was too rapturous to be of long duration. I gradually descended
from these heights; and the remembrance of past incidents, connected with the
images of your family, to which I was returning, fed my thoughts into a
different channel. Welbeck and the unhappy girl whom he had betrayed; Mrs.
Villars and Wallace were recollected anew. The views which I had formed, for
determining the fate and affording assistance to Clemenza, were recalled. My
former resolutions, with regard to her, had been suspended by the uncertainty
in which the fate of the Hadwins was, at that time, wrapped. Had it not become
necessary wholly to lay aside these resolutions?

That, indeed, was an irksome conclusion. No wonder that I struggled to repel
it: that I fostered the doubt whether money was the only instrument of benefit:
whether caution, and fortitude, and knowledge were not the genuine
preservatives from evil. Had I not the means in my hands of dispelling her
fatal ignorance of Welbeck and of those with whom she resided? Was I not
authorized by my previous, though slender, intercourse, to seek her presence?

Suppose I should enter Mrs. Villars' house, desire to be introduced to the
lady, accost her with affectionate simplicity, and tell her the truth? Why be
anxious to smooth the way; why deal in apologies, circuities and inuend^es? All
the^e are feeble and perverse refinements, unworthy of an honest purpose and an
erect spirit. To believe her inaccessible to my visit, was ^b^u^d. To wait for
the perm^ssion of those whose interest it might be to shut out visitants, was
cowardice. This was an infringement of her liberty, which equity and law
equally condemned. By what right could she be restrained from intercourse with
others? Doors and passages may be between her and me. With a purpose such as
mine, no one had a right to close the one or obstruct the other. Away with
cowardly reluctances and clownish scruples, and let me hasten this moment to
her dwelling.

Mrs. Villars is the portress of the mansion. She will probably present herself
before me, and demand the reason of my visit. What shall I say to her? The
truth. To faulter, or equivocate, or dissemble to this woman, would be wicked.
Perhaps her character has been misunderstood and maligned. Can I render her a
greater service than to apprize her of the aspersions that have rested on it,
and afford her the opportunity of vindication? Perhaps she is indeed selfish
and profligate; the betrayer of youth and the agent of laciviousness. Does she
not deserve to know the extent of her errors and the ignominy of her trade?
Does she not merit the compassion of the good and the rebukes of the wise? To
shrink from the task, would prove me cowardly and unfirm. Thus far, at least,
let my courage extend.

Alas! Clemenza is unacquainted with my language. My thoughts cannot make
themselves apparent but by words, and to my words she will be able to affix no
meaning. Yet is not that an hasty decision? The version from the dramas of Zeno
which I found in her toilet, was probably hers, and proves her to have a
speculative knowledge of our tongue. Near half a year has since elapsed, during
which she has dwelt with talkers of English, and consequently could not fail to
have acquired it. This conclusion ^s somewhat dubious, but experiment will give
it certainty.

Hitherto I had strolled along the path at a lingering pace. Time enough,
methought, to reach your threshold between sunrise and moonlight, if my way
had been three times longer than it was. You were the pleasing phantoms that
hovered before me, and beckoned me forward. What a total revolution had
occurred in the course of a few seconds, for thus long did my reasonings with
regard to Clemenza and the Villars require to pass through my understanding,
and escape, in half muttered soliloquy, from my lips. My muscles trembled with
eagerness, and I bounded forward with impetuosity. I saw nothing but a visto of
catalpas, leafless, loaded with icicles, and terminating in four chimneys and a
painted roof. My fancy outstripped my footsteps, and was busy in picturing
faces and rehearsing dialogues. Presently I reached this new object of my
pursuit, darted through the avenue, noticed that some windows of the house were
unclosed, drew thence an hasty inference that the house was not without
inhabitants, and knocked, quickly and loudly, for admission.

Some one within crept to the door, opened it with seeming caution, and just
far enough to allow the face to be seen. It was the timid, pale and unwashed
face of a girl who was readily supposed to be a servant, taken from a cottage,
and turned into a bringer of wood and water, and a scourer of tubs and
trenchers. She waited in timorous silence the delivery of my message. Was Mrs.
Villars at home?

No: she was gone to town.

Were any of her daughters within?

She could not tell; she believed -- she thought -- which did I want? Miss
Hetty or Miss Sally?

Let me see Miss Hetty. Saying this, I pushed gently against the door. The
girl, half reluctant, yielded way: I entered the passage, and putting my hand
on the lock of a door that seemed to lead into a parlour -- is Miss Hetty in
this room?

No: there was nobody there.

Go call her then. Tell her there is one who wishes to see her on important
business. I will wait for her coming in this room. So saying, I opened the
door, and entered the apartment, while the girl withdrew to perform my message.

The parlour was spacious and expensively furnished, but an air of negligence
and disorder was every where visible. The carpet was wrinkled and unswept; a
clock on the table, in a glass frame, so streaked and spotted with dust as
scarcely to be transparent, and the index motionless, and pointing at four
instead of nine; embers scattered on the marble hearth, and tong^ lying on the
fender with the handle in the ashes; an harpsicord, uncovered, one end loaded
with scores, tumbled together in a heap, and the other with volumes of novels
and plays, some on their edges, some on their backs, gaping open by the
scorching of their covers; rent; blurred; stained; blotted; dog-eared; tables
awry; chairs crouding each other; in short, no object but indicated the neglect
or ignorance of domestic neatness and economy.

My leisure was employed in surveying these objects, and in listening for the
approach of Miss Hetty. Some minutes elapsed, and no one came. A reason for
delay was easily imagined, and I summoned patience to wait. I opened a book;
touched the instrument; surveyed the vases on the mantle-tree; the figures on
the hangings, and the print of Apollo and the Sybil, taken from Salvator, and
hung over the chimney. I eyed my own shape and garb in the mirror, and asked
how my rustic appearance would be regarded by that supercilious and voluptuous
being, to whom I was about to present myself.

Presently the latch of the door was softly moved, it opened, and the
simpleton, before described, appeared. She spoke, but her voice was so full of
hesitation, and so near a whisper, that much attention was needed to make out
her words: Miss Hetty was not at home -- she was gone to town with her mistiss.

This was a tale not to be credited. How was I to act? She persisted in
maintaining the truth of it. -- Well then, said I, at length, tell Miss Sally
that I wish to speak with her. She will answer my purpose just as well.

Miss Sally was not at home neither. She had gone to town too. They would not
be back, she did not know when: not till night, she supposed. It was so indeed,
none of them was not at home: none but she and Nanny in the kitchen -- indeed'n
there was not.

Go tell Nanny to come here -- I will leave my message with her. She withdrew,
but Nanny did not receive the summons, or thought proper not to obey it. All
was vacant and still.

My state was singular and critical. It was absurd to prolong it; but to leave
the house with my errand unexecuted, would argue imbecility and folly. To
ascertain Clemenza's presence in this house, and to gain an interview, were yet
in my power. Had I not boasted of my intrepidity in braving denials and
commands, when they endeavored to obstruct my passage to this woman? But here
were no obstacles nor prohibitions. Suppose the girl had said truth, that the
matron and her daughters were absent, and that Nanny and herself were the only
guardians of the mansion. So much the better. My design will not be opposed. I
have only to mount the stair, and go from one room to another, till I find what
I seek.

There was hazard, as well as plausibility, in this scheme. I thought it best
once more to endeavor to extort information from the girl, and persuade her to
be my guide to whomsoever the house contained. I put my hand to the bell and
rung a brisk peal. No one come. I passed into the entry, to the foot of a
staircase, and to a back window. Nobody was within hearing or sight.

Once more I reflected on the rectitude of my intentions, on the possibility
that the girl's assertions might be true, on the benefits of expedition, and of
gaining access to the object of my visit without interruption o^ delay. To
these considerations was added a sort of charm, not easily explained, and by no
means justifiable, produced by the very temerity and hazardness accompanying
this attempt. I thought, with scornful emotions, on the bars and hindrances
which pride and caprice, and delusive maxims of decorum, raise in the way of
human intercourse. I spurned at these semblances and substitutes of honesty,
and delighted to shake such fetters into air, and trample such impediments to
dust. I wanted to see an human being, in order to promote her happiness. It was
doubtful whether she was within twenty paces of the spot where I stood. The
doubt was to be solved. How? By examining the space. I forthwith proceeded to
examine it. I reached the second story. I approached a door that was closed* I
knocked: after a pause, a soft voice said, who is there?

The accents were as musical as those of Clemenza, but were in other respects,
different. I had no topic to discuss with this person. I answered not, yet
hesitated to withdraw. Presently the same voice was again heard: what is it you
want? Why don't you answer? Come in! -- I complied with the command, and
entered the room.

It was deliberation and foresight that led me hither, and not chance or
caprice. Hence, instead of being disconcerted or vanquished by the objects that
I saw, I was tranquil and firm. My curiosity, however, made me a vigilant
observer. Two females, arrayed with voluptuous negligence, in a manner adapted
to the utmost seclusion, and seated in a careless attitude, on a sofa, were now
discovered.

Both darted glances at the door. One, who appeared to be the youngest, no
sooner saw me, than she shrieked, and starting from her seat, betrayed, in the
looks which she successively cast upon me, on herself and on the chamber, whose
apparatus was in no less confusion than that of the apartment below, her
consciousness of the unseasonableness of this meeting.

The other shrieked likewise, but on her it seemed to be the token of surprise,
rather than that of terror. There was, probably, somewhat in my aspect and garb
that suggested an apology for this intrusion, as arising from simplicity and
mistake. She thought proper, however, to assume the air of one offended, and
looking sternely -- How now, fellow, said she, what is this? Why come you
hither?

This questioner was of mature age, but had not passed the period of
attractiveness and grace. All the beauty that nature had bestowed was still
retained, but the portion had never been great. What she possessed was so
modelled and embellished by such a carriage and dress, as to give it most power
over the senses of the gazer. In proportion, however, as it was intended and
adapted to captivate those, who know none but physical pleasures, it was
qualified to breed distaste and aversion in me.

I am sensible how much error may have lurked in this decision. I had brought
with me the belief of their being uncha^te; and seized, perhaps, with too much
avidity, any appearance that coincided with my prepossessions. Yet the younger
by no means inspired the same disgust; though I had no reason to suppose her
more unblemished than the elder. Her modesty seemed unaffected, and was by no
means satisfied, like that of the elder, with defeating future curiosity. The
consciousness of what had already been exposed filled her with confusion, and
she would have flown away, if her companion had not detained her by some degree
of force. What ails the girl? There Is nothing to be frightened at. Fellow! she
repeated, what brings you here?

I advanced and stood before them. I looked steadfastly, but, I believe, with
neither effrontery nor anger, on the one who addressed me. I spoke in a tone
serious and emphatical. I come for the sake of speaking to a woman, who
formerly resided in this house, and probably resides here still. Her name is
Clemenza Lodi. If she be here, I request you to conduct me to her instantly.

Methought I perceived some inquietude, a less imperious and more inquisitive
air, in this woman, on hearing the name of Clemenza. It was momentary, and gave
way to peremptory looks. What is your business with her? And why did you adopt
this mode of enquiry? A very extraordinary intrusion! Be good enough to leave
the chamber. Any questions proper to be answered, will be answered below.

I meant not to intrude or offend. It was not an idle or impertinent motive
that led me hither. I waited below for some time after soliciting an audience
of you, through the servant. She assured me you were absent, and laid me under
the necessity of searching for Clemenza Lodi myself, and without a guide. I am
anxious to withdraw, and request merely to be directed to the room which she
occupies.

I direct you, replied she in a more resolute t^^e, to quit the room and the
house.

Impossible, madam, I replied, still looking at her earnestly, leave the house
without seeing her* You might as well enjoin me to pull the Andes on my head!
To walk barefoot to Peking! Impossible!

Some solicitude was now mingled with her anger. This is strange insolence!
unaccountable behavior! -- be gone from my room! will you compel me to call
the gentlemen?

Be not alarmed, said I, with augmented mildness. There was indeed compassion
and sorrow at my heart, and these must have somewhat influenced my looks. Be
not alarmed -- I came to confer a benefit, not to perpetrate an injury. I came
not to censure or expostulate with you, but merely to counsel and aid a being
that needs both: all I want is to see her. In this chamber I sought not you,
but her. Only lead me to her, or tell me where she is. I will then rid you of
my presence.

Will you compel me to call those who will punish this insolence as it deserves?

Dearest madam! I compel you to nothing. I merely supplicate. I would ask you
to lead me to these gentlemen, if I did not know that there are none but
females in the house. It is you who must receive and comply with my petition.
Allow me a moment's interview with Clemenza Lodi. Compliance will harm you not,
but will benefit her. What is your objection?

This is the strangest proceeding! the most singular conduct! Is this a place
fit to parley with you? I warn you of the consequence of staying a moment
longer. Depend upon it, you will sorely repent it.

You are obdurate, said I, and turned toward the younger, who listened to this
discourse in tremors and panick. I took her hand with an air of humility and
reverence. Here, said I, there seems to be purity, innocence and condescension.
I took this house to be the temple of voluptuousness. Females, I expected to
find in it, but such only as traded in licentious pleasures: specious, perhaps
not destitute of talents, beauty and address, but dissolute and wanton; sensual
and avaricious; yet, in this countenance and carriage there are tokens of
virtue. I am born to be deceived, and the semblance of modesty is readily
assumed. Under this veil, perhaps, lurk a tainted heart and depraved appetites.
Is it so?

She made me no answer, but somewhat in her looks seemed to evince that my
favorable prepossessions were just. I noticed likewise that the alarm of the
elder was greatly increased by this address to her companion. The thought
suddenly occurred that this girl might be in circumstances not unlike those of
Clemenza Lodi; that she was not apprized of the character of her associates,
and might by this meeting be rescued from similar evils.

This suspicion filled me with tumultuous feelings. Clemenza was for a time
forgotten. I paid no attention to the looks or demeanor of the elder, but was
wholly occupied in gazing on the younger. My anxiety to know the truth, gave
pathos and energy to my tones, while I spoke:

Who, where, what are you? Do you reside in this house? Are you a sister or
daughter in this family, or merely a visitant? Do you know the character,
profession and views of your companions? Do you deem them virtuous, or know
them to be profligate? Speak! tell me, I beseech you!

The maiden confusion which had just appeared in the countenance of this
person, now somewhat abated. She lifted her eyes, and glanced by turns at me
and at her who sat by her side. An air of serious astonishment overspread her
features, and she seemed anxious for me to proceed. The elder, meanwhile,
betrayed the utmost alarm, again upbraided my audacity, commanded me to
withdraw, and admonished me of the danger I incurred by lingering.

I noticed not her interference, but again entreated to know of the younger her
true state. She had no time to answer me, supposing her not to want the
inclination, for every pause was filled by the clamorous importunities and
menaces of the other. I began to perceive that my attempts were useless to this
end, but the chief, and most estimable purpose, was attainable. It was in my
power to state the knowledge I possessed, through your means, of Mrs. Villars
and her daughters. This information might be superfluous, since she to whom it
was given, might be one of this licentious family. The contrary, however, was
not improbable, and my tidings, therefore, might be of the utmost moment to her
safety.

A resolute, and even impetuous manner, reduced my incessant interruptor to
silence. What I had to say I compressed in a few words, and adhered to
perspicuity and candor with the utmost care. I still held the hand that I had
taken, and fixed my eyes upon her countenance with a steadfastness that
hindered her from lifting her eyes.

I know you not; whether you be dissolute or chaste, I cannot tell. In either
case, however, what I am going to say will be useful. Let me faithfully repeat
what I have heard. It is mere rumor, and I vouch not for its truth. Rumor as it
is, I submit it to your judgment, and hope that it may guide you into paths of
innocence and honor.

Mrs. Villars and her three daughters are English women, who supported for a
time an unblemished reputation, but who, at length, were suspected of carrying
on the trade of prostitution. This secret could not be concealed forever. The
profligates who frequented their house, betrayed them. One of them who died
under their roof, after they had withdrawn from it into the country, disclosed
to his kinsman, who attended his death bed, their genuine character.

The dying man likewise related incidents in which I am deeply concerned. I
have been connected with one by name Welbeck. In his house I met an unfortunate
girl, who was afterward removed to Mrs. Villars's. Her name was Clemenza Lodi.
Residence in this house, under the control of a woman like Mrs. Villars and
her daughters, must be injurious to her innocence, and from this control I now
come to rescue her.

I turned to the elder, and continued: By all that is sacred, I adjure you to
tell me whether Clemenza Lodi be under this roof! if she be not, whither has
she gone? To know this, I came hither, and any difficulty or reluctance in
answering, will be useless; till an answer be obtained, I will not go hence.

During this speech, anger had been kindling in the bosom of this woman. It now
burst upon me in a torrent of opprobrious epithets. I was a villain, a
calumniator, a thief. I had lurked about the house, till those whose sex and
strength enabled them to cope with me, had gone. I had entered these doors by
fraud. I was a wretch, guilty of the last excesses of insolence and insult.

To repel these reproaches, or endure them, was equally useless. The
satisfaction that I sought was only to be gained by searching the house. I left
the room without speaking. Did I act illegally in passing from one story and
one room to another? Did I really deserve the imputations of rashness and
insolence? My behavior, I well know, was ambiguous and hazardous, and perhaps
wanting in discretion, but my motives were unquestionably pure. I aimed at
nothing but the rescue of an human creature from distress and dishonor.

I pretend not to the wisdom of experience and age; to the praise of
forethought or subtlety. I choose the obvious path, and pursue it with headlong
expedition. Good intentions, unaided by knowledge, will, perhaps, produce more
injury than benefit, and therefore, knowledge must be gained, but the
acquisition is not momentary; is not bestowed unasked and untoil'd for:
meanwhile, we must not be unactive because we are ignorant. Our good purposes
must hurry to performance, whether our knowledge be greater or less.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XII.
TO explore the house in this manner was so contrary to ordinary rules, that
the design was probably wholly unsuspected by the women whom I had just left.
My silence, at parting, might have been ascribed by them to the intimidating
influence of invectives and threats. Hence I proceeded in my search without
interruption.

Presently I reached a front chamber in the third story. The door was ajar. I
entered it on tiptoe. Sitting on a low chair by the fire, I beheld a female
figure, dressed in a negligent, but not indecent manner. Her face in the
posture in which she sat was only half seen. Its hues were sickly and pale, and
in mournful unison with a feeble and emaciated form. Her eyes were fixed upon a
babe, that lay stretched upon a pillow at her feet. The child, like its mother,
for such she was readily imagined to be, was meagre and cadaverous. Either it
was dead, or could not be very distant from death.

The features of Clemenza were easily recognized, though no contrast could be
greater, in habit and shape, and complexion, than that which her present bore
to her former appearance. All her roses had faded, and her brilliances
vanished. Still, however, there was somewhat fitted to awaken the tenderest
emotions. There were tokens of incons^l^ble distress.

Her attention was wholly absorbed by the child. She lifted not her eyes, till
I came close to her, and stood before her. When she discovered me, a faint
start was perceived. She looked at me for a moment, then putting one spread
hand before her eyes, she stretched out the other toward the door, and waving
it in silence, as if to admonish me to depart.

This motion, however emphatical, I could not obey. I wished to obtain her
attention, but knew not in what words to claim it. I was silent. In a moment
she removed her hand from her eyes, and looked at me with new eagerness. Her
features bespoke emotions, which, perhaps, flowed from my likeness to her
brother, joined with the memory of my connection with Welbeck.

My situation was full of embarrassment. I was by no means certain that my
language would be understood. I knew not in what light the policy and
dissimulation of Welbeck might have taught her to regard me. What proposal,
conducive to her comfort and her safety, could I make to her?

Once more she covered her eyes, and exclaimed in a feeble voice, go away! be
gone!

As if satisfied with this effort, she resumed her attention to her child. She
stooped and lifted it in her arms, gazing, meanwhile, on its almost lifeless
features with intense anxiety. She crushed it to her bosom, and again looking
at me, repeated, go away! go away! be gone!

There was somewhat in the lines of her face, in her tones and gestures, that
pierced to my heart. Added to this, was my knowledge of her condition; her
friendlessness; her poverty; the pangs of unrequited love; and her expiring
infant. I felt my utterance choked, and my tears struggling for passage. I
turned to the window, and endeavored to regain my tranquillity.

What was it, said I, that brought me hither? The perfidy of Welbeck must
surely have long since been discovered. What can I tell her of the Villars
which she does not already know, or of which the knowledge will be useful? If
their treatment has ^een just, why should I detract from their merit? If it has
been otherwise, their own conduct will have disclosed their genuine character.
Though voluptuous themselves, it does not follow that they have labored to
debase this creature. Though wanton, they may not be inhuman.

I can propose no change in her condition for the better. Should she be willing
to leave this house, whither is it in my power to conduct her? O that I were
rich enough to provide food for the hungry, shelter for the housless, and
raiment for the naked.

I was roused from these fruitless reflections by the lady, whom some sudden
thought induced to place the child in its bed, and rising to come toward me.
The utter dejection which her features lately betrayed, was now changed for an
air of anxious curiosity. Where, said she, in her broken English, where is
Signior Welbeck?

Alas! returned I, I know not. That question might, I thought, with more
propriety be put to you than me.

I know where he be; I fear where he be.

So saying, the deepest sighs burst from her heart. She turned from me, and
going to the child, took it again into her lap. Its pale and sunken cheek was
quickly wet with the mother's tears, which, as she silently hung over it,
dropped fast from her eyes.

This demeanor could not but awaken curiosity, while it gave a new turn to my
thoughts. I began to suspect that in the tokens which I saw, there was not only
distress for her child, but concern for the fate of Welbeck. Know you, said I,
where Mr. Welbeck is? Is he alive? Is he near? Is he in calamity?

I do not know if he be alive. He be sick. He be in prison. They will not let
me go to him. And -- Here her attention and mine was attracted by the infant,
whose frame, till now motionless, began to be tremulous. Its features sunk into
a more ghastly expression. Its breathings were difficult, and every effort to
respire produced a convulsion harder than the last.

The mother easily interpreted these tokens. The same mortal struggle seemed to
take place in her feature as in those of her child. At length her agony found
way in a piercing shriek. The struggle in the infant was past. Hope looked in
vain for a new motion in its heart or its eyelids. The lips were closed, and
its breath was gone, forever!

The grief which overwhelmed the unhappy parent, was of that outrageous and
desperate kind which i^ wholly incompatible with thinking. A few incoherent
motions and screams, that rent the soul, were followed by a deep swoon. She
sunk upon the floor, pale and lifeless as her babe.

I need not describe the pangs which much a scene was adapted to produce in me.
These were rendered more acute by the helpless and ambiguous situation in which
I was placed. I was eager to bestow consolation and succor, but was destitute
of all means. I was plunged into uncertainties and doubts. I gazed alternately
at the infant and its mother. I sighed. I wept. I even sobbed. I stooped down
and took the lifeless hand of the sufferer. I bathed it with my tears, and
exclaimed, Ill-fated woman! unhappy mother! what shall I do for thy relief? How
shall I blunt the edge of this calamity, and rescue thee from new evils?

At this moment the door of the apartment was opened, and the youngest of the
women whom I had seen below, entered. Her looks betrayed the deepest
conste^nation and anxiety. Her eyes in a moment were fixed by the decayed form
and the sad features of Clemenza. She shuddered at this spectacle, but was
silent. She stood in the midst of the floor, fluctuating and bewildered. I
dropped the hand that I was holding, and approached her.

You have come, said I, in good season. I know you not, but will believe you to
be good. You have an heart, it may be, not free from corruption, but it is
still capable of pity for the miseries of others. You have an hand that refuses
not its aid to the unhappy. See; there is an infant dead. There is a mother
whom grief has, for a time, deprived of life. She has been oppressed and
betrayed; been robbed of property and reputation -- but not of innocence. She
is worthy of relief. Have you arms to receive her? Have you sympathy,
protection, and a home to bestow upon a forlorn, betrayed and unhappy stranger?
I know not what this house is; I suspect it to be no better than a brother. I
know not what treatment this woman has received. If, when her situation and
wants are ascertai^ed* will you timely (...) wants? Will you rescue her from
evils that may attend her continuance here?

She was disconcerted and be wildered by this address. At length she said --
All that has happened, all that I have heard and seen is so unexpected, so
strange, that I am amazed and distracted. Your behavior I cannot comprehend,
nor your motive for making this address to me. I cannot answer you, except in
one respect. If this woman has suffered injury, I have had no part in it. I
knew not of her existence, nor her situation till this moment; and whatever
protection or assistance she may justly claim, I am both able and willing to
bestow. I do not live here, but in the city. I am only an occasional visitant
in this house.

What then, I exclaimed, with sparkling eyes and a rapturous accent, you are
not profligate; are a stranger to the manners of this house, and a detester of
these manners? Be not a deceiver, I entreat you. I depend only on your looks
and professions, and these may be dissembled.

These questions, which indeed argued a childish simplicity, excited her
surprise. She looked at me, uncertain whether I was in earnest or in jest. At
length she said, your language is so singular, that I am at a loss how to
answer it. I shall take no pains to find out its meaning, but leave you to form
conjectures at leisure. Who is this woman, and how can I serve her? After a
pause, she continued -- I cannot afford her any immediate assistance, and shall
not stay a moment longer in this house. There (putting a card in my hand) is my
name and place of abode. If you shall have any proposals to make, respecting
this woman, I shall be ready to receive them in my own house. So saying, she
withdrew.

I looked wistfully after her, but could not but assent to her assertion, that
her presence here would be more injurious to her than beneficial to Clemenza.
She had scarcely gone, when the elder woman entered. There was rage,
sullenness, and disappointment in her aspect. These, however, were suspended by
the situation in which she discovered the mother and child. It was plain that
all the sentiments of woman were not extinguished in her heart. She summoned
the servants and seemed preparing to take such measures as the occasion
prescribed. I now saw the folly of supposing that these measures would be
neglected, and that my presence could not essentially contribute to the benefit
of the sufferer. Still, however, I lingered in the room, till the infant was
covered with a cloth, and the still senseless parent was conveyed into an
adjoining chamber. The woman then, as if she had not seen me before, fixed
scowling eyes upon me, and exclaimed, thief! villain! why do you stay here?

I mean to go, said I, but not till I express my gratitude and pleasure, at the
sight of your attention to this sufferer. You deem me insolent and perverse,
but I am not such; and hope that the day will come when I shall convince you of
my good intentions.

Begone! interrupted she, in a more angry tone. Begone this moment, or I will
treat you as a thief. She now drew forth her hand from under her gown, and
showed a pistol. You shall see, she continued, that I will not be insulted with
impunity. If you do not vanish, I will shoot you as a robber.

This woman was far from wanting a force and intrepidity worthy of a different
sex. Her gestures and tones were full of energy. They denoted an haughty and
indignant spirit. It was plain that she conceived herself deeply injured by my
conduct; and was it absolutely certain that her anger was without reason? I had
loaded her house with atrocious imputations, and these imputations might be
false. I had conceived them upon such evidence as chance had provided, but this
evidence, intricate and dubious as human actions and motives are, might be void
of truth.

Perhaps, said I, in a sedate tone, I have injured you; I have mistaken your
character. You shall not find me less ready to repair, than to perpetrate, this
injury. My error was without malice, and --

I had not time to finish the sentence, when this rash and enraged woman thrust
the pistol close to my head and fired it. I was wholly unaware that her fury
would lead her to this excess. It was a sort of mechanical impulse that made me
raise my hand, and attempt to turn aside the weapon. I did this deliberately
and tranquilly, and without conceiving that any thing more was intended by her
movement than to intimidate me. To this precaution, however, I was indebted for
life. The bullet was diverted from my forehead to my left ear, and made a
slight wound upon the surface, from which the blood gushed in a stream.

The loudness of this explosion, and the shock which the ball produced in my
brain, sunk me into a momentary stupor. I reeled backward, and should have
fallen had not I supported myself against the wall. The sight of my blood
instantly restored her reason. Her rage disappeared, and was succeeded by
terror and remorse. She clasped her hands, and exclaimed -- Oh! what, what have
I done? My frantic passion has destroyed me.

I needed no long time to show me the full extent of the injury which I had
suffered and the conduct which it became me to adopt. For a moment I was
bewildered and alarmed, but presently perceived that this was an incident more
productive of good than of evil. It would teach me caution in contending with
the passions of another, and showed me that there is a limit which the
impetuosities of anger will sometimes overstep. Instead of reviling my
companion, I addressed myself to her thus:

Be not frighted. You have done me no injury, and I hope will derive
instruction from this event. Your rashness had like to have sacrificed the life
of one who is your friend, and to have exposed yourself to infamy and death,
or, at least, to the pangs of eternal remorse. Learn, from hence, to curb your
passions, and especially to keep at a distance from every murderous weapon, on
occasions when rage is likely to take place of reason.

I repeat that my motives in entering this house were connected with your
happiness as well as that of Clemenza Lodi. If I have erred, in supposing you
the member of a vile and pernicious trade, that error was worthy of being
rectified, but violence and invective tend only to confirm it. I am incapable
of any purpose that is not beneficent; but, in the means that I use and in the
evidence on which I proceed, I am liable to a thousand mistakes. Point out to
me the road by which I can do you good, and I will cheerfully pursue it.

Finding that her fears had been groundless, as to the consequences of her
rashness, she renewed, though with less vehemence than before, her imprecations
on my intermeddling and audacious folly. I listened till the storm was nearly
exhausted, and then, declaring my intention to re-visit the house, if the
interest of Clemenza should require it, I resumed my way to the city.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XIII.
WHY, said I, as I hasted forward, is my fortune so abundant in unforeseen
occurrences? Is every man, who leaves his cottage and the impressions of his
infancy behind him, ushered into such a world of revolutions and perils as have
trammelled my steps? or, is my scene indebted for variety and change to my
propensity to look into other people's concern, and to make their sorrows and
their joys mine?

To indulge an adventurous spirit, I left the precincts of the barn-door,
enlisted in the service of a stranger, and encountered a thousand dangers to my
virtue under the disastrous influence of Welbeck. Afterward my life was set at
hazard in the cause of Wallace, and now am I loaded with the province of
protecting the helpless Eliza Hadwin and the unfortunate Clemenza. My wishes
are fervent, and my powers shall not be inactive in their defense, but how
slender are these powers!

In the offers of the unknown lady there is, indeed, some consolation for
Clemenza. It must be my business to lay before my friend Stevens the
particulars of what has befallen me, and to entreat his directions how this
disconsolate girl may be most effectually succored. It may be wise to take her
from her present abode, and place her under some chaste and humane
guardianship, where she may gradually lose remembrance of her dead infant and
her specious betrayer. The barrier that severs her from Welbeck must be high as
heaven and insuperable as necessity.

But, soft! Talked she not of Welbeck? Said she not that he was in prison and
was sick? Poor wretch! I thought thy course was at an end; that the penalty of
guilt no longer weighed down thy heart. That thy misdeeds and thy remorses were
buried ^n a common and obscure grave; but it seems too ^^art still alive.

Is it rational to cherish the hope of thy restoration to innocence and peace?
Thou art no obdurate criminal; had thou less virtue, thy compunctions would
be less keen. Were thou deaf to the voice of duty, thy wanderings into guilt
and folly would be less fertile of anguish. The time will perhaps come, when
the measure of thy transgressions and calamities will overflow, and the folly
of thy choice will be too conspicuous to escape thy discernment. Surely, even
for such transgressors as thou, there is a salutary power in the precepts of
truth and the lessons of experience.

But, thou art imprisoned and art sick. This, perhaps, is the crisis of thy
destiny. Indigence and dishonor were the evils, to shun which thy integrity
and peace of mind have been lightly forfeited. Thou have found that the price
was given in vain; that the hollow and deceitful enjoyments of opulence and
dignity were not worth the purchase; and that, frivolous and unsubstantial as
they are, the only path that leads to them is that of honesty and diligence.
Thou art in prison and art sick; and there is none to cheer thy hour with
offices of kindness, or uphold thy fainting courage by the suggestions of good
counsel. For such as thou the world has no compassion. Mankind will pursue thee
to the grave with execrations. Their cruelty will be justified or palliated,
since they know thee not. They are unacquainted with the goadings of thy
conscience and the latter retributions which thou art daily suffering: they are
full of their own wrongs, and think only of those tokens of exultation and
complacency which thou wast studious of assuming in thy intercourse with them.
It is I only that thoroughly know thee, and can rightly estimate thy claims ^^
compassion.

I have somewhat partaken of thy kindness, and thou merits some gratitude at
my hands. Shall I not visit and e^deavor to console thee in thy distress? Let
me, at lea^t, ascertain thy condition, and be the instrument in repairing the
wrongs which thou have inflicted. Let me gain, from contemplation of thy
nusery, new motives to sincerity and rectitude.

While occupied by these reflections, I entered the city. The thoughts which
engrossed my mind related to Welbeck. It is not my custom to defer till
tomorrow what can be done today. The destiny of man frequently hangs upon the
lapse of a minute. I will stop, said I, at the prison; and, since the moment of
my arrival may not be indifferent, I will go thither with all possible haste. I
did not content myself with walking, but, regardless of the comments of
passengers, hurried along the way at full speed.

Having enquired for Welbeck, I was conducted through a dark room, crowded with
beds, to a staircase. Never before had I been in a prison. Never had I smelt so
noisome an odor, or surveyed faces so begrimed with filth and misery. The
walls and floors were alike squallid and detestable. It seemed that in this
house existence would be bereaved of all its attractions; and yet those faces,
which could be seen through the obscurity that encompassed them, were either
void of care or distorted with mirth.

This, said I, as I followed my conductor, is the residence of Welbeck. What
contrasts are these to the repose and splendour, pictured walls, glossy
hangings, gilded sofas, mirrors that occupied from cieling to floor, carpets of
Taur^s, and the spotless and transcendent brilliancy of coverlets and napkins,
in thy former dwelling? Here brawling and the shuffling of rude feet are
eternal. The air is loaded with the exhalations of disease and the fumes of
debauchery. Thou art cooped up in airless space, and, perhaps, compelled to
share thy narrow cell with some stupid ruffian. Formerly, the breezes were
courted by thy lofty windows. Aromatic shrubs were scattered on thy hearth.
Menials, splendid in apparel, showed their faces with diffidence in thy
apartment, trod lightly on thy marble floor, and suffered not the sanctity of
silence to be troubled by a whisper. Thy lamp shot its rays through the
transparency of alabaster, and thy fragrant lymph flowed from vases of
porcelain. Such were formerly the decorations of thy hall, the embellishments
of thy existence; but now -- alas! --

We reached a chamber in the second story. My conductor knocked at the door. No
one answered. Repeated knocks were unheard or unnoticed by the person within.
At length, lifting a latch, we entered together.

The prisoner lay upon the bed, with his face turned from the door. I advanced
softly, making a sign to the keeper to withdraw. Welbeck was not asleep, but
merely buried in reverie. I was unwilling to disturb his musing, and stood with
my eyes fixed upon his form. He appeared unconscious that any one had entered.

At length, uttering a deep sigh, he changed his posture, and perceived me in
my motionless and gazing attitude. Recollect in what circumstances we had last
parted. Welbeck had, no doubt, carried away with him, from that interview, a
firm belief, that I should speedily die. His prognostic, however, was fated to
be contradicted.

His first emotions were those of surprise. These gave place to mortification
and rage. After eyeing me for some time, he averted his glances, and that
effort which is made to dissipate some obstacle to breathing, showed me that
his sensations were of the most excruciating kind. He laid his head upon the
pillow, and sunk into his former musing. He disdained, or was unable, to utter
a syllable of welcome or contempt.

In the opportunity that had been afforded me to view his countenance, I had
observed tokens of a kind very different from those which used to be visible.
The gloomy and malignant (...) more con^picuous. Health had forsaken his (...)
taken along with it those flexible parts, which formerly enabled him to cover
his secret torments and in^idious purposes, beneath a veil of benevolence and
cheerfulness. Alas! said I, loud enough for him to hear me, here is a monument
of ruin. Despair and mischievous passions are too deeply rooted in this heart
for me to tear them away.

These expressions did not escape his notice. He turned once more and cast
sullen looks upon me. There was somewhat in his eyes that made me sh^dder. They
denoted that his reverie was not that of grief, but of madness. I continued, in
a less steadfast voice than before:

Unhappy Clemenza! I have performed thy message. I have visited him that is
sick and in prison. Thou had cause for anguish and terror, even greater cause
than thou imaginedst. Would to God that thou would be contented with the
report which I shall make; that thy misguided tenderness would consent to leave
him to his destiny, would suffer him to die alone; but that is a forbearance
which no eloquence that I possess will induce thee to practice. Thou must come,
and witness for thyself.

In speaking thus, I was far from foreseeing the effects which would be
produced on the mind of Welbeck. I was far from intending to instill into him a
belief that Clemenza was near at hand, and was preparing to enter his
apartment: yet no other images but these would, perhaps, have roused him from
his lethargy, and aw^kened that attention which I wished to awaken. He started
up, and gazed fearfully at the door.

What! he cried. What! Is she here? Ye powers, that have scattered woes in my
path, spare me the sight of her! But from this agony I will rescue myself. The
moment she appears I will pluck out the^e eyes and dash them at her feet.

So saying, he gazed with augmented eagerness upon the door. His hands were
lifted to his head, as if ready to execute his frantic purpose. I seized his
arm, and besought him to lay aside his terror, for that Clemenza was far
distant. She had no intention, and besides was unabl^, to visit him.

Then I am respited. I breathe again. No; keep her from a prison. Drag her to
the wheel or to the scaffold; mangle her with stripes; torture her with famine;
strangle her child before her face, and cast it to the hungry dogs that are
bowling at the gate; but -- keep her from a prison. Never let her eater the^e
doors. -- There he stopped; his eyes being fixed on the floor, and his thoughts
once more buried in reverie. I resumed:

She is occupied with other griefs than those connected with the fate of
Welbeck. She is not unmindful of you: she kn^ws you to be sick and in prison^;
and I came to do for you whatever office your condition might require, and I
came at her suggestion. She, alas! has full employment for her tears in
watering the grave of her child.

He started. What! dead? Say you that the child is dead?

It is dead. I witnessed its death. I saw it expise in the arms of its mother;
that mother whom I formerly met under your roof blooming and gay, but whom
calamity has tarnished and withered. I saw her in the raiment of poverty, under
an ^ccursed roof; desolate; alone; unsolaced by the countenance or sympathy of
human beings; approached only by those who mock at her distress, set snares for
her innocence, and push her to infamy. I saw her leaning over the face of her
dying babe.

Welbeck put his hands to his head and exclaimed: curses on thy lips, infernal
messenger! Ch^^t el^^where thy rueful ditty! Vanish! if thou would not feel
in thy heart fangs red with blood less guilty than thine.

Till this moment the uproar in Welbeck's mind appeared to hinder him from
distinctly recognizing his visitant. Now it seemed as if the incidents of our
last interview suddenly sprung up in his remembrance.

What! This is the villain that rifled my cabinet, the maker of my poverty and
of all the evils which it has since engendered! That has led me to a prison!
Execrable fool! you are the author of the scene that you describe* and of
horrors without number and name. To whatever crimes I have been urged since
that interview, and the fit of madness that made you destroy my property, they
spring from your act; they flowed from necessity, which, had you held your hand
at that fateful moment, would never have existed.

How dare you thrust yourself upon my privacy? Why am I not alone? Fly! and let
my miseries want, at least, the aggravation of beholding their author. My eyes
loathe the sight of thee! My heart would suffocate thee with its own
bitterness! Begone!

I know not, I answered, why innocence should tremble at the ravings of a
lunatic; why it should be overwhelmed by unmerited reproaches! Why it should
not deplore the errors of its foe, labor to correct those errors, and --

Thank thy fate, youth, that my hands are tied up by my scorn; thank thy fate
that no weapon is within reach. Much has passed since I saw thee, and I am a
new man. I am no longer inconstant and cowardly. I have no motives but contempt
to hinder me from expiating the wrongs which thou have done me in thy blood. I
disdain to take thy life. Go; and let thy fidelity, at least, to the confidence
which I have placed in thee, be inviolate. Thou have done me harm enough, but
can do, if thou will, still more. Thou can betray the secrets that are
lodged in thy bosom, and rob me of the comfort of reflecting that my guilt is
known but to one among the living.

This suggestion made me pause, and look back upon the past. I had confided
this man's tale to you. The secrecy, on which he so fondly leaned, was at an
end. Had I acted culpably or not?

But why should I ruminate, with anguish and doubt, upon the past? The future
was within my power, and the road of my duty was too plain to be mistaken. I
would disclose to Welbeck the truth, and cheerfully encounter every
consequence. I would summon my friend to my aid, and take his counsel in the
critical emergency in which I was placed. I ought not to rely upon myself alone
in my efforts to benefit this being, when another was so near whose
discernment, and benevolence, and knowledge of mankind, and power of affording
relief were far superior to mine.

Influenced by these thoughts, I left the apartment without speaking; and,
procuring pen and paper* dispatched to you the billet which brought about our
meeting.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XIV.
MERVYN'S auditors allowed no pause in their attention to this story. Having
ended, a deep silence took place. The clock which stood upon the mantle, had
sounded twice the customary larum, but had not been heard by us. It was now
struck a third time. It was one. Our guest appeared somewhat startled (...)
this signal, and looked, with a mournful sort of earnestness, at the clock.
There was an air of inquietude about him, which I had never observed in an
equal degree before.

I was not without much curiosity respecting other incidents than those which
had just been related by him; but after so much fatigue as he had undergone, I
thought it improper to prolong the conversation.

Come, said I, my friend, let us to bed. This is a drowsy time, and after so
much exercise of mind and body, you cannot but need some repose. Much has
happened in your absence, which is proper to be known to you, but our discourse
will be best defe^red till tomorrow. I will come into your chamber by day-dawn,
and unfold to you my particular.

Nay, said he, withdraw not on my account. If I go to my chamber, it will not
be to sleep, but to meditate, especially after your assurance that something of
moment has occurred in my absence. My thoughts, independently of any cause of
sorrow or fear, have received an impulse which solitude and darkness will not
stop. It is impossible to know too much for our safety and integrity, or to
know it too soon. What has happened?

I did not hesitate to comply with his request, for it was not difficult to
conceive that, however tired the limbs might be, the adventures of this day
would not be easily expelled from the memory at night. I told him the substance
of the conversation with Mrs. Althorpe. He smiled at these parts of the
narrative which related to himself; but when his father's depravity and poverty
were mentioned, he melted into tears.

Poor wretch! I that knew thee in thy better days, might have easily divined
this consequence. I foresaw thy poverty and degradation in the same hour that I
left thy roof. My soul drooped at the prospect; but I said, it cannot be
prevented, and this reflection was an antidote to grief, but now that thy ruin
is complete, it seems as if some of it were imputable to me, who forsook thee
when the succor and counsel of a son were most needed. Thou art ignorant and
vicious, but thou art my father still. I see that the sufferings of a better
man than thou art would less afflict me than thine. Perhaps it is still in my
power to restore thy liberty and good name, and yet -- that is a fond wish.
Thou art past the age when the ignorance and grovelling habits of a human being
are susceptible of cure -- There he stopped, and after a gloomy pause, continued:

I am not surprised or afflicted at the misconceptions of my neighbors, with
relation to my own character. Men must judge from what they see: they must
build their conclusions on their knowledge. I never saw in the rebukes of my
neighbors, any thing but laudable abhorrence of vice. They were not eager to
blame, to collect materials of censure rather than of praise. It was not me
whom they hated and despised. It was the phantom that passed under my name,
which existed only in their imagination, and which was worthy of all their
scorn and all their enmity.

What I appeared to be in their eyes, was as much the object of my own
disapprobation as of theirs. Their reproaches only evinced the rectitude of
their decisions, as well as of my own. I drew from them new motives to
complacency. They fortified my perseverance in the path which I had chosen as
best; they raised me higher in my own esteem; they hightened the claims of the
reproachers themselves to my respect and my gratitude.

They thought me slothful, incurious, destitute of knowledge, and of all thirst
of knowledge, insolent and profligate. They say that in the treatment of my
father, I have been ungrateful and inhuman. I have stolen his property, and
deserted him in his calamity. Therefore they hate and revile me. It is well: I
love them for these proofs of their discernment and integrity. Their
indignation at wrong is the truest test of their virtue.

It is true that they mistake me, but that arises from the circumstances of our
mutual situation. They examined what was exposed to their view: they grasped at
what was placed within their reach. To decide contrary to appearances; to judge
from what they know not, would prove them to be brutish and not rational, would
make their decision of no worth, and render them, in their turn, objects of
neglect and contempt.

It is true that I hated school; that I sought occasions of absence, and
finally, on being struck by the master, determined to enter his presence no
more. I loved to leap, to run, to swim, to climb trees, and to clamber up
rocks, to shroud myself in thickets, and stroll among woods, to obey the
impulse of the moment, and to prate or be silent, just as my humor prompted me.
All this I loved more than to go to and fro in the same path, and at stated
hours, to look off and on a book, to read just as much, and of such a kind, to
stand up and be seated, just as another thought proper to direct. I hated to be
classed, cribbed, rebuked and feruled at the pleasure of one, who, as it seemed
to me, knew no guide in his rewards but caprice, and no prompter in his
punishments but passion.

It is true that I took up the spade and the hoe as rarely, and for as short a
time, as possible. I preferred to ramble in the forest and loiter on the hill:
perpetually to change the scene; to scrutinize the endless variety of objects;
to compare one leaf and pebble with another; to pursue those trains of thought
which their resemblances and differences suggested; to enquire what it was that
gave them this place, structure, and form, were more agreeable employments than
plowing and threshing.

My father could well afford to hire labor. What my age and my constitution
enabled me to do could be done by a sturdy boy, in half the time, with half the
toil, and with none of the reluctance. The boy was a bond servant, and the cost
of his clothing and food was next to nothing. True it is, that my service would
have saved him even this expense, but my motives for declining the effort were
not hastily weighed or superficially examined. The^e were my motives:

My frame was delicate and feeble. Exposure to wet blasts and vertical suns was
sure to make me sick. My father was insensible to this consequence; and no
degree of diligence would please him, but that which would destroy my health.
My health was dearer to my mother than to me. She was more anxious to exempt me
from possible injuries than reason justified; but anxious she was, and I could
not save her from anxiety, but by almost wholly abstaining from labor. I
thought her peace of mind was of some value, and that, if the inclination of
either of my parents must be gratified at the expense of the other, the
preference was due to the woman who bore me; who nursed me in disease; who
watched over my safety with incessant tenderness; whose life and whose peace
were involved in mine. I should have deemed myself brutish and obdurately
wicked to have loaded her with fears and cares merely to smooth the brow of a
froward old man, whose avarice called on me to sacrifice my ease and my health,
and who shifted to other shoulders the province of sustaining me when sick, and
of mourning for me when dead.

I likewise believed, that it became me to reflect upon the influence of my
decision on my own happiness; and to weigh the profits flowing to my father
from my labor, against the benefits of mental exercise, the pleasures of the
woods and streams, healthful sensations, and the luxury of musing. The
pecuniary profit was petty and contemptible. It obviated no necessity. It
purchased no rational enjoyment. It merely provoked, by furnishing the means of
indulgence, an appetite from which my father was not exempt. It cherished the
seeds of depravity in him, and lessened the little stock of happiness belonging
to my mother.

I did not detain you long, my friends, in pourtraying my parents, and
recounting domestic incidents, when I first told you my story. What had no
connection with the history of Welbeck and with the part that I have acted upon
this stage, I thought it proper to omit. My omission was likewise prompted by
other reasons. My mind is ennervated and feeble like my body. I cannot look
upon the sufferings of those I love without exquisite pain. I cannot steel my
heart by the force of reason, and by submission to necessity; and, therefore,
too frequently employ the cowardly expedient of endeavoring to forget what I
cannot remember without agony.

I told you that my father was sober and industrious by habit, but habit is not
uniform. There were intervals when his plodding and tame spirit gave place to
the malice and fury of a demon. Liquors were not sought by him, but he could
not withstand entreaty, and a potion that produced no effect upon others
changed him into a maniac.

I told you that I had a sister, whom the arts of a villain destroyed. Alas!
the work of her destruction was left unfinished by him. The blows and
contumelies of a misjudging and implacable parent, who scrupled not to thrust
her, with her newborn infant, out of doors; the curses and taunts of unnatural
brothers left her no alternative but death -- But I must not think of this; I
must not think of the wrongs which my mother endured in the person of her only
and darling daughter.

My brothers were the copyists of the father, whom they resembled in temper and
person. My mother doated on her own image in her daughter and in me. This
daughter was ravished from her by self-violence, and her other children by
disease. I only remained to appropriate her affections and fulfill her hopes.
This alone had furnished a sufficient reason why I should be careful of my
health and my life, but my father's character supplied me with a motive
infinitely more cogent.

It is almost incredible, but, nevertheless, true, that the only being whose
presence and remonstrances had any influence on my father, at moments when his
reason was extinct, was myself. As to my personal strength, it was nothing; yet
my mother's person was rescued from brutal violence: he was checked, in the
midst of his ferocious career, by a single look or exclamation from me. The
fear of my rebukes had even some influence in enabling him to resist
temptation. If I entered the tavern, at the moment when he was lifting the
glass to his lips, I never weighed the injunctions of decorum, but, snatching
the vessel from his hand, I threw it on the ground. I was not deterred by the
presence of others; and their censures, on my want of filial respect and duty,
were listened to with unconcern. I chose not to justify myself by expatiating
on domestic miseries, and by calling down that pity on my mother, which I knew
would only have increased her distress.

The world regarded my deportment as insolent and perverse to a degree of
insanity. To deny my father an indulgence which they thought harmless, and
which, indeed, was harmless in its influence on other men; to interfere thus
publicly with his social enjoyments, and expose him to mortification and shame,
was loudly condemned; but my duty to my mother debarred me from eluding this
censure on the only terms on which it could have been eluded. Now it has ceased
to be necessary to conceal what passed in domestic retirements, and I should
willingly confess the truth before any audience.

At first my father imagined, that threats and blows would intimidate his
monitor. In this he was mistaken, and the detection of this mistake impressed
him with an involuntary reverence for me, which set bounds to those excesses
which disdained any other control. Hence, I derived new motiv^^ for cherishing
a life which was useful, in so many ways, to my mother.

My condition is now changed. I am no longer on that field to which the law, as
well as reason, must acknowledge that I had some right, while there was any in
my father. I must hazard my life, if need be, in the pursuit of the means of
honest subsistence. I never spared myself while in the service of Mr. Hadwin;
and, at a more inclement season, should probably have incurred some hazard by
my diligence.

These were the motives of my idleness -- for, my abstaining from the common
toils of the farm passed by that name among my neighbors; though, in truth, my
time was far from being wholly unoccupied by manual employments, but these
required less exertion of body or mind, or were more connected with
intellectual efforts. They were pursued in the seclusion of my chamber or the
recesses of a wood. I did not labor to conceal them, but neither was I anxious
to attract notice. It was sufficient that the censure of my neighbors was
unmerited, to make me regard it with indifference.

I sought not the society of persons of my own age, not from sullen or
unsociable habits, but merely because those around me were totally unlike
myself. Their tastes and occupations were incompatible with mine. In my few
books, in my pen, in the vegetable and animal existences around me, I found
companions who adapted their visits and intercourse to my convenience and
caprice, and with whom I was never tired of communing.

I was not unaware of the opinion which my neighbors had formed of my being
improperly connected with Betty Lawrence. I am not sorry that I fell into
company with that girl. Her intercourse has instructed me in what some would
think ^mpossible to be attained by one who had never haunted the impure
recesses of licentiousness in a city. The knowledge* which residence in this
town for ten years gave her audacious and inquisitive spirit, she imparted to
me. Her character, profligate and artful, libidinous and impudent, and made up
of the impressions which a city life had produced on her coarse but active
mind, was open to my study, and I studied it.

I scarcely know how to repel the charge of illicit conduct, and to depict the
exact species of intercourse subsisting between us. I always treated her with
freedom, and sometimes with gaiety. I had no motives to reserve. I was so
formed that a creature like her had no power over my senses. That species of
temptation adapted to entice me from the true path, was widely different from
the artifices of Betty. There was no point at which it was possible for her to
get possession of my fancy. I watched her while she practiced all her tricks
and blandishments, just as I regarded a similar deportment in the animal salax
igna^umque who inhabits the stye. I made efforts to pursue my observations
unembarrassed; but my efforts were made, not to restrain desire, but to
suppress disgust. The difficulty lay, not in withholding my caresses, but in
forbearing to repulse her with rage.

Deco^um, indeed, was not outraged, and all limits were not overstept, at once.
Dubious advances were employed; but, when found unavailing, were displaced by
more shameless and direct proceedings. She was too little versed in human
nature to see that her last expedient was always worse than the preceding; and
that, in proportion as she lost sight of decency, she multiplied the obstacles
to her success.

Betty had many enticements in person and air. She was ruddy, smooth, and
plump. To these she added -- I must not say what, for it is strange to what
lengths a woman destitute of modesty will sometimes go. But all her artifices
availing her not at all in the contest with my insensibilities, she resorted to
extremes which it would serve no good purpose to describe in this audience.
They produced not the consequences she wished, but they produced another which
was by no means displeasing to her. An incident one night occurred, from which
a sagacious observer deduced the existence of an intrigue. It was useless to
attempt to rectify his mistake, by explaining appearances, in a manner
consistent with my innocence. This mode of explication implied a continence in
me which he denied to be possible. The standard of possibilities, especially in
vice and virtue, is fashioned by most men after their own character. A
tempta^^on which this judge of human nature knew that he was unable to r^sist,
he sagely concluded to be irresistible by any other man, and quickly
established the belief among my neighbors, that the woman who married the
father had been prostituted to the son. Though I never admitted the truth of
this aspersion, I believe it useless to deny, because no one would credit my
denial, and because I had no power to disprove it.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XV.
WHAT other enquiries were to be resolved by our young friend, we were now, at
this late hour, obliged to postpone till the morrow. I shall pass over the
reflections which a story like this would naturally suggest, and hasten to our
next interview.

After breakfast next morning, the subject of last night's conversation was
renewed. I told him that something had occurred in his absence, in relation to
Mrs. Wentworth and her nephew, that had perplexed us not a little. My
information is obtained, continued I, from Wortley; and it is nothing less,
than that young Clavering, Mrs. Wentworth's nephew, is, at this time, actually
alive.

Surprise, but none of the embarrassment of guilt, appeared in his countenance
at these tidings. He looked at me as if desirous that I should proceed.

It seems, added I, that a letter was lately received by this lady from the
father of Clavering, who is now in Europe. This letter reports that this son
was lately met with in Charleston, and relates the means which old Mr.
Clavering had used to prevail upon his son to return home; means, of the
success of which he entertained well grounded hopes. What think you?

I can only reject it, said he, after some pause, as untrue. The father's
correspondent may have been deceived. The father may have been deceived, or the
father may conceive it necessary to deceive the aunt, or some other
supposition, as to the source of the error, may be true; but an error it surely
is. Clavering is not alive. I know the chamber where he died, and the withered
pine under which he lies buried.

If she be deceived, said I, it will be impossible to rectify her error.

I hope not. An honest front and a straight story will be sufficient.

How do you mean to act?

Visit her without doubt, and tell her the truth. My tale will be too
circumstantial and consistent to permit her to disbelieve.

She will not hearken to you. She is too strongly prepossessed against you to
admit you even to an hearing.

She cannot help it. Unless she lock her door against me, or stuff her ears
with wool, she must hear me. Her prepossessions are reasonable, but are easily
removed by telling the truth. Why does she suspect me of artifice? Because I
seemed to be allied to Welbeck, and because I disguised the truth. That she
thinks ill of me is not her fault, but my misfortune; and, happily for me, a
misfortune easily removed.

Then you will try to see her.

I will see her, and the sooner the better. I will see her today; this
morning; as soon as I have seen Welbeck, whom I shall immediately visit in his
prison.

There are other embarrassments and dangers of which you are not aware. Welbeck
is pursued by many persons whom he has defrauded of large sums. By these
persons you are deemed an accomplice in his guilt, and a warrant is already in
the hands of officers for arresting you wherever you are found.

In what way, said Mervyn, sedately, do they imagine me a partaker of his crime?

I know not. You lived with him. You fled with him. You aided and connived at
his escape.

Are these crimes?

I believe not, but they subject you to suspicion.

To arrest and to punishment?

To detention for a while, perhaps. But these alone cannot expose you to
punishment.

I thought so. Then I have nothing to fear.

You have imprisonment and obloquy, at least, to dread.

True; but they cannot be avoided but by my exile and skulking out of sight --
evils infinitely more formidable. I shall, therefore, not avoid them. The
sooner my conduct be subjected to scrutiny, the better. Will you go with me to
Welbeck?

I will go with you.

Enquiring for Welbeck of the keeper of the prison, we were informed that he
was in his own apartment very sick. The physician, attending the prison, had
been called, but the prisoner had preserved an obstinate and scornful silence;
and had neither explained his condition, nor consented to accept any aid.

We now went, alone, into his apartment. His sensibility seemed fast ebbing,
yet an emotion of joy was visible in his eyes at the appearance of Mervyn. He
seemed likewise to recognize in me his late visitant, and made no objection to
my entrance.

How are you this morning? said Arthur, seating himself on the bedside, and
taking his hand. The sick man was scarcely able to articulate his reply -- I
shall soon be well. I have longed to see you. I want to leave with you a few
words. He now cast his languid eyes on me. You are his friend, he continued.
You know all. You may stay. --

There now succeeded a long pause, during which he closed his eyes, and
resigned himself as if to an oblivion of all thought. His pulse under my hand
was scarcely perceptible. From this in some minutes he recovered, and fixing
his eyes on Mervyn, resumed, in a broken and feeble accent:

Clemenza! You have seen her. Weeks ago, I left her in an accursed house: yet
she has not been mistreated. Neglected and abandoned indeed, but not
mistreated. Save her Mervyn. Comfort her. Awaken charity for her sake.

I cannot tell you what has happened. The tale would be too long -- too
mournful. Yet, in justice to the living, I must tell you something. My woes and
my crimes will be buried with me. Some of them, but not all.

Ere this, I should have been many leagues upon the ocean, had not a newspaper
fallen into my hands while on the eve of embarkation. By that I learned that a
treasure was buried with the remains of the ill-fated Watson. I was destitute.
I was unjust enough to wish to make this treasure my own. Prone to think I was
forgotten, or numbered with the victims of pestilence, I ventured to return
under a careless disguise. I penetrated to the vaults of that deserted dwelling
by night. I dug up the bones of my friend, and found the girdle and its
valuable contents, according to the accurate description that I had read.

I hastened back with my prize to Baltimore, but my evil destiny overtook me at
last. I was recognized by emissaries of Jamieson, arrested and brought hither,
and here shall I consummate my fate and defeat the rage of my creditors by
death. But first --

Here Welbeck stretched out his left hand to Mervyn, and, after some
reluctance, showed a roll of lead.

Receive this, said he. In the use of it, be guided by your honesty and by the
same advertisement that furnished me the clue by which to recover it. That
being secured, the world and I will part forever. Withdraw, for your presence
can help me nothing.

We were unwilling to comply with his injunction, and continued some longer
time in his chamber, but our kind intent availed nothing. He quickly relapsed
into insensibility, from which he recovered not again, but next day expired.
Such, in the flower of his age, was the fate of Thomas Welbeck.

Whatever interest I might feel in accompanying the progress of my young
friend, a sudden and unforeseen emergency compelled me again to leave the city.
A kinsman, to whom I was bound by many obligations, was suffering a lingering
disease, and imagining, with some reason, his dissolution to be not far
distant, he besought my company and my assistance, to sooth, at least, the
agonies of his last hour. I was anxious to clear up the mysteries which
Arthur's conduct had produced, and to shield him, if possible, from the evils
which I feared awaited him. It was impossible, however, to decline the
invitation of my kinsman, as his residence was not a day's journey from the
city. I was obliged to content myself with occasional information, imparted by
Mervyn's letters, or those of my wife.

Meanwhile, on leaving the prison, I hasted to inform Mervyn of the true nature
of the scene which had just passed. By this extraordinary occurrence, the
property of the Maurices was now in honest hands. Welbeck, stimulated by
selfish motives, had done that which any other person would have found
encompassed with formidable dangers and difficulties. How this attempt was
suggested or executed, he had not informed us, nor was it desirable to know. It
was sufficient that the means of restoring their own to a destitute and
meritorious family, were now in our possession.

Having returned home, I unfolded to Mervyn all the particulars respecting
Williams and the Maurices, which I had lately learned from Wortley. He listened
with deep attention, and my story being finished, he said: In this small
compass, then, is the patrimony and subsistence of a numerous family. To
restore it to them is the obvious proceeding -- but how? Where do they abide?

Williams and Watson's wife live in Baltimore, and the Maurices live near that
town. The advertisements alluded to by Wortley, and which are to be found in
any newspaper, will inform us; but first, are we sure that any or all of these
bills are contained in this covering?

The lead was now unrolled, and the bills which Williams had described, were
found enclosed. Nothing appeared to be deficient. Of this, however, we were
scarcely qualified to judge. Those that were the property of Williams might not
be entire, and what would be the consequence of presenting them to him, if any
had been embezzled by Welbeck?

This difficulty was obviated by Mervyn, who observed that the advertisement,
describing these bills, would afford us ample information on this head. Having
found out where the Maurices and Mrs. Watson live, nothing remains but to visit
them, and put an end, as far as lies in my power, to their inquietudes.

What! Would you go to Baltimore?

Certainly. Can any other expedient be proper? How shall I otherwise insure the
safe conveyance of these papers?

You may send them by post.

But why not go myself?

I can hardly tell, unless your appearance on such an errand, may be suspected
likely to involve you in embarrassments.

What embarrassments? If they receive their own, ought they not to be satisfied?

The enquiry will naturally be made as to the manner of gaining possession of
these papers. They were lately in the hands of Watson, but Watson has
disappeared. Suspicions are awake respecting the cause of his disappearance.
These suspicions are connected with Welbeck, and Welbeck's connection with you
is not unknown.

These are evils, but I see not how an ingenuous and open conduct is adapted to
increase these evils. If they come, I must endure them.

I believe your decision is right. No one is so skilful an advocate in a cause,
as he whose cause it is. I rely upon your skill and address, and shall leave
you to pursue your own way. I must leave you for a time, but shall expect to be
punctually informed of all that passes. With this agreement we parted, and I
hastened to perform my intended journey.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XVI.
I AM glad, my friend, thy nimble pen has got so far upon its journey. What
remains of my story may be dispatched in a trice. I have just now some vacant
hours, which might possibly be more usefully employed, but not in an easier
manner or more pleasant. So, let me carry on thy thread.

First, let me mention the resolutions I had formed at the time I parted with
my friend. I had several objects in view. One was a conference with Mrs.
Wentworth: another was an interview with her whom I met with at Villars's. My
heart melted when I thought upon the desolate condition of Clemenza, and
determined me to direct my first efforts for her relief. For this end I was to
visit the female who had given me a direction to her house. The name of this
person is Achsa Fielding, and she lived, according to her own direction, at No.
40, Walnut-street.

I went thither without delay. She was not at home. Having gained information
from the servant, as to when she might be found, I proceeded to Mrs.
Wentworth's. In going thither my mind was deeply occupied in meditation; and,
with my usual carelessness of forms, I entered the house and made my way to the
parlour, where an interview had formerly taken place between us.

Having arrived, I began, though somewhat un^easonably, to reflect upon the
topics with which I should introduce my conversation, and particularly the
manner in which I should introduce myself. I had opened doors without warning,
and traversed passages without being noticed. This had arisen from my
thoughtlessness. There was no one within hearing or sight. What was next to be
done? Should I not return softly to the outer door, and summon the servant by
knocking?

Preparing to do this, I heard a footstep in the entry which suspended my
design. I stood in the middle of the floor, attentive to these movements, when
presently the door opened, and there entered the apartment Mrs. Wentworth
herself! She came, as it seemed, without expectation of finding any one there.
When, therefore, the figure of a man caught her vagrant attention, she started
and cast an hasty look toward me.

Pray! (in a peremptory tone) how came you here, sir? and what is your business?

Neither arrogance, on the one hand; nor humility, upon the other, had any part
in modesting my deportment. I came not to deprecate anger, or exult over
distress. I answered, therefore, distinctly, firmly, and erectly.

I came to see you, madam, and converse with you* but, being busy with other
thoughts, I forgot to knock at the door. No evil was intended by my negligence,
though propriety has certainly not been observed. Will you pardon this
intrusion, and condescend to grant me your attention?

To what? What have you to say to me? I know you only as the accomplice of a
villain in an attempt to deceive me. There is nothing to justify your coming
hither, and I desire you to leave the house with as little ceremony as you
entered it.

My eyes were lowered at this rebuke, yet I did not obey the command. Your
treatment of me, madam, is such as I appear to you to deserve. Appearances are
unfavorable to me, but those appearances are false. I have concurred in no plot
against your reputation or your fortune. I have told you nothing but the truth.
I came hither to promote no selfish or sinister purpose. I have no favor ^o
entreat, and no petition to offer, but that you will suffer me to clear up
those mistakes which you have harbored respecting me.

I am poor. I am destitute of fame and of kindred. I have nothing to console me
in obscurity and indigence, but the approbation of my own heart and the good
opinion of those who know me as I am. The good may be led to despise and
condemn me. Their aversion and scorn shall not make me unhappy; but it is my
interest and my duty to rectify their error if I can. I regard your character
with esteem. You have been mistaken in condemning me as a liar and impostor,
and I came to remove this mistake. I came, if not to procure your esteem, at
least, to take away hatred and suspicion.

But this is not all my purpose. You are in an error in relation not only to my
character, but to the situation of your nephew Clavering. I formerly told you,
that I saw him die; that I assisted at his burial; but my tale was incoherent
and imperfect, and you have since received intelligence to which you think
proper to trust, and which assures you that he is still living. All I now ask
is your attention, while I relate the particulars of my knowledge.

Proof of my veracity or innocence may be of no value in your eyes, but the
fate of your nephew ought to be known to you. Certaintly, on this head, may be
of much importance to your happiness, and to the regulation of your future
conduct. To hear me patiently can do you no injury, and may benefit you much.
Will you permit me to go on?

During this address, little abatement of resentment and scorn was visible in
my companion.

I will hear you, she replied. Your invention may amuse if it does not edify.
But, I pray you, let your story be short.

I was obliged to be content with this ungraceful concession, and proceeded to
begin my narration. I described the situation of my father's dwelling. I
mentioned the year, month, day, and hour of her nephew's appearance among us. I
expatiated minutely on his form, features, dress, sound of his voice, and
repeated his words. His favorite gestures and attitudes were faithfully
described.

I had gone but a little way in my story, when the effects were visible in her
demeanor which I expected from it. Her knowledge of the youth, and of the time
and manner of his disappearance, made it impossible for me, with so minute a
narrative, to impose upon her credulity. Every word, every incident related,
attested my truth, by their agreement with what she herself previously knew.

Her suspicions and angry watchfulness was quickly exchanged for downcast
looks, and stealing tears, and sighs difficultly repressed. Meanwhile, I did
not pause, but described the treatment he received from my mother's tenderness,
his occupations, the freaks of his insanity, and, finally, the circumstances of
his death and funeral.

Thence I hastened to the circumstances which brought me to the city; which
placed me in the service of Welbeck, and obliged me to perform so ambiguous a
part in her presence. I left no difficulty to be solved and no question
unanticipated.

I have now finished my story, I continued, and accomplished my design in
coming hither. Whether I have vindicated my integrity from your suspicions, I
know not. I have done what in me lay to remove your error; and, in that, have
done my duty. -- What more remains? Any enquiries you are pleased to make, I am
ready to answer. If there be none to make, I will comply with your former
commands, and leave the house with as little ceremony as I entered it.

Your story, she replied, has been unexpected. I believe it fully, and am sorry
for the hard thoughts which past appearances have made me entertain concerning
you.

Here she sunk into mournful silence. The information, she at length resumed,
which I have received from another quarter respecting that unfortunate youth,
astonishes and perplexes me. It is inconsistent with your story, but it must be
founded on some mistake, which I am, at present, unable to unravel. Welbeck,
whose connection has been so unfortunate to you --

Unfortunate! Dear Madam! How unfortunate? It has done away a part of my
ignorance of the world in which I live. It has led me to the situation in which
I am now placed. It has introduced me to the knowledge of many good people. It
has made me the witness and the subject of many acts of beneficence and
generosity. My knowledge of Welbeck has been useful to me. It has enabled me to
be useful to others. I look back upon that allotment of my destiny which first
led me to his door, with gratitude and pleasure.

Would to Heaven, continued I, somewhat changing my tone, intercourse with
Welbeck had been as harmless to all others as it has been to me: that no injury
to fortune and fame, and innocence and life, had been incurred by others
greater than has fallen upon my head. There is one being, whose connection with
him has not been utterly dissimilar in its origin and circumstances to mine,
though the catastrophe has, indeed, been widely and mournfully different.

And yet, within this moment, a thought has occurred from which I derive some
consolation and some hope. You, dear madam, are rich. These spacious
apartments, this plentiful accommodation are yours. You have enough for your
own gratification and convenience, and somewhat to spare. Will you take to your
protecting arms, to your hospitable roof, an unhappy girl whom the arts of
Welbeck have robbed of fortune, reputation and honor, who is now languishing in
poverty, weeping over the lifeless remains of her babe, surrounded by the
agents of vice, and trembling on the verge of infamy?

What can this mean? replied the lady. Of whom do you speak?

You shall know her. You shall be apprized of her claims to your compassion.
Her story, as far as is known to me, I will faithfully repeat to you. She is a
stranger; an Italian; her name is Clemenza Lodi. --

Clemenza Lodi! Good Heaven! exclaimed Mrs. Wentworth; why, surely -- it cannot
be. And yet -- Is it possible that you are that person?

I do not comprehend you, madam.

A friend has related a transaction of a strange sort. It is scarcely an hour
since she told it me. The name of Clemenza Lodi was mentioned in it, and a
young man of most singular deportment was described. -- But tell me how you
were engaged on Thursday morning?

I was coming to this city from a distance. I stopped ten minutes at the house
of --

Mrs. Villars?

The same. Perhaps you know her and her character. Perhaps you can confirm or
rectify my present opinions concerning her. It is there that the unfortunate
Clemenza abides. It is thence that I wish her to be speedily removed.

I have heard of you; of your conduct upon that occasion.

Of me? answered I eagerly. Do you know that woman? So saying, I produced the
card which I had received from her, and in which her name was written.

I know her well. She is my countrywoman and my friend.

Your friend? Then she is good -- she is innocent -- she is generous. Will she
be a sister, a protectress to Clemenza? Will you exhort her to a dead of
charity? Will you be, yourself, an example of beneficence? Direct me to Miss
Fielding, I beseech you. I have called on her already, but in vain, and there
is no time to be lost.

Why are you so precipitate? What would you do?

Take her away from that house instantly -- bring her hither -- place her under
your protection -- give her Mrs. Wentworth for a counselor -- a friend -- a
mother. Shall I do this? Shall I hie thither today, this very hour -- now?
Give me your consent, and she shall be with you before noon.

By no means, replied she, with earnestness. You are too hasty. An affair of so
much importance cannot be dispatched in a moment. There are many difficulties
and doubts to be first removed.

Let them be reserved for the future. Withhold not your helping hand till the
struggler has disappeared forever. Think on the gulf that is already gaping to
swallow her. This is no time to hesitate and faulter. I will tell you her
story, but not now; we will postpone it till tomorrow; and first secure her
from impending evils. She shall tell it you herself. In an hour I will bring
her hither, and she herself shall recount to you her sorrows. Will you let me?

Your behavior is extraordinary. I can scarcely tell whether this simplicity
be real or affected. One would think that your common sense would show you the
impropriety of your request. To admit under my roof a woman, notoriously
dishonored, and from an infamous house --

My dearest madam! How can you reflect upon the situation without irresistible
pity? I see that you are thoroughly aware of her past calamity and her present
danger. Do not these urge you to make haste to her relief? Can any lot be more
deplorable than hers? Can any state be more perilous? Poverty is not the only
evil that oppresses, or that threatens her. The scorn of the world* and her own
compunction, the death of the fruit of her error and the witness of her shame,
are not the worst. She is exposed to the temptations of the profligate; while
she remains with Mrs. Villars, her infamy accumulates; her further debasement
is facilitated; her return to reputation and to virtue is obstructed by new
bars.

How know I that her debasement is not already complete and irremidable? She is
a mother but not a wife. How came she thus? Is her being Welb^ck's prostitute
no proof of her guilt?

Alas! I know not. I believe her not very culpable; I know her to be
unfortunate; to have been robbed and betrayed. You are a stranger to her
history. I am myself imperfectly acquainted with it.

But let me tell you the little that I know. Perhaps my narrative may cause you
to think of her as I do.

She did not object to this proposal, and I immediately recounted all that I
had gained from my own observations, or from Welbeck himself, respecting this
forlorn girl. Having finished my narrative, I proceeded thus: --

Can you hesitate to employ that power which was given you for good ends, to
rescue this sufferer? Take her to your home; to your bosom; to your confidence.
Keep aloof those temptations which beset her in her present situation. Restore
her to that purity which her desolate condition, her ignorance; her misplaced
gratitude and the artifices of a skilful dissembler, have destroyed, if it be
destroyed; for how know we under what circumstances her ruin was accomplished?
With what pretenses or appearances, or promises she was won to compliance?

True. I confess my ignorance; but ought not that ignorance to be removed
before she makes a part of my family?

O no! It may be afterward removed. It cannot be removed before. By bringing
her hither you shield her, at least, from future and possible evils. Here you
can watch her conduct and sift her sentiments conveniently and at leisure.
Should she prove worthy of your charity, how justly may you congratulate
yourself on your seasonable efforts in her cause? If she prove unworthy, you
may then demean yourself according to her demerits.

I must reflect upon it. -- Tomorrow --

Let me prevail on you to admit her at once, and without delay. This very
moment may be the critical one. Today, we may exert ourselves with success,
but tomorrow, all our efforts may be fruitless. Why fluctuate, why linger,
when so much good may be done, and no evil can possibly be incurred? It
requires but a word from you; you need not move a finger. Your house is large.
You have chambers vacant and convenient. Consent only that your door shall not
be barred against her; that you will treat her with civility; to carry your
kindness into effect; to persuade her to attend me hither and to place herself
in your care, shall be my province.

These, and many similar entreaties and reasonings, were ineffectual. Her
general disposition was kind, but she was unaccustomed to strenuous or sudden
exertions. To admit the persuasions of such an advocate to so uncommon a scheme
as that of sharing her house with a creature, thus previously unknown to her,
thus loaded with suspicion and with obloquy, was not possible.

I at last forbore importunity, and requested her to tell me when I might
expect to meet with Miss Fielding at her lodgings? Enquiry was made to what end
I sought an interview? I made no secret of my purpose.

Are you mad, young man? she exclaimed. Mrs. Fielding has already been
egregiously imprudent. On the faith of an ancient slight acquaintance with Mrs.
Villars in Europe, she suffered herself to be decoyed into a visit. Instead of
taking warning by numerous tokens of the real character of that woman, in her
behavior, and in that of her visitants, she consented to remain there one
night. The next morning took place that astonishing interview with you which
she has since described to me. She is now warned against the like indiscretion.
And pray, what benevolent scheme would you propose to her?

Has she property? Is she rich?

She is. Unhappily, perhaps, for her, she is absolute mistress of her fortune,
and has neither guardian nor parent to control her in the use of it.

Has she virtue? Does she know the value of affluence and a fair fame? And will
not she devote a few dollars to rescue a fellow creature from indigence and in
famy and vice? Surely she will. S. will hazard nothing by the boon. I will be
her almoner. I will provide the wretched stranger with food and raiment and
dwelling, I will pay for all, if Miss Fielding, from her superfluity will
supply the means. Clemenza shall owe life and honor to your friend, till I am
able to supply the needful sum from my own stock.

While thus speaking, my companion gazed at me with steadfastness -- I know not
what to make of you. Your language and ideas are those of a lunatic. Are you
acquainted with Mrs. Fielding?

Yes. I have seen her two days ago, and she has invited me to see her again.

And on the strength of this acquaintance, you expect to be her almoner? To be
the medium of her charity*

I desire to save her trouble; to make charity as light and easy as possible.
'Twill be better if she perform those offices herself. 'Twill redound more to
the credit of her reason and her virtue. But I solicit her benignity only in
the cause of Clemenza. For her only do I wish at present to call forth her
generosity and pity.

And do you imagine she will entrust her money to one of your age and sex, whom
she knows so imperfectly, to administer to the wants of one whom she found in
such an house as Mrs. Villars's? She never will. She mentioned her imprudent
engagement to meet you, but she is now warned against the folly of such
confidence.

You have told me plausible stories of yourself and of this Clemenza. I cannot
say that I disbelieve them, but I know the ways of the world too well to bestow
implicit faith so easily. You are an extraordinary young man. You may possibly
be honest. Such an one as you, with your education and address, may possibly
have passed all your life in an hovel; but it is scarcely credible, let me tell
you. I believe most of the facts respecting my nephew, because my knowledge of
him before his flight, would enable me to detect your falsehood; but there must
be other proofs besides an innocent brow and a voluble tongue, to make me give
full credit to your pretensions.

I have no claim upon Welbeck which can embarrass you. On that score, you are
free from any mo^estation from me or my friends. I have suspected you of being
an accomplice in some vile plot, and am now inclined to acquit you, but that is
all that you must expect from me, till your character be established by other
means than your own assertions. I am egaged at present, and must therefore
request you to put an end to your visit.

This strain was much unlike the strain which preceded it. I imagined, by the
mildness of her tone and manners, that her unfavorable prepossessions were
removed, but they seemed to have suddenly regained their pristine force. I was
somewhat disconcerted by this unexpected change. I stood for a minute silent
and irresolute.

Just then a knock was heard at the door, and presently entered that very
female whom I had met with at Villars's. I caught her figure as I glanced
through the window. Mrs. Wentworth darted at me many significant glances, which
commanded me to withdraw; but with this object in view, it was impossible.

As soon as she entered, her eyes were fixed upon me. Certain recollections
naturally occurred at that moment, and made her cheeks glow. Some confusion
reigned for a moment, but was quickly dissipated. She did not notice me, but
exchanged salutations with her friend.

All this while I stood near the window, in a situation not a little painful.
Certain tremors which I had not been accustomed to feel, and which seemed to
possess a mystical relation to the visitant, disabled me at once from taking my
leave, or from performing any useful purpose by staying. At length, struggling
for composure, I approached her, and showing her the card she had given me,
said: --

Agreeably to this direction, I called, an hour ago, at your lodgings. I found
you not. I hope you will permit me to call once more. When shall I expect to
meet you at home?

Her eyes were cast on the floor. A kind of indirect attention was fixed on
Mrs. Wentworth, serving to intimidate and check her. At length she said, in an
irresolute voice, I shall be at home this evening.

And this evening, replied I, I will call to see you. So saying, I left the
house.

This interval was tedious; but was to be endured with equanimity. I was
impatient to be gone to Baltimore, and hoped to be able to set out by the dawn
of next day. Meanwhile, I was necessarily to perform something with respect to
Clemenza.

After dinner I accompanied Mrs. Stevens to visit Miss Carlton. I was eager to
see a woman who could bear adversity in the manner which my friend had
described.

She met us at the door of her apartment. Her seriousness was not abated by her
smiles of affability and welcome. -- "My friend!" whispered I, "How truly
lovely is this Miss Carlton! Are the heart and the intelligence within worthy
of these features?"

"Yes, they are. Your account of her employments; of her resignation to the ill
fate of the brother whom she loves, proves that they are."

My eyes were rivetted to her countenance and person. I felt uncontrollable
eagerness to speak to her, and to gain her good opinion.

You must know this young man, my dear Miss Carlton, said my friend, looking at
me: He is my husband's friend, and professes a great desire to be yours. You
must not treat him as a mere stranger, for he knows your character and
situation already, as well as that of your brother.

She looked at me with benignity. -- I accept his friendship willingly and
gratefully, and shall endeavor to convince him that his good opinion is not
misplaced.

There now ensued a conversation somewhat general, in which this young woman
showed a mind vigorous from exercise and unembarrassed by care. She affected no
concealment of her own condition, of her wants, or her comforts. She laid no
stress upon misfortunes, but contrived to deduce some beneficial consequence to
herself, and some motive for gratitude to Heaven, from every wayward incident
that had befallen her.

This demeanor emboldened me, at length, to enquire into the cause of her
brother's imprisonment, and the nature of his debt.

She answered frankly and without hesitation. It is a debt of his father's, for
which he made himself responsible during his father's life. The act was
generous but imprudent, as the event has shown; though, at the time, the
unhappy effects could not be foreseen.

My father, continued she, was arrested by his creditor, at a time when the
calmness and comforts of his own dwelling were necessary to his health. The
creditor was obdurate, and would release him upon no condition but that of
receiving a bond from my brother, by which he engaged to pay the debt at
several successive times and in small portions. All these instalments were
discharged with great difficulty indeed, but with sufficient punctuality,
except the last, to which my brother's earnings were not adequate.

How much is the debt?

Four hundred dollars.

And is the state of the creditor such as to make the loss of four hundred
dollars of more importance to him than the loss of liberty to your brother?

She answered, smiling, that is a very abstract view of things. On such a
question, you and I might, perhaps, easily decide in favor of my brother; but
would there not be some danger of deciding partially? His conduct is a proof of
his decision, and there is no power to change it.

Will not argument change it? Methinks in so plain a case I should be able to
convince him. You say he is rich and childless. His annual income is ten times
more than this sum. Your brother cannot pay the debt while in prison; whereas,
if at liberty, he might slowly and finally discharge it. If his humanity would
not yield, his avarice might be brought to acquiesce.

But there is another passion which you would find it somewhat harder to
subdue, and that is his vengeance. He thinks himself wronged, and imprisons my
brother, not to enforce payment, but to inflict misery. If you could persuade
him, that there is no hardship in imprisonment, you would speedily gain the
victory; but that could not be attempted consistently with truth. In proportion
to my brother's suffering is his gratification.

You draw an odious and almost incredible portrait.

And yet such an one as would serve for the likeness of almost every second man
we meet.

And is such your opinion of mankind? Your experience must surely have been of
a rueful tenor to justify such hard thoughts of the rest of your species.

By no means. It has been what those whose situation disables them from looking
further than the surface of things, would regard as unfortunate; but if my
goods and evils were equitably balanced, the former would be the weightiest. I
have found kindness and goodness in great numbers, but have likewise met
prejudice and rancor in many. My opinion of Farquhar is not lightly taken up. I
have seen him yesterday, and the nature of his motives in the treatment of my
brother was plain enough.

Here this topic was succeeded by others, and the conversation ceased not till
the hour had arrived on which I had preconcerted to visit Mrs. Fielding. I left
my two friends for this purpose.

I was admitted to Mrs. Fielding's presence without scruple or difficulty.
There were two females in her company, and one of the other sex, well dressed,
elderly, and sedate persons. Their discourse turned upon political topics, with
which, as you know, I have but slight acquaintance. They talked of fleets and
armies, of Robespierre and Pit, of whom I had only a newspaper knowledge.

In a short time the women rose, and, huddling on their cloaks, disappeared, in
company with the gentleman. Being thus left alone with Mrs. Fielding, some
embarrassment was mutually betrayed. With much hesitation, which, however,
gradually disappeared, my companion, at length, began the conversation.

You met me lately, in a situation, sir, on which I look back with trembling
and shame, but not with any self-condemnation. I was led into it without any
fault, unless a too hasty confidence may be styled a fault. I had known Mrs.
Villars in England, where she lived with an untainted reputation, at least; and
the sight of my countrywoman, in a foreign land, awakened emotions, in the
indulgence of which I did not imagine there was either any guilt or any danger.
She invited me to see her at her house with so much urgency and warmth, and
solicited me to take a place immediately in a chaice in which she had come to
the city, that I too incautiously complied.

You are a stranger to me, and I am unacqainted with your character. What
little I have seen of your deportment, and what little I have lately heard
concerning you from Mrs. Wentworth, do not produce unfavorable impressions; but
the apology I have made was due to my own reputation, and should have been
offered to you whatever your character had been. There she stopped.

I came not hither, said I, to receive an apology. Your demeanor, on our first
interview, shielded you sufficiently from any suspicions or surmises that I
could form. What you have now mentioned was likewise mentioned by your friend,
and was fully believed upon her authority. My purpose, in coming, related not
to you but to another. I desired merely to interest your generosity and justice
on behalf of one, whose destitute and dangerous condition may lay claim to your
compassion and your succor.

I comprehend you, said she, with an air of some perplexity. I know the claims
of that person.

And will you comply with them?

In what manner can I serve her?

By giving her the means of living.

Does she not possess them already?

She is destitute. Her dependence was wholly placed upon one that is dead, by
whom her person was dishonored and her fortune embezzled.

But she still lives. She is not turned into the street. She is not destitute
of home.

But what an home?

Such as she may choose to remain in.

She cannot choose it. She must not choose it. She remains through ignorance, or
through the incapacity of leaving it.

But how shall she be persuaded to a change?

I will persuade her. I will fully explain her situation. I will supply her
with a new home.

You would persuade her to go with you, and to live at a home of your
providing, and on your bounty?

Certainly.

Would that change be worthy of a cautious person? Would it benefit her
reputation? Would it prove her love of independence?

My purposes are good. I know not why she should suspect them. But I am only
anxious to be the instrument. Let her be indebted to one of her own sex, of
unquestionable reputation. Admit her into this house. Invite her to your arms.
Cherish and console her as your sister.

Before I am convinced that she deserves it? And even then, what regard shall
I, young, unmarried, independent, affluent, pay to my own reputation in
harboring a woman in these circumstances?

But you need not act yourself. Make me your agent and almoner. Only supply her
with the means of subsistence through me.

Would you have me act a clandestine part? Hold meetings with one of your sex,
and give him money for a purpose which I must hide from the world? Is it worth
while to be a dissembler and impostor? And will not such conduct incur more
dangerous surmises and suspicions, than would arise from acting openly and
directly? You will forgive me for reminding you likewise, that it is
particularly incumbent upon those in my situation, to be circumspect in their
intercourse with men and with strangers. This is the second time that I have
seen you. My knowledge of you is extremely dubious and imperfect, and such as
would make the conduct you prescribe to me, in an high degree, rash and
culpable. You must not, therefore, expect me to pursue it.

These words were delivered with an air of firmness and dignity. I was not
insensible to the truth of her representations. I confess, said I, what you
have said makes me doubt the propriety of my proposal: yet I would fain be of
service to her. Cannot you point out some practicable method?

She was silent and thoughtful, and seemed indisposed to answer my question.

I had set my heart upon success in this negotiation, continued I, and could
not imagine any obstacle to its success; but I find my ignorance of the world's
ways much greater than I had previously expected. You defraud yourself of all
the happiness redounding from the act of making others happy. You sacrifice
substance to show, and are more anxious to prevent unjust aspersions from
lighting on yourself, than to rescue a fellow creature from guilt and infamy.

You are rich, and abound in all the conveniences and luxuries of life. A small
portion of your superfluity would obviate the wants of a being not less worthy
than yourself. It is not avarice or aversion to labor that makes you withhold
your hand. It is dread of the sneers and surmises of malevolence and ignorance.

I will not urge you further at present. Your determination to be wise should
not be hasty. Think upon the subject calmly and sedately, and form your
resolution in the course of three days. At the end of that period I will visit
you again. So saying, and without waiting for comment or answer, I withdrew.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XVII.
I MOUNTED the stage-coach at daybreak the next day, in company with a sallow
Frenchman from Saint Domingo, his fiddle-case, an ape, and two female blacks.
The Frenchman, after passing the suburbs, took out his violin and amused
himself with humming to his own tweedle-tweedle. The monkey now and then
mounched an apple, which was given to him from a basket by the blacks, who
gazed with stupid wonder, and an exclamatory La! La! upon the passing scenery;
or chattered to each other in a sort of open-mouthed, half-articulate,
monotonous, and sing-song jargon.

The man looked seldom either on this side or that; and spoke only to rebuke
the frolicks of the monkey, with a Tenez! Dominique! Prenez guard! Diable noir!

As to me my thought was busy in a thousand ways. I sometimes gazed at the
faces of my four companions, and endeavored to discern the differences and
samenesses between them. I took an exact account of the features, proportions,
looks, and gestures of the monkey, the Congolese, and the Creole-Gaul. I
compared them together, and examined them apart. I looked at them in a thousand
different points of view, and pursued, untired and unsatiated, those trains of
reflections which began at each change of tone, feature, and attitude.

I marked the country as it successively arose before me, and found endless
employment in examining the shape and substance of the fence, the barn and the
cottage, the aspect of earth and of heaven. How great are the pleasures of
health and of mental activity.

My chief occupation, however, related to the scenes into which I was about to
enter. My imaginations were, of course, crude and inadequate; and I found an
uncommon gratification in comparing realities, as they successively occurred,
with the pictures which my wayward fancy had (...).

I will not describe my dreams. My proper task is to relate the truth. Neither
shall I dwell upon the images suggested by the condition of the country through
which I passed. I will confine myself to mentioning the transactions connected
with the purpose of my journey.

I reached Baltimore at night. I was not so fatigued, but that I could ramble
through the town. I intended, at present, merely the gratification of a
stranger's curiosity. My visit to Mrs. Watson and her brother I designed should
take place on the morrow. The evening of my arrival I deemed an unseasonable
time.

While roving about, however, it occurred to me, that it might not be impolitic
to find the way to their habitation even now. My purposes of general curiosity
would equally be served whichever way my steps were bent; and, to trace the
path to their dwelling, would save me the trouble of enquiries and
interrogations tomorrow.

When I looked forward to an interview with the wife of Watson, and to the
subject which would be necessarily discussed at that interview, I felt a
trembling and misgiving at my heart. Surely, thought I, it will become me to
exercise immeasurable circumspection and address; and yet how little are these
adapted to the impetuosity and candor of my nature.

How am I to introduce myself? What am I to tell her? That I was a sort of
witness to the murder of her husband? That I received from the hand of his
assassin the letter which I afterward transmitted to her? and, from the same
hands, the bills contained in his girdle?

How will she start and look aghast? What suspicions will she harbor? What
enquiries shall be made of me? How shall they be disarmed and eluded, or
answered? Deep consideration will be necessary before I trust myself to such an
interview. The coming night shall be devoted to reflection upon this subject.

From these thoughts I proceed^d to enquiries for the street mentioned in the
advertisement, where Mrs. Watson was said to reside. The street, and, at
length, the habitation, was found. Having reached a station opposite, I paused
and surveyed the mansion. It was a wooden edifice of two stories; humble, but
neat. You ascended to the door by several stone steps. Of the two lower
windows, the shutters of one were closed, but those of the other were open.
Though late in the evening, there was no appearance of light or fire within.

Beside the house was a painted fence, through which was a gate leading to the
back of the building. Guided by the impulse of the moment, I crossed the street
to the gate, and, lifting the latch, entered the paved alley, on one side of
which was a paled fence, and on the other the house, looking through two
windows into the alley.

The first window was dark like those in front; but at the second a light was
discernible. I approached it, and, looking through, beheld a plain but neat
apartment, in which parlour, kitchen, and nursery seemed to be united. A fire
burnt cheerfully in the chimney, over which was a tea-kettle. On the hearth sat
a smiling and playful cherub of a boy, tossing something to a black girl who
sat opposite, and whose innocent and regular features wanted only a different
hue to make them beautiful. Near it, in a rocking-chair, with a sleeping babe
in her lap, sat a female figure in plain but neat and becoming attire. Her
posture permitted half her face to be seen, and saved me from any danger of
being observed.

This countenance was full of sweetness and benignity, but the sadness that
veiled its luster was profound. Her eyes were now fixed upon the fire and were
moist with the tears of remembrance, while she sung, in low and scarcely
audible strains, an artless lullaby.

This spectacle exercised a strange power over my feelings. While occupied in
meditating on the features of the mother, I was unaware of my conspicuous
situation. The black girl having occasion to change her situation, in order to
reach the ball which was thrown at her, unluckily caught a glance of my figure
through the glass. In a tone of half surprise and half terror she cried out --
O! see dare! a man!

I was tempted to draw suddenly back, but a second thought showed me the
impropriety of departing thus abruptly, and leaving behind me some alarm. I
felt a sort of necessity for apologizing for my intrusion into these precincts,
and hastened to a door that led into the same apartment. I knocked. A voice
somewhat confused bade me enter. It was not till I opened the door and entered
the room, that I fully saw in what embarrassments I had incautiously involved
myself.

I could scarcely obtain sufficient courage to speak, and gave a confused
assent to the question -- "Have you business with me, sir?" She offered me a
chair, and I sat down. She put the child, not yet awakened, into the arms of
the black, who kissed it and rocked it in her arms with great satisfaction,
and, resuming her seat, looked at me with inquisitiveness mingled with
complacency.

After a moment's pause, I said -- I was directed to this house as the abode of
Mr. Ephraim Williams. Can he be seen, madam?

He is not in town at present. If you will leave a message with me, I will
punctually deliver it.

The thought suddenly occurred, whether any more was needful than merely to
leave the bills suitably enclosed, as they already were, in a packet. Thus all
painful explanations might be avoided, and I might have reason to congratulate
myself on his seasonable absence. Actuated by these thoughts, I drew forth the
packet, and put it into her hand, saying, I will leave this in your
possession, and must earnestly request you to keep it safe until you can
deliver it into his own hands.

Scarcely had I said this before new suggestions occurred. Was it right to act
in this clandestine and mysterious manner? Should I leave these persons in
uncertainty respecting the fate of an husband and a brother? What perplexities,
misunderstandings, and suspences might not grow out of this uncertainty; and
ought they not to be precluded at any hazard to my own safety or good name?

These sentiments made me involuntarily stretch forth my hand to retake the
packet. This gesture, and other significances in my manners, joined to a
trembling consciousness in herself, filled my companion with all the tokens of
confusion and fear. She alternately looked at me and at the paper. Her
trepidation increased, and she grew pale. These emotions were counteracted by a
strong effort.

At length she said f^^lteringly, I will take good care of them, and will give
them to my brother.

She rose and placed them in a drawer, after which she resumed her seat.

On this occasion all my wariness forsook me. I cannot explain why my
perplexity and the trouble of my thot's were greater upon this than upon
similar occasions. However it be, I was incapable of speaking, and fixed my
eyes upon the floor. A sort of electrical sympathy pervaded my companion, and
terror and anguish were strongly manifested in the glances which she sometimes
stole at me. We seemed fully to understand each other without the aid of words.

This imbecility could not last long. I gradually recovered my composure and
collected my scattered thoughts. I looked at her with seriousness, and
steadfastly spoke -- Are you the wife of Amos Watson?

She started. -- I am, indeed. Why do you ask? Do you know any thing of --?
There her voice failed.

I replied with quickness, yes. I am fully acquainted with his destiny.

Good God! she exclaimed in a paroxysm of surprise, and bend^ng eagerly
forward, my husband is then alive. This packet is from him. Where is he? When
have you seen him?

It Is a long time since.

But where, where is he now? Is he well? Will he return to me?

Never*

Merciful Heaven! looking upwards and clasping her hands, I thank thee at least
for his life! But why has he forsaken me? Why will he not return?

For a good reason, said I with augmented solemnity, he will never return to
thee. Long ago was he laid in the cold grave.

She shrieked; and, at the next moment, sunk in a swoon upon the floor. I was
alarmed. The two children shrieked, and ran about the room terrified and
unknowing what they did. I was overwhelmed with somewhat like terror, yet I
involuntarily raised the mother in my arms, and cast about for the means of
recalling her from this ^it.

Time to effect this had not clapsed, when several persons, apparently Mrs.
Watson's neighbors, and raised by the outcries of the girls, hastily entered
the room. They looked at me with mingled surprise and suspicion; but my
attitude, being that not of an injurer but helper; my countenance, which showed
the pleasure their entrance, at this critical moment, afforded me; and my
words, in which I besought their assistance, and explained, in some degree, and
briefly, the cause of those appearances, removed their ill thoughts.

Presently, the unhappy woman, being carried by the new-comers into a bed-room
adjoining, recovered her sensibility. I only waited for this. I had done my
part. More information would be useless to her, and not to be given by me, at
least, in the present audience, without embarrassment and peril. I suddenly
determined to withdraw, and this, the attention of the company being otherwise
engaged, I did without notice. I returned to my inn, and shut myself up in my
chamber. Such was the change which, undesigned, unforeseen, an half an hour had
wrought in my situation. My cautious projects and perished in their conception.
That which I had deemed so arduous, to require such circumspect approaches,
such well concerted speeches, was done.

I had started up before this woman as if from the pores of the ground. I had
vanished with the same celerity, but had left her in possession of proofs
sufficient that I was neither spectre nor demon. I will visit her, said I,
again. I will see her brother, and know the full effect of my disclosure. I
will tell them all that I myself know. Ignorance would be no less injurious to
them than to myself; but, first, I will see the Maurices.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XVIII.
NEXT morning I arose betimes, and equipped myself without delay. I had eight
or ten miles to walk, so far from the town being the residence of these people;
and I forthwith repaired to their dwelling. The persons whom I desired to see
were known to me only by name, and by their place of abode. It was a mother and
her three daughters to whom I now carried the means not only of competence but
riches; means which they, no doubt, had long ago despaired of regaining, and
which, among all possible messengers, one of my age and guise would be the
least suspected of being able to restore.

I arrived, through intricate ways, at eleven o'clock, at the house of Mrs.
Maurice. It was a neat dwelling, in a very fanciful and rustic style, in the
bosom of a valley, which, when decorated by the verdure and blossoms of the
coming season, must possess many charms. At present it was naked and dreary.

As I approached it, through a long avenue, I observed two female figures,
walking arm-in-arm and slowly to and fro, in the path in which I now was.
These, said I, are daughters of the family. Graceful, well-dressed, fashionable
girls they seem at this distance. May they be deserving of the good tidings
which I bring. -- Seeing them turn toward the house, I mended my pace, that I
might overtake them and request their introduction of me to their mother.

As I more nearly approached, they again turned; and, perceiving me, they stood
as if in expectation of my message. I went up to them.

A single glance, cast at each, made me suspect that they were not sisters;
but, somewhat to my disappointment, there was nothing highly prepossessing in
the countenance of either. They were what is every day met with, though less
embellished by brilliant drapery and turban, in markets and streets. An air,
somewhat haughty, somewhat supercilious, lessened still more their attractions.
These defects, however, were nothing to me.

I enquired, of her that seemed to be the elder of the two, for Mrs. Maurice.

She is indisposed, was the cold reply.

That is unfortunate. Is it not possible to see her?

No -- with still more gravity.

I was somewhat at a loss how to proceed. A pause ensued. At length, the same
lady resumed -- What Is your business? You can leave your message with me.

With no body but her. If she be not very indisposed --

She is very indiposed, interrupted she peevishly. If you cannot leave your
message, you may take it back again, for she must not be disturbed.

This was a singular reception. I was disconcerted and silent. I knew not what
to say. Perhaps, I at last observed, some other time --

No, with increasing heat, no other time. She is more likely to be worse than
better. Come, Betsy, said she, taking hold of her companion's arm; and, hieing
into the house, shut the door after her, and disappeared. I stood, at the
bottom of the steps, confounded at such strange and unexpected treatment. I
could not withdraw till my purpose was accomplished. After a moment's pause, I
stepped to the door, and pulled the bell. A Negro came, of a very unpropitious
aspect, and opening the door, looked at me in silence. To my question, was Mrs.
Maurice to be seen? he made some answer, in a jargon which I could not
understand; but his words were immediately ^^^lowed by an unseen pe^^^n within
the house -- Mr^* Maurice cannot be seen by any body. Come in, Cato, and shut
the door. This injunction was obeyed by Cato without ceremony.

Here was a dilemma! I came with ten thousand pounds in my hands, to bestow
freely on these people, and such was the treatment I received. I must adopt,
said I, a new mode.

I lifted the latch, without a second warning, and, Cato having disappeared,
went into a room, the door of which chanced to be open, on my right hand. I
found within the two females whom I had accosted in the portico. I now
addressed myself to the younger -- This intrusion, when I have explained the
reason of it, will, I hope, be forgiven. I (...) --

Yes, interrupted the other, with a countenance suffu^ed by indignation, I know
very well whom you come from, and what it is that prompts this insolence, but
your employer shall see that we have not sunk so low as he imagines. Cato! ^ob!
I say.

My employer, madam! I see you labor under some great mistake. I have no
employer. I come from a great distance. I come to bring intelligence of the
utmost importance to your family. I come to benefit and not to injure you.

By this time, Bob and Cato, two sturdy blacks, entered the room. Turn this
person, said the imperious lady, regardless of my explanations, out of the
house. Don't you hear me? she continued, observing that they looked one upon
the other and hesitated.

Surely, madam, said I, you are precipitate. You are treating like an enemy one
who will prove himself your mother's best friend.

Will you leave the house? she exclaimed, quite beside herself with anger.
Villains! why don't you do as I bid you?

The blacks looked upon each other, as if waiting for an example. Their
habitual deference for every thing white, no doubt, held their hands from what
they regarded as a profanation. At last Bob said, in a whining, beseeching tone
-- Why, missee, massa buckra wanna go for do, dan he wanna go fo' we.

The lady now burst into tears of rage. She held out her hand, menacingly. Will
you leave the house?

Not willingly, said I, in a mild tone. I came too far to return with the
business that brought me unperformed. I am persuaded, madam, you mistake my
character and my views. I have a message to deliver your mother which deeply
concerns her and your happiness, if you are her daughter. I merely wished to
see her, and leave with her a piece of important news; news in which her
fortune is deeply interested.

These words had a wonderful effect upon the young lady. Her anger was checked.
Good God! she exclaimed, are you Watson?

No: I am only Watson's representative, and come to do all that Watson could do
if he were present.

She was now importunate to know my business.

My business lies with Mrs. Maurice. Advertisements, which I have seen, direct
me to her, and to this house, and to her only shall I deliver my message.

Perhaps, said she, with a face of apology, I have mistaken you. Mrs. Maurice
is my mother. She is really indisposed, but I can stand in her place on this
occasion.

You cannot represent her in this instance. If I cannot have access to her now,
I must go; and shall return when you are willing to grant it.

Nay, replied she, she is not, perhaps, so very sick but that -- I will go, and
see if she will admit you -- So saying, she left me for three minutes; and
returning said, her mother wished to see me.

I followed up stairs, at her request; and, entering an ill-furnished chamber,
found, seated in an arm-chair, a lady seemingly in years, pale and visibly
infirm. The lines of her countenance were far from laying claim to my
reverence. It was too much like the daughter's

She looked at me, at my entrance, with great eagerness, and said, in a sharp
tone, pray, friend, that is it you want with-me? Make haste; tell your story,
and begone.

My story is a short one, and easily told. Amos Watson was your agent in
Jamaica. He sold an estate belonging to you, and received the money.

He did, said she, attempting ineffectually to rise from her seat, and her eyes
beaming with a significance that sho^ked me -- He did, the villain, and
purloined the money, to the ruin of me and my daughters. But if there be
justice on earth it will overtake him. I trust, I shall have the pleasure one
day -- I hope to hear he is hanged. Well, but go on, friend. He did sell it, I
tell you.

He sold it for ten thousand pounds, I resumed, and invested this sum in bills
of exchange. Watson is dead. These bills came into my hands. I was lately
informed, by the public papers, who were the real owners, and have come from
Philadelphia with no other view than to restore them to you. There they are,
continued I, placing them in her lap, entire and untouched.

She seized the papers, and looked at me and at her daughter, by turns, with an
air of one suddenly bewildered. She seemed speechless, and growing suddenly
more ghastly pale, leaned her head back upon the chair. The daughter screamed,
and hastened to support the languid parent, who difficultly articulated -- O! I
am sick; sick to death. Put me on the bed.

I was astonished and affrighted at this scene. Some of the domestics, of both
colors, entered, and gazed at me with suprize. Involuntarily I withdrew, and
returned to the room below into which I had first entered, and which I now
found deserted.

I was for some time at a loss to guess at the cause of these appearances. At
length it occurred to me, that joy was the source of the sickness that had
seized Mrs. Maurice. The abrupt recovery of what had probably been deemed
irretrievable, would naturally produce this effect upon a mind of a certain
texture.

I was deliberating, whether to stay or go, when the daughter entered the room,
and, after expressing some surprise at seeing me, whom she supposed to have
retired, told me that her mother wished to see me again before my departure. In
this request there was no kindness. All was cold, supercilious, and sullen. I
obeyed the summons without speaking.

I found Mrs. Maurice seated in her arm-chair, much in her former guise.
Without desiring me to be seated, or relaxing ought in her asperity of looks
and tones -- Pray, friend, how did you come by these papers?

I assure you, madam, they were honestly come by, answered I, sedately and with
half a smile; but, if the whole is there that was missing, the mode and time in
which they came to me is matter of concern only to myself. Is there any
deficiency?

I Am not sure. I don't know much of these matters. There may be less. I dare
say there is. I shall know that ^oon. I expect a friend of mine every minute
who will look them over. I don't doubt you can give a good account of yourself.

I doubt not but I can -- to those who have a right to demand it. In this case,
curiosity must be very urgent indeed, before I shall consent to gratify it.

You must know this is a suspicious case. Watson, to be sure, embezzled the
money: to be sure, you are his accomplice.

Certainly, said I, my conduct, on this occasion, proves that. What I have
brought to you, of my own accord; what I have restored to you, fully and
unconditionally, it is plain Watson embezzled, and that I was aiding in the
fraud. To restore what was never ^tolen always betrays the thief. To give what
might he kept without suspicion, is, without doubt, arrant knavery. -- To be
serious, madam, in coming thus far, for this purpose, I have done enough; and
must now bid you farewell.

Nay, don't go (...). I have something more to say to you. My friend I Am sure
will be here presently. There he is, noticing a peal upon the bell. Polly, go
down, and see if that is Mr. Summers. If it is, bring him up. The daughter went.

I walked to the window absorbed in my own reflections. I was disappointed and
dejected. The scene before me was the unpleasing reverse of all that my fancy,
while coming hither, had foreboded. I expected to find virtuous indigence and
sorrow lifted, by my means, to affluence and exultation. I expected to witness
the tears of gratitude and the caresses of affection. What had I found? Nothing
but sordidness, stupidity, and illiberal suspicion.

The daughter staid much longer than the mother's patience could endure. She
knocked against the floor with her heel. A servant came up. -- Where Is Polly,
you slut? It was not you, hussy, that I wanted. It was her.

She is talking in the parlour with a gentleman.

Mr. Summers, I suppose; hay! fool! Run with my compliments to him, wench. Tell
him, please walk up.

It is not Mr. Summers, ma'am.

No! Who then, saucebox? What gentleman can have any thing to do with Polly?

I don't know, ma'am.

Who said you did, impertinence? Run, and tell her I want her this instant.

The summons was not delivered, or Polly did not think proper to obey it. Full
ten minutes of thoughtful silence on my part, and of muttered vexation and
impatience on that of the old lady, elapsed before Polly's entrance. As soon as
she appeared, the mother began to complain bitterly of her inattention and
neglect; but Polly, taking no notice of her, addressed herself to me, and told
me, that a gentleman below wished to see me. I hastened down, and found a
stranger, of a plain appearance, in the parlour. His aspect was liberal and
ingenuous; and I quickly collected from his discourse, that this was the
brother-in-law of Watson, and the companion of his last voyage.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XIX.
MY eyes sparkled with pleasure at this unexpected interview, and I willingly
confessed my desire to communicate all the knowledge of his brother's destiny
which I possessed. He told me, that, returning late to Baltimore on the last
evening, he found his sister in much agitation and distress, which, after a
time, she explained to him. She likewise put the pacquets I had left into his
hands.

I leave you to imagine, continued he, my surprise and curiosity at this
discovery. I was, of course, impatient to see the bearer of such extraordinary
tidings. This morning, enquiring for one of your appearance at the taverns, I
was, at length, informed of your arrival yesterday in the stage; of your going
out alone in the evening; of your subsequent return; and of your early
departure this morning. Accidentally I lighted on your footsteps; and, by
suitable enquiries on the road, have finally traced you hither.

You told my sister her husband was dead. You left with her papers that were
probably in his possession at the time of his death. I understand from Miss
Maurice that the bills belonging to her mother, have just been delivered to
her. I presume you have no objection to clear up this mystery.

To you I am anxious to unfold every thing. At this moment, or at any time, but
the sooner, the more agreeable to me, I will do it.

This, said he, looking around him, is no place; there is an inn not an hundred
yards from this gate, where I have left my horse; will you go thither? I
readily consented, and calling for a private apartment, I laid before this man
every incident of my life connected with Welbeck and Watson; my full,
circumstantial and explicit story, appeared to remove every doubt which he
might have entertained of my integrity.

In Williams, I found a plain good man, of a temper confiding and affectionate.
My narration being finished, he expressed, by unaffected tokens, his wonder and
his grief on account of Watson's destiny. To my enquiries, which were made with
frankness and fervor, respecting his own and his sister's condition, he said,
that the situation of both was deplorable till the recovery of this property.
They had been saved from utter ruin, from beggary and a jail, only by the
generosity and lenity of his creditors, who did not suffer the suspicious
circumstances attending Watson's disappearance to outweigh former proofs of his
probity. They had never relinquished the hopes of receiving some tidings of
their kinsman.

I related what had just passed in the house of Mrs. Maurice, and requested to
know from him the history and character of this family.

They have treated you, he answered, exactly as any one who knew them would
have predicted. The mother is narrow, ignorant, bigoted, and avaricious. The
eldest daughter, whom you saw, resembles the old lady in many things. Age,
indeed, may render the similitude complete. At present, pride and ill-humor are
her chief characteristics.

The youngest daughter has nothing in mind or person in common with her family.
Where they are irrascible, she is patient; where they are imperious, she is
humble; where they are covetous, she is liberal; where they are ignorant and
indolent, she is studious and skilful. It is rare, indeed, to find a young lady
more amiable than Miss Fanny Maurice, or who has had more crosses and
afflictions to sustain.

The eldest daughter always extorted the supply of her wants, from her parents,
by threats and importunities; but the younger could never be prevailed upon to
employ the same means, and, hence, she suffered inconveniences which, to any
other girl, born to an equal rank, would have been, to the last degree,
humiliating and vexatious. To her they only afforded new opportunities for the
display of her most shining virtues -- fortitude and charity. No instance of
their sordidness or tyranny ever stole a murmur from her. For what they had
given, existence and a virtuous education, she said they were entitled to
gratitude. What they withheld was their own, in the use of which they were not
accountable to her. She was not ashamed to owe her subsistence to her own
industry, and was only held, by the pride of her family -- in this instance
their pride was equal to their avarice -- from seeking out some lucrative kind
of employment. Since the shock which their fortune sustained, by Watson's
disappearance, she has been permitted to pursue this plan, and she now teaches
music in Baltimore for a living. No one, however, in the highest rank, can be
more generally respected and caressed than she is.

But will not the recovery of this money make a favorable change in her
condition?

I can hardly tell; but I am inclined to think it will not. It will not change
her mother's character. Her pride may be awakened anew, and she may oblige Miss
Fanny to relinquish her new profession, and that will be a change to be
deplored.

What good has been done, then, by restoring this money?

If pleasure be good, you must have conferred a great deal on the Maurices;
upon the mother and two of the daughters, at least. The only pleasure, indeed,
which their natures can receive. It is less than if you had raised them from
absolute indigence, which has not been the case, since they had wherewithal to
live upon beside their Jamaica property. But how, continued Williams, suddenly
recollecting himself, have you claimed the reward promised to him who should
restore these bills?

What reward?

No less than a thousand dollars. It was publicly promised under the hands of
Mrs. Maurice and of Hemming, her husband's executor.

Really, said I, that circumstance escaped my attention, and I wonder that it
did; but is it too late to repair the evil?

Then you have no scruple to accept the reward?

Certainly not. Could you suspect me of so strange a punctilio as that?

Yes; but I know not why. The story you have just finished taught me to expect
some unreasonable refinement upon that head. -- To be hired, to be bribed to do
our duty is supposed by some to be degrading.

This is no such bribe to me. I should have acted just as I have done, had no
recompense been promised. In truth, this has been my conduct, for I never once
thought of the reward; but now that you remind me of it, I would gladly see it
bestowed. To fulfill their engagements, in this respect, is no more than justice
in the Maurices. To one, in my condition, the money will be highly useful. If
these people were poor, or generous and worthy, or if I myself were already
rich, I might less repine at their withholding it; but, things being as they
are with them and with me, it would, I think, be gross injustice in them to
withhold, and in me to refuse.

That injustice, said Williams, will, on their part, I fear, be committed. It Is
pity you first applied to Mrs. Maurice. Nothing can be expected from her
avarice, unless it be wrested from her by a lawsuit.

That is a force which I shall never apply.

Had you gone first to Hemming's, you might, I think, have looked for payment.
He is not a mean man. A thousand dollars he must know is not much to give for
forty thousand. Perhaps, indeed, it may not yet be too late. I am well known to
him, and if you please, will attend you to him in the evening, and state your
claim.

I thankfully accepted this offer, and went with him accordingly. I found that
Hemmings had been with Mrs. Maurice in the course of the day; had received from
her intelligence of this transaction, and had entertained the expectation of a
visit from me for this very purpose.

While Williams explained to him the nature of my claim, he scanned me with
great intentness. His austere and inflexible brow, afforded me little room to
hope for success, and this hopelessness was confirmed by his silence and
perplexity, when Williams had made an end.

To be sure, said he, after some pause, the contract was explicit. To be sure,
the conditions on Mr. Mervyn's side have been performed. Certain it is, the
bills are entire and complete, but Mrs. Maurice will not consent to do her
part, and Mrs. Maurice, to whom the papers were presented, is the person, by
whom, according to the terms of the contract, the reward must be paid.

But Mrs. Maurice, you know, sir, may be legally compelled to pay, said
Williams.

Perhaps she may; but I tell you plainly, that she never will do the thing
without compulsion. Legal process, however, in this case, will have other
inconveniences besides delay. Some curiosity will naturally be excited, as to
the history of these papers. Watson disappeared a twelve month ago. Who can
avoid asking, where have these papers been deposited all this while, and how
came this person in possession of them?

That kind of curiosity, said I, is natural and laudable, and gladly would I
gratify it. Disclosure or concealment in that case, however, would no wise
affect my present claim. Whether a bond, legally executed, shall be paid, does
not depend upon determining whether the payer is fondest of boiled mutton or
roast beef. Truth, in the first case, has no connection with truth in the
second. So far from eluding this curiosity; so far from studying concealment, I
am anxious to publish the truth.

You are right, to be sure, said Hemmings. Curiosity is a natural, but only an
incidental consequence in this case. I have no reason for desiring that it
should be an unpleasant consequence to you.

Well, sir, said Williams, you think that Arthur Mervyn has no remedy in this
case but the law.

Mrs. Maurice, to be sure, will never pay but on compulsion. Mervyn should have
known his own interest better. While his left hand was stretched out to give,
his right should have been held forth to receive. As it is, he must be
contented with the aid of law. Any attorney will prosecute on condition of
receiving half the sum when recovered.

We now rose to take our leave, when, Hemmings desiring us to pause a moment,
said, to be sure, in the utmost strictness of the terms of our promise, the
reward was to be paid by the person who received the papers; but it must be
owned that your claim, at any rate, is equitable: I have money of the deceased
Mr. Maurice in my hands. These very bills are now in my possession. I will
therefore pay you your due, and take the consequences of an act of justice on
myself. I was prepared for you. Sign that receipt, and there is a check for the
amount.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XX.
THIS unexpected and agreeable decision was accompanied by an invitation to
supper, at which we were treated by our host with much affability and kindness.
Finding me the author of Williams's good fortune, as well as Mrs. Maurice's,
and being assured by the former of his entire conviction of the rectitude of my
conduct, he laid aside all reserve and distance with regard to me. He enquired
into my prospects and wishes, and professed his willingness to serve me.

I dealt with equal unreserve and frankness. I am poor, said I* Money for my
very expenses hither, I have borrowed from a friend, to whom I am, in other
respects, much indebted, and whom I expect to compensate only by gratitude and
future services.

In coming hither, I expected only an increase of my debts; to sink still
deeper into poverty; but happily the issue has made me rich. This hour has
given me competence, at least.

What! call you a thousand dollars competence?

More than competence. I call it an abundance. My own ingenuity, while I enjoy
health, will enable me to live. This I regard as a fund, first to pay my debts,
and next to supply deficiencies occasioned by untoward accidents or ill health,
during the ensuing three or four years, at least.

We parted with this new acquaintance at a late hour, and I accepted Williams's
invitation to pass the time I should spend at Baltimore, under his sister's
roof. There were several motives for prolonging this stay. What I had heard of
Miss Fanny Maurice, excited strong wishes to be personally acquainted with her.
This young lady was affectionately attached to Mrs. Watson, by whose means my
wishes were easily accomplished.

I never was in habits of reserve, even with those whom I had no reason to
esteem. With those who claimed my admiration and affection, it was impossible
to be incommunicative. Before the end of my second interview, both these women
were mistresses of every momentous incident of my life, and of the whole chain
of my feelings and opinions, in relation to every subject, and particularly in
relation to themselves. Every topic disconnected with these, is comparatively
lifeless and inert.

I found it easy to win their attention, and to render them communicative in
their turn. As full disclosures as I had made without condition or request, my
enquiries and example easily obtained from Mrs. Watson and Miss Maurice. The
former related every event of her youth, and the circumstances leading to her
marriage. She depicted the character of her husband, and the whole train of
suspences and inquietudes occasioned by his disappearance. The latter did not
hide from me her opinions upon any important subject, and made me thoroughly
acquainted with her actual situation.

This intercourse was strangely fascinating. My heart was buoyed up by a kind
of intoxication. I now found myself exalted to my genial element, and began to
taste the delights of existence. In the intercourse of ingenious and
sympathetic minds, I found a pleasure which I had not previously conceived.

The time flew swiftly away, and a fortnight passed almost before I was aware
that a day had gone by. I did not forget the friends whom I had left behind,
but maintained a punctual correspondence with Stevens, to whom I imparted all
occurrences.

The recovery of my friend's kinsman, allowed him in a few days to return home.
His first object was the consolation and relief of Carlton, whom, with much
difficulty, he persuaded to take advantage of the laws in favor of insolvent
debtors. Carlton's only debt was owing to his uncle, and by rendering up every
species of property, except his clothes and the implements of his trade, he
obtained a full discharge. In conjunction with his sister, he once more assumed
the pen, and being no longer burdened with debts he was unable to discharge,
he resumed, together with his pen, his cheerfulness. Their mutual industry was
sufficient for their decent and moderate subsistence.

The chief reason for my hasty return, was my anxiety respecting Clemenza Lodi.
This reason was removed by the activity and benevolence of my friend. He paid
this unfortunate stranger a visit at Mrs. Villars's. Access was easily
obtained, and he found her sunk into the deepest melancholy. The recent loss of
her child, the death of Welbeck, of which she was soon apprized, her total
dependence upon those with whom she was placed, who, however, had always
treated her without barbarity or indecorum, were the calamities that weighed
down her spirit.

My friend easily engaged her confidence and gratitude, and prevailed upon her
to take refuge under his own roof. Mrs. Wentworth's scruples, as well as those
of Mrs. Fielding, were removed by his arguments and entreaties, and they
consented to take upon themselves, and divide between them, the care of her
subsistence and happiness. They condescended to express much curiosity
respecting me, and some interest in my welfare, and promised to receive me on
my return, on the footing of a friend.

With some reluctance, I at length bade my new friends farewell, and returned to
Philadelphia. Nothing remained, before I should enter on my projected scheme of
study and employment, under the guidance of Stephens, but to examine the
situation of Eliza Hadwin with my own eyes, and if possible, to extricate my
father from his unfortunate situation.

My father's state had given me the deepest concern. I figured to myself his
condition, besotted by brutal appetites, reduced to beggary, shut up in a
noisome prison, and condemned to that society which must foster all his
depraved propensities. I revolved various schemes for his relief. A few
hundreds would take him from prison, but how should he be afterward disposed
of? How should he be cured of his indolent habits? How should he be screened
from the contagion of vicious society? By what means, consistently with my own
wants, and the claims of others, should I secure to him an acceptable
subsistence?

Exhortation and example were vain. Nothing but restraint would keep him at a
distance from the haunts of brawling and debauchery. The want of money would be
no obstacle to prodigality and waste. Credit would be resorted to as long as it
would answer his demand. When that failed, he would once more be thrown into a
prison; the same means to extricate him would be to be repeated, and money be
thus put into the pockets of the most worthless of mankind, the agents of
drunkenness and blasphemy, without any permanent advantage to my father, the
principal object of my charity.

Though unable to fix on any plausible mode of proceeding, I determined, at
least, to discover his present condition. Perhaps, something might suggest
itself, upon the spot, suited to my purpose. Without delay I proceeded to the
village of Newtown, and alighting at the door of the prison, enquired for my
father.

Sawny Mervyn you want, I suppose, said the keeper. Poor fellow! He came into
limbo in a crazy condition, and has been a burden on my hands ever since.
After lingering along for some time, he was at last kind enough to give us the
slip. It is just a week since he drank his last pint -- and died.

I was greatly shocked at this intelligence. It was some time before my reason
came to my aid, and showed me that this was an event, on the whole, and on a
disinterested and dispassionate view, not unfortunate. The keeper knew not my
relation to the deceased, and readily recounted the behavior of the prisoner
and the circumstances of his last hours.

I shall not repeat the narrative. It is useless to keep alive the sad
remembrance. He was now beyond the reach of my charity or pity; and since
reflection could answer no beneficial end to him, it was my duty to divert my
thoughts into different channels, and live henceforth for my own happiness and
that of those who were within the sphere of my influence.

I was now alone in the world, so far as the total want of kindred creates
solitude. Not one of my blood, nor even of my name, were to be found in this
quarter of the world. Of my mother's kindred I knew nothing. So far as
friendship or service might be claimed from them, to me they had no existence.
I was destitute of all those benefits which flow from kindred, in relation to
protection, advice or property. My inheritance was nothing. Not a single
relic or trinket in my possession constituted a memorial of my family. The
scenes of my childish and juvenile days were dreary and desolate. The fields
which I was wont to traverse, the room in which I was born, retained no traces
of the past. They were the property and residence of strangers, who knew
nothing of the former tenants, and who, as I was now told, had hastened to
new-model and transform every thing within and without the habitation.

These images filled me with melancholy, which, however, disappeared in
proportion as I approached the abode of my beloved girl. Absence had endeared
the image of my Bess -- I loved to call her so -- to my soul. I could not think
of her without a melting softness at my heart, and tears in which pain and
pleasure were unaccountably mingled. As I approached Curling's house, I
strained my sight, in hopes of distinguishing her form through the evening dusk.

I had told her of my purpose, by letter. She expected my approach at this
hour, and was stationed, with a heart throbbing with impatience, at the road
side, near the gate. As soon as I alighted, she rushed into my arms.

I found my sweet friend less blithsome and contented than I wished. Her
situation, in spite of the parental and sisterly regards which she received
from the Curlings, was mournful and dreary to her imagination. Rural business
was irksome, and insufficient to fill up her time. Her life was tiresome, and
uniform and heavy.

I ventured to blame her discontent, and pointed out the advantages of her
situation. Whence, said I, can these dissatisfactions and repinings arise?

I cannot tell, said she; I don't know how it is with me. I am always sorrowful
and thoughtful. Perhaps, I think too much of my poor father and of Susan, and
yet that cannot be it neither, for I think of them but seldom; not half as much
as I ought, perhaps. I think of nobody almost, but you. Instead of minding my
business, or chatting and laughing with Peggy Curling, I love to get by myself
-- to read, over and over, your letters, or to think how you are employed just
then, and how happy I should be if I were in Fanny Maurice's place.

But it is all over now; this visit rewards me for every thing. I wonder how I
could ever be sullen or mopeful. I will behave better, indeed I will, and be
always, as now, a most happy girl.

The greater part of three days was spent in the society of my friend, in
listening to her relation of all that had happened during my absence, and in
communicating, in my turn, every incident which had befallen myself. After this
I once more returned to the city.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XXI.
I NOW set about carrying my plan of life into effect. I began with ardent zeal
and unwearied diligence the career of medical study. I bespoke the counsels and
instructions of my friend; attended him on his professional visits* and acted,
in all practicable cases, as his substitute. I found this application of time
more pleasurable than I had imagined. My mind gladly expanded itself, as it
were, for the reception of new ideas. My curiosity grew more eager, in
proportion as it was supplied with food, and every day added strength to the
assurance that I was no insignificant and worthless being; that I was destined
to be something in this scene of existence, and might sometime lay claim to the
gratitude and homage of my fellow-men.

I was far from being, however, monopolized by these pursuits. I was formed on
purpose for the gratification of social intercourse. To love and to be loved;
to exchange hearts, and mingle sentiments with all the virtuous and amiable,
whom my good fortune had placed within the circuit of my knowledge, I always
esteemed my highest enjoyment and my chief duty.

Carlton and his sister, Mrs. Wentworth and Achsa Fielding, were my most
valuable associates beyond my own family. With all these my correspondence was
frequent and unreserved, but chiefly with the lattar. This lady had dignity and
independence, a generous and enlightened spirit beyond what her education had
taught me to expect. She was circumspect and cautious in her deportment, and
was not prompt to make advances or accept them. She withheld her esteem and
confidence until she had full proof of their being deserved.

I am not sure that her treatment of me was fully conformable to her rules. My
manners, indeed, as she once told me, she had never met with in another.
Ordinary rules were so totally overlooked in my behavior, that it seemed
impossible for any one who knew me to adhere to them. No option was left but to
admit my claims to friendship and confidence, instantly, or to reject them
altogether.

I was not conscious of this singularity. The internal and undiscovered
character of another, weighed nothing with me in the question, whether they
should be treated with frankness or reserve. I felt no scruple on any occasion,
to disclose every feeling and every event. Any one who could listen, found me
willing to talk. Every talker found me willing to listen. Every one had my
sympathy and kindness, without claiming it, but I claimed the kindness and
sympathy of every one.

Achsa Fielding's countenance bespoke, I thought, a mind worthy to be known and
to be loved. The first moment I engaged her attention, I told her so. I related
the little story of my family, spread out before her all my reasonings and
determinations, my notions of right and wrong, my fears and wishes. All this
was done with sincerity and fervor, with gestures, actions and looks, in which
I felt as if my whole soul was visible. Her superior age, sedateness and
prudence, gave my deportment a filial freedom and affection, and I was fond of
calling her " mamma."

I particularly dwelt upon the history of my dear country girl; painted her
form and countenance; recounted our dialogues, and related all my schemes for
making her wise and good and happy. On these occasions my friend would listen
to me with the mutest attention. I showed her the letters I received, and
offered her for her perusal, those which I wrote in answer, before they were
sealed and sent.

On these occasions she would look by turns on my face and away from me. A
varying hue would play upon her cheek, and her eyes were fuller than was common
of meaning.

Such and such, I once said, are my notions; now what do you think?

Think! emphatically, and turning somewhat aside, she answered, that you are
the most -- strange of human creatures.

But tell me, I resumed, following and searching her averted eyes, am I right;
would you do thus? Can you help me to improve my girl? I wish you knew the
bewitching little creature. How would that heart overflow with affection and
with gratitude toward you. She should be your daughter. No -- you are too
nearly of an age for that. A sister: her elder sister you should be. That, when
there is no other relation, includes them all. Fond sisters you would be, and I
the fond brother of you both.

My eyes glistened as I spoke. In truth, I am in that respect, a mere wom^n. My
friend was more powerfully moved. After a momentary struggle, she burst into
tears.

Good Heaven! said I, what ails you? Are you not well?

Her looks betrayed an unaccountable confusion, from which she quickly
recovered -- it was folly to be thus affected. Some^hing ailed me I believe,
but it is past -- But come; you ^^nt some lines of finishing the description of
the (...) in La Cepide.

True. And I ^ave twenty minutes to spare. Poor Franks is very ill indeed, but
he cannot be seen till nine. We'll read till then.

Thus on the wings of pleasure and improvement past my time; not without some
hues, occasionally of a darker tinct. My heart was now and then detected in
sighing. This occurred when my thoughts glanced at the poor Eliza, and
measured, as it were, the interval between us. We are too -- too far apart,
thought I.

The best solace on these occasions was the company of Mrs. Fielding; her
music, her discourse, or some book which she set me to rehearsing to her. One
evening, when preparing to pay her a visit, I received the following letter
from my Bess.

TO A. MERVYN. Curling's, May 6, 1794.
WHERE does this letter you promised me, stay all this while? Indeed, Arthur,
you torment me more than I deserve, and more than I could ever find it in my
heart to do you. You treat me cruelly. I must say so, though I offend you. I
must write, though you do not deserve that I should, and though I fear I am in
a humor not very fit for writing. I had better go to my chamber and weep: weep
at your -- unkindness, I was going to say; but, perhaps, it is only
forgetfulness: and yet what can be more unkind than forgetfulness? I am sure I
have never forgotten you. Sleep itself, which wraps all other images in
forgetfulness, only brings you nearer, and makes me see you more distinctly.

But where can this letter stay? -- O! that -- hush! foolish girl! If a word of
that kind escape thy lips, Arthur will be angry with thee; and then, indeed,
thou might weep in earnest. Then thou would have some cause for thy tears.
More than once already has he almost broken thy heart with his reproaches. Sore
and weak as it now is, any new reproaches would assuredly break it quite.

I will be content. I will be as good an housewife and dairy-woman, stir about
as briskly, and sing as merrily as Peggy Curling. Why not? I am as young, as
innocent, and enjoy as good health. -- Alas! she has reason to be merry. She
has father, mother, brothers; but I have none. -- And he that was all these,
and more than all these, to me, has -- forgotten me.

But, perhaps, it is some accident that hinders. Perhaps Oliver left the market
earlier than he used to do; or you mistook the house; or, perhaps, some poor
creature was sick, was taken suddenly ill, and you were busy in chafing his
clay-cold limbs; it sell to you to wipe the clammy drops from his brow. Such
things often happen; don't they, Arthur, to people of your trade, and some such
thing has happened now; and that was the reason you did not write.

And if so, shall I repine at your silence? O no! At such a time the poor Bess
might easily be, and ought to be forgotten. She would not deserve your love, if
she could repine at a silence brought about this way.

And O! May it be so! May there be nothing worse than this. If the sick man --
see, Arthur, how my hand trembles. Can you read this scrawl? What is always
bad, my fears make worse than ever.

I must not think that. And yet, if it be so, if my friend himself be sick,
what will become of me? Of me, that ought to cherish you and comfort you; that
ought to be your nurse. Endure for you your sickness, when she cannot remove it.

O! that -- I will speak out -- O! that this strange scruple had never
possessed you. Why should I not be with you? Who can love you and serve you as
well as I? In sickness and health, I will console and assist you. Why will you
deprive yourself of such a comforter, and such an aid as I would be to you?

Dear Arthur, think better of it. Let me leave this dreary spot, where, indeed,
as long as I am thus alone, I can enjoy no comfort. Let me come to you. I will
put up with any thing for the sake of seeing you, though it be but once a day.
Any garret or cellar in the dirtiest lane or darkest alley, will be good enough
for me. I will think it a palace, so that I can but see you now and then.

Do not refuse -- do not argue with me, so fond you always are of arguing! My
heart is set upon your compliance. And yet, dearly as I prize your company, I
would not ask it, if I thought there was any thing improper. You say there is,
and you talk about it in a way that I do not understand. For my sake, you tell
me, you refuse, but let me entreat you to comply for my sake.

Your pen cannot teach me like your tongue. You write me long letters, and tell
me a great deal in them, but my soul droops when I call to mind your voice and
your looks, and think how long a time must pass before I see you and hear you
again. I have no spirit to think upon the words and paper before me. My eye and
my thought wander far away.

I bethink me how many questions I might ask you; how many doubts you might
clear up if you were but within hearing. If you were but close to me; but I
cannot ask them here. I am too poor a creature at the pen, and, some how or
another, it always happens. I can only write about myself or about you. By the
time I have said all this, I have tired my fingers, and when I set about
telling you how this poem and that story have affected me, I am at a loss for
words; I am bewildered and bemazed as it were.

It is not so when we talk to one another. With your arm about me, and your
sweet face close to mine, I can prattle forever. Then my heart overflows at my
lips. After hours thus spent, it seems as if there were a thousand things still
to be said. Then I can tell you what the book has told me. I can repeat scores
of verses by heart* though I heard them only once read, but it is because you
have read them to me.

Then there is nobody here to answer my questions. They never look into books.
They hate books. They think it waste of time to read. Even Peggy, who you any
has naturally a strong mind, wonders what I can find to amuse myself in a book.
In her playful mood, she is always teazing me to lay it aside.

I do not mind her, for I like to read; but if I did not like it before, I
could not help doing so ever since you told me that nobody could gain your love
who was not fond of books. And yet, though I like it on that account, more than
I did, I don't read somehow so earnestly, and understand so well as I use to
do, when my mind was all at ease; always frolicksome, and ever upon tiptoe, as
I may say.

How strangely, (have you not observed it?) I am altered of late; I that was
ever light of heart, the very soul of gaiety, brim full of glee -- am now,
demure as our old tabby -- and not half as wise. Tabby had wit enough to keep
her paws out of the coals, whereas poor I have -- but no matter what. It will
never come to pass, I see that. So many reasons for every thing! Such looking
forward! Arthur, are not men sometimes too wise to be happy?

I am now so grave. Not one smile can Peggy sometimes get from me, though she
tries for it the whole day. But I know how it comes. Strange, indeed, if losing
father and sister, and thrown upon the wide world, pennyless and friendless
too, now that you forget me; I should continue to smile. No. I never shall
smile again. At least while I stay here, I never shall, I believe.

If a certain somebody suffer me to live with him -- near him, I mean: perhaps
the sight of him as he enters the door, perhaps the sound of his voice, asking
-- "where is my Bess?" -- might produce a smile. Such a one as the very thought
produces now -- yet not, I hope, so transient, and so quickly followed by a
tear. Women are born, they say, to trouble, and tears are given them for their
relief. It Is all very true.

Let it be as I wish, will you? If Oliver bring not back good tidings, if he
bring not a letter from thee, or thy letter still refuses my request -- I don't
know what may happen. Consent, if you love your poor girl.

E. H. ARTHUR


ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XXII.
THE reading of this letter, though it made me mournful, did not hinder me from
paying the visit I intended. My friend noticed my discomposure.

What, Arthur, thou art quite the "penseroso" to night. Come, let me cheer thee
with a song. Thou shall have thy favorite ditty: -- She stepped to the
instrument, and with more than airy lightness, touched and sung: Now knit hands
and beat the ground
In a light, fantastic round,
Till the tell-tale sun descry
Our concealed solemnity.


Her music, though blithsome and aerial, was not sufficient for the end. My
cheerfulness would not return even at her bidding. She again noticed my
sedateness, and enquired into the cause.

This girl of mine, said I, has infected me with her own sadness. There is a
letter I have just received -- she took it and began to read.

Meanwhile, I placed myself before her, and fixed my eyes steadfastly upon her
features. There is no book in which I read with more pleasure, than the face of
woman. That is generally more full of meaning, and of better meaning too* than
the hard and inflexible lineaments of man, and this woman's face has no
parallel.

She read it with visible emotion. Having gone through it, she did not lift her
eye from the paper, but continued silent, as if buried in thought. After some
time, for I would not interrupt the pause, she addressed me thus:

This girl seems to be very anxious to be with you.

As much as I am that she should be so. -- My friend's countenance betrayed
some perplexity. As soon as I perceived it, I said, why are you thus grave?
Some little confusion appeared as if she would not have her gravity discovered.
There again, said I, new tokens in your face, my good mamma, of something which
you will not mention. Yet, sooth to say, this is not your first perplexity. I
have noticed it before, and wondered. It happens only when my Bess is
introduced. Something in relation to her it must be, but what I cannot imagine.
Why does her name, particularly, make you thoughtful; disturbed; dejected? --
There now -- but I must know the reason. You don't agree with me in my notions
of this girl, I fear, and you will not disclose your thoughts.

By this time, she had gained her usual composure, and without noticing my
comments on her looks, said: Since you are both of one mind, why does she not
leave the country?

That cannot be, I believe. Mrs. Stevens says it would be disreputable. I am no
proficient in etiquette, and must, therefore, in affairs of this kind, be
guided by those who are. But would to Heaven, I were truly her father or
brother. Then all difficulties would be done away.

Can you seriously wish that?

Why no. I believe it would be more rational to wish that the world would
suffer me to act the fatherly or brotherly part, without the relationship.

And is that the only part you wish to act toward this girl?

Certainly, the only part.

You surprise me. Have you not confessed your love for her?

I do love her. There is nothing upon earth more dear to me than my Bess.

But love is of different kinds. She was loved by her father --

Less than by me. He was a good man, but not of lively feelings. Besides, he
had another daughter, and they shared his love between them, but she has no
sister to share my love. Calamity too, has endeared her to me; I am all her
consolation, dependence and hope, and nothing, surely, can induce me to abandon
her.

Her reliance upon you, for happiness, replied my friend, with a sigh, is plain
enough.

It is: but why that sigh? And yet I understand it. It remonstrates with me on
my incapacity for her support. I know it well, but it is wrong to be cast down.
I have youth, health and spirits, and ought not to despair of living for my own
benefit and hers; but you sigh again, and it is impossible to keep my courage
when you sigh. Do tell me what you mean by it?

You partly guessed the cause. She trusts to you for happiness, but I somewhat
suspect she trusts in vain.

In vain! I beseech you tell me why you think so.

You say you love her -- why then not make her your wife?

My wife! Surely her extreme youth, and my destitute condition, will account
for that.

She is fifteen: the age of delicate fervor; of inartificial love, and suitable
enough for marriage. As to your condition, you may live more easily together
than apart. She has no false taste or perverse desires to gratify. She has been
trained in simple modes and habits. Besides, that objection can be removed
another way. But are these all your objections?

Her youth I object to, merely in connection with her mind. She is too little
improved to be my wife. She wants that solidity of mind; that maturity of
intelligence which ten years more may possibly give her, but which she cannot
have at this age.

You are a very prudential youth; then you are willing to wait ten years for a
wife?

Does that follow? Because my Bess will not be qualified for wedlock, in less
time, does it follow that I must wait for her?

I spoke on the supposition that you loved her.

And that is true; but love is satisfied with studying her happiness as her
father or brother. Some years hence, perhaps in half a year, for this passion,
called wedded, or marriage-wishing love, is of sudden growth, my mind may
change, and nothing may content me but to have Bess for my wife. Yet I do not
expect it.

Then you are determined against marriage with this girl.

Of course; until that love comes which I feel not now; but which, no doubt,
will come, when Bess has had the benefit of five or eight years more, unless
previously excited by another.

All this is strange, Arthur. I have heretofore supposed that you actually
loved (I mean with the marririage-see^ing passion) your Bess.

I believe I once did; but it happened at a time when marriage was improper; in
the life of her father and sister, and when I had never known in what female
excellence consisted. Since that time my happier lot has cast me among women so
far above Eliza Hadwin; so far above, and so widely different from any thing
which time is likely to make her, that I own, nothing appears more unlikely
than that I shall ever love her.

Are you not a little capricious in that respect, my good friend? You have
praised your Bess as rich in natural endowments; as having an artless purity
and rectitude of mind, which somewhat supersedes the use of formal education;
as being full of sweetness and tenderness, and in her person a very angel of
loveliness.

All that is true. I never saw features and shape so delicately beautiful; I
never knew so young a mind so quick sighted and so firm; but, nevertheless, she
is not the creature whom I would call my wife. My bosom slave; counselor;
friend; the mother; the pattern; the tutress of my children must be a different
creature.

But what are the attributes of this desirable which Bess wants?

Every thing she wants. Age, capacity, acquirements, person, features, hair,
complexion, all, all are different from this girl's.

And pray of what kind may they be?

I cannot pourtray them in words -- but yes, I can: -- The creature whom I
shall worship: -- it sounds oddly, but, I verily believe, the sentiment which I
shall feel for my wife, will be more a kin to worship than any thing else. I
shall never love, but such a creature as I now image to myself, and such a
creature will deserve, or almost deserve, worship -- but this creature, I was
going to say, must be the exact counterpart, my good mamma -- of yourself.

This was said very earnestly, and with eyes and manners that fully expressed
my earnestness: perhaps my expressions were unwittingly strong and emphatic,
for she started and blushed, but the cause of her discomposure, whatever it
was, was quickly removed, and she said:

Poor Bess! This will be sad news to thee!

Heaven forbid! said I, of what moment can my opinions be to her?

Strange questioner that thou art. Thou know that her gentle heart is
touched with love. See how it shows itself in the tender and inimitable strain
of this epistle. Does not this sweet ingenuousness bewitch you?

It does so, and I love, beyond expression, the sweet girl; but my love is in
some inconceivable way, different from the passion which that other creature
will produce. She is no stranger to my thoughts. I will impart every thought
over and over to her. I question not but I shall make her happy without
forfeiting my own.

Would marriage with her, be a forfeiture of your happiness?

Not absolutely, or forever, I believe. I love her company. Her absence for a
long time is irksome. I cannot express the delight with which I see and hear
her. To mark her features, beaming with vivacity* playful in her pleasures; to
hold her in my arms, and listen to her prattle; always musically voluble;
always sweetly tender, or artlessly intelligent -- and this you will say is the
dearest privilege of marriage: and so it is; and dearly should I prize it; and
yet, I fear my heart would droop as often as that other image should occur to
my fancy. For then, you know, it would occur as something never to be possessed
by me.

Now this image might, indeed, seldom occur. The intervals, at least, would be
serene. It would be my interest to prolong these intervals as much as possible,
and my endeavors to this end, would, no doubt, have some effect. Besides, the
bitterness of this reflection would be lessened by contemplating, at the same
time, the happiness of my beloved girl.

I should likewise have to remember, that to continue unmarried, would not
necessarily secure me the possession of the other good --

But these reflections, my friend (broke she in upon me) are of as much force
to induce you to marry, as to reconcile you to marriage already contracted.

Perhaps they are. Assuredly, I have not a hope that the fancied excellence
will ever be mine. Such happiness is not the lot of humanity, and is, least of
all, within my reach.

Your diffidence, replied my friend, in a timorous accent, has not many
examples; but your character, without doubt, is all your own, possessing all
and disclaiming all, is, in few words, your picture.

I scarcely understand you. Do you think I ever shall be happy to that degree
which I have imagined. Think you I shall ever meet with an exact copy of
yourself!

Unfortunate you will be, if you do not meet with many better. Your Bess, in
personals, is, beyond measure, my superior, and in mind, allowing for
difference in years, quite as much so.

But that, returned I, with quickness and fervor, is not the object. The very
counterpart of you I want; neither worse nor better, nor different in any
thing. Just such form, such features, such hues. Just that melting voice, and
above all, the same habits of thinking and conversing. In thought, word and
deed; gesture, look and form, that rare and precious creature whom I shall
love, must be your resemblance. Your --

Have done with these comparisons, interrupted she, in some hurry, and let us
return to the country girl, thy Bess.

You once, my friend, wished me to treat this girl of yours as my sister. Do
you know what the duties of a sister are?

They imply no more kindness or affection than you already feel toward my Bess.
Are you not her sister?

I ought to have been so. I ought to have been proud of the relation you
ascribe to me, but I have not performed any of its duties. I blush to think
upon the coldness and perverseness of my heart. With such means as I possess,
of giving happiness to others, I have been thoughtless and inactive to a
strange degree; perhaps, however, it is not yet too late. Are you still willing
to invest me with all the rights of an elder sister over this girl? And will
she consent, think you?

Certainly, she will; she has.

Then the first act of sistership, will be to take her from the country; from
persons on whose kindness she has no natural claim, whose manners and
characters are unlike her own, and with whom no improvement can be expected,
and bring her back to her sister's house and bosom, to provide for her
subsistence and education, and watch over her happiness.

I will not be a nominal sister. I will not be a sister by halves. All the
rights of that relation I will have, or none. As for you, you have claims upon
her, on which I must be permitted to judge, as becomes the elder sister, who,
by the loss of all other relations, must occupy the place, possess the rights,
and fulfill the duties of father, mother and brother.

She has now arrived at an age, when longer to remain in a cold and churlish
soil, will stunt her growth and wither her blossoms. We must hasten to
transplant her to a genial element, and a garden well enclosed. Having so long
neglected this charming plant, it becomes me henceforth to take her wholly to
myself.

And now, for it is no longer in her or your power to take back the gift, since
she is fully mine* I will charge you with the office of conducting her hither.
I grant it to you as a favor. Will you go?

Go! I will fly! I exclaimed, in an extacy of joy, on pinions swifter than the
wind. Not the lingering of an instant will I bear. Look! one, two, three --
thirty minutes after nine. I will reach Curling's gate by the morn's dawn. I
will put my girl into a chaise, and by noon, she shall throw herself into the
arms of her sister. But first, shall I not, in some way, manifest my gratitude?

My senses were bewildered, and I knew not what I did. I intended to kneel, as
to my mother or my deity, but, instead of that, I clasped her in my arms, and
kissed her lips fervently. I staid not to discover the effects of this
insanity, but left the room and the house, and calling for a moment at
Stevens's, left word with the servant, my friend being gone abroad, that I
should not return till the morrow.

Never was a lighter heart, a gaiety more overflowing, and more buoyant than
mine. All cold from a boisterous night, at a chilly season, all weariness from
a rugged and miry road, were charmed away. I might have ridden, but I could not
brook delay, even the delay of enquiring for and equipping an horse. I might
thus have saved myself fatigue, and have lost no time, but my mind was in too
great a tumult for deliberation and forecast. I saw nothing but the image of my
girl, whom my tidings would render happy.

The way was longer than my fond imagination had foreseen. I did not reach
Curling's till an hour after sunrise. The distance was full thirty-five miles.
As I hastened up the green lane leading to the house, I spied my Bess passing
through a covered way, between the dwelling and kitchen. I caught her eye. She
stopped and held up her hands, and then ran into my arms.

What means my girl? Why this catching of the breath? Why this sobbing? Look at
me my love. It is Arthur, he who has treated you with forgetfulness, neglect
and cruelty.

O! do not, she replied, hiding her face with her hand. One single reproach,
added to my own, will kill me. That foolish, wicked letter -- I could tear my
fingers for writing it.

But, said I, I will kiss them -- and put them to my lips. They have told me
the wishes of my girl. They have enabled me to gratify her wishes. I have come
to carry thee this very moment to town.

Lord bless me, Arthur -- said she, lost in a sweet confusion, and her cheeks,
always glowing, glowing still more deeply -- indeed, I did not mean -- I meant
only -- I will stay here -- I would rather stay --

It grieves me to hear that, said I, with earnestness, I thought I was studying
our mutual happiness.

It grieves you? Don't say so. I would not grieve you for the world -- but,
indeed, indeed, it is too soon. Such a girl as I, am not yet fit to -- live in
your city. Again she hid her glowing face in my bosom.

Sweet consciousness! Heavenly innocence! thought I; may Achsa's conjectures
prove false! -- You have mistaken my design, for I do not intend to carry you
to town with such a view as you have hinted -- but merely to place you with a
beloved friend; with Achsa Fielding, of whom already you know so much, where we
shall enjoy each other's company without restraint or intermission.

I then proceeded to disclose to her the plan suggested by my friend, and to
explain all the consequences that would flow from it. I need not say that she
assented to the scheme. She was all rapture and gratitude. Preparations for
departure were easily and speedily made. I hired a chaise of a neighboring
farmer, and, according to my promise, by noon the same day, delivered the timid
and bashful girl into the arms of her new sister.

She was received with the utmost tenderness, not only by Mrs. Fielding, but by
all my friends. Her affectionate heart was encouraged to pour forth all its
feeling as into the bosom of a mother. She was reinspired with confidence. Her
want of experience was supplied by the gentlest admonitions and instructions.
In every plan for her improvement, suggested by her new mamma, for she never
called her by any other name, she engaged with docility and eagerness; and her
behavior and her progress exceeded the most sanguine hopes that I had formed,
as to the softness of her temper and the acuteness of her genius.

Those graces which a polished education, and intercourse with the better
classes of society, are adapted to give, my girl possessed, in some degree, by
a native and intuitive refinement and sagacity of mind. All that was to be
obtained from actual observation and instruction, was obtained without
difficulty; and in a short time, nothing but the affectionate simplicity and
unperverted feelings of the country girl, bespoke the original condition. --

What art so busy about, Arthur? Always at thy pen of late. Come, I must know
the fruit of all this toil and all this meditation. I am determined to scrape
acquaintance with Haller and Lineus. I will begin this very day. All one's
friends you know should be our's. Love has made many a patient, and let me see
if it cannot, in my case, make a physician. But first, what is all this writing
about?

Mrs. Wentworth has put me upon a strange task -- not disagreeable, however,
but such as I should, perhaps, have declined, had not the absence of my Bess,
and her mamma, made the time hang somewhat heavy. I have, oftener than once,
and far more circumstantially than now, told her my adventures, but she is not
satisfied. She wants a written narrative, for some purpose which she tells me
she will disclose to me hereafter.

Luckily, my friend Stevens has saved me more than half the trouble. He has
done me the favor to compile much of my history with his own hand. I cannot
imagine what could prompt him to so wearisome an undertaking; but he says that
adventures and a destiny so singular as mine, ought not to be abandoned to
forgetfulness like any vulgar and every-day existence. Besides, when he wrote
it, he suspected that it might be necessary to the safety of my reputation and
my life, from the consequences of my connection with Welbeck. Time has
annihilated that danger. All enmities and all suspicions are buried with that
ill-fated wretch. Wortley has been won by my behavior, and confides in my
integrity now as much as he formerly suspected it. I am glad, however, that the
task was performed. It has saved me a world of writing. I had only to take up
the broken thread, and bring it down to the period of my present happiness, and
this was done, just as you tripped along the entry this morning.

To bed, my friend, it is late, and this delicate frame is not half so able to
encounter fatigue as a youth spent in the hay-field and the dairy might have
been expected to be.

I will, but let me take these sheets along with me. I will read them, that I
am determined, before I sleep, and watch if you have told the whole truth.

Do so, if you please; but remember one thing. Mrs. Wentworth requested me to
write not as if it were designed for her perusal, but for those who have no
previous knowledge of her or of me. 'Twas an odd request. I cannot imagine what
she means by it, but she never acts without good reason, and I have done so.
And now withdraw, my dear, and farewell.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XXIII.
MOVE on, my quill! wait not for my guidance. Re-animated with thy master's
spirit, all-airy light! An hey day rapture! A mounting impulse sways him: lifts
him from the earth.

I must, cost what it will, rein in this upward pulling, forward-urging -- what
shall I call it? But there are times, and now is one of them, when words are
poor.

It will not do -- Down this hill, up that steep; through this thicket, over that
hedge -- I have labored to fatigue myself: To reconcile me to repose; to
lolling on a sofa; to poring over a book, to any thing that might win for my
heart a respite from these throbs; to deceive me into a few tolerable moments
of forgetfulness.

Let me see: they tell me this is Monday night. Only three days yet to come! If
thus restless to day; if my heart thus bounds till its mansion scarcely can
hold it, what must be my state to morrow! What next day! What as the hour
hastens on; as the sun descends; as my hand touches her in sign of wedded
unity, of love without interval; of concord without end.

I must quell these tumults. They will disable me else. They will wear out all
my strength. They will drain away life itself. But who could have thought! So
soon! Not three months since I first set eyes upon her. Not three weeks since
our plighted love, and only three days to terminate suspense and give me all.

I must compel myself to quiet: to leep. I must find some refuge from
anticipations so excruciating. All extremes are agonies. A joy like this is too
big for this narrow tenement. I must thrust it forth; I must bar and bolt it
out for a time, or these frail walls will burst asunder. The pen is a pacifyer.
It checks the mind's career; it circumscribes her wanderings. It traces out,
and compels us to adhere to one path. It ever was my friend. Often it h^s
blunted my vexations; hushed my stormy passions; turned my peevishness to
soothing; my fierce revenge to heart-dissolving pity.

Perhaps it will befriend me now. It may temper my impetuous wishes; lull my
intoxication: and render my happiness supportable: And, indeed, it has produced
partly this effect already. My blood, within the few minutes thus employed,
flows with less destructive rapidity. My thoughts range themselves in less
disorder -- And now that the conquest is effected, what shall I say? I must
continue at the pen, or shall immediately relapse.

What shall I say? Let me look back upon the steps that led me hither. Let me
recount preliminaries. I cannot do better.

And first as to Achsa Fielding -- to describe this woman.

To recount, in brief, so much of her history as has come to my knowledge, will
best account for that zeal, almost to idolatry, with which she has, ever since
I thoroughly knew her, been regarded by me.

Never saw I one to whom the term lovely more truly belonged: And yet, in
stature she is too low; in complexion, dark and almost sallow; and her eyes,
though black and of piercing luster, has a cast, which I cannot well explain.
It lessens without destroying their luster and their force to charm; but all
personal defects are outweighed by her heart and her intellect. There is the
secret of her power to entrance the soul of the listener and beholder. It is
not only when she sings that her utterance is musical. It is not only when the
occasion is urgent and the topic momentous that her eloquence is rich and
flowing. They are always so.

I had vowed to love her and serve her, and been her frequent visitant, long
before I was acquainted with her past life. I had casually picked up some
intelligence, from others, or from her own remarks. I knew very soon that she
was English by birth, and had been only a year and an half in America; that she
had scarcely passed her twenty-fifth year, and was still embellished with all
the graces of youth; that she had been a wife; but was uninformed whether the
knot had been untied by death or divorce: That she possessed considerable, and
even splendid fortune; but the exact amount, and all beside these particulars,
were unknown to me till some time after our acquaintance was begun.

One evening, she had been talking very earnestly on the influence annexed, in
Great Britain, to birth, and had given me some examples of this influence.
Meanwhile, my eyes were fixed steadfastly on hers. The peculiarity in their
expression never before affected me so strongly. A vague resemblance to
something seen elsewhere, on the same day, occurred, and occasioned me to
exclaim, suddenly in a pause of her discourse --

As I live, my good mamma, those eyes of yours have told me a secret. I almost
think they spoke to me; and I am not less amazed at the strangeness than at the
distinctness of their story.

And pry'thee what have they said?

Perhaps I was mistaken. I might have been deceived by a fancied voice, or have
confounded one word with another near akin to it; but let me die, if I did not
think they said that you were -- a Jew.

At this sound, her features were instantly veiled with the deepest sorrow and
confusion. She put her hand to her eyes, the tears started and she sobbed. My
surprise at this effect of my words, was equal to my contrition. I besought her
to pardon me, for having thus unknowingly, alarmed and grieved her.

After she had regained some composure, she said, you have not offended,
Arthur. Your surmise was just and natural* and could not always have escaped
you. Connected with that word are many sources of anguish, which time has not,
and never will, dry up; and the less I think of past events, the less will my
peace be disturbed. I was desirous that you should know nothing of me, but what
you see; nothing but the present and the future, merely that no allusions might
occur in our conversation, which will call up sorrows and regrets that will
avail nothing.

I now perceive the folly of endeav^^ring to keep you in ignorance, and shall
therefore, once for all, inform you of what has befallen me, that your
enquiries and suggestions may be made, and fully satisfied at once, and your
curiosity have no motive for calling back my thoughts to what I ardently desire
to bury in oblivion.

My father was indeed a jew, and one of the most opulent of his nation in
London. A Portuguese by birth, but came to London when a boy. He had few of the
moral or external qualities of jews. For I suppose there is some justice in the
obloquy that follows them so closely. He was frugal without meanness, and
cautious in his dealings, without extortion. I need not fear to say this, for
it was the general voice.

Me, an only child, and of course, the darling of my parents, they trained up
in the most liberal manner. My education was purely English. I learned the same
things and of the same masters with my neighbors. Except frequenting their
church and repeating their creed, and partaking of the same food, I saw no
difference between them and me. Hence I grew more indifferent, perhaps, than
was proper to the distinctions of religion. They were never enforced upon me.
No pains were taken to fill me with scruples and antipathies. They never stood,
as I may say, upon the threshold: They were often thought upon but were vague,
and easily eluded or forgotten.

Hence it was that my heart too readily admitted impressions, that more zeal
and more parental caution would have saved me from. They could scarcely be
avoided, as my society was wholly English; and my youth, my education and my
father's wealth made me an object of much attention. And the same causes that
lulled to sleep my own watchfulness, had the same effect upon that of others.
To regret or to praise this remissness, is now too late. Certain it is, that my
destiny, and not a happy destiny, was fixed by it.

The fruit of this remissness was a passion for one, who fully returned it.
Almost as young as I, who was only sixteen; he knew as little as myself, what
obstacles the difference of our births was likely to raise between us. His
father, Sir Ralph Fielding, a man nobly born, high in office, splendidly
allied, could not be expected to consent to the marriage of his eldest son, in
such green youth, to the daughter of an alien, a Portuguese, a Jew; but these
impediments were not seen by my ignorance, and were overlooked by the youth's
passion.

But strange to tell, what common prudence would have so confidently predicted,
did not happen. Sir Ralph had a numerous family, likely to be still more so*
had but slender patrimony: the income of his offices nearly made up his all.
The young man was headstrong, impetuous, and would probably disregard the
inclinations of his family. Yet the father would not consent but on one
condition, that of my admission to the English church.

No very strenuous opposition to these terms could be expected from me. At so
thoughtless an age, with an education so unfavorable to religious impressions;
swayed likewise, by the strongest of human passions; made somewhat impatient by
the company I kept, of the disrepute and scorn to which the Jewish nation are
every where condemned, I could not be expected to be very averse to the scheme.

My fear^, as to what my father's decision would be, were soon at an end. He
loved his child too well to thwart her wishes in so essential a point. Finding
in me no scruples, no unwillingness, he thought it absurd to be scrupulous for
me. My own heart having abjured my religion, it was absurd to make any
difficulty about a formal renunciation. These were his avowed reasons for
concurrence, but time showed that he had probably other reasons, founded,
indeed, in his regard for my happiness, but such, as if they had been known,
would p^o^ably have strengthened into invincible, the reluctance of my lover's
family.

No marriage was ever attended with happier presages. The numerous relations of
my husband, admitted me with the utmost cordiality, among them My father's
tenderness was unabated by this change, and those humiliations to which I had
before been exposed, were now no more; and every tie was strengthened, at the
end of a year, by the feelings of a mother. I had need, indeed, to know a
season of happiness, that I might be fitted to endure the sad reverses that
succeeded. One after the other my disasters came, each one more heavy than the
last, and in such swift succession, that they hardly left me time to breathe.

I had scarcely left my chamber, I had scarcely recovered my usual health, and
was able to pre^s with true fervor, the new and precious gift to my bosom, when
melancholy tidings came -- I was in the country, at the seat of my
father-in-law, when the messenger arrived.

A shocking tale it was! and told abruptly, with every unpitying aggravation. I
hinted to you once, my father's death. The kind of death -- O! my friend! It
was horrible. He was then a placid venerable old man; though many symptoms of
disquiet had long before been discovered by my mother's watchful tenderness.
Yet none could suspect him capable of such a d^^d; for none, so carefully had
he conducted his affairs, suspected the havoc that mischance had made of his
property.

I, that had so much reason to love my father -- I will leave you to imagine
how I was affected by a catastrophe so dreadful, so unlooked-for. Much less
could I suspect the cause of his despair; yet he had foreseen his ruin before
my marriage; had resolved to defer it for his daughter's and his wife's sake,
as long as possible, but had still determined not to survive the day that
should reduce him to indigence. The desperate act was thus preconcerted -- thus
deliberate.

The true state of his affairs was laid open by his death. The failure of great
mercantile houses at Frankfort and Liege was the cause of his disasters. Thus
were my prospects shut in. That wealth, which no doubt, furnished the chief
inducement with my husband's family to concur in his choice, was now suddenly
exchanged for poverty.

Bred up, as I had been, in pomp and luxury; conscious that my wealth was my
chief security from the contempt of the proud and bigoted, and my chief title
to the station to which I had been raised, and which I the more delighted in
because it enabled me to confer so great obligations on my husband. What
reverse could be harder than this, and how much bitterness was added by it to
the grief, occasioned by the violent end of my father!

Yet, loss of fortune, though it mortified my pride, did not prove my worst
calamity. Perhaps it was scarcely to be ranked with evils, since it furnished a
touchstone by which my husband's affections were to be tried; especially as the
issue of the trial was auspicious; for my misfortune seemed only to heighten
the interest which my character had made for me in the hearts of all that knew
me. The paternal regards of Sir Ralph had always been tender, but that
tenderness seemed now to be redoubled.

New events made this consolation still more necessary. My unhappy mother! --
She was nearer to the dreadful scene when it happened. Had no surviving object
to beguile her sorrow; was rendered, by long habit, more dependent upon fortune
th^n her child.

A melancholy always mute was the first effect upon my mother. Nothing could
charm her eye, or her ear. Sweet sounds that she once loved, and especially
when her darling child was the warbler, were heard no longer. How, with
streaming eyes, have I sat and watched the dear lady, and endeavored to catch
her eye, to rouse her attention! -- But I must not think of these things.

But even this distress was little in comparison with what was to come. A
frenzy thus mute, motionless and vacant, was succeeded by fits, talkative,
outrageous, requiring incessant superintendance, restraint, and even violence.

Why led you me thus back to my sad remembrances? Excuse me for the present. I
will tell you the rest some other time; tomorrow.

Tomorrow, accordingly, my friend resumed her story.

Let me now make an end, said she, of my mournful narrative, and never, I
charge you, do any thing to revive it again.

Deep as was my despondency, occasioned by these calamities, I was not
destitute of some joy. My husband and my child were lovely and affectionate. In
their caresses, in their welfare, I found peace; and might still have found it,
had there not been -- But why should I open afresh, wounds which time has
imperfectly closed? But the story must have sometime been told to you, and the
sooner it is told and dismissed to forgetfulness, the better.

My ill fate led me into company with a woman too well known in the idle and
dissipated circles. Her character was not unknown to me. There was nothing in
her features or air to obviate disadvantageous prepossessions. I sought not her
intercourse; I rather shunned it, as unpleasing and discreditable, but she
would not be repulsed. Self invited, she made herself my frequent guest; took
unsolicited part in my concerns; did me many kind offices; and, at length, in
spite of my counter inclination, won upon my sympathy and gratitude.

No one in the world, did I fondly think, had I less reason to fear than Mrs.
Waring. Her character excited not the slightest apprehension for my own safety.
She was upwards of forty, no wise remarkable for grace or beauty; tawdry in her
dress; accustomed to render more conspicuous the traces of age by her attempts
to hide them; the mother of a numerous family, with a mind but slenderly
cultivated; always careful too to save appearances; studiously preserving
distance with my husband, and he, like myself, enduring, rather than wishing
her society. What could I fear from the arts of such an one?

But alas! the woman had consummate address. -- Patience too, that nothing
could tire. Watchfulness that none could detect. Insinuation the wiliest and
most subtle. Thus wound she herself into my affections, by an unexampled
perseverance in seeming kindness; by tender confidence; by artful glo^ses of
past misconduct; by self-rebukes and feigned contritions.

Never were strata^e^s so intricate, dissimulation so profound! But still, that
such an one should seduce my husband; young; generous; ambitious; impatient of
contumely and reproach, and surely not indifferent; before this fatal
intercourse, not indifferent to his wife and child! -- Yet, so it was!

I saw his discontents; his struggles; I heard him curse this woman, and the
more deeply for my attempts, unconscious as I was of her machinations, to
reconcile them to each other, to do away what seemed a causeless indignation,
or antipathy against her. How little I suspected the nature of the conflict in
his heart, between a new passion and the claims of pride; of conscience and of
humanity; the claims of a child and a wife; a wife already in affliction, and
placing all that yet remained of happiness, in the firmness of his virtue; in
the continuance of his love; a wife, at the very hour of his meditated flight,
full of terrors at the near approach of an event, whose agonies demand a double
share of an husband's supporting; encouraging love --

Good Heaven! For what evils are some of thy creatures reserved! Resignation to
thy decree, in the last, and most cruel distress, was, indeed, an hard task.

He was gone. Some unavoidable engagement calling him to Hamburgh was pleaded.
Yet to leave me at such an hour! I dared not upbraid, nor object. The tale was
so specious! The fortunes of a friend depended on his punctual journey. The
falsehood of his story too soon made itself known. He was gone, in company with
his detested paramour!

Yet, though my vigilance was easily deceived, it was not so with others. A
creditor, who had his bond for three thousand pounds, pursued, and arrested him
at Harwich. He was thrown into prison, but his companion, let me, at least, say
that in her praise, would not desert him. She took lod^ing near the place of
his confinement, and saw him daily. Tha^, had she not done it, and had my
personal condition allowed, should have been my province.

Indignation and grief hastened the painful crisis with me. I did not weep that
the second fruit of this unhappy union saw not the light. I wept only that this
hour of agony, was not, to its unfortunate mother, the last.

I felt not anger; I had nothing but compassion for Fielding. Gladly would I
have recalled him to my arms and to virtue: I wrote, adjuring him by all our
past joys, to return; vowing only gratitude for his new affection, and claiming
only the recompense of seeing him restored to his family; to liberty; to
reputation.

But alas! Fielding had a good, but a proud, heart. He looked upon his error
with remorse; with self-detestation, and with the fatal belief that it could
not be retrieved; shame made him withstand all my reasonings and persuasions,
and in the hurry of his feelings, he made solemn vows that he would, in the
moment of restored liberty, abjure his country and his family forever. He bore
indignantly the yoke of his new attachment, but he strove in vain to shake it
off. Her behavior, always yielding, doting, supplicative, preserved him in
her fetters. Though upbraided, spurned and banished from his presence, she
would not leave him, but by new efforts and new artifices, soothed, appeased,
and won again, and kept his tenderness.

What my entreaties were unable to effect, his father could not hope to
accomplish. He offered to take him from prison; the creditor offered to cancel
the bond, if he would return to me; but this condition he refused. All his
kindred, and one who had been his bosom friend from childhood, joined in
beseeching his compliance with these conditions; but his pride, his dread of my
merited reproaches; the merits and dissuasions of his new companion, whose
sacrifices for his sake had not been small, were obstacles which nothing could
subdue.

Far, indeed, was I from imposing these conditions. I waited only till, by
certain arrangements, I could gather enough to pay his debts, to enable him to
execute his vow; empty would have been my claims to his affection, if I could
have suffered, with the means of his deliverance in my hands, my husband to
remain a moment in prison.

The remains of my father's vast fortune, was a jointure of a thousand pounds a
year, settled on my mother, and after her death, on me. My mother's helpless
condition put this revenue into my disposal. By this means was I enabled,
without the knowledge of my father-in-law, or my husband, to purchase the debt,
and dismiss him from prison. He set out instantly, in company with his
paramour, to France.

When somewhat recovered from the shock of this calamity, I took up my abode
with my mother. What she had was enough, as you, perhaps, will think, for
plentiful subsistence, but to us, with habits of a different kind, it was
little better than poverty. That reflection, my father's memory, my mother's
deplorable state, which every year grew worse, and the late misfortune, were
the chief companions of my thoughts.

The dear child, whose smiles were uninterrupted by his mother's afflictions,
was some consolation in my solitude. To his instruction and to my mother's
wants, all my hours were devoted. I was sometimes not without the hope of
better days. Full as my mind was of Fielding's merits, convinced by former
proofs of his ardent and generous spirit, I trusted that time and reflection
would destroy that spell by which he was now bound.

For some time, the progress of these reflections was not known. In leaving
England, Fielding dropped all correspondence and connection with his native
country. He parted with the woman (...), leaving no trace behind him by which
she might follow him, as she wished to do. She never returned to England, but
died a twelve month afterward in Switzerland.

As to me, I had only to muse day and night upon ^he possible ^^stiny of this
beloved fugitive. His incensed father cared not for him. He had cast him out of
his paternal affections, ceased to make enquiries respecting him, and even
wished never to hear of him again. My boy succeeded to my husband's place in
his grand-father's affections, and in the hopes and views of the family; and
his mother wanted nothing which their compassionate and respectful love could
bestow.

Three long and tedious years passed away, and no tidings were received.
Whether he were living or dead, nobody could tell. At length, an English
traveller, going out of the customary road from Italy, met with Fielding, in a
town in the Venaissin. His manners, habit and language* had become French. He
seemed unwilling to be recognized by an old acquaintance, but not being able to
avoid this, and becoming gradually familiar, he informed the traveller of many
particulars in his present situation. It appeared that he had made himself
useful to a neighboring Seigneur, in whose chateau he had long lived on the
footing of a brother. France he had resolved to make his future country, and
among other changes for that end, he had laid aside his English name, and taken
that of his patron, which was Perrin. He had endeavored to compensate himself
for all other privations, by devoting himself to rural amusements and to study.

He carefully shunned all enquiries respecting me, but when my name was
mentioned by his friend, who knew well all that had happened, and my general
welfare, together with that of his son, asserted, he showed deep sensibility,
and even consented that I should be made acquainted with his situation.

I cannot describe the effect of this intelligence on me. My hopes of bringing
him back to me, were suddenly revived. I wrote him a letter, in which I poured
forth my whole heart; but his answer contained avowals of (...) his former
resolutions, to which time had only made his adherence more easy. A second and
third letter were written, and an offer made to follow him to his retreat, and
share his exile; but all my efforts availed nothing. He solemnly and repeatedly
renounced all the claims of an husband over me, and absolved me from every
obligation as a wife.

His part in this correspondence, was performed without harshness or contempt.
A strange mixture there was of pathos and indifference; of tenderness and
resolution. Hence I continually derived hope, which time, however, brought no
nearer to certainty.

At the opening of the revolution, the name of Perrin appeared among the
deputies to the constituent assembly, for the district in which he resided. He
had thus succeeded in gaining all the rights of a French citizen; and the hopes
of his (...) became almost extinct: but that, and every other hope, respecting
him, has since been totally extinguished by his marriage with Marguerite
D'Almont, a young lady of great merit and fortune, and a native of Avignon.

A long period of suspense was now at an end, and left me in a state almost as
full of anguish as that which our first separation produced. My sorrows were
increased by my mother's death, and this incident freeing me from those
restraints upon my motions which before existed, I determined to come to
America.

My son was now eight years old, and his grandfather claiming the province of
his instruction, I was persuaded to part with him, that he might be sent to a
distant school. Thus was another tie removed, and in spite of the well meant
importunities of my friends, I persisted in my scheme of crossing the ocean.

I could not help, at this part of her narration, expressing my surprise, that
any motives were strong enough to recommend this scheme.

It was certainly a freak of despair. A few months would, perhaps, have allayed
the fresh grief, and reconciled me to my situation; but I would not pause or
deliberate. My scheme was opposed by my friends, with great earnestness. During
my voyage, affrighted by the dangers which surrounded me, and to which I was
wholly unused, I heartily repented of my resolution; but now, methinks, I have
reason to rejoice at my perseverance. I have come into a scene and society so
new, I have had so many claims made upon my ingenuity and fortitude, that my
mind has been diverted in some degree from former sorrows. There are even times
when I wholly forget them, and catch myself indulging in cheerful reveries.

I have often reflected with surprise on the nature of my own mind. It is eight
years since my father's violent death. How few of my hours since that period,
have been blessed with serenity! How many nights and days, in hateful and
lingering succession, have been bathed in tears and tormented with regrets!
That I am still alive with so many causes of death, and with such a slow
consuming malady, is surely to be wondered at.

I believe the worst foes of man, at least of men in grief, are solitude and
idleness. The same eternally occurring round of objects, feeds his disease, and
the effects of mere vacancy and uniformity, is sometimes mistaken for those of
grief. Yes, I am glad I came to America. My relations are importunate for my
return, and till lately, I had some thoughts of it; but I think now, I shall
stay where I am, for the rest of my days.

Since I arrived, I am become more of a student than I used to be. I always
loved literature, but never, till of late, had a mind enough at ease, to read
with advantage. I now find pleasure in the occupation which I never expected to
find.

You see in what manner I live. The letters which I brought secured me a
flattering reception from the best people in your coun^ry; but scenes of gay
resort had nothing to attract me, and I quickly withdrew to that seclusion in
which you now find me. Here, always at leisure, and mistress of every laudable
means of gratification, I am not without the belief of serene days yet to come.

I now ventured to enquire what were her latest tidings of her husband.

At the opening of the revolution, I told you he became a champion of the
people. By his zeal and his efforts he acquired such importance as to be
deputed to the National Assembly. In this post he was the adherent of violent
measures, till the subversion of monarchy; and then, when too late for his
safety, he checked his career.

And what has since become of him?

She sighed deeply. You were yesterday reading a list of the proscribed under
Robespierre. I checked you. I had good reason. But this subject grows too
painful, let us change it.

Some time after I ventured to renew this topic; and discovered that Fielding,
under his new name of Perrin d'Almont, was among the outlawed deputies of last
year 1793.
, and had been slain in resisting the officers, sent to arrest him. My friend
had been informed that his wife Philippine d'Almont, whom she had reason to
believe, a woman of great merit, had eluded persecution, and taken refuge in
some part of America. She had made various attempts, but in vain, to find out
her retreat. Ah! said I, you must commission me to find her. I will hunt her
through the continent from Penobscot to Savanna. I will not leave a nook
unsearched.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XXIV.
NONE will be surprised, that to a woman thus unfortunate and thus deserving,
my heart willingly rendered up all its sympathies; that as I partook of all her
grief, I hailed, with equal delight, those omens of felicity which now, at
length, seemed to play in her fancy.

I saw her often, as often as my engagements would permit, and oftener than I
allowed myself to visit any other. In this I was partly selfish. So much
entertainment, so much of the best instruction did her conversation afford me,
that I never had enough of it.

Her experience had been so much larger than mine, and so wholly different, and
she possessed such unbounded facility of recounting all she had seen and felt,
and absolute sincerity and unreserve in this respect, were so fully established
between us, that I can imagine nothing equally instructive and delightful with
her conversation.

Books are cold, jejune, vexatious in their sparingness of information at one
time, and their impertinent loquacity at another. Besides, all they choose to
give, they give at once; they allow no questions; offer no further
explanations, and bend not to the caprices of our curiosity. They talk to us
behind a screen. Their tone is lifeless and monotonous. They charm not our
attention by mute significances of gesture and looks. They spread no light upon
their meaning by cadences and emphasis and pause.

How different was Mrs. Fielding's discourse! So versatile; so bending to the
changes of occasion; so obsequious to my curiosity, and so abundant in that
very knowledge in which I was most deficient, and on which I set the most
value, the knowledge of the human heart; of society as it existed in another
world, more abundant in the varieties of customs and characters, ^han I had
ever had the power to witness.

Partly selfish I have said my motives were, but not wholly so, as long as I
saw that my friend derived pleasure, in her turn, from my company. Not that I
could add directly to her knowledge or pleasure, but that expansion of heart,
that ease of utterance and flow of ideas which always were occasioned by my
approach, were sources of true pleasure of which she had been long deprived,
and for which her privation had given her a higher relish than ever.

She lived in great affluence and independence, but made use of her privileges
of fortune chiefly to secure to herself the command of her own time. She had
been long ago tired and disgusted with the dull and fulsome uniformity and
parade of the playhouse and ball-room. Formal visits were endured as
mortifications and penances, by which the delights of privacy and friendly
intercourse were by contrast increased. Music she loved, but never sought it in
place of public resort, or from the skill (...) mercenary performers, and books
were not the least of her pleasures.

As to me, I was wax in her hand. Without design and without effort, I was
always of that form she wished me to assume. My own happiness became a
secondary passion, and her gratification the great end of my being. When with
her, I thought not of myself. I had scarcely a separate or independent
existence, since my senses were occupied by her, and my mind was full of those
ideas which her discourse communicated. To meditate on her looks and words, and
to pursue the means suggested by my own thoughts, or by her, conducive, in any
way, to her good, was all my business.

What a fate, said I, at the conclusion of one of our interviews, has been
yours. But, thank Heaven, the storm has disappeared before the age of
sensibility has gone past, and without drying up every source of happiness. You
are still young: all your powers unimpaired; rich in the compassion and esteem
of the world; wholly independent of the claims and caprices of others; amply
supplied with that mean of usefulness, called money; wise in that experience
which (...) adversity can give. Past evils and sufferings, if i^c^^red and
endured without guilt, if called to view without remorse, make up the materials
of present joy. They cheer our most dreary hours with the whispered accents of
"well done," and they heighten our pleasures into somewhat of celestial
brilliancy, by furnishing a deep, a ruefully deep contrast.

From this moment, I will cease to weep for you. I will call you the happiest
of women. I will share with you your happiness by witnessing it -- but that
shall not content me. I must someway contribute to it. Tell me how I shall
serve you? What can I do to make you happier? Poor am I in every thing but
zeal, but still I may do something. What -- pray tell me what can I do?

She looked at me with sweet and solemn significance. What it was exactly, I
could not divine, yet I was strangely affected by it. It was but a glance,
instantly withdrawn. She made me no answer.

You must not be silent; you must tell me what I can do for you. Hitherto I
have done nothing. All the service is on your side. Your conversation has been
my study, a delightful study, but the profit has only been mine. Tell me how I
can be grateful -- my voice and manner, I believe, seldom belie my feelings. At
this time, I had almost done what a second thought made me suspect to be
unauthorized. Yet I cannot tell why. My heart had nothing in it but reverence
and admiration. Was she not the substitute of my lost mamma. Would I not have
clasped that beloved shade? Yet the two beings were not just the same, or I
should not, as now, have checked myself, and only pressed her hand to my lips.

Tell me, repeated I, what can I do to serve you? I read to you a little now,
and you are pleased with my reading. I copy for you when you want the time. I
guide the reins for you when you choose to ride. Humble offices, indeed, though,
perhaps, all that a raw youth like me can do for you; but I can be still more
assiduous. I can read several hours in the day, instead of one. I can write ten
times as much as now.

Are you not my lost mamma come back again? And yet, not exactly her, I think.
Something different; something better, I believe, if that be possible. At any
rate, methinks I would be wholly yours. I shall be impatient and uneasy till
every act, every thought, every minute, someway does you good.

How! said I -- her eye still averted, seemed to hold back the tear with
difficulty, and she made a motion as if to rise -- have I grieved you? Have I
been importunate? Forgive me if I have offended you.

Her eyes now overflowed without restraint. She articulated with difficulty --
Tears are too prompt with me of late; but they did not upbraid you. Pain has
often caused them to flow, but now it -- is -- pleasure.

What an heart must yours be, I resumed. When susceptible of such pleasures,
what pangs must formerly have rent it! -- But you are not displeased, you say,
with my importunate zeal. You will accept me as your own in every thing. Direct
me: prescribe to me. There must be something in which I can be of still more
use to you: some way in which I can be wholly yours --

Wholly mine! she repeated, in a smothered voice, and rising -- leave me,
Arthur. It is too late for you to be here. It was wrong to stay so late.

I have been wrong, but how too late! I entered but this moment. It is twilight
still: Is it not?

No -- it is almost twelve. You have been here a long four hours; short ones, I
would rather say -- but indeed you must go.

What made me so thoughtless of the time! But I will go, yet not till you
forgive me. I approached her with a confidence, and for a purpose at which,
upon reflection, I am not a little surprised, but the being called Mervyn is
not the same in her company and in that of another. What is the difference, and
whence comes it? Her words and looks engross me. My mind wants room for any
other object. But why enquire whence the difference? The superiority of her
merits and attractions to all those whom I knew, would surely account for my
fervor. Indifference, if I felt it, would be the only just occasion of wonder.

The hour was, indeed too late, and I hastened home. Stevens was waiting my
return with some anxiety. I apologized for my delay, and recounted to him what
had just passed. He listened with more than usual interest. When I had finished,

Mervyn, said he, you seem not to be aware of your present situation. From what
you now tell me, and from what you have formerly told me, one thing seems very
plain to me.

Pry'thee, what is it?

Eliza Hadwin -- do you wish -- could you bear to see her the wife of another?

Five years hence I will answer you. Then my answer may be -- "No: I wish her
only to he mine." Till then, I wish her only to be my pupil, my ward, my sister*

But these are remote considerations: they are bars to marriage, but not to
love. Would it not molest and disquiet you to observe in her a passion for
another?

It would, but only on her own account: not on mine. At a suitable age it is
very likely I may love her, because, it is likely, if she holds on in her
present career, she will then be worthy, but, at present, though I would die to
ensure her happiness, I have no wish to ensure it by marriage with her.

Is there no other whom you love?

No. There is one worthier than all others: one whom I wish the woman who shall
be my wife to resemble in all things.

And who is this model?

You know I can only mean Achsa Fielding.

If you love her likeness, why not love herself?

I felt my heart leap. -- What a thougt is that! Love her I do as I love my
God; as I love virtue. To love her in another sense, would brand me for a
lunatic.

To love her as a woman, then, appears to you an act of folly.

In me it would be worse than folly. 'Twould be frenzy.

And why?

Why? Really, my friend, you astonish me. Nay, you startle me -- for a question
like that implies a doubt in you whether I have not actually harbored the though it.

No, said he, smiling, presumtuous though you be, you have not, to be sure,
reached so high a pitch. But still, though I think you innocent of so heinous
an offense, there is no harm in asking why you might not love her, and even
seek her for a wife.

Achsa Fielding my wife! Good Heaven! -- The very sound threw my soul into
unconquerable tumults. -- Take care, my friend, continued I, in beseeching
accents, you may do me more injury than you conceive, by even starting such a
thought.

True, said he, as long as such obstacles exist to your success; so many
incurable objections; for instance, she is six years older than you --

That is an advantage. Her age is what it ought to be.

But she has been a wife and mother already.

That is likewise an advantage. She has wisdom, because she has experience. Her
sensibilities are stronger, because they have been exercised and chastened. Her
first marriage was unfortunate. The purer is the felicity she will taste in a
second! If her second choice be propitious, the greater her tenderness and
gratitude.

But she is a foreigner: independent of control, and rich.

All which, are blessings to herself and to him for whom her hand is reserved;
especially if like me, he is indigent.

But then she is unsightly as a night-hag, tawney as a moor, the eye of a
gypsey, low in stature, contemptibly diminutive, scarcely bulk enough to cast a
shadow as she walks, less luxuriance than a char^ed log, ^ewer elasticities
than a sheet pebble.

Hush! hush! blasphemer! -- and I put my hand before his mouth -- have I not
told you that in mind, person and condition, she is the type after which my
enamored fancy has modelled my wife.

O ho! Then the objection does not lie with you. It lies with her, it seems.
She can find nothing in you to esteem! And pray, for what faults do you think
she would reject you?

I cannot tell. That she can ever balance for a moment, on such a question, is
incredible. Me! me! That Achsa Fielding should think of me!

Incredible, indeed! You who are loathsome in your person, an idiot in your
understanding, a villain in your morals! deformed! withered! vain, stupid and
malignant. That such an one should choose you for an idol!

Pray, my friend, said I, anxiously, jest not. What mean you by an hint of this
kind?

I will not jest then, but will soberly enquire, what faults are they which
make this lady's choice of you so incredible? You are younger than she, though
no one, who merely observed your manners, and heard you talk, would take you to
be under thirty. You are poor; are these impediments?

I should think not. I have heard her reason with admirable eloquence, against
the vain distinctions of property and nation and rank. They were once of moment
in her eyes; but the sufferings, humiliations and reflections of years, have
cured her of the folly. Her nation has suffered too much by the inhuman
antipathies of religious and political faction; she, herself, has felt so often
the contumelies of the rich, the highborn, and the bigoted, that --

Pry'thee then, what do imagine her obje^tions to be?

Why -- I don't know. The thought was so aspiring; to call her my wife, was an
height of bliss; the very far-off view of which made my head dizzy.

An height, however, to attain which you suppose only her consent, her love, to
be necessary?

Without doubt, her love is indispensible.

Sit down, Arthur, and let us no longer treat this matter lightly. I clearly
see the importance of this moment to this lady's happiness and yours. It is
plain that you love this woman. How could you help it? A brilliant skin is not
here is; nor elegant proportions* nor majestic stature; yet no creature had ever
more power to bewitch. Her manners have grace and dignity that flow from
exquisite feeling, delicate taste, and the quickest and keenest penetration.
She has the wisdom of men and of books. Her sympathies are enforced by reason,
and her charities regulated by knowledge. She has a woman's age, fortune more
than you wish, and a spotless fame. How could you fail to love her?

You, who are her chosen friend, who partake her pleasures, and share her
employments, on whom she almost exclusively bestows her society and confidence,
and to whom she thus affords the strongest of all indirect proofs of
impassioned esteem. How could you, with all that firmness to love, joined with
all that discernment of her excellence, how could you escape the enchantment?

You have not thought of marriage. You have not suspected your love. From the
purity of your mind, from the idolatry with which this woman has inspired you,
you have imaged no delight beyond that of enjoying her society as you now do,
and have never fostered an hope beyond this privilege.

How quickly would this tranquillity vanish, and the true state of your heart
be evinced, if a rival should enter the scene and be entertained with
preference; then would the seal be removed, the spell be broken, and you would
awaken to terror and to anguish.

Of this, however, there is no danger. Your passion is not felt by you alone.
From her treatment of you, your diffidence disables you from seeing, but
nothing can be clearer to me than, that she loves you.

I started on my feet. A flush of scorching heat flowed to every part of my
frame. My temples began to throb like my heart. I was half delirious, and my
delirium was strangely compounded of fear and hope, of delight and of terror.

What have you done, my friend? You have overturned my peace of mind. Till now
the image of this woman has been followed by complacency and sober rapture; but
your words have dashed the scene with dismay and confusion. You have raised up
wishes and dreams and doubts, which possess me in spite of my reason, in spite
of a thousand proofs.

Good God! You say she loves; loves me! me, a boy in age; bred in clownish
ignorance; scarcely ushered into the world; more than childishly unlearned and
raw; a barn-door simpleton; a plow-tail, kitchen-hearth, turnip-hoeing novice!
She, thus splendidly endowed; thus allied to nobles; thus gifted with arts, and
adorned with graces; that she should choose me, me for the partner of her
fortune; her affections; and her life! It cannot be. Yet, if it were; if your
guesses should -- prove -- Oaf! madman! To indulge so fatal a chimera! So rash
a dream!

My friend! my friend! I feel that you have done me an irreparable injury. I
can never more look her in the face. I can never more frequent her society.
These new thoughts will beset and torment me. My disquiet will chain up my
tongue. That overflowing gratitude; that innocent joy* unconscious of offense,
and knowing no restraint, which have hitherto been my titles to her favor, will
fly from my features and manners. I shall be anxious* vacant and unhappy in her
presence. I shall dread to look at her, or to open ^y lips lest my mad and
unhallowed ambition should betray itself.

Well, replied Stevens, this scene is quite new. I could almost find it in my
heart to pity you. I did not expect this; and yet from my knowledge of your
character, I ought, perhaps, to have foreseen it. This is a necessary part of
the drama. A joyous certainty, on these occasions, must always be preceded by
suspenses and doubts, and the close will be joyous in proportion as the
preludes are excruciating. Go to bed, my good friend, and think of this. Time
and a few more interviews with Mrs. Fielding, will, I doubt not, set all to
rights.

ARTHUR MERVYN. SECOND PART. CHAPTER XXV.
I WENT to my chamber, but what different sensations did I carry into it, from
those with which I had left it a few hours before. I stretched myself on the
mattress and put out the light; but the swarm of new images that rushed on my
mind, set me again instantly in motion. All was rapid, vague and undefined,
wearying and distracting my attention. I was roused as by a divine voice, that
said: -- "Sleep no more: Mervyn shall sleep no more."

What chiefly occupied me was a nameless sort of terror. What shall I compare
it to? Methinks, that one falling from a tree, overhanging a torrent, plunged
into the whirling eddy, and gasping and struggling while he sinks to rise no
more, would feel just as I did then. Nay, some such image actually possessed
me. Such was one of my reveries, in which suddenly I stretched my hand, and
caught the arm of a chair. This act called me back to reason, or rather gave my
soul opportunity to roam into a new track equally wild.

Was it the abruptness of this vision that thus confounded me! was it a latent
error in my moral constitution, which this new conjuncture drew forth into
influence? These were all the tokens of a mind lost to itself; bewildered;
unhinged; plunged into a drear insanity.

Nothing less could have prompted so phantastically -- for midnight as it was,
my chamber's solitude was not to be supported. After a few turns across the
floor, I left the room, and the house. I walked without design and in an
hurried pace. I posted straight to the house of Mrs. Fielding. I lifted the
latch, but the door did not open. It was, no doubt, locked.

How comes this, said I, and looked around me. The hour and occasion were
unthought of. Habituated to this path, I had taken it spontaneously. How comes
this? repeated I. Locked upon me! but I will summon them, I warrant me -- and
rung the bell, not timidly or slightly, but with violence. Some one hastened
from above. I saw the glimmer of a candle through the keyhole.

Strange, thought I, a candle at noon day! -- The door was opened, and my poor
Bess, robed in a careless and a hasty manner, appeared. She started at sight of
me* but merely because she did not, in a moment, recognize me. -- Ah! Arthur,
is it you? Come in. My mamma has wanted you these two hours. I was just going
to dispatch Philip to tell you to come.

Lead me to her, said I.

She led the way into the parlor. -- "Wait a moment here: I will tell her you
are come" -- and she tripped away.

Presently a step was heard. The door opened again, and then entered a man. He
was tall, elegant, sedate to a degree of sadness: Something in his dress and
aspect that bespoke the foreigner; the Frenchman.

What, said he, mildly, is your business with my wife? She cannot see you
instantly, and has sent me to receive your commands.

Your wife! I want Mrs. Fielding.

True; and Mrs. Fielding is my wife. Thank Heaven I have come in time to
discover her, and claim her as such.

I started back. I shuddered. My joints slackened, and I stretched my hand to
catch something by which I might be saved from sinking on the floor. Meanwhile,
Fielding changed his countenance into rage and fury. He called me villain! bad
me avaunt! and drew a shining steel from his bosom, with which he stabbed me to
the heart. I sunk upon the floor, and all, for a time, was darkness and
oblivion! At length, I returned as it were to life. I opened my eyes. The mists
disappeared, and I found myself stretched upon the bed in my own chamber. I
remembered the fatal blow I had received. I put my hand upon my breast; the
spot where the dagger entered. There were no traces of a wound. All was perfect
and entire. Some miracle had made me whole.

I raised myself up. I re-examined my body. All around me was hushed, till a
voice from the pavement below, proclaimed that it was "past three o'clock."

What, said I, has all this miserable pageantry, this midnight wandering, and
this ominous interview, been no more than -- a dream!

It may be proper to mention, in explanation of this scene, and to show the
thorough perturbation of my mind, during this night, intelligence gained some
days after from Eliza. She said, that about two o'clock, on this night, she was
roused by a violent ringing of the bell. She was startled by so unseasonable a
summons. She slept in a chamber adjoining Mrs. Fielding's, and hesitated
whether she should alarm her friend, but the summons not being repeated, she
had determined to forbear.

Added to this, was the report of Mrs. Stevens, who, on the same night, about
half an hour after I and her husband had retired, imagined that she heard the
street-door opened and shut, but this being followed by no other consequence,
she supposed herself mistaken. I have little doubt, that, in my feverish and
troubled sleep, I actually went forth, posted to the house of Mrs. Fielding,
rung for admission, and shortly after, returned to my own apartment.

This confusion of mind was somewhat allayed by the return of light. It gave
way to more uniform, but not less rueful and despondent perceptions. The image
of Achsa filled my fancy, but it was the harbinger of nothing but humiliation
and sorrow. To outroot the conviction of my own unworthiness, to persuade
myself that I was regarded with the tenderness that Stevens had ascribed to
her, that the discovery of my thoughts would not excite her anger and grief, I
felt to be impossible.

In this state of mind, I could not see her. To declare my feelings would
produce indignation and anguish; to hide them from her scrutiny was not in my
power: yet, what would she think of my estranging myself from her society? What
expedient could I honestly adopt to justify my absence, and what employments
could I substitute for those precious hours hitherto devoted to her.

This afternoon, thought I, she has been invited to spend at Stedman's country
house on Schuylkill. She consented to go, and I was to accompany her. I am fit
only for solitude. My behavior, in her presence, will be enigmatical,
capricious and morose. I must not go: Yet, what will she think of my failure?
Not to go will be injurious and suspicious.

I was undetermined. The appointed hour arrived. I stood at my chamber window,
torn by variety of purposes, and swayed alternately by repugnant arguments. I
several times went to the door of my apartment, and put my foot upon the first
step of the staircase, but as often paused, reconsidered and returned to my
room.

In these fluctuations the hour passed. No messenger arrived from Mrs.
Fielding, enquiring into the cause of my delay. Was she offended at my
negligence? Was she sick and disabled from going, or had she changed her mind?
I now remember her parting words at our last interview. Were they not
susceptible of two constructions? She said my visit was too long, and bad me
begone. Did she suspect my presumption, and is she determined thus to punish me?

This terror added anew to all my former anxieties. It was impossible to rest
in this suspense. I would go to her. I would lay before her all the anguish of
my heart: I would not spare myself, She shall not reproach me more severely
than I will reproach myself. I will hear my sentence from her own lips, and
promise unlimited submission to the doom of separation and exile, which she
will pronounce.

I went forthwith to her house. The drawing room and summer house was empty. I
summoned Philip the footman -- his mistress was gone to Mr. Sedman's.

How? -- To Stedman's? -- In whose company?

Miss Stedman and her brother called for her in the carriage, and persuaded her
to go with them.

Now my heart sunk, indeed! Miss Stedman's brother! A youth, forward, gallant
and gay! Flushed with prosperity, and just returned from Europe, with all the
confidence of age, and all the ornaments of education! She has gone with him,
though pre-engaged to me! Poor Arthur, how art thou despised!

This information only heightened my impatience. I went away, but returned in
the evening. I waited till eleven, but she came not back. I cannot justly paint
the interval that passed till next morning. It was void of sleep. On leaving
her house, I wandered into the fields. Every moment increased my impatience.
She will probably spend the morrow at Stedman's, said I, and possibly the next
day. Why should I wait for her return? Why not seek her there, and rid myself
at once of this agonizing suspense? Why not go thither now? This night,
wherever I spend it, will be unacquainted with repose. I will go, it is already
near twelve, and the distance is more than eight miles. I will hover near the
house till morning* and then, as early as possible, demand an interview.

I was well acquainted with Stedman's Villa, having formerly been there with
Mrs. Fielding. I quickly entered its precincts. I went close to the house;
looked mournfully at every window. At one of them a light was to be seen, and I
took various stations to discover, if possible, the persons within. Methought
once I caught a glimpse of a female, whom my fancy easily imagined to be Achsa.
I sat down upon the lawn, some hundred feet from the house, and opposite the
window whence the light proceeded. I watched it, till at length some one came
to the window, lifted it, and leaning on her arms, continued to look out.

The preceding day had been a very sultry one; the night, as usual after such a
day, and the fall of a violent shower, was delightfully serene and pleasant.
Where I stood, was enlightened by the moon. Whether she saw me or not, I could
hardly tell, or whether she distinguished any thing but a human figure.

Without reflecting on what was due to decorum and punctilio, I immediately
drew near the house. I quickly perceived that her attention was fixed. Neither
of us spoke, till I had placed myself directly under her; I then opened my
lips, without knowing in what manner to address her. She spoke first, and in a
startled and anxious voice --

Who is that?

Arthur Mervyn: he that was two days ago your friend.

Mervyn! What is it that brings you here at this hour? What is the matter? What
has happened? Is any body sick?

All is safe -- all are in good health.

What then do you come hither for at such an hour?

I meant not to disturb you: I meant not to be seen.

Good Heavens! How you frighten me. What can be the reason of so strange --

Be not alarmed. I meant to hover near the house till morning, that I might see
you as early as possible.

For what purpose?

I will tell you when we meet, and let that be at five o'clock; the sun will
then be risen; in the cedar grove under the bank; till when, farewell.

Having said this, I prevented all expostulation, by turning the angle of the
house, and hastening toward the shore of the river. I roved about the grove
that I have mentioned. In one part of it is a rustic seat and table, shrouded
by trees and shrubs, and an intervening eminence, from the view of those in the
house. This I designed to be the closing scene of my destiny.

Presently, I left this spot and wandered upward through embarrassed and
obscure paths, starting forward or checking my pace, according as my wayward
meditations governed me. Shall I describe my thoughts? -- Impossible! It was
certainly a temporary loss of reason; nothing less than madness could lead into
such devious tracts, drag me down to so hopeless, helpless, panickful a depth,
and drag me down so suddenly; lay waste, as at a signal, all my flourishing
structures, and reduce them in a moment to a scene of confusion and horror.

What did I fear? What did I hope? What did I design? I cannot tell; my glooms
were to retire with the night. The point to which every tumultuous feeling was
linked, was the coming interview with Achsa. That was the boundary of
fluctuation and suspense. Here was the sealing and ratification of my doom.

I rent a passage through the thicket, and struggled upward till I reached the
edge of a considerable precipice; I laid me down at my length upon the rock,
whose cold and hard surface I pressed with my bared and throbbing breast. I
leaned over the edge; fixed my eyes upon the water and wept -- plentifully; but
why?

May this be my heart's last beat, if I can tell why.

I had wandered so far from Stedman's, that when roused by the light, I had
some miles to walk before I could reach the place of meeting. Achsa was already
there. I slid down the rock above, and appeared before her. Well might she be
startled at my wild and abrupt appearance.

I placed myself, without uttering a word, upon a seat opposite to her, the
table between, and crossing my arms upon the table, leaned my head upon them,
while my face was turned toward and my eyes fixed upon hers, I seemed to have
lost the power and the inclination to speak.

She regarded me, at first, with anxious curiosity; after examining my looks,
every emotion was swallowed up in terrified sorrow. For God's sake! -- what
does all this mean? Why am I called to this place? What tidings, what fearful
tidings do you bring?

I did not change my posture or speak. What, she resumed, could inspire all
this woe? Keep me not in this suspense, Arthur; these looks and this silence
shocks and afflicts me too much.

Afflict you? said I, at last: I come to tell you, what, now that I am here, I
cannot tell -- there I stopped.

Say what, I entreat you. You seem to be very unhappy -- such a change -- from
yesterday!

Yes! From yesterday: all then was a joyous calm, and now all is -- but then I
knew not my infamy, my guilt --

What words are these, and from you Arthur? Guilt is to you impossible. If
purity is to be found on earth, it is lodged in your heart. What have you done?

I have dared -- how little you expect the extent of my daring. That such as I
should look upwards with this ambition.

I now stood up, and taking her hands in mine, as she sat, looked earnestly in
her face -- I come only to beseech your pardon. To tell you my crime, and then
disappear forever; but first let me see if there be any omen of forgiveness.
Your looks -- they are kind; heavenly; compassionate still. I will trust them,
I believe: and yet -- letting go her hands, and turning away -- This offense is
beyond the reach even of your mercy.

How beyond measure these words and this deportment distress me! Let me know
the worst; I cannot bear to be thus perplexed.

Why, said I, turning quickly round, and again taking her hands, that Mervyn,
whom you have honored and confided in, and blessed with your sweet regards, has
been --

What has he been? Divinely amiable, heroic in his virtue, I am sure. What else
has he been?

This Mervyn has imagined, has dared -- Will you forgive him?

Forgive you what? Why don't you speak? Keep not my soul in this suspense.

He has dared -- But do not think that I am he. Continue to look as now, and
reserve your killing glances, the vengeance of those eyes as for one that is
absent. -- Why, what -- You weep, then, at last. That is a propitious sign.
When pity drops from the eyes of our judge, then should the suppliant approach.
Now, in confidence of pardon, I will tell you: This Mervyn, not content with
all you have hitherto granted him, has dared -- to love you; nay, to think of
you, as of his wife!

Her eye sunk beneath mine, and disengaging her hands, covered her face with
them.

I see my fate, said I, in a tone of despair. Too well did I predict the effect
of this confession; but I will go -- and unforgiven.

She now partly uncovered her face. The hand withdrawn from her cheek, was
stretched toward me. She looked at me.

Arthur! I do forgive thee. -- With what accents was this uttered! With what
looks! The cheek that was before pale with terror, was now crimsoned over by a
different emotion, and delight swam in her eye.

Could I mistake? My doubts, my newborn fears made me tremble, while I took
the offered hand.

Surely -- faultered I, I am not -- I cannot be -- so blessed.

There was no need of words. The hand that I held, was sufficiently eloquent.
She was still silent.

Surely, said I, my senses deceive me. A bliss like this cannot be reserved for
me. Tell me, once more -- set my doubting heart at rest. --

She now gave herself to my arms -- I have not words -- Let your own heart tell
you, you have made your Achsa --

At this moment, a voice from without, it was Miss Stedman's, called -- Mrs.
Fielding! where are you?

My friend started up, and in a hasty voice, bade me begone! You must not be
seen by this giddy girl. Come hither this evening, as if by my appointment, and
I will return with you. -- She left me in a kind of trance. I was immovable.
My reverie was too delicious; -- but let me not attempt the picture. If I can
convey no image of my state, previous to this interview, my subsequent feelings
are still more beyond the reach of my powers to describe.

Agreeably to the commands of my mistress, I hastened away, evading paths which
might expose me to observation. I speedily made my friends partake of my joy,
and passed the day in a state of solemn but confused rapture. I did not
accurately pourtray the various parts of my felicity. The whole rushed upon my
soul at once. My conceptions were too rapid, and too comprehensive to be
distinct.

I went to Stedman's in the evening. I found in the accents and looks of my
Achsa new assurances that all which had lately past, was more than a dream. She
made excuses for leaving the Stedmans sooner than ordinary, and was accompanied
to the city by her friend. We dropped Mrs. Fielding at her own house, and
thither, after accompanying Miss Stedman to her own home, I returned, upon the
wings of tremulous impatience. --

Now could I repeat every word of every conversation that has since taken place
between us; but why should I do that on paper? Indeed it could not be done. All
is of equal value, and all could not be comprised but in many volumes. There
needs nothing more deeply to imprint it on my memory; and while thus reviewing
the past, I should be iniquitously neglecting the present. What is given to the
pen, would be taken from her; and that, indeed, would be -- but no need of
saying what it would be, since it is impossible.

I merely write to allay these tumults which our necessary separation produces;
to aid me in calling up a little patience, till the time arrives, when our
persons, like our minds, shall be united forever. That time -- may nothing
happen to prevent -- but nothing can happen. But why this ominous misgiving
just now? My love has infected me with these unworthy terrors, for she has them
too.

This morning I was relating my dream to her. She started, and grew pale. A sad
silence ensued the cheerfulness that had reigned before -- why thus dejected,
my friend?

I hate your dream. It is a horrid thought. Would to God it had never occurred
to you.

Why surely place no confidence in dreams.

I know not where to place confidence; not in my present promises of joy -- and
she wept. I endeavored to soothe or console her. Why, I asked, did she weep.

My heart is sore. Former disappointments were so heavy; the hopes which were
blasted, were so like my present ones, that the dread of a like result, will
intrude upon my thoughts. And now your dream! Indeed, I know not what to do. I
believe I ought still to retract -- ought, at least, to postpone an act so
irrevocable.

Now was I obliged again to go over in my catalogue of arguments to induce her
to confirm her propitious resolution to be mine within the week. I, at last,
succeeded, even in restoring her serenity and beguiling her fears by dwelling
on our future happiness.

Our household, while we staid in America -- in a year or two we hie to Europe
-- should be thus composed. Fidelity and skill and pure morals, should be
sought out, and enticed, by generous recompenses, into our domestic service.
Duties should be light and regular. -- Such and such should be our amusements
and employments abroad and at home, and would not this be true happiness?

O yes -- If it may be so.

It shall be so; but this is but the humble outline of the scene; something is
still to be added to complete our felicity.

What more can be added?

What more? Can Achsa ask what more? She who has not been only a wife --

But why am I indulging this pen-prattle? The hour she fixed for my return to
her is come, and now take thyself away, quill. Lie there, snug in thy leathern
case, till I call for thee, and that will not be very soon. I believe I will
abjure thy company till all is settled with my love. Yes: I will abjure thee,
so let this be thy last office, till Mervyn has been made the happiest of men.

THE END.

