A DISCOURSE ON General Washington; Delivered in the CATHOLIC CHURCH OF St.
PETER, IN BALTIMORE -- Feb. 22 d 1800.

BY THE RIGHT REV. BISHOP CARROLL.

BALTIMORE: PRINTED by WARNER and HANNA.

DISCOURSE etc.
WHEN the death of men distinguished by superior talents, high endowments, and
eminent services to their country, demands the expression of public mourning
and grief; their loss is accompanied generally with this mitigation, that,
however grievous and painful, it is not irreparable; and that the void, caused
by their mortality, will perhaps be filled up by others, uniting equal
abilities with the same zeal and watchfulness for the general welfare. Hope
then wipes off the tears, with which sorrow bedews the grave of departed worth.
But on the present occasion, no such consolation can be administered; for he,
whose expectations are most sanguine, dares not promise again to his country
the union of so many splendid and useful virtues, as adorned that illustrious
Man, whose memory excites our grateful and tender sensibility, and to whose
tomb the homage of his country is to be solemnly offered on this day. Whether
we consult our own experience, by bringing into comparison with Washington, any
of our cotemporaries, most eminent for their talents, virtues and services; or
whether we search through the pages of history, to discover in them a character
of equal fame; justice and truth will acknowledge, that he stands supereminent
and unrivalled in the annals of mankind; and that no one before him, acting in
such a variety of new and arduous situations, bore with him to the grave a
reputation as clear from lawless ambition, and as undefiled by injustice or
oppression; a reputation, neither depressed by indolence, nor weakened by
irresolution, nor shadowed by those imperfections, which seemed to be the
essential appendages of human nature, till providence exhibited in Washington
this extraordinary phenomenon.

What language can be equal to the excellence of such a character? what
proportion can exist between eloquence, and the tribute of praise, due to so
much virtue? Nevertheless, my fellow citizens, I read in the eagerness of your
attention, your desire to offer this tribute: Methinks I hear your filial
piety, your tender reverence for your best friend, the Father of his country,
calling on me to bear for you, at least a feeble testimony of your
unextinguishable gratitude for his services, your immortal remembrance of, and
veneration for his virtues. In your name therefore, I presume to add some
grains of incense to the homage, which throughout the United States every
friend to their happiness now presents at the shrine of Washington. Pardon, O
departed Spirit of the first of Heroes! if with the cold accents of an
exhausted imagination, I likewise dare attempt to celebrate thy name, whilst so
many sons of genius, ardent in youthful vigor, delineate in glowing colors
the vivid features of thy mind, and the glorious deeds of thy virtuous life.
With unequal steps I venture on the same career, not seeking to add luster to
the fame of Washington, or perpetuate his memory to future times; for he is
already enshrined in the records of immortality: but humbly hoping, that a
recital of his services will open to our countrymen the road to true honor,
and kindle in their breasts the warmth of generous emulation, and real
patriotism. To contribute in this manner to the best interests of his beloved
country, will be to him the most gratifying commendation, if in the regions of
immortality, human affairs still claim a share of his solicitude.

The language uniformly held by Washington, the maxim invariably inculcated and
repeated by him in almost every public manifestation of his sentiments, was the
acknowledgement of a superintending providence, preparing, regulating and
governing all human events for the accomplishment of its eternal purposes, and
predisposing the instruments, by which they are to be effected. Religion and
observation had taught him, that God's provident wisdom reaches from end to
end mightily, and disposes all things sweetly. Wis. chapter 8. He contemplated
with Christian piety, and the philosophy of a Sage, the most remarkable
revolutions and occurrencies of former, as well as his own times; and learned
there from to refer every human event to the moral government of a supreme
intelligent Being. This became the polar star, by which he was guided in his
progress through life, and in all his anxious solicitude for maintaining the
liberty, perfecting the policy, preserving the peace, insuring the stability of
his country on the foundations of order and morality, and guarding it against
the turbulence of faction, licentiousness, foreign hostility and artifice.

This virtuous maxim of religious, moral, and political wisdom, so deeply
impressed him, never perhaps was more illustrated, than by the course of
providence in preparing and adapting his body and mind to suit the destinies of
his life. He was to be himself a most luminous proof of that truth, which was
so rooted in his soul.

That infinite knowledge, which in its comprehensive range through the whole
extent of creation, embraces the future, no less distinctly, than past and
present contingencies, beheld the period approaching, when this vast portion of
America, now constituting the U. States; this country spread through so many
climates; so diversified in its productions; so abundant in natural resources;
so benefited by land and water; so admirably calculated for the employment of
industry, and for affording subsistence to millions and millions, was to break
the bonds of its ancient connection with G. Britain, and, emancipated from
vassalage, elevate itself to the station of a great, powerful and independent
Empire!

A convulsion so violent in the political system of Europe and America,
involved the demolition of deeply rooted habits and opinions. The associations
arising out of consanguinity, habitual intercourse, unity of government,
identity of laws, language and religion were to be melted down, before that
wonderful revolution could be completed. A new people, unconscious before of
their own strength, were to feel in their physical and moral energies the
ripeness of manhood. Accustomed to respect the nation, with which they would
have to contend, as irresistible in arms, and inexhaustible in resources, they
must dare nevertheless to make the vigorous effort, and conceive a reliance on
their own native strength. Powerful interests, the necessary effects of long
established government, would naturally counteract every tendency toward its
downfall; but these interests were to be resisted by force, and borne down by
the enthusiastic ardor of patriotism.

To superintend the movements, and operations of such a revolution; to
control, during its progress, jealousies, enmities, suspicions, and other
conflicting passions; and from their collision, to educe national and
individual prosperity, peace, order, liberty and regular government; required
the discernment and masterly contrivance of that Supreme Director and Artist,
who unites together the links, and holds in his hands the chain of all human
events. Contemplating, as much as is allowed to feeble mortals, his divine
agency in preparing the means and conducting the progress of the American
revolution, we may presume to say, that heaven impressed a character on the
life of Washington, and a temper on his soul, which eminently qualified him to
bear the most conspicuous part, and be its principal instrument in
accomplishing this stupendous work.

We trace as far back, as to his early youth, the evidences of this
providential interposition. Born in times, and circumstances, unfavourable to
the spirit and exertions of bold enterprise, he however soon devoted himself to
useful and active exercises. He disdained the inglorious ease, and ignoble
pursuits, which fettered, or perverted the talents of his young countrymen;
unactive, not through choice, but wanting objects and encouragement. To deliver
Washington from the danger of contracting similar habits, he was inspired to
embrace the hardy discipline of difficult and perilous labors, which added
vigor to his constitution, and a robustness to his nerves, that never after
shrunk from danger. Following the instinct of his towering genius, he had not
reached the years of manhood, when he was engaged in enterprises pregnant with
terror, and presenting to his view objects of a most formidable aspect. He did
not however enter on them with thoughtless temerity. At that early period he
began, what he presisted in through life, to associate motives of public utility
with magnanimous undertakings. The usual occupations of his young countrymen
were not a sufficient employment for his active mind: he therefore turned his
views toward that vast Western region, now so familiar to our ears and
acquaintance, but then known only by the terrors it inspired, and the cruelties
practiced by the savage Indians, lurking in its forests and recesses. He left
the endearments of society to explore the courses of rivers, to traverse plains
and mountains far beyond the then inhabited frontiers; hoping to discover
sources, whence future opulence might flow to his country; to examine the
productions, and estimate the fertility of immense tracts, capable of rewarding
the industry of thousands, pining in want and oppression in foreign lands;
whose descendants might people the wilderness, beautify it by cultivation, and
multiply the resources of his native province. In these achievements, the
heroic youth was to inure himself to hunger and thirst; to lie on the damp
earth without any covering, but the spreading branches of the oak, and the
canopy of the heavens; to accustom himself to the vicissitudes of seasons, the
parching heat, and chilling frost; to herd with the beasts of the forest; to be
exposed to the tomahawk and scalping knife; to be surrounded by difficulties,
yet never be disheartened; to meet at every step the image of death, without
ever being appalled, or admitting a momentary sentiment of despair.

Imagine not my fellow citizens, that this is an ideal and fanciful
representation of Washington's youthful years. No: it is faintly, but truly
copied from real scenes of his life. Who, on the wing of imagination, has
followed him, clambering over the lofty Western mountains, fording unfathomed
and rapid rivers, exposing his invaluable life to innumerable accidents of
treachery and hostility, without shuddering for his existence, and admiring his
cool, collected courage, in conquering obstacles, and surmounting danger? Such
was the training and education, by which Providence prepared him for the
fulfillment of his future destinies.

Far different from his, were the motives, which urged the youth of Sparta and
Rome to encounter toils of danger and opposition. They obeyed the institutions
of their country; they were stimulated by the goad of aspiring ambition, and a
desire of acquiring that false glory, which, in the erroneous opinions of their
cotemporaries, attached itself to the men, who carried devastation and carnage
into the bowels of neighboring nations. With better views, and superior
courage, Washington penetrated into the inhospitable confines of the savage
Indian; that he might render them the abodes of peace, and introduce into their
bosom the improvements of civilization. So successfully the guardian angel of
this chosen Youth, ministering to the designs of Providence, had infused already
into his soul the sweet spirit of benevolence, together with heroical fortitude.

For him it was decreed, in the progression of his life, to defend, and
ultimately to establish, by just and necessary warfare, the liberties of his
country. Providence therefore permitted a train of occurrences to ensue, which
served to furnish his mind with the first rudiments of military science, and
discipline him to the vigilance and profession of a soldier. At that time, two
powerful European nations held North America in their subjection: their
territories bordered on each other, and each claimed rights, disallowed by its
rival power. One of them, France, sent out a military force and her Indian
allies, to occupy posts, deemed to be within the territory of Virginia, and
contiguous to the stations, selected by Washington, as best adapted to the
protection of his native land: for his intrepidity and local knowledge had
already placed him at the head of a small body of his countrymen, collected
together to stop the progress of the Invaders. With those he covered the
inhabitants from hostile encroachment; he won the confidence of the savage
Indian; and conducted a dangerous and intricate negotiation for a suspension of
hostilities.

But the durable preservation of peace depended not on the counsels of America.
England and France transported their enmity to her shores, and covered our
country with hostile array. England, confident of her prowess and the
discipline of her armies, would not commit the defense of her interests to raw
Provincials. Washington's ardent soul suffered him not to remain behind in
safety, while the security of his country was at stake. The hand of Providence
lead him forward, that he might add to his experience and native fortitude. He
fought under Braddock; and that ill-fated commander having paid by his death
the tribute of his rashness; his army dispirited by defeat, and flying before
an enemy flushed with victory; Washington in that perilous moment, gathered
round him his first companions in arms, and rescued out of the jaws of death
the remains of the vanquished battallions. He did more: he stood in the front
of danger, and every where opposing himself to the merciless savages, ready to
burst as a dark cloud, fraught with the thunderbolts of heaven, on a terrified
land, he averted the storm, and restored to his trembling country the serenity
of hope, and peace.

The theater of war was transported afterward to distant provinces of America.
Then the same all-wise Providence, which had inured him to danger, prepared him
for the toils of government, and the important duty of superintending, in his
riper years, the political administration of a great and widely extended
people. His services in the field had won the confidence of his fellow
citizens; they committed to his vigilance and integrity their highest interests
in their legislative assembly. In this school he perfected himself in the
knowledge of mankind: he observed the contentions of parties, the artifices and
conflicts of human passions: he saw the necessity of curbing them by salutary
restraints: he studied the complicated science of legislation: he learned to
venerate the sanctity of laws, to esteem them as the palladium of civil
society, and deeply inbibed this maxim, so important for the Soldier and the
Statesman, and which he ever after made the rule of his conduct, that the armed
defenders of their country would break up the foundations of social order and
happiness, if they availed themselves of the turbulence of war, to violate the
rights of private property, and personal liberty.

Thus Washington, during the interval of peace, stored his mind with the
treasures of political wisdom. The time was approaching for him to expend those
treasures on his country's welfare.

I need not recapitulate the origin of the discontents between G. Britain, and
her American dependencies. Suffice it to say, that America viewed the claims of
the parent country, as incompatible with her freedom and happiness. The great
soul of Washington revolted at the idea of national degradation; but tempering
his ardor with deliberate wisdom, he associated with other Sages of his
country, to meditate on her new and critical situation.

Here let us pause, fellow citizens, to contemplate this exalted man, revolving
in his breast the natural and social rights of human kind; comparing these with
actual and impending grievances, and with the obligations of an allegiance due
to a long established government. Had lawless ambition reigned in his breast,
he would have decided the public voice for immediate hostility. But in this
point also, Providence destined him to leave a memorable and salutary example,
He was not dazzled by the prospect of being elevated to the chief command of
the military force of America. In his opinion, nothing could justify a
recurrence to the sword, and a revolt from established authority, but extreme
necessity. All reasonable means of redress should be tried, before a good
citizen will dissolve the fabric of government, and expose a people to the
convulsive shocks of a revolution, the explosions of which no considerate man
can promise himself to regulate, or foresee their termination.

A reflection here forces itself upon my mind, which I ought not to withold
from my respectable auditors. Would to God, that the principal authors and
leaders of the many revolutions, through which unhappy France has passed in the
course of a few years, would to God, that they had been influenced by a
morality as pure and enlightened, as that of Washington, and his associates in
the first Congress! What scenes of carnage and cruelty! what private woes and
public calamity would have been spared to that ill-fated country? and how
sacred and venerable would have still remained to it the sanctuary of religion?

Washington and his colleagues obeying at the same time the dictates of
patriotism, and the duty of allegiance, represented their wrongs to their
Sovereign, and claimed their rights. On the event of their remonstrance,
depended the redress of their grievances; or, if no redress followed, their
justification for standing on their defense. Britain would not relent, and all,
that remained to America, was submission, or resistance. The election was soon
made; every one prepared himself for the awful contest, and all eyes and hopes
were turned toward Washington. With universal approbation he was summoned to
place himself in the front of danger, and assume supreme military command. The
possession of such a citizen, at a moment so critical, was an invaluable
treasure, and an animating presage of the favorable issue of the great contest.

But far other thoughts absorbed his attention. Modest, as he was eminent in
valor and wisdom, he contemplated with mingled emotions of self-diffidence,
and generous resolution, the important stake placed in his hands; the
subjection or independence; the vassalage or freedom of an immense territory,
destined to be the habitation of countless millions. When therefore, in
obedience to the voice of his country, he placed himself at the head of her
army, the expressions of his dependence on Providence should never be
forgotten. Claiming no personal merit, apprehensive of injuring the public
interest through some misconduct; yet trusting to the justice of his cause, and
conscious of the purity of his motives, he called upon his fellow citizens to
remember, that he depended for success, not on his own military skill, but on
the God of battles, to whom he made his solemn appeal.

Washington, now at a period of his highest elevation, drew on him the
attention, not only of this Western Continent; but of every European nation. O
fellow citizens! what days and years of anxious disquietude revolved over us,
whilst we gazed on this splendid luminary, uncertain whether it would shed on
its country the effulgence of victory and peace, crowned by liberty; or whether
its brightness would be shadowed by the clouds of disaster and defeat?

Here language fails: I dare not, I cannot follow the heroic Washington in the
career of his military glory. To baffle the stratagems of the ablest Generals,
to repel the onset of the bravest, and best disciplined armies, what had
America to place in his hands? neither soldiers trained to arms, or accustomed
to subordination; nor the implements of war, nor the treasures to purchase
them. But the genius of the commander finally supplied every deficiency. He
introduced order and discipline; inspired love and confidence; and with these
auxiliaries, he kept together uncloathed and unpaid armies, which, under other
generals, would perhaps have demanded justice at the point of their bayonets.
Always vigilant to foil hostile attempts, he exhausted the resources of the
enemy, without suffering them to force him to action. Tender of the blood of
his fellow soldiers, and never exposing their lives without cause, or prospect
of advantage, humanity was as dear to him, as victory; as his enemies, that
fell into his power, always experienced. When a decree of retaliation became
necessary to restrain their licentious excesses, with what delicacy, without
the least abatement of fortitude, did he save the life of the victim, devoted
to atone for the cruelty, that had been committed on an American officer? not
however till he had compelled the opposing General to restrain and disavow
outrages, that aggravate so much the necessary evils of war. How sacred was his
respect to the civil authority; how effectual his protection of the property of
his fellow citizens? When the generous feelings of the virtuous and beneficient
Lewis, whose deplorable fate should draw tears of blood from every American
heart, sent out his Nobles, and legions, to combat by his side, the dignity of
his manners and his unassuming merit won their entire confidence: His
integrity, and conciliating spirit united, as a band of Brothers, nations
before unknown to each other, and totally different in manners, habits and
religion. Their union, of which he was the soul, was a new omen of victory, and
gained for America the prize, for which she bled and contended; honorable
peace and Independence.

What but unfading laurels remained now for Washington, after satisfying his
honest ambition, and steering the vessel of the American republic, through so
many storms, into the safe harbor of liberty and tranquillity? It remained for
him to leave this important lesson to the chiefs of armies, vested with great
commands; that magnanimity and true glory consist in laying down their swords
at their country's seet, when the object is attained, for which alone it was
permitted to draw them. It remained for him, after abdicating public
employments, to exhibit in the shade of retirement those private virtues, which
are the true foundations of national prosperity. Dutiful to this moral
principle, Washington, before he left his army, stipulated for no personal
reward, and even refused all that could be offered: Unmindful of himself, he
was only sollicitous to obtain for his faithful legions a generous and liberal
acknowledgment of their constancy and valor. This being effected, as far as it
depended on him, he resigned the insignia of his command to those, from whom he
had received it, and resumed the rank of a private citizen, carrying with him
into his domestic retreat, the esteem, respect and veneration of an admiring
world.

Here the curtain drops, and seems to close for ever from the public eye and
public duty this wonderful man. His country has no more right to disturb his
calm repose: He has paid superabundantly her claim to his services. But the
views of providence over him are not yet completed: Peace and independence are
obtained; but to preserve them, experience soon made it manifest, that to
invigorate with one spirit the vast mass of population throughout the U: States
one general superintending government was essentially requisite, which saving
the rights of all, should likewise be competent to command the services of all
for the public weal; to maintain order within, and repel aggression from
abroad; enforce the demands of justice, and diffuse over important national
acts, dignity, energy, unity of design and execution. Washington's penetration
soon discovered the want of such a government, and in a paternal, affectionate
address to his countrymen, had bequeathed on them, as a legacy, his earnest
recommendation for its establishment.

Various causes delayed the execution of this necessary work, till the edifice
of American independance, unsupported by its necessary pillars, was crumbling
into ruin. Then every friend to his country remembered Washington's fatherly
advice; every patriotic hand was ready to prop up the tottering fabric. Wisdom
and experience combined to blend in a republican form of government all the
advantages, of which other forms are productive, without many of their evils.
Our illustrious Deliverer presided at the deliberations, which produced it: The
American people besought him once more to quit his beloved retreat, and perfect
a work, of which he had been the first founder and a principal architect. The
earnestness of their request overpowered his reluctant mind; he could not
resist their unanimous wishes, nor could any personal dangers stand in
competition with the advancement of general happiness. Yet how immense were his
sacrifices! how perilous his hazards! Sacrifices known only to them, who having
spent their best years in transactions, that kept every nerve on the stretch,
are permitted in the evening of their days to taste of the calm repose of rural
felicity, and the solace of domestic endearments. Disheartening was the
prospect in venturing again on the agitated ocean of national responsibility.
There existed not in the world a name so bright as his: no character stood on
such lofty preeminence. Shall he expose these to the capricious fluctuations of
popular opinion? Shall he embark, the treasure of a reputation purchased by so
many services, on a sea, sown thick with rocks of envy, pride and
disappointment? These were sufficient to appall a heart less sublime, and less
inflamed with genuine patriotism. But such considerations had no effect on him,
and he took into his hands the helm of the State.

What were the effects of his administration? are we not deceived by magical
delusion? or is the transformation, which our senses witness, really effected?
Have the U. States risen from a lethagic, impoverished, degraded condition to
activity, opulence and respect? Does the farmer receive a generous retribution
for his industry? does the merchant cover the seas with his ships, conveying to
every clime the productions of our native soil? does the public creditor obtain
security and payment for his generous reliance on national faith? does justice
dispense her equitable awards to every suitor approaching her sanctuary? do
distant nations respect the counsels, and solicit the friendship of the U.
States? are the natives of every land wafted to our shores, as to the refuge of
peace, the residence of true liberty? Yes, fellow citizens, this is not
delusion. These are the real effects and monuments of Washington's
administration. Yet it was thwarted and embarrassed by internal opposition, and
foreign intrigue. Scarce had we tasted of the sweets of peace, enlivened by
industry and commerce, when attempts were made to ravish from us these
inestimable blessings, and plunge us into the horrors of war: not only of war,
but of a war of that kind, which connecting our interests and fate with that of
a country, delivered up to anarchy, and a prey to frantic, outrageous passions,
would have tended to extinguish amongst us the principles of morality; inflame
us with the rage of innovation; intoxicate us with delusive, ruinous theories
of government; and most probably, would have substituted them to that excellent
constitution, which is, and may it long continue to be! our pride and
happiness. But, thanks to thy immortal spirit, O ever dear and venerable Father
of thy country! thy wisdom discerned the approaching storm, and thy firmness
baffled its violence. Our peace and constitution remain to us, unimpaired. No
foreign influence dictated to the counsels of America. She increased in vigor;
she rose in character; and by self-government, by keeping herself disentangled
from the strifes of contending nations, she evinced herself worthy of her
independence.

After settling his country in this desirable state, Washington had fulfilled
the destinies of that providence, which formed him for the exalted purpose of
diffusing the choicest blessings over millions of men, and preparing the same
for millions yet unborn. His wish to bury himself again in the shades of
retirement returned on him with redoubled force; to hide, if possible, his
greatness from the world; and in the sweet repose of domestic life, diversified
however by useful and honorable occupations, to forget his past glory. The
last act of his supreme magistracy was to inculcate in most impressive language
on his countrymen, or rather on his dearest children, this, his deliberate and
solemn advice; to bear incessantly in their minds, that nations and individuals
are under the moral government of an infinitely wise and just providence; that
the foundations of their happiness are morality and religion; and their union
amongst themselves their rock of safety: that to venerate their constitution
and its laws is to insure their liberty. Then he took his tender farewell of
public employments, devoting the remainder of his precious life to a
commendable self-review of it, through all its vicissitudes and agitations; a
review, for which every wise man, knowing his accountability to a sovereign
Judge, should allot time and make opportunity.

After endeavoring thus far to satisfy our common duty to our illustrious
Deliverer, before I conclude, I am earnest, my fellow citizens, to leave
impressed on you, in strong characters, some principal features of his mind,
and furnish you with short memorials of his most remarkable actions, hoping
thereby to perpetuate your gratitude, and incite you to emulate his virtues.
Happily, to supply my inability, I find this task executed, as it would seem,
by the spirit of prophecy, and in the language of inspiration, in the 8th
chapter of the book of Wisdom; where the author's expressions need no comment
to appropriate them to Washington. So striking the resemblance! so true is the
picture! Here are the words of the inspired writer: I purposed, says he, to
take wisdom with me to live with me, knowing that she will communicate with me
of her good things, and will be a comfort in my care -- for her sake I shall
have glory among the multitude, and honor with the ancient, though I am young;
and -- I shall be admired in the sight of the mighty, and the faces of princes
shall wonder at me. -- By the means of her, I shall have immortality, and shall
leave behind me an everlasting memory to them, that come after me. I shall set
the people in order, and nations shall be subject to me. Terrible kings hearing
shall be afraid of me; among the multitude I shall be found good and valiant in
war. When I go into my house, I shall repose myself with her; for her
conversation has no bitterness, nor her company any tediousness, but joy and
gladness. Thinking these things with myself, and pondering them in my heart,
that to be allied to wisdom, is immortality. -- I went about seeking, that I
might take her to myself.

In this picture, every stroke of the pencil exhibits traits of Washington. The
early maturity of his judgment was the fruit of his youthful conferences with
wisdom. She initiated him into her counsels, and procured for him love,
respect, honor, confidence, authority and command: She enabled him to set the
people in order by good government, and an impartial, disinterested
administration of it; and when, all public duties fulfilled, he went to his
house to repose himself, no tediousness or bitterness mingled themselves in
their conversation, but joy and gladness, serenity of mind, and the pleasing
prospect of conscious integrity.

Providence having preserved and lengthened his days, that he might rear up his
country in the infancy of her independence, suffered him now to withdraw
himself from the disquietudes of government. He had infused the spirit of his
administration into all its departments. His excellent Successor inherited, not
only the mantle of his office, but his wisdom, firmness, and love of peace,
subordinate only to a determination of never purchasing it, at the price of
national dishonor.

Washington beheld from his retirement, as the Jewish legislator from the
summit of mount Phasga, the flourishing prosperity of his country. Health
sweetened his repose and rural occupations; his body and mind retained their
usual vigor. We flattered ourselves with the expectation of his continuing
long to retain them: Joy beamed in our hearts, when on every annual revolution,
we gratefully hailed this, his auspicious birthday. But, alas! how dark is the
cloud, that now overshadows it? The songs of festivity converted into the
throbs of mourning! The prayers of thanksgiving for his health and life changed
into lamentations for his death! Who feels not for him, as for his dearest
friend, his protector, and his Father? Whilst he lived, we seemed to stand on
loftier ground, for breathing the same air, inhabiting the same country, and
enjoying the same constitution and laws, as the sublime and magnanimous
Washington. He was invested with a glory, that shed a luster on all around him.
For his country's safety, he often had braved death, when clad in her most
terrific form: he had familiarised himself with her aspect; at her approaching
to cut the thread of his life, he behold her with constancy and serenity; and
with his last breath, as we may believe from knowing the ruling passion of his
soul, he called to heaven to save his country, and recommended it to the
continual protection of that Providence, which he so reverently adored. May his
prayer have been heared! May these United States flourish in pure and undefiled
religion, in morality, peace, union, liberty and the enjoyment of their
excellent Constitution, as long as respect, honor, and veneration shall gather
round the name of Washington; that is, whilst there shall be any surviving
record of human events.

FINIS.

